 At the same time , British submarines began reconnoitering the German patrol lines . On 23 August , several British commanders submitted a plan to attack the patrol line with the light cruisers and destroyers of the Harwich Force , commanded by Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt . These ships would be supported by submarines and Vice Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers and associated light forces . The plan was approved and set for 28 August . The British forces began to leave port on the evening of 26 August , beginning with the submarines assigned to the operation . Most of the surface forces went to sea early on the following morning ; the 7th Cruiser Squadron , which had been added to provide further support to the Harwich Force , left port later in the day . 
 On the morning of 28 August , Cöln was re @-@ coaling in Wilhelmshaven . Her sister , Mainz , was at anchor in the mouth of the Ems , and Ariadne lay in the entrance to the Weser . These three cruisers were assigned to support the cruisers Stettin and Frauenlob , and the aviso Hela , which were stationed on the patrol line that morning . At 07 : 57 , the Harwich Force encountered the outer German torpedo boats , which fled back to the German cruisers on the patrol line . In the ensuing Battle of Heligoland Bight , Stettin engaged the British force first , and was quickly reinforced by Frauenlob . Upon receiving reports of the action , Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper , the commander of the reconnaissance forces , ordered Maass to deploy his cruisers to support the engaged vessels . At 09 : 30 , Cöln steamed out of port . 
 Cöln steamed to aid her sister Mainz , which was under heavy fire from several British cruisers and battlecruisers . At around 13 : 25 , she came upon the damaged cruiser HMS Arethusa and several destroyers . Cöln engaged the British ships briefly , but was interrupted by the appearance of the British battlecruisers . At 13 : 37 , Cöln made a 16 @-@ point turn and returned fire at the battlecruisers ; the British ships turned to port to steam closer to Cöln , which in turn similarly altered course to escape . She was hit several times , however , including one hit that killed Maass . At 13 : 56 , another German cruiser arrived on the scene , which distracted the British ships and allowed Cöln to slip away to the north . About fifteen minutes later , she turned back south @-@ east to return to port . 
 The reversal of course brought her back in range of the British battlecruisers , however , which quickly opened fire and scored several damaging hits . The order to abandon ship was given , and men began gathering on the deck . Engineers set scuttling charges while the men topside prepared to go into the water . At 14 : 25 , the ship rolled over and sank . The survivors expected the British to pick them up , but they instead departed . German ships searched the area three days later , to find only one survivor , Leading Stoker Neumann ; the rest of the crew had died in the water . The wreck was moved in August 1979 to render it less of an underwater hazard . Some parts of the ship were salvaged and are now preserved in the Cuxhaven Shipwreck Museum . 
 = Wigwam ( Bob Dylan song ) = 
 " Wigwam " is a song by Bob Dylan that was released on his 1970 album Self Portrait . It was a hit single that reached the Top 10 in several countries worldwide . The song 's basic track , including " la @-@ la " vocals , was recorded in early March 1970 in New York City . Later that month , producer Bob Johnston had brass instrument overdubs added to the track ; these were recorded in Nashville , Tennessee at a session without Dylan present . 
 Critical appraisal of " Wigwam " has been mostly positive , and reviewers have called it a highlight of Self Portrait . Several artists have covered the composition , including <unk> Deutscher , whose version of it was a Top 20 hit in Germany . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " Wigwam " was recorded during the sessions for Dylan 's Self Portrait album , and produced by Bob Johnston . The basic track was put on tape on March 4 , 1970 , at Columbia Studio A in New York City , and was labelled " New Song 1 " on the recording sheet . The musicians on the basic track were Dylan , vocals and guitar ; David Bromberg , guitar ; Al Kooper , piano . On April 20 , 2013 , this early version of " Wigwam " was released as a single for Record Store Day , and on August 27 of the same year , it appeared on The Bootleg Series Vol . 10 – Another Self Portrait ( 1969 – 1971 ) . 
 On March 17 , 1970 , at Columbia Recording Studios in Nashville , Tennessee , instrumental overdubs were recorded for " Wigwam " and several other songs . Dylan was not present for the overdubs , and they were overseen by Johnston . 
 In the song , Dylan sings " la @-@ la " vocals , accompanied by horns , in an arrangement that has been called " mariachi @-@ like " , and " Tex @-@ Mex " . The feeling of the song has also been described as " campfire music " and as having a " hazy glow " . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Wigwam " was released on Self Portrait on June 8 , 1970 , and as a single in June or July . The single 's B @-@ side is " Copper Kettle " . The single was a Top 10 hit in Belgium , Denmark ( in 1972 ) , France , Malaysia , the Netherlands , Singapore , and Switzerland , and was a Top 40 hit in Canada and Germany . In the US , the song reached No. 41 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and No. 13 on the Billboard Top 40 Easy Listening chart . 
 Years later , in the early 2000s , " Wigwam " appeared on the " Limited Tour Edition " of The Essential Bob Dylan . The song was also included on the soundtrack to the film The Royal Tenenbaums ( 2001 ) , as well as on the compilations One Hit Wonders and Hard to Find Classics ( 2003 ) , Radio 2 - De <unk> ' 70 Vol . 2 ( 2010 ) , Top 40 <unk> - 1970 ( 2011 ) , and Remember the 70s Vol . 5 . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Reactions to the song have been generally positive . A review in Billboard magazine describes the track as " winning " . Biographer Rober Shelton includes " Wigwam " among the " quality " songs on Self Portrait , describing it as " hard to forget " ; it is also one of the " AllMusic Picks " of the highlights of Self Portrait , and Michael Gray similarly rates it as one of the " best tracks " on the album . Greil Marcus is likewise positive about the track , calling it " a great job of arranging " . PopMatters reviewer Tom <unk> calls the song " more than worthy " , while NME writer Paul Stokes qualifies it as " melodious " and as demonstrating Dylan 's " versatility and impact " . In a review of The Royal Tenenbaums soundtrack , critic Heather Phares writes that the " hazy glow " of the song " add [ s ] to the album 's strangely timeless but emotionally direct atmosphere . " Critic Sean Egan writes that " Dylan la @-@ las against a big brass arrangement in a not disagreeable way — but is ' not disagreeable ' supposed to be what a Dylan track amounts to ? " 
 On a more negative note , writer Seth Rogovoy describes " Wigwam " as a " bizarre , wordless vocal tune " . Critic Anthony <unk> considers the instrumentation on " Wigwam " to be an example of " horns misplaced " , and " evidence of flaws " in Bob Johnston 's production choices on Self Portrait . Pitchfork writer Rob Mitchum characterizes the song as " moaning along with the brass section " and " rather unpleasant " . 
 = = Covers = = 
 Artists who have covered " Wigwam " include the New Christy Minstrels , Sounds Orchestral , and the French orchestra leaders Raymond Lefèvre and <unk> . <unk> Deutscher released a version with German lyrics , entitled " Weil ich dich lieb " ( " Because I Love You " ) , that was a Top 20 hit in Germany in 1970 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = George Nicol ( baseball ) = 
 George Edward Nicol ( October 17 , 1870 – August 4 , 1924 ) was an American baseball pitcher and outfielder who played three seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played for the St. Louis Browns , Chicago Colts , Pittsburgh Pirates and Louisville Colonels from 1890 to 1894 . Possessing the rare combination of batting right @-@ handed and throwing left @-@ handed , he served primarily as a right fielder when he did not pitch . 
 Signed by the Browns without having previously played any minor league baseball , Nicol made his debut on September 23 , 1890 , and pitched — what was then considered to be — a no @-@ hitter . In the following season , he joined the Chicago Colts in July after starting in the minor leagues . After a two @-@ year sojourn away from the major leagues , he signed for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1894 . In August of the same season , he was traded to the Louisville Colonels , with whom he played his final game on September 29 , 1894 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nicol was born on October 17 , 1870 in Barry , Illinois . His father , Matthew Nicol , immigrated to the United States from Scotland in 1852 , while his mother , Eliza , was born in America . As a youngster , he played baseball for a semi @-@ professional club in nearby Mount Sterling . There , he rose to fame as a left @-@ handed pitcher — probably due to rarity and <unk> of southpaws — and eventually got the opportunity to play in the major leagues before he turned twenty . 
 After his professional baseball career ended , Nicol moved to Milwaukee , Wisconsin . In 1896 , he married his wife Lilian . Together , they had one son , George Jr . , who was born in 1908 . In order to support his new family , he became a machinist . During this time , he continued to play baseball — albeit amateur baseball — with the Milwaukee City League . 
 On the night of August 3 , 1924 , Nicol died in his sleep at the age of 53 . His death was treated as suspicious , as a post @-@ mortem examination found him to have four broken ribs that led to his death . He was interred at the Union Cemetery in Milwaukee . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = St. Louis Browns ( 1890 ) = = = 
 Nicol was signed by the St. Louis Browns near the end of the 1890 season , even though he had no prior experience in minor league baseball . The team were in desperate need for players ; their situation was a microcosm of the American Association ( AA ) that already had few players with major league experience to begin with . The league 's precarious situation was not helped by the fact that they had to compete with both the well @-@ established National League ( NL ) and the newly formed yet highly popular Players ' League . Although the latter league lasted just one season , they were able to <unk> both the AA and NL in terms of attendance . This put a dent in the fortunes of the American Association , whose teams consequently struggled to pay the players ' salaries and thus , had to utilize amateur , semi @-@ professional or minor league players . 
 Nicol made his major league debut for the Browns on September 23 , 1890 , starting the game against the Philadelphia Athletics that resulted in a 21 – 2 win . He did not allow a single hit to the Athletics through seven innings , after which the game was called off due to darkness . Although the game was previously considered a no @-@ hitter , a rule change made by the MLB 's Committee on Statistical Accuracy in 1991 redefined the definition of a no @-@ hitter ; a no @-@ hit game now had to span a minimum of nine innings . As a result , Nicol 's debut was one of fifty no @-@ hitters deleted from the official record books . 
 Three days after his debut , Nicol faced the Athletics again in his second major league start . He followed up his dazzling debut with another solid performance , giving up just one hit — a single — in a 7 – 3 win that ended after five innings . His subsequent starts were disappointing , most notably a 10 – 3 loss against the Toledo <unk> , where his inability to hold baserunners was first exposed . He finished the season with a win – loss record of 2 – 1 , a 4 @.@ 76 earned run average ( ERA ) , had 16 strikeouts but walked 19 in three games started . After his contract expired at the end of the season , no major league team signed Nicol , so he began the 1891 season with the Davenport Pilgrims , a minor league baseball team that competed in the Illinois – Iowa League . 
 = = = Chicago Colts ( 1891 ) = = = 
 Nicol 's tenure with the Pilgrims was successful , albeit brief . He compiled a 15 – 8 record with a 1 @.@ 36 ERA in 23 games started and threw five shutouts . He soon demonstrated himself as the best pitcher in the league by holding opposing teams to three hits or less in four separate games . His pitching performances caught the eye of Chicago Colts ' manager Cap Anson , who offered him a $ 225 a month contract . Nicol originally agreed to the deal , but subsequently wanted to renege , citing " a change of heart . " However , he was eventually forced to accept the offer when the Colts threatened to blacklist him . The Pilgrims , who were already struggling financially , received just $ 300 from the Colts for their ace and folded soon after he left the team . 
 Nicol arrived in Chicago on July 20 and was penciled in to start on consecutive days against Charles Radbourn and Cy Young . Though he performed poorly in both games , the Colts still managed to win . He was shelled in the third inning by the Cincinnati Reds and on the next day , he gave up seven runs to the Cleveland Spiders in only two innings . Because of these starts , he did not appear in another game until August 14 , when he was used in relief to face the Brooklyn Dodgers . His control issues flared up and he had trouble holding the Dodgers ' baserunners . He was released one week later , having walked 10 batters in the 11 innings he pitched for the Colts . He ended the season playing for Marinette of the Wisconsin State League . 
 = = = Minor league sojourn = = = 
 After 1891 , Nicol went back to the Illinois – Iowa League and joined the Rockford Hustlers . He pitched well throughout the 1892 season — though his record was 16 – 16 , he had a 1 @.@ 47 ERA , 230 strikeouts in 288 innings pitched and pitched five shutouts . He limited his opponents to two hits in five different complete games and threw a one @-@ hitter . The league , however , was struggling financially and after the end of the league 's postseason , his request for release was granted . 
 At the start of 1893 , Nicol signed with the Los Angeles Angels of the California League . A new rule was introduced stipulating that the pitcher 's mound be 60 feet 6 inches ( 18 @.@ 44 m ) away from home plate . This increase of five feet in distance gave batters a greater advantage . Despite this , Nicol was noted for his ability to adapt to the new rule better than other pitchers in the league . This was evident as he was able to garner a 15 – 8 record and 0 @.@ 86 ERA in 1881 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His control suffered , however , as he struck out just 64 batters and walked 125 , thus contributing to his 1 @.@ 66 WHIP that season . In early June , there was speculation that players would have their salaries cut in order to sustain the league , which was allegedly on the verge of collapsing . Several weeks after two of his teammates departed , Nicol himself left the team , joining the two in the Eastern League with the Erie Blackbirds . He continued his stellar pitching performances with a 13 – 9 record and a 1 @.@ 80 ERA in 200 innings , while reducing the number of walks issued to 89 . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates and Louisville Colonels ( 1894 ) = = = 
 Nicol signed for the Pittsburgh Pirates at the start of the 1894 season . His stint with the team was dismal , as he posted a 3 – 4 record with a 6 @.@ 22 ERA , while his control and strikeout ability continued to diminish , evident with his 39 walks issued against a mere 13 strikeouts in 9 games pitched . On August 13 , he was traded to the Louisville Colonels in exchange for Jock Menefee and $ 1000 . 
 In his first game for the Colonels , Nicol was battered by the opposing team , giving up 19 hits and 15 earned runs in a complete game . He made just one more start for the team and finished with a 13 @.@ 76 ERA over 17 innings pitched . Because of his pitching struggles , he changed positions and played 26 games in the outfield during his time with the organization , making 43 putouts , 2 assists and committed 9 errors , resulting in a <unk> fielding percentage . His overall statistics for the year were mixed . His pitching record was 3 – 5 with an 8 @.@ 24 ERA , 17 strikeouts and 55 walks issued over 631 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . However , his offensive numbers were impressive , as he posted a batting average of .351 and amassed 47 hits , 7 doubles , 4 triples , 22 runs batted in and a .463 slugging percentage in 141 plate appearances , while striking out just 5 times . At the conclusion of the season , he was released by the Colonels . 
 = = = Back to the minors = = = 
 Nicol returned to minor league baseball , joining the Indianapolis Hoosiers of the Western League . After spending just one month with the team , he moved within the league to the Milwaukee Brewers , where he played for five seasons and was utilized exclusively as an outfielder from 1896 onwards . In 1896 , he was at the centre of controversy when the Philadelphia Phillies drafted him and promised the Brewers that they would return him should they not be in need of his services . However , he was instantly outrighted to the Detroit Tigers , with the Phillies ' president acknowledging that they were assisting and collaborating with the Tigers , who had requested the transaction . The case went to an arbitral tribunal , which ruled in favour of the Brewers . 
 In 1900 , Nicol joined the Wilkes @-@ Barre Coal Barons of the Atlantic League . The league disbanded in June of that year , whereupon he joined the Detroit Tigers , who were now part of the American League . He was released at the end of the season , having batted .258 in 73 games . He returned to the now @-@ expanded Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League in 1904 and played there for two seasons . His career after 1906 is unclear , although the Society for American Baseball Research writes that he signed with a Wisconsin State League team based in Freeport , Illinois and played for them for the remainder of the year before retiring from professional baseball . 
 = Murder of Suzanne Capper = 
 The murder of Suzanne Capper was committed in Greater Manchester , England in December 1992 . Sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Suzanne Jane Capper died in Withington Hospital on 18 December 1992 , from multiple organ failure arising from eighty percent burns after she was deliberately set on fire on 14 December . Before her death , Capper related that she had previously been kidnapped and kept prisoner for seven days at a house in Moston , Manchester , where she was beaten and tortured . She was taken from the house by car , driven into the countryside and forced out of the car virtually naked into a wood at Werneth Low where petrol was poured over her and she was set alight . The torture and murder arose from the " avenging [ of ] trivial grievances : a sexual insult , infection with pubic lice and the loss of a pink duffle coat . " 
 Detectives conducting the inquiry said that " for sheer mindless brutality " the crime ranked alongside the torture inflicted on children by the Moors murderers . The case went to trial in November 1993 , but received " comparatively little publicity " as it coincided with the trial of Robert Thompson and Jon Venables for the murder of James Bulger . On 17 December 1993 , Jean Powell , aged 26 , her ex @-@ husband Glyn Powell , aged 29 , and Bernadette McNeilly , aged 24 , were sentenced to life imprisonment for their parts in the murder . Jeffrey Leigh , aged 27 , was jailed for twelve years for false imprisonment . Jean Powell 's brother Clifford Pook , aged 18 , was sentenced to fifteen years in a Young Offenders ' Institution for false imprisonment and conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm . Anthony Michael Dudson , who was 16 years old at the time of the murder , was also found guilty of murder and sentenced to be detained at Her Majesty 's pleasure under section 53 ( 1 ) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Capper , described as " a gentle and easily influenced girl , " had been babysitting for Jean Powell since she was ten years old . In 1990 she had spent time in the care of the local authority after her mother , Elizabeth Capper , and her stepfather separated , after which Suzanne and her older sister Michelle stayed with their stepfather . Around this time Capper began to truant from Moston Brook High School , and her attendance during the final two years of schooling was described as " erratic . " Capper increasingly spent her time at Powell 's house . Powell lived at 97 Langworthy Road , Moston , a small Victorian terraced house , where she also dealt drugs and was involved with the handling of stolen motor vehicles . Michelle Capper had briefly lived with Powell , but moved out in August 1992 because she did not like the " evil new friends " Powell was associating with , particularly Bernadette McNeilly , who had recently moved in three doors away at number 91 . McNeilly , who had three children , subsequently moved in with Powell and her three children , where the two shared a bed in the downstairs dining room because the bedrooms were " full of children . " Capper continued to stay regularly even though Powell and McNeilly frequently bullied her . Her sister said : " It was not that she was scared of them , it 's just that she would do anything for them . She pampered their every whim . " 
 Powell was separated from her husband Glyn , although the two remained friendly and he would visit regularly from his nearby home . McNeilly 's boyfriend was 16 @-@ year @-@ old Anthony Dudson , who was also having sexual intercourse with Powell . Powell was sexually involved with Jeffrey Leigh , a regular visitor to the house as a purchaser of amphetamines . Another frequent visitor to the house was Powell 's younger brother , Clifford Pook . 
 = = Events leading to murder = = 
 = = = Kidnap = = = 
 At trial , it emerged that Capper had been kidnapped for " insubstantial , even trivial " reasons : Jean Powell claimed that Capper had tried to persuade her to sleep with a man for money ; McNeilly and Dudson had contracted pubic lice which they believed were from a bed that Capper had also used ; and McNeilly believed that she had taken a pink duffle coat that belonged to her . In November 1992 , when Dudson had contracted pubic lice and had his pubic hair shaved , McNeilly told him she thought that he had caught them from Capper . Dudson believed otherwise , and said later : " I told Jean [ Powell ] I thought I got them from Bernie [ McNeilly ] . " On 7 December 1992 , Capper was lured to Jean Powell 's home , where Glyn Powell and Dudson were already waiting . She was grabbed as soon as she arrived and held down while Glyn Powell shaved her head and her eyebrows and then made her clean up the hair and place it in a bin . Then he placed a plastic bag over her head and walked round her while hitting her on the head . She was then kicked by Jean Powell and McNeilly as she lay curled up on the floor and both women took turns beating her with a three @-@ foot @-@ long wooden instrument and a belt . She was then taken to the bathroom and forced to shave off her own pubic hair as " ritual humiliation in revenge for having caused , as they claimed , Dudson and McNeilly themselves to be shaved . " Afterwards Jean Powell locked her in a cupboard overnight . The following morning she was taken upstairs and locked in another cupboard . On 8 December she was transferred to McNeilly 's house because of concern that Powell and McNeilly 's six children were disturbed by Capper 's crying . There she was tied <unk> to an upturned bed with electrical flex in a downstairs back room . 
 = = = Torture = = = 
 Over the next five days Capper was subjected to a series of violent acts , " increasing in severity and brutality as the time passed . " She was regularly beaten and injected with amphetamines , burned with cigarettes , and had rave music — in particular a 45 @-@ minute long remix of Hi , I 'm Chucky ( Wanna Play ? ) by 150 Volts , featuring samples from the movie Child 's Play — played at maximum volume through headphones . McNeilly would commence each torture session with the phrase " Chucky ’ s coming to play " and soon the words themselves were enough to make Capper scream . At some point during the week Pook and Leigh called at the house and were shown Capper , blindfolded and gagged , tied to the bed . By this time , Capper had been lying in her own urine and faeces for several days and was placed in a bath containing concentrated disinfectant and scrubbed with a stiff brush with sufficient force to remove skin . Pook then used pliers to extract two of her teeth , which police later found at his house " like some kind of macabre trophy . " Dudson said : " I was stood at the doorway with Jeanie [ Powell ] and Bernie [ McNeilly ] . Cliff [ Pook ] took her gag off . He told her to open her mouth . He said : ' Right , I 'm going to rip your teeth out ' . He started hitting her teeth with the pliers . He got the pliers on and started pulling it out . But it just snapped and chipped . Then he hit them a few more times . He put the pliers on again and really , really pulled . He pulled Suzanne 's head forward until there was a snap and he had the tooth in the pliers . He did the same again and he was laughing . " 
 = = = Missed opportunities for rescue = = = 
 David Hill , 18 , was asked to " sit in " at the house , and while there heard Dudson shout " Shut up , you slag ! " in the back room . When he asked what was going on , Leigh had shown him Capper . He said : " She had a sort of cloth over her face , from just above the eyebrows and covering her nose . She had a bit of dried blood on her lip . She had no hair . " Hill also said he had heard them talking about " dentistry work . It was something about pulling her teeth out with a pair of pliers . " Later , he was left alone in the house with Capper , who pleaded with him to untie her . He said : " She asked me if I could help but I told her I couldn 't . I asked her who she was . She said her name was Suzanne . She asked me if I could untie her . I said I couldn 't do anything . " He later claimed that he was too afraid of Leigh to intervene or raise the alarm , saying : " I thought they would batter me . If I 'd said [ anything ] they 'd all have got me , wouldn 't they ? I didn 't know what to do . I was too shocked to do anything . " While Capper was being held in the house , Leigh and Dudson met up with her sister 's fiance Paul Barlow to help him repair his car . Barlow said : " They could have told me there and then . The door would have been kicked down and I would have got Suzanne out . I did not think they were capable of such savagery . Now all I want is ten minutes with them in a back room . " 
 = = Murder = = 
 The six finally agreed that Capper had to be removed from the house after Michelle Capper told them her stepfather was going to report her to the police as a missing person . In the early hours of 14 December 1992 , Capper was forced into the boot of a stolen white Fiat Panda car and driven 15 miles to a narrow lane at Werneth Low near <unk> , on the outskirts of Stockport . In the car were McNeilly , the Powells and Dudson . McNeilly " giggled " as they made the journey . Capper was pushed down an embankment into a patch of brambles and then McNeilly poured petrol over her . Powell stated : " Suzanne was still wobbly and fell over . Bernie [ McNeilly ] said ' Get up . ' Bernie pushed her down the hill and poured petrol on her . " When McNeilly had difficulty getting the petrol to ignite , Glyn Powell asked Dudson for some paper , who handed him a folded envelope which Powell then attempted to light and use as a taper . After three failed attempts , Dudson said : " In the end he just went up to her with a lighter and lit her . He lit her on the back . She went straight up in flames and was screaming . The flames lit up the whole forest . " McNeilly began to sing " Burn baby burn ! Burn baby burn ! " from the Trammps ' song Disco Inferno . Believing Capper to be dead , the four returned to Jean Powell 's house , stopping to buy canned drinks on the way . Both Leigh and Pook were at the house when they arrived and Dudson stated : " Cliff [ Pook ] asked Glyn [ Powell ] , ' Have you done it ? ' Glyn said ' Yes ' and he was laughing . He gave Cliff his lighter back . " 
 = = = Naming attackers before death = = = 
 Capper had not died immediately as her murderers believed , and after they left she managed to scramble back up the embankment and stagger along the lane for approximately a quarter of a mile to <unk> Road before being found at 06 : 10 by Barry Sutcliffe and two of his colleagues on their way to work . She told them : " Over there , in the field . They burnt me , they put petrol on me . " They immediately took her to a nearby house and roused the residents , Michael and Margaret Coop , to call for an ambulance . Michael Coop said : " Both her hands appeared like ash . Her legs were just like raw meat and her feet appeared to be badly charred . I was struck by how polite the victim was . She was constantly thanking my wife for her assistance . " Margaret Coop said : " I instinctively went to put my arms around her but she pulled away because she could not bear to be touched . Her head was shaved and there were recent , not new , cuts to her head . Her face was almost featureless . Her hands were red raw and black at the fingertips . Her legs were red from top to bottom . She couldn 't bear anything near her legs . " Capper drank six glasses of water , but was unable to hold the glass herself because of the injuries to her hands . Margaret Coop said : " She looked like the victim of an attack in the Vietnam war . But I felt she would survive . I had this theory that , now she had got to somewhere she could be helped , she would live . " Capper was rushed to the hospital and was able to give the names of her six assailants and Powell 's address before falling into a coma . The extent of her burns was such that her mother and stepfather were unable to recognise her , and she was positively identified by a partial fingerprint from her thumb , the only part of her hands not severely burned . She died on 18 December 1992 , without regaining consciousness . 
 = = = Arrests = = = 
 The inquiry was led by Detective Inspector Peter Wall of Greater Manchester Police . At 07 : 30 on 14 December , he instructed officers to attend 97 Langworthy Road and arrest everyone that they found there . Jean Powell and McNeilly laughed and joked with each other as they were arrested . Initially , all six denied involvement . Under questioning , Dudson , who had been urged by his father to tell the truth , began to talk . D.I. Wall said of Dudson 's statement : " As the story began to unfold , we just couldn 't believe it . I kept asking myself how one human being could do this to another . " Police officers " wept as the extent of Suzanne 's suffering was revealed , " and together with civilian staff at the station the police collected cash to send flowers to her at the hospital . On 17 December 1992 , the six accused appeared before magistrates in Manchester and were remanded into custody charged with kidnapping and attempted murder . Following Capper 's death they were charged with her murder on 23 December 1992 . 
 = = = Inquest = = = 
 The inquest was opened by Leonard <unk> at Manchester Coroner 's Court on 8 January 1993 . Dr William Lawler , a Home Office pathologist , testified that Capper had suffered 75 — 80 per cent burns consistent with having had petrol thrown over her and set alight , and that her chance of survival had been minimal . " It was clear from the outset that Suzanne was unlikely to survive . She suffered widespread burns that led to several complications internally . " Death was due to complications caused by these burns . The coroner said : " It is clear that this young girl must have suffered a great deal of pain and had no chance of survival . But she did fortunately survive long enough to give information which led to the people mentioned being charged with her death . " To Capper 's mother and stepfather the coroner said : " I offer you , not just on my behalf but on behalf of the whole nation , my very deepest sympathy and condolences at this tragic happening to your young daughter . " 
 = = Convictions = = 
 The trial commenced on 16 November 1993 , and lasted 22 days . All six denied murder and in their testimonies each defendant tried to minimise their part in the crime . On 24 November , Clifford Pook was cleared of murder on the directions of the judge Mr. Justice Potts . The jury began their deliberations on 16 December 1993 , and took nine hours and fifty @-@ two minutes to reach their verdicts . Mr Justice Potts said : " Each of you has been convicted on clear evidence of murder which was as appalling a murder as it is possible to imagine . " 
 = = = <unk> and sentences = = = 
 Bernadette McNeilly 
 guilty of murder — life imprisonment with a minimum tariff of 25 years 
 guilty of conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm — 20 years 
 pleaded guilty to false imprisonment — 20 years 
 Jean Powell 
 guilty of murder — life imprisonment with a minimum tariff of 25 years 
 guilty of conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm — 20 years 
 pleaded guilty to false imprisonment — 20 years 
 Glyn Powell 
 guilty of murder — life imprisonment with a minimum tariff of 25 years 
 guilty of conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm — 20 years 
 guilty of false imprisonment — 20 years 
 Jeffrey Leigh 
 pleaded guilty to false imprisonment — 12 years 
 acquitted of murder 
 acquitted of conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm 
 Anthony Michael Dudson 
 guilty of murder — detained indefinitely with a minimum tariff of 18 years 
 guilty of conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm — 15 years 
 pleaded guilty to false imprisonment — 15 years 
 Clifford Pook 
 pleaded guilty to conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm — 15 years 
 pleaded guilty to false imprisonment — 15 years 
 acquitted of murder 
 As the sentences were announced two women jurors wept and there were cries of " Yes ! Yes ! " from the public gallery , which was filled with relatives of the victim . In a statement to the press after the sentencing D.I. Wall said : " Psychological reports say that these are absolutely sane individuals . It 's frightening that they are such ordinary people . There is nothing special about any of them . " 
 = = = Appeals = = = 
 Leigh appealed against his sentence , which was reduced from 12 years to 9 years on 4 November 1994 . In 2002 , Dudson 's minimum tariff was cut from 18 years to 16 years . Dudson appealed again , arguing that the reduction was insufficient and that the Lord Chief Justice " had failed to reflect the continuing obligation to have regard to Dudson 's welfare . " Lord Justice Kennedy and Mr Justice Mackay dismissed this second appeal on 21 November 2003 . He was moved to an open prison in 2009 . 
 Jean Powell and McNeilly were granted leave to have the lengths of their minimum sentences reviewed at the Court of Appeal in June 2012 . McNeilly 's sentence was reduced by one year . 
 = = = McNeilly prison controversy = = = 
 While she was incarcerated at HM Prison Durham , a routine security check in 1996 uncovered letters which revealed McNeilly had been having an affair with the prison governor , Mike Martin . The married officer resigned his position before disciplinary action could be taken . McNeilly , who was sharing a wing with Rosemary West and Myra Hindley , was immediately transferred to HM Prison New Hall . 
 = = = Releases from prison = = = 
 Leigh was freed early from his sentence in 1998 , as was Pook in May 2001 . Both were released on licence . McNeilly was released from prison in December 2014 . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Social environment = = = 
 There was wide commentary in the news media about the social situation in and around Moston . Writing in The Times , Jon Ronson focused on Manchester 's apparent economic imbalance , pointing out that while " superficially , it is a city of growth " — hosting international environmental conferences in 1993 and bidding to host the 2000 Olympic Games — this could not disguise the realities of the poor quality of " built @-@ to @-@ collapse " housing , the city council 's policy on homelessness , poverty , street violence and drug culture , all of which played parts in the events leading up to Capper 's murder . The city , he said , had violent ' no @-@ go ' areas , where " you can expect to be mugged , " created through drug abuse and hopelessness , and populated by people who " don 't work , have no money , and rarely leave the houses that they find themselves living in before dark . " Ronson highlighted a city of contrasts , where " expensive canal @-@ side cafes are springing up faster than you can count them : the joke around town is that you can sip cappuccino all day and gaze out at the corpses floating past . " David Ward , writing in The Guardian , similarly drew attention to the housing policies , and quoted an older Moston resident as saying : " These people are moving in and out every three months . They 're illiterate half of them — just shagging and having kids . " The Daily Mail – in what Barker and Petley called " ideological overdrive " – described Capper 's killers as " the product of a society that tolerates petty crime , the break @-@ up of families and feckless spending ... Most of Suzanne 's tormentors were on social security ... [ and belong to ] an underclass which is a grave threat to Britain 's future . " Author Carol Anne Davis agreed that when looking for answers about how this crime came about one need only " look at the upbringings of these women who were single parents to three children by their mid twenties , had teenage boyfriends who were barely legal and who supported themselves through drug dealing and theft . " 
 = = = " Moral panic " = = = 
 Davis also noted the unusual situation in that " a gang was involved and that two females were the sadistic leaders . " Following the convictions of Powell and McNeilly , there was wider press speculation about " girl gangs " and the rise in violent crime committed by young women , and " the probation service and ex @-@ offender organisations found themselves bombarded with requests from journalists seeking out case histories to illustrate this apparent explosion of LA @-@ style girl @-@ gang culture on the streets of Britain . " Mary <unk> , a senior probation officer at the Inner London Probation Service Women 's Centre , dismissed the notion , saying : " One woman does something somewhere and immediately there 's a great moral panic . People think there 's an epidemic of it . " However , statistics and research produced by the National Association of Probation Officers did show " an increase in the number of women jailed for offences involving violence . " The association 's assistant general secretary Harry Fletcher said that , like the women involved in the Capper murder , the group is " characterised by neglect , personal abuse , drug or alcohol abuse and low self @-@ esteem . Many have themselves been the victim of violence . The problem needs help rather than incarceration . " In one of the " starkest signs of change " there was evidence that " in the 15 — 17 age group , girls are more likely to take pleasure in violence than boys , an indication we may face far more female violence in the future as these girls grow up . " Despite the focus on the female perpetrators around the time of the crime and trial Davis pointed out that , in cases like this which involved female and male sadists , " the female 's role is invariably forgotten over time . This was apparent when Dudson 's appeals were reported in the national press . Manchester newspapers named all of the killers involved , but most less @-@ localised reports simply referred to the ' violent gang ' he belonged to , and it probably wouldn 't have occurred to newer readers that this gang included two merciless female sadists who thought that an allegedly stolen duffle coat was an excuse to torture someone to death . " 
 = = = " Video nasties " = = = 
 The moral panic was not confined solely to the gender of the murderers , but also the role played by so @-@ called " video nasties " . The news media immediately made a connection between the Bulger murder trial and the Capper murder trial when the horror movie Child 's Play 3 : Look Who 's Stalking was mentioned as part of the testimonies . D.I. Wall said " throughout interviews with the accused there was no suggestion that the reason Suzanne was killed had anything to do with Child 's Play " but this was overlooked by more sensationalist headlines ( Demonic doll Chucky links the horror crimes ; The curse of Chucky ) . Neither Powell or McNeilly owned a video recorder , and the Child 's Play – inspired music that had been used to torture Capper was a popular track at the time , taped direct from Manchester 's Piccadilly Radio . Broadcaster David Elstein called the video connection " a false story ... branded into the consciousness of the media , " and questioned the news media 's fascination with the film : " There is no reason to believe that Suzanne Capper would be alive today if the audiotape had instead contained the torture scene from King Lear , or a catchphrase from Bruce Forsyth ... But the Child 's Play hare has been running ever since the last day of the James Bulger murder trial . " Elstein argued that the film was simply a scapegoat which the press " made a three @-@ course meal out of . " The Guardian reported that 21 @,@ 000 four – nine @-@ year @-@ olds watched each of BSkyB 's two transmissions of Child 's Play 3 – but Elstein explained the figure was " simply a projection based on an average of just two actual viewers from BARB 's reporting panel , and that the margin of error means even the two may have been just one . But why spoil a good running story by asking what the figures mean ? " 
 In April 1994 , Professor Elizabeth Newson published Video Violence and the Protection of Children ( the " Newson Report " ) which attracted huge media interest due to its claims that it had " definitively established the long sought @-@ for link between screen violence and the real @-@ life variety , " and which cited the Capper murder as an example . Despite its support by the press , however , the report failed to demonstrate any definitive link , " merely drawing inferences from ... often highly speculative accounts in the press rather than independent first @-@ hand research . " Newson was called to give oral evidence to the House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee on Video Violence , where she asserted : " The Suzanne Capper case is another example of very explicit imitation of video and the use of video and that was Child 's Play 3 . " The chairman of the committee , Sir Ivan Lawrence had to point out to Newson that this was incorrect , and that both the police and the British Board of Film Classification had ruled out any connection between the movie and the murder . 
 The link between the murders and Child 's Play 3 by the news media directly led to the delay of the release certification for both Natural Born Killers and Reservoir Dogs . 
 = Black catbird = 
 The black catbird ( Melanoptila <unk> ) is a songbird species in the monotypic genus Melanoptila , part of the family Mimidae . At 19 – 20 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 – 8 in ) in length and 31 @.@ 6 – 42 g ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 oz ) in mass , it is the smallest of the mimids . Sexes appear similar , with glossy black plumage , black legs and bill , and dark reddish eyes . The species is endemic to the Yucatán Peninsula , and is found as far south as Campeche , northern Guatemala and northern Belize . Although there are historical records from Honduras and the US state of Texas , the species is not now known to occur in either location . It is found at low elevations in semi @-@ arid to humid habitats ranging from shrubland and abandoned farmland to woodland with thick understory , and is primarily sedentary . 
 Although it is a mimid , the black catbird is not known to imitate any other species . Its song is a mix of harsh notes and clear flute @-@ like whistles , with the phrases repeated . It builds a cup nest in low bushes or trees , and lays two bluish eggs . It is threatened by habitat loss , and has been assessed as near threatened by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 When Philip Sclater first described the black catbird in 1858 , from a specimen collected in Omoa Honduras , he assigned it to the monotypic genus Melanoptila , which he created at the same time . At least one subsequent ornithologist assigned the species to the genus Turdus , believing it to be a thrush , but most agreed with Sclater 's assessment . DNA studies have since shown that it is most closely related to various endemic Antillean mimids and the gray catbird , and it is sometimes included with the latter species in the genus <unk> . Although some taxonomists place the birds from Mexico 's Cozumel Island in a separate subspecies ( M. g. <unk> ) , most authorities do not feel that such distinction is warranted and the species is generally regarded as monotypic throughout its range . 
 The genus name Melanoptila is a compound word created from two Greek words : melas , meaning " black " and ptilon , meaning " plumage " . This and the " black " of the bird 's common name are a straightforward reference to its general appearance . The species name <unk> is a combination of two Latin words : glaber , meaning " smooth or hairless " and <unk> , meaning " beak " ( rostrum ) . This is a reference to the very small rictal bristles which surround the black catbird 's beak , in marked comparison to the prominent bristles found on the gray catbird . 
 = = Description = = 
 At 19 – 20 @.@ 5 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 – 8 in ) in length and 31 @.@ 6 – 42 g ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 oz ) in mass , the black catbird is the smallest of the mimids . It has short , rounded wings and a relatively long tail . The sexes are similar in appearance , though the male tends to be heavier . The plumage is glossy black with a purplish sheen overall , though the rectrices and primary and secondary coverts have a greenish sheen and the remiges are a duller blackish @-@ brown color showing reduced sheen . The female is less glossy than the male , and juveniles are brownish @-@ gray with mottling below . The legs are black . The bill , which is black and shorter than the head , has a generally straight culmen , decurved toward the tip . The iris is a dark reddish color in adults and gray in juveniles . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Although the black catbird is unlikely to be mistaken for any other mimid species , there are several other black birds — including the melodious blackbird , the bronzed cowbird and the giant cowbird — that occur within the same range and might conceivably cause confusion . All are birds of more open habitats . The melodious blackbird is larger and longer tailed ; it has dark eyes and a stocky bill with an evenly curved culmen . The bronzed cowbird is thicker necked than is the catbird and has a bronzy , rather than purplish or greenish gloss to its plumage ; its eye is bright red rather than dark red . The giant cowbird is considerably larger , and is relatively longer tailed and thicker necked than is the catbird . 
 = = Range and habitat = = 
 The black catbird is endemic to the Yucatán Peninsula . It occurs as far south as the Mexican state of Campeche , northern Guatemala and northern Belize , and is found on the offshore islands of Cozumel , Isla Mujeres , Ambergris Caye , Caye Caulker , Lighthouse Reef and Glover 's Reef . Although the type specimen of the bird was apparently collected in northwestern Honduras in 1855 or 1856 , it has not been recorded in that country since , and must have been rare if it was ever there . Some authors feel that the specimen might have been mislabeled , and have come instead from northwestern " British Honduras " as Belize was then called . There is also a single specimen of a black catbird collected from Brownsville , Texas in 1892 . Although obtained by a reportedly reputable collector , and accepted by the Texas State Records Committee , the origin of this specimen is a source of some controversy , and it has not been accepted by the American Birding Association or the American Ornithologists ' Union . 
 The species is found at low elevations in semi @-@ arid to humid areas in habitats ranging from scrubland and abandoned farmland to wood edge . It prefers areas with dense thickets , scrub or understory , and is uncommon in taller forest where the vegetation beneath the canopy is more open . Although it is largely sedentary , there may be some localized seasonal movements away from the drier northern parts of the Yucatán Peninsula in late summer to early winter . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Unlike many of its fellow mimids , the black catbird is not known to imitate any other species . Its song consists of repeated phrases of notes ranging from harsh and scratchy to warbled and flute @-@ like , often interspersed with metallic clicking buzzes . It often sings from exposed perches . It has a variety of calls , including some which are quite similar to those of the gray catbird ; these are variously described as a harsh <unk> , a nasal <unk> and a grating <unk> . 
 = = = Food and feeding = = = 
 Although no specific studies have been done on the black catbird 's feeding ecology , it is thought to be an omnivore , like its close relatives are . It is known to eat the fruits of Bursera simaruba and Ficus <unk> , two deciduous trees found in the Neotropics . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Little is known about the breeding biology of the black catbird . Its breeding season appears to run from spring through summer ; nest building was observed in Belize in early May , and small young were found in a nest in Mexico in mid @-@ August . The nest , an open cup of twigs lined with rootlets and other fine material , is placed low in a dense bush or small tree . The female lays two greenish @-@ blue eggs . However , details of nest @-@ building , incubation times , parental care , fledging periods and number of broods are unknown . 
 = = Conservation and threats = = 
 The range of the black catbird is small and dwindling further due to habitat loss . In 2008 , the world population was estimated to be less than 50 @,@ 000 and decreasing . Due to the speed of its decline , which is reported to have been " precipitous " on Caye Caulker between 2003 and 2008 , the International Union for the Conservation of Nature has assessed the species as near threatened . The late 20th century arrival of the shiny cowbird , a brood parasite , into the Yucatán may cause problems for the black catbird as ( based on past host choices ) the catbird may become a target of the cowbird . 
 = = Note = = 
 = Zou Bisou Bisou = 
 " Zou Bisou Bisou " ( also performed as " Zoo Be Zoo Be Zoo " ) is a song written by Bill Shepherd and Alan Tew , and Michel <unk> for the lyrics of the French version . The song 's origins stem from the Yé @-@ yé movement with which an early version of the song was associated . Its theme is variously described as an open declaration of love and the joy of kissing . 
 " Zou Bisou Bisou " was Gillian Hills ' first single in the summer of 1960 . A French recording titled " Zoo Be Zoo Be Zoo " was produced by George Martin and sung in English by Sophia Loren . Although most sources associate the origins of the song with Hills , New York claims that the songwriting credits make it more likely that Loren 's version was the original . Slate 's David Haglund notes that Hills ' version is the best @-@ known of the early recordings . 
 It was performed by Jessica Paré as Megan Draper in the first episode of the fifth season of Mad Men on March 26 , 2012 . The morning after its on @-@ air performance on AMC , the song was released as a music download and as a vinyl special edition . Paré 's on @-@ air performance of the song was lip synced to a prior recording . 
 = = Versions = = 
 Amazon.com sells music downloads of nine versions of the song but not Paré 's . They carry the Hills version from Twistin ' : The Rock - Vol . 9 , the Casabianca version from Les Chansons de ma jeunesse , three different remixes of the song by Bart & Baker featuring Lada <unk> from the Zou Bisou Bisou extended play , two versions by Loren by the name " Zoo Be Zoo Be Zoo " from Pete & Sophia , and a karaoke version . Additionally , they carry a cha @-@ cha version by Gilles <unk> , from Ca <unk> En Gironde under the title " Bisou Zou Bisou " . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Martin 's production of " Zoo Be Zoo Be Zoo " was originally recorded by Sophia Loren as publicity associated with the film The Millionairess ( 1960 ) on the album Peter and Sophia . Several sources , including a posting at AMC 's website , state that Hills did not produce her version , with <unk> 's lyrics , until 1961 , after Loren 's October 1960 movie . Another version of the song , by Israeli @-@ French performer Maya Casabianca , appeared on France 's Billboard chart in September 1961 . Additional cover versions have been produced by the Pennies and Kerstin Dahl . 
 At the time of the Mad Men performance , Hills was working as a professional artist and illustrator married to Stewart Young , the manager for AC / DC , Cyndi Lauper , and Foreigner . 
 Lionsgate Television released a music download edition of Paré 's version at the iTunes Store as well as two vinyl editions made available online . It will also be released in the future on Amazon.com and in stores . This version was produced by Matthew Weiner , Russell <unk> , David Carbonara , and James T. Hill . Paré recorded her lyrics in a recording studio , working with Carbonara , and choreographed her routine with Marianne Ann Kellogg . The 7 @-@ inch vinyl version includes the B @-@ side , " A Beautiful Mine " by <unk> , which is the theme music for the show . Weiner tracked down the song and had many objectives for Paré to achieve in the production of the song . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Roughly translated from French to English " Zou Bisou Bisou " means " Oh ! Kiss Kiss " or " Oh You Kiss Kiss " . The Hills version is described as " . . <unk> in style of the international yé @-@ yé movement " , which is much like the go @-@ go music genre and was most popular in France , Spain , and Quebec , Mrs. Draper 's homeland . The movement 's name has phonetic origins , stemming from the exclamation of " Yeah Yeah " in typical fashion during rock and roll music . After translating the song , Haglund claimed that the theme of the song is about " . . <unk> declaring and displaying one 's love , coming out from ' the bushes ' where ' lovers glide stealthily ' and feeling love ' everywhere ' " . The Huffington Post summarized the song more simply saying that it made the statement " about how kissing is fun " . Slate noted that yé @-@ yé singers were often " teenage girls who exuded a faux @-@ innocent sexuality " , which played on Megan Draper 's " youthful sex appeal and the generation gap between Megan and Don " . Paré stated that , " Megan , who is younger and more naïve than Don , was ' unknowingly putting their intimate connection on the line ' in front of their friends and co @-@ workers ' . . . ' The reason that it ’ s so awkward isn ’ t that she was doing anything wrong , but because it ’ s private ' . . . " 
 = = Critical response to Mad Men scene = = 
 Numerous critics from prominent media outlets such as The Wall Street Journal , Slate , USA Today , Rolling Stone , Daily Mail , New York Daily News , Los Angeles Times , Chicago Sun @-@ Times , CBS News , noted that the highlight of the 5th season premiere was Paré 's performance of this song during Don Draper 's surprise 40th birthday party , describing the performance and Paré as sexy , slinky and sultry . Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone said that " Megan sings … for her husband , who can barely suppress his embarrassment and discomfort . " Erin Carlson of The Hollywood Reporter described Paré 's performance as " bizarre , come @-@ hither burlesque " , noting that she " … stunned partygoers who openly ogled her while the ad exec ( Jon Hamm ) squirmed with polite embarrassment . " 
 The song 's performance became a trending topic on Twitter . Since the song was trending the entire following day , The Roots performed a brief rendition of a verse of the song as interstitial music the following night on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . Despite the social media frenzy , the song did not crack the iTunes Top 100 . However , it did reach the final position of the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Vivien Leigh = 
 Vivian Mary Hartley , later known as Vivien Leigh and Lady Olivier ( 5 November 1913 – 8 July 1967 ) , was an English stage and film actress . She won two Academy Awards for Best Actress for her performances as Scarlett O 'Hara in Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) and Blanche DuBois in the film version of A Streetcar Named Desire ( 1951 ) , a role she had also played on stage in London 's West End in 1949 . She also won a Tony Award for her work in the Broadway version of <unk> ( 1963 ) . 
 After her drama school education , Leigh appeared in small roles in four films in 1935 and progressed to the role of heroine in Fire Over England ( 1937 ) . Lauded for her beauty , Leigh felt that it sometimes prevented her from being taken seriously as an actress . Despite her fame as a screen actress , Leigh was primarily a stage performer . During her 30 @-@ year stage career , she played roles ranging from the heroines of Noël Coward and George Bernard Shaw comedies to classic Shakespearean characters such as Ophelia , Cleopatra , Juliet , and Lady Macbeth . Later in life , she played character roles in a few films . 
 To the public at the time , Leigh was strongly identified with her second husband Laurence Olivier , to whom she was married from 1940 to 1960 . Leigh and Olivier starred together in many stage productions , with Olivier often directing , and in three films . She earned a reputation for being difficult to work with , as for much of her adult life she suffered from bipolar disorder as well as recurrent bouts of chronic tuberculosis , first diagnosed in the mid @-@ 1940s , which ultimately claimed her life at the age of 53 . Although her career had periods of inactivity , in 1999 , the American Film Institute ranked Leigh as the 16th greatest female movie star of classic Hollywood cinema . 
 = = Early life and acting debut = = 
 Leigh was born Vivian Mary Hartley in British India on the campus of St. Paul 's School , Darjeeling . She was the only child of Ernest Richard Hartley , an English broker , and his wife , Gertrude Mary Frances ( née Yackjee ; she also used the name Robinson ) . Her father was born in Scotland in 1882 , while her mother , a devout Roman Catholic , was born in Darjeeling in 1888 and may have been of Irish and Parsi Indian ancestry . Gertrude 's parents , who lived in India , were Michael John Yackjee ( born 1840 ) , a man of independent means , and Mary Teresa Robinson ( born 1856 ) , who was born to an Irish family killed during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and grew up in an orphanage , where she met Yackjee ; they married in 1872 and had five children , of whom Gertrude was the youngest . Ernest and Gertrude Hartley were married in 1912 in Kensington , London . 
 In 1917 , Ernest Hartley was transferred to Bangalore as an officer in the Indian Cavalry , while Gertrude and Vivian stayed in Ootacamund . At the age of three , young Vivian made her first stage appearance for her mother 's amateur theatre group , reciting " Little Bo Peep " . Gertrude Hartley tried to instil an appreciation of literature in her daughter and introduced her to the works of Hans Christian Andersen , Lewis Carroll and Rudyard Kipling , as well as stories of Greek mythology and Indian folklore . At the age of six , Vivian was sent by her mother to the Convent of the Sacred Heart ( now Woldingham School ) then situated in Roehampton , southwest London , from Loreto Convent , Darjeeling . One of her friends there was future actress Maureen O 'Sullivan , two years her senior , to whom Vivian expressed her desire to become " a great actress " . She was removed from the school by her father , and travelling with her parents for four years , she attended schools in Europe , notably in Dinard , Biarritz , San Remo and Paris , becoming fluent in both French and Italian . The family returned to Britain in 1931 . She attended A Connecticut Yankee , one of O 'Sullivan 's films playing in London 's West End and told her parents of her ambitions to become an actress . Shortly after , her father enrolled Vivian at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) in London . 
 Vivian met Herbert Leigh Holman , known as Leigh Holman , a barrister 13 years her senior , in 1931 . Despite his disapproval of " theatrical people " , they married on 20 December 1932 , and she terminated her studies at RADA ; her attendance and interest in acting having already waned after meeting Holman . On 12 October 1933 in London , she gave birth to a daughter , Suzanne , later Mrs. Robin Farrington . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Leigh 's friends suggested she take a small role as a schoolgirl in the film Things Are Looking Up , which was her film debut , albeit uncredited as an extra . She engaged an agent , John <unk> , who believed that " Vivian Holman " was not a suitable name for an actress . After rejecting his many suggestions , she took " Vivian Leigh " as her professional name . <unk> recommended her to Alexander Korda as a possible film actress , but Korda rejected her as lacking potential . She was cast in the play The Mask of Virtue , directed by Sidney Carroll in 1935 and received excellent reviews , followed by interviews and newspaper articles . One such article was from the Daily Express , in which the interviewer noted " a lightning change came over her face " , which was the first public mention of the rapid changes in mood which had become characteristic of her . John Betjeman , the future Poet Laureate , described her as " the essence of English girlhood " . Korda attended her opening night performance , admitted his error , and signed her to a film contract . She continued with the play ; but , when Korda moved it to a larger theatre , Leigh was found to be unable to project her voice adequately or to hold the attention of so large an audience , and the play closed soon after . In the playbill , Carroll had revised the spelling of her first name to " Vivien " . 
 In 1960 Leigh recalled her ambivalence towards her first experience of critical acclaim and sudden fame , commenting , " some critics saw fit to be as foolish as to say that I was a great actress . And I thought , that was a foolish , wicked thing to say , because it put such an onus and such a responsibility onto me , which I simply wasn 't able to carry . And it took me years to learn enough to live up to what they said for those first notices . I find it so stupid . I remember the critic very well and have never forgiven him . " 
 = = Meeting Laurence Olivier = = 
 Laurence Olivier saw Leigh in The Mask of Virtue , and after he congratulated her on her performance , a friendship developed . Olivier and Leigh began an affair while acting as lovers in Fire Over England ( 1937 ) , but Olivier was still married to actress Jill Esmond . During this period , Leigh read the Margaret Mitchell novel Gone with the Wind and instructed her American agent to suggest her to David O. Selznick , who was planning a film version . She remarked to a journalist , " I 've cast myself as Scarlett O 'Hara " ; and The Observer film critic C. A. Lejeune recalled a conversation of the same period in which Leigh " stunned us all " with the assertion that Olivier " won 't play Rhett Butler , but I shall play Scarlett O 'Hara . Wait and see . " 
 Despite her relative inexperience , Leigh was chosen to play Ophelia to Olivier 's Hamlet in an Old Vic Theatre production staged at Elsinore , Denmark . Olivier later recalled an incident when her mood rapidly changed as she was preparing to go onstage . Without apparent provocation , she began screaming at him , before suddenly becoming silent and staring into space . She was able to perform without mishap ; and , by the following day , she had returned to normal with no recollection of the event . It was the first time Olivier witnessed such behaviour from her . They began living together , as their respective spouses had each refused to grant either of them a divorce . Under the moral standards then enforced by the film industry , their relationship had to be kept from public view . 
 Leigh appeared with Robert Taylor , Lionel Barrymore and Maureen O 'Sullivan in A Yank at Oxford ( 1938 ) , the first of her films to receive attention in the United States . During production , she developed a reputation for being difficult and unreasonable , partly because she disliked her secondary role but mainly because her petulant antics seemed to be paying dividends . After dealing with the threat of a lawsuit brought over a frivolous incident , Korda , however , instructed her agent to warn her that her option would not be renewed if her behaviour did not improve . Her next role was in Sidewalks of London , also known as St. Martin 's Lane ( 1938 ) , with Charles Laughton . 
 Olivier had been attempting to broaden his film career . He was not well known in the United States despite his success in Britain , and earlier attempts to introduce him to American audiences had failed . Offered the role of Heathcliff in Samuel Goldwyn 's production of Wuthering Heights ( 1939 ) , he travelled to Hollywood , leaving Leigh in London . Goldwyn and the film 's director , William Wyler , offered Leigh the secondary role of Isabella ; but she refused , preferring the role of Cathy , which went to Merle Oberon . 
 = = Gone with the Wind = = 
 Hollywood was in the midst of a widely publicised search to find an actress to portray Scarlett O 'Hara in David O. Selznick 's production of Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) . At the time , Myron Selznick , David 's brother , and Leigh 's American theatrical agent was the London representative of the Myron Selznick Agency . In February 1938 , Leigh made a request to Myron Selznick that she be considered to play Scarlett O 'Hara . 
 Myron Selznick , who watched her performances that month in Fire Over England and A Yank at Oxford , thought her to be excellent , but , in no way , a possible Scarlett , as she was " too British " . Leigh travelled to Los Angeles , however , to be with Olivier and to try to convince David Selznick that she was Scarlett . When Myron Selznick , who also represented Olivier , met Leigh , he felt that she possessed the qualities his brother was searching for . According to legend , Myron Selznick took Leigh and Olivier to the set where the burning of the Atlanta Depot scene was being filmed and stage @-@ managed an encounter , where he introduced Leigh , derisively addressing his younger brother , " Hey , genius , meet your Scarlett O 'Hara . " The following day , Leigh read a scene for Selznick , who organised a screen test with director George Cukor , and wrote to his wife , " She 's the Scarlett dark horse and looks damn good . Not for anyone 's ear but your own : it 's narrowed down to Paulette Goddard , Jean Arthur , Joan Bennett and Vivien Leigh " . The director , George Cukor , concurred and praised Leigh 's " incredible wildness " ; she secured the role of Scarlett soon after . 
 Filming proved difficult for Leigh . Cukor was dismissed and replaced by Victor Fleming , with whom Leigh frequently quarrelled . She and Olivia de Havilland secretly met with Cukor at night and at weekends for his advice about how they should play their parts . Leigh befriended Clark Gable , his wife Carole Lombard and Olivia de Havilland ; but she clashed with Leslie Howard , with whom she was required to play several emotional scenes . Leigh was sometimes required to work seven days a week , often late into the night , which added to her distress ; and she missed Olivier , who was working in New York City . On a long @-@ distance telephone call to Olivier , she declared : " Puss , my puss , how I hate film acting ! Hate , hate , and never want to do another film again ! " 
 Quoted in a 2006 biography of Olivier , Olivia de Havilland defended Leigh against claims of her manic behaviour during the filming of Gone with the Wind : " Vivien was impeccably professional , impeccably disciplined on Gone with the Wind . She had two great concerns : doing her best work in an extremely difficult role and being separated from Larry [ Olivier ] , who was in New York . " 
 Gone with the Wind brought Leigh immediate attention and fame ; but she was quoted as saying , " I 'm not a film star – I 'm an actress . Being a film star – just a film star – is such a false life , lived for fake values and for publicity . Actresses go on for a long time and there are always marvellous parts to play . " The film won 10 Academy Awards including a Best Actress award for Leigh , who also won a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . 
 = = Marriage and early joint projects = = 
 In February 1940 , Jill Esmond agreed to divorce Laurence Olivier , and Leigh Holman agreed to divorce Vivian Leigh , although they maintained a strong friendship for the rest of Leigh 's life . Esmond was granted custody of Tarquin , her son with Olivier . Holman was granted custody of Suzanne , his daughter with Leigh . On 31 August 1940 , Olivier and Leigh were married at the San Ysidro Ranch in Santa Barbara , California , in a ceremony attended only by their hosts , Ronald and Benita Coleman and witnesses , Katharine Hepburn and Garson Kanin . Leigh had made a screen test and hoped to co @-@ star with Olivier in Rebecca , which was to be directed by Alfred Hitchcock with Olivier in the leading role . After viewing Leigh 's screen test , David Selznick noted that " she doesn 't seem right as to sincerity or age or innocence " , a view shared by Hitchcock and Leigh 's mentor , George Cukor . 
 Selznick observed that she had shown no enthusiasm for the part until Olivier had been confirmed as the lead actor so he cast Joan Fontaine . He refused to allow her to join Olivier in Pride and Prejudice ( 1940 ) , and Greer Garson played the role Leigh had wanted for herself . Waterloo Bridge ( 1940 ) was to have starred Olivier and Leigh ; however , Selznick replaced Olivier with Robert Taylor , then at the peak of his success as one of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's most popular male stars . Her top billing reflected her status in Hollywood , and the film was popular with audiences and critics . 
 The Oliviers mounted a stage production of Romeo and Juliet for Broadway . The New York press publicised the adulterous nature of the beginning of Olivier and Leigh 's relationship and questioned their ethics in not returning to the UK to help with the war effort . 
 Critics were hostile in their assessment of Romeo and Juliet . Brooks Atkinson for The New York Times wrote : " Although Miss Leigh and Mr. Olivier are handsome young people , they hardly act their parts at all . " While most of the blame was attributed to Olivier 's acting and direction , Leigh was also criticised , with Bernard Grebanier commenting on the " thin , <unk> quality of Miss Leigh 's voice " . The couple had invested almost all of their combined savings of $ 40 @,@ 000 in the project , and the failure was a financial disaster for them . 
 The Oliviers filmed That Hamilton Woman ( 1941 ) with Olivier as Horatio Nelson and Leigh as Emma Hamilton . With the United States not yet having entered the war , it was one of several Hollywood films made with the aim of arousing a pro @-@ British sentiment among American audiences . The film was popular in the United States and an outstanding success in the Soviet Union . Winston Churchill arranged a screening for a party that included Franklin D. Roosevelt and , on its conclusion , addressed the group , saying , " Gentlemen , I thought this film would interest you , showing great events similar to those in which you have just been taking part . " The Oliviers remained favourites of Churchill , attending dinners and occasions at his request for the rest of his life ; and , of Leigh , he was quoted as saying , " By Jove , she 's a clinker . " 
 The Oliviers returned to Britain , and in 1943 , Leigh toured through North Africa as part of a revue for the armed forces stationed in the region . Leigh performed for troops before falling ill with a persistent cough and fevers . In 1944 she was diagnosed as having tuberculosis in her left lung and spent several weeks in hospital before appearing to have recovered . Leigh was filming Caesar and Cleopatra ( 1945 ) when she discovered she was pregnant , then had a miscarriage . Leigh temporarily fell into a deep depression that hit its low point , with her falling to the floor , sobbing in an hysterical fit . This was the first of many major bipolar disorder breakdowns . Olivier later came to recognise the symptoms of an impending episode – several days of hyperactivity followed by a period of depression and an explosive breakdown , after which Leigh would have no memory of the event , but would be acutely embarrassed and remorseful . 
 With her doctor 's approval , Leigh was well enough to resume acting in 1946 , starring in a successful London production of Thornton Wilder 's The Skin of Our Teeth ; but her films of this period , Caesar and Cleopatra ( 1945 ) and Anna Karenina ( 1948 ) , were not great commercial successes . All British films in this period were adversely affected by a Hollywood boycott of British films . 
 In 1947 Olivier was knighted and Leigh accompanied him to Buckingham Palace for the investiture . She became Lady Olivier . After their divorce , according to the style granted to the divorced wife of a knight , she became known socially as Vivien , Lady Olivier . 
 By 1948 Olivier was on the board of directors for the Old Vic Theatre , and he and Leigh embarked on a six @-@ month tour of Australia and New Zealand to raise funds for the theatre . Olivier played the lead in Richard III and also performed with Leigh in The School for Scandal and The Skin of Our Teeth . The tour was an outstanding success and , although Leigh was plagued with insomnia and allowed her understudy to replace her for a week while she was ill , she generally withstood the demands placed upon her , with Olivier noting her ability to " charm the press " . Members of the company later recalled several quarrels between the couple as Olivier was increasingly resentful of the demands placed on him during the tour . The most dramatic altercation occurred in Christchurch , New Zealand , when her shoes were not found and Leigh refused to go onstage without shoes . An exhausted and exasperated Olivier screamed an obscenity at her and slapped her face , and a devastated Leigh slapped him in return , dismayed that he would hit her publicly . Subsequently , she made her way to the stage in borrowed pumps , and in seconds , had " dried her tears and smiled brightly onstage " . By the end of the tour , both were exhausted and ill . Olivier told a journalist , " You may not know it , but you are talking to a couple of walking corpses . " Later , he would observe that he " lost Vivien " in Australia . 
 The success of the tour encouraged the Oliviers to make their first West End appearance together , performing the same works with one addition , Antigone , included at Leigh 's insistence because she wished to play a role in a tragedy . 
 = = A Streetcar Named Desire = = 
 Leigh next sought the role of Blanche DuBois in the West End stage production of Tennessee Williams 's A Streetcar Named Desire and was cast after Williams and the play 's producer Irene Mayer Selznick saw her in The School for Scandal and Antigone ; Olivier was contracted to direct . Containing a rape scene and references to promiscuity and homosexuality , the play was destined to be controversial , and the media discussion about its suitability added to Leigh 's anxiety . Nevertheless , she believed strongly in the importance of the work . 
 When the West End production of Streetcar opened in October 1949 , J. B. Priestley denounced the play and Leigh 's performance ; and the critic Kenneth Tynan , who was to make a habit of dismissing her stage performances , commented that Leigh was badly miscast because British actors were " too well @-@ bred to emote effectively on stage " . Olivier and Leigh were chagrined that part of the commercial success of the play lay in audience members attending to see what they believed would be a salacious story , rather than the Greek tragedy that they envisioned . The play also had strong supporters , among them Noël Coward , who described Leigh as " magnificent " . 
 After 326 performances , Leigh finished her run , and she was soon engaged to reprise her role as Blanche DuBois in the film version . Her irreverent and often bawdy sense of humour allowed her to establish a rapport with her co @-@ star Marlon Brando , but she had an initial difficulty in working with director Elia Kazan , who was displeased with the direction that Olivier had taken in shaping the character of Blanche . Kazan had favoured Jessica Tandy and later , Olivia de Havilland over Leigh , but knew she had been a success on the London stage as Blanche . He later commented that he did not hold her in high regard as an actress ; " she had a small talent , " but , as work progressed , he became " full of admiration " for " the greatest determination to excel of any actress I 've known . She 'd have crawled over broken glass if she thought it would help her performance . " Leigh found the role gruelling and commented to the Los Angeles Times , " I had nine months in the theatre of Blanche DuBois . Now she 's in command of me . " Olivier accompanied her to Hollywood where he was to co @-@ star with Jennifer Jones in William Wyler 's Carrie ( 1952 ) . 
 Leigh 's performance in A Streetcar Named Desire won glowing reviews , as well as a second Academy Award for Best Actress , a British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Award for Best British Actress , and a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . Tennessee Williams commented that Leigh brought to the role " everything that I intended , and much that I had never dreamed of " . Leigh herself had mixed feelings about her association with the character ; in later years , she said that playing Blanche DuBois " tipped me over into madness " . 
 = = Struggle with illness = = 
 In 1951 Leigh and Laurence Olivier performed two plays about Cleopatra , William Shakespeare 's Antony and Cleopatra and George Bernard Shaw 's Caesar and Cleopatra , alternating the play each night and winning good reviews . They took the productions to New York , where they performed a season at the Ziegfeld Theatre into 1952 . The reviews there were also mostly positive , but the critic Kenneth Tynan angered them when he suggested that Leigh 's was a mediocre talent that forced Olivier to compromise his own . Tynan 's diatribe almost precipitated another collapse ; Leigh , terrified of failure and intent on achieving greatness , dwelt on his comments and ignored the positive reviews of other critics . 
 In January 1953 , Leigh travelled to Ceylon to film Elephant Walk with Peter Finch . Shortly after filming commenced , she had a breakdown and Paramount Pictures replaced her with Elizabeth Taylor . Olivier returned her to their home in Britain , where , between periods of incoherence , Leigh told him she was in love with Finch and had been having an affair with him . She gradually recovered over a period of several months . As a result of this episode , many of the Oliviers ' friends learned of her problems . David Niven said she had been " quite , quite mad " . Noël Coward expressed surprise in his diary that " things had been bad and getting worse since 1948 or thereabouts " . Leigh 's romantic relationship with Finch began in 1948 , and waxed and waned for several years , ultimately flickering out as her mental condition deteriorated . 
 In 1953 Leigh recovered sufficiently to play The Sleeping Prince with Olivier ; and , in 1955 , they performed a season at Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon in Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night , Macbeth , and Titus Andronicus . They played to capacity houses and attracted generally good reviews , Leigh 's health seemingly stable . John Gielgud directed Twelfth Night and wrote , " ... perhaps I will still make a good thing of that divine play , especially if he will let me pull her little <unk> ( who is <unk> than he but not a born actress ) out of her timidity and <unk> . He dares too confidently ... but she hardly dares at all and is terrified of overreaching her technique and doing anything that she has not killed the spontaneity of by <unk> . " In 1955 Leigh starred in Anatole Litvak 's film The Deep Blue Sea ; co @-@ star Kenneth More felt he had poor chemistry with Leigh during the filming . 
 In 1956 Leigh took the lead role in the Noël Coward play South Sea Bubble , but became pregnant and withdrew from the production . Several weeks later , she miscarried and entered a period of depression that lasted for months . She joined Olivier for a European tour of Titus Andronicus , but the tour was marred by Leigh 's frequent outbursts against Olivier and other members of the company . After their return to London , her former husband , Leigh Holman , who could still exert a strong influence on her , stayed with the Oliviers and helped calm her . 
 In 1958 considering her marriage to be over , Leigh began a relationship with the actor Jack Merivale , who knew of Leigh 's medical condition and assured Olivier he would care for her . In 1959 , when she achieved a success with the Noël Coward comedy Look After Lulu ! , The Times critic described her as " beautiful , delectably cool and matter of fact , she is mistress of every situation " . 
 In 1960 she and Olivier divorced and Olivier soon married actress Joan Plowright . In his autobiography , Olivier discussed the years of strain they had experienced because of Leigh 's illness : " Throughout her possession by that uncannily evil monster , manic depression , with its deadly ever @-@ tightening spirals , she retained her own individual <unk> – an ability to disguise her true mental condition from almost all except me , for whom she could hardly be expected to take the trouble . " 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 Merivale proved to be a stabilising influence for Leigh , but despite her apparent contentment , she was quoted by <unk> Harris as confiding that she " would rather have lived a short life with Larry [ Olivier ] than face a long one without him " . Her first husband , Leigh Holman , also spent considerable time with her . Merivale joined her for a tour of Australia , New Zealand and Latin America that lasted from July 1961 until May 1962 , and Leigh enjoyed positive reviews without sharing the spotlight with Olivier . Though she was still beset by bouts of depression , she continued to work in the theatre and , in 1963 , won a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical for her role in <unk> . She also appeared in the films The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone ( 1961 ) and Ship of Fools ( 1965 ) . 
 Leigh 's last screen appearance in Ship of Fools was both a triumph and emblematic of her illnesses taking root . Producer and director Stanley Kramer who ended up with the film , planned to star Leigh but was initially unaware of the fragile mental and physical health of his star . In later recounting her work , Kramer remembered her courage in taking on the difficult role , " She was ill , and the courage to go ahead , the courage to make the film – was almost unbelievable . " Leigh 's performance was tinged by paranoia and resulted in outbursts that marred her relationship with other actors , although both Simone Signoret and Lee Marvin were sympathetic and understanding . In one unusual instance during the attempted rape scene , Leigh became distraught and hit Marvin so hard with a spiked shoe , that it marked his face . 
 Leigh won the L 'Étoile de Cristal for her performance in a leading role in Ship of Fools . 
 In May 1967 Leigh was rehearsing to appear with Michael Redgrave in Edward Albee 's A Delicate Balance when her tuberculosis recurred . Following several weeks of rest , she seemed to recover . On the night of 7 July 1967 , Merivale left her as usual at their Eaton Square flat , to perform in a play , and returned home just before midnight to find her asleep . About 30 minutes later , he returned to the bedroom and discovered her body on the floor . She had been attempting to walk to the bathroom and , as her lungs filled with liquid , they collapsed and she suffocated . Merivale first contacted her family and the next day was able to reach Olivier , who was receiving treatment for prostate cancer in a nearby hospital . In his autobiography , Olivier described his " grievous anguish " as he immediately travelled to Leigh 's residence , to find that Merivale had moved her body onto the bed . Olivier paid his respects , and " stood and prayed for forgiveness for all the evils that had sprung up between us " , before helping Merivale make funeral arrangements ; Olivier stayed until her body was removed from the flat . 
 On the public announcement of her death on 8 July , the lights of every theatre in central London were extinguished for an hour . A Catholic service for Leigh was held at St. Mary 's Church , Cadogan Street , London . Her funeral was attended by the luminaries of British stage and screen . According to the provisions of her will , Leigh was cremated at the Golders Green Crematorium and her ashes were scattered on the lake at her summer home , <unk> Mill , near <unk> , East Sussex , England . A memorial service was held at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , with a final tribute read by John Gielgud . In 1968 Leigh became the first actress honoured in the United States , by " The Friends of the Libraries at the University of Southern California " . The ceremony was conducted as a memorial service , with selections from her films shown and tributes provided by such associates as George Cukor , who screened the tests that Leigh had made for Gone With the Wind , the first time the screen tests had been seen in 30 years . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Leigh was considered one of the most beautiful actresses of her day , and her directors emphasised this in most of her films . When asked if she believed her beauty had been an impediment to being taken seriously as an actress , she said , " People think that if you look fairly reasonable , you can 't possibly act , and as I only care about acting , I think beauty can be a great handicap , if you really want to look like the part you 're playing , which isn 't necessarily like you . " 
 Director George Cukor described Leigh as a " consummate actress , hampered by beauty " , and Laurence Olivier said that critics should " give her credit for being an actress and not go on forever letting their judgments be distorted by her great beauty . " Garson Kanin shared their viewpoint and described Leigh as " a stunner whose ravishing beauty often tended to obscure her staggering achievements as an actress . Great beauties are infrequently great actresses – simply because they don 't need to be . Vivien was different ; ambitious , persevering , serious , often inspired . " 
 Leigh explained that she played " as many different parts as possible " in an attempt to learn her craft and to dispel prejudice about her abilities . She believed that comedy was more difficult to play than drama because it required more precise timing and said that more emphasis should be placed upon comedy as part of an actor 's training . Nearing the end of her career , which ranged from Noël Coward comedies to Shakespearean tragedies , she observed , " It 's much easier to make people cry than to make them laugh . " 
 Her early performances brought her immediate success in Britain , but she remained largely unknown in other parts of the world until the release of Gone with the Wind . In December 1939 , film critic Frank Nugent wrote in The New York Times , " Miss Leigh 's Scarlett has vindicated the absurd talent quest that indirectly turned her up . She is so perfectly designed for the part by art and nature that any other actress in the role would be inconceivable " , and as her fame escalated , she was featured on the cover of Time magazine as Scarlett . In 1969 critic Andrew Sarris commented that the success of the film had been largely due to " the inspired casting " of Leigh , and in 1998 , wrote that " she lives in our minds and memories as a dynamic force rather than as a static presence " . Film historian and critic Leonard Maltin described the film as one of the all @-@ time greats , writing in 1998 that Leigh " brilliantly played " her role . 
 Her performance in the West End production of A Streetcar Named Desire , described by the theatre writer Phyllis Hartnoll as " proof of greater powers as an actress than she had hitherto shown " , led to a lengthy period during which she was considered one of the finest actresses in British theatre . Discussing the subsequent film version , Pauline Kael wrote that Leigh and Marlon Brando gave " two of the greatest performances ever put on film " and that Leigh 's was " one of those rare performances that can truly be said to evoke both fear and pity . " 
 Her greatest critic was Kenneth Tynan who ridiculed Leigh 's performance opposite Olivier in the 1955 production of Titus Andronicus , commenting that she " receives the news that she is about to be ravished on her husband 's corpse with little more than the mild annoyance of one who would have preferred foam rubber . " He was also critical of her reinterpretation of Lady Macbeth in 1955 , saying that her performance was insubstantial and lacked the necessary fury demanded of the role . After her death , however , Tynan revised his opinion , describing his earlier criticism as " one of the worst errors of judgment " he had ever made . He came to believe that Leigh 's interpretation , in which Lady Macbeth uses her sexual allure to keep Macbeth enthralled , " made more sense ... than the usual battle @-@ axe " portrayal of the character . In a survey of theatre critics conducted shortly after Leigh 's death , several named her performance as Lady Macbeth as one of her greatest achievements in theatre . 
 In 1969 a plaque to Leigh was placed in the Actors ' Church , St Paul 's , Covent Garden , London . In 1985 a portrait of her was included in a series of United Kingdom postage stamps , along with Sir Alfred Hitchcock , Sir Charlie Chaplin , Peter Sellers and David Niven to commemorate " British Film Year " . In April 2013 she was again included in another series , this time celebrating the 100th anniversary of her birth , achieving the rare accolade for a non @-@ royal of appearing on British stamps on more than one occasion . 
 The British Library in London purchased the papers of Laurence Olivier from his estate in 1999 . Known as The Laurence Olivier Archive , the collection includes many of Vivien Leigh 's personal papers , including numerous letters she wrote to Olivier . The papers of Vivien Leigh , including letters , photographs , contracts and diaries , are owned by her daughter , Mrs. Suzanne Farrington . In 1994 the National Library of Australia purchased a photograph album , monogrammed " L & V O " and believed to have belonged to the Oliviers , containing 573 photographs of the couple during their 1948 tour of Australia . It is now held as part of the record of the history of the performing arts in Australia . In 2013 , an archive of Vivien Leigh 's letters , diaries , photographs , annotated film and theatre scripts and her numerous awards was acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
 = = Vivien Leigh performances = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Ghost ( Mystery Skulls song ) = 
 " Ghost " is a song written , recorded , produced and performed by American musician Luis Dubuc for his solo project Mystery Skulls . The track was released by Warner Bros. Records as the lead single off the project 's debut album Forever described as an electro retro funk track , written , produced and performed by Dubuc , is about him wanting to " disappear completely and start over " after he didn 't let anyone know about him moving from Dallas to Los Angeles , as reflected in the song 's chorus . The official music video for the track , directed by Josh Thomas , was released in February 2014 by Vice Media 's electronic music channel Thump . However , a fan @-@ animated music video for the song , which garnered over two million views in less than a month , helped put the track in the top 20 of the American Billboard Dance / Electronic Songs chart . The song was also well @-@ received critically . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Ghost " is a four @-@ minute , eighteen @-@ second song described by Vibe as an " electro retro funk " track with harmonies influenced from disco . " Ghost " is about wanting to " disappear completely and start over " again , as it was inspired by Dubuc relocating from Dallas to Los Angeles without letting anyone know . The concept of the song is sung in the hook " This time I might just disappear . " He described it as " really special song . The moment I wrote it , I thought , ' Wow , this could really be something . " Written and produced by Dubuc , the original mix that appears on Mystery Skulls ' debut album Forever was mixed by Jeremy Wheatley for 365 Artists at <unk> Studios in London , with Adam Looker assisting . Colin Leonard mastered the track at SING Mastering in Atlanta using SING Technology . 
 = = Release = = 
 Warner Bros. Records premiered the final mix of " Ghost " for streaming on December 10 , 2013 , and the song became available in digital stores by January 31 , 2014 . A remix by house producer Claude VonStroke was released on February 18 , 2014 by Spin magazine , which journalist Chris Martins named a " demented dance @-@ floor delight . " A day later , Vice Media 's channel Noisey released a remix by New York City @-@ based duo <unk> , advertised to " make you nostalgic for the long weekend just gone ( thanks President 's Day ! ) , but super happy because Friday is just a little bit closer than it should be . " Both re @-@ workings were part of the song 's remix EP that also featured remixes from Fred Falke , Thomas Newson and Viceroy . A re @-@ cut by producer <unk> that was not on the EP premiered on the blog Stoney Roads , who noted the song to be fitting in an episode of the HBO series Girls . " Ghost " was also included on the soundtrack for the game WWE 2K15 , and Dubuc has admitted to being happy of being involved with the game : " I 've been a really big fan for a long time , and they found out I was a fan , and it turns out that some of the people that work at WWE and in the game specifically are fans of Mystery Skulls and they were like , " What the fuck ? This is so cool ! Let 's do something together ! " " 
 " Ghost " garnered favorable reviews , with many writers highlighting its catchiness . One reviewer from Dance Music Northwest praised the song for putting Dubuc 's diverse talent on display . However , a critic who reviewed Forever was more mixed on the song , calling it , along with " When I 'm With You " , to be " slightly lackluster and boring . " The track also did well commercially ; it debuted at its peak position of number 15 on the American Billboard Dance / Electronic Songs chart , issue dated November 22 , 2014 , and landed the on the digital component of that chart in the top 20 the same week . It lasted on the Dance / Electronic chart for eighteen weeks , ending up at number 99 on the chart 's 2015 year @-@ end list . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The official video for " Ghost " , produced by company Oh Yeah Wow and directed by Josh Thomas , parodies the 1973 horror film The Exorcist , but was also noted to spoof scenes from 1976 's Carrie by one writer . It premiered on February 4 , 2014 by Vice 's electronic music channel Thump , who advertised it as " a really good video . It 's got zombies . It 's got a funny exorcist . It 's got old people looking like they 're about to poop their Depends . People ( and things ) fly through the air . It 's neat , and it 's all set to an extremely catchy beat . " The video , which involves a priest who dances through an exorcism , was well @-@ received by publications . This included a writer for Bloody Disgusting who called it " awesome " , and another one who honored the choreography of the dancing priest as " seriously impressive " . 
 However , the song 's commercial success has been attributed to a fan @-@ made animated music video by Ben Mangum , also known as <unk> , that garnered more than two million views in under a month . The Scooby @-@ Doo @-@ esque video involves kids running in " the most colorful , vibrant , psychedelic , funky fresh haunted mansion I 've ever had the pleasure of laying eyes on " , as described by <unk> of Kotaku 's Talk Amongst <unk> . He also noted that " Everything happens on rhythm to the song which some may find a little cheesy cliche but its a nice way to keep the viewer into whats happening visual while still enjoying the music . As if one can 't exist without the other . " 
 = = Track list = = 
 Single 
 " Ghost " – 4 : 18 
 Remix EP 
 " Ghost " ( <unk> Remix ) – 3 : 38 
 " Ghost " ( Fred Falke Remix ) – 6 : 38 
 " Ghost " ( Claude VonStroke Remix ) – 6 : 15 
 " Ghost " ( Thomas Newson Remix ) – 4 : 25 
 " Ghost " ( Viceroy Remix ) – 4 : 20 
 = = Charts = = 
 = AI Mk . IV radar = 
 Airborne Interception radar , Mark IV , or AI Mk . IV for short , was the world 's first operational air @-@ to @-@ air radar system . Early Mk . III units appeared in July 1940 on converted Bristol Blenheim light bombers , while the definitive Mk . IV reached widespread availability on the Bristol Beaufighter heavy fighter by early 1941 . On the Beaufighter , the Mk . IV arguably played a role in ending the Blitz , the Luftwaffe 's night bombing campaign of late 1940 and early 1941 . 
 Early development was prompted by a 1936 memo of Henry Tizard on the topic of night fighting . The memo was sent to Robert Watt , director of the radar research efforts , who agreed to allow physicist Edward George " Taffy " Bowen to form a team to study the problem of air interception . The team had a test bed system in flights later that year , but progress was delayed for four years by emergency relocations , three abandoned production designs , and Bowen 's increasingly adversarial relationship with Watt 's replacement , Albert Percival Rowe . Ultimately , Bowen was forced from the team just as the system was finally maturing . 
 The Mk . IV series operated at a frequency of about 193 megahertz ( MHz ) with a wavelength of 1 @.@ 5 metres , and offered detection ranges against large aircraft up to 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) . Considerable skill was required of the radar operator to interpret the displays of its two cathode ray tubes ( CRTs ) for the pilot . It had numerous operational limitations , including a maximum range that increased with the aircraft 's altitude and a minimum range that was barely close enough to allow the pilot to see the target . It was only with the increasing proficiency of the crews , along with the installation of new ground @-@ based radar systems dedicated to the interception task , that interception rates began to increase . These roughly doubled every month through the spring of 1941 , during the height of The Blitz . 
 The Mk . IV was used in the front lines for only a short period . The introduction of the cavity magnetron in 1940 led to rapid progress in microwave @-@ frequency radars , which offered far greater accuracy and were effective at low altitudes . The prototype Mk . VII began to replace the Mk . IV at the end of 1941 , and the AI Mk . VIII largely relegated the Mk . IV to second @-@ line duties by 1943 . The basic electronics design , originally a television receiver , was used as the basis of the ASV Mk . II radar , Chain Home Low , <unk> Type 7 , and many other radar systems throughout the war . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Genesis = = = 
 By late 1935 , Robert Watt 's development of Chain Home ( CH ) radar at Bawdsey Manor in Suffolk on the east coast of England had succeeded in building a system able to detect large aircraft at ranges over 40 miles ( 64 km ) . On 9 October , Watt wrote a memo calling for the construction of a chain of radar stations running down the east coast of England and Scotland , spaced about 20 miles ( 32 km ) apart , providing early warning for the entire British Isles . Development continued , and by the end of 1935 the range had improved to over 80 miles ( 130 km ) , reducing the number of stations required . 
 During 1936 the experimental system at Bawdsey was tested against a variety of simulated attacks , along with extensive development of interception theory carried out at RAF Biggin Hill . One observer was Hugh Dowding , initially as the director of research for the RAF , and later as the commander of RAF Fighter Command . Dowding noted that the CH stations provided so much information that operators had problems relaying it to the pilots , and the pilots had problems understanding it . He addressed this through the creation of what is today known as the Dowding system . 
 The Dowding system relied on a private telephone network forwarding information from the CH stations , Royal Observer Corps ( ROC ) , and pipsqueak radio direction finding ( RDF ) to a central room where the reports were plotted on a large map . This information was then telephoned to the four regional Group headquarters , who re @-@ created the map covering their area of operations . Details from these maps would then be sent to each Group 's Sectors , covering one or two main airbases , and from there to the pilots via radio . This process took time , during which the target aircraft moved . As the CH systems were only accurate to about 1 km at best , subsequent reports were scattered and could not place a target more accurately than about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) . This was fine for daytime interceptions ; the pilots would have normally spotted their targets within this range . 
 = = = Night bombing = = = 
 Henry Tizard , whose committee spearheaded development of the CH system , grew concerned that CH would be too effective . He expected that the Luftwaffe would suffer so many losses that they would be forced to call off daylight attacks , and would turn to a night bombing effort . Their predecessors in World War I did the same when the London Air Defence Area successfully blocked daytime raids , and attempts to intercept German bombers at night proved comically ineffective . Tizard 's concerns would prove prophetic ; Bowen called it " one of the best examples of technological forecasting made in the twentieth century " . 
 Tizard was aware that tests showed an observer would only be able to see an aircraft at a range of about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) , perhaps 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) under the very best moonlit conditions , an accuracy that the Dowding system could not provide . Adding to the problem would be the loss of information from the ROC , who would not be able to spot the aircraft except under the very best conditions . If the interception was to be handled by radar , it would have to be arranged in the short time between initial detection and the aircraft passing beyond the CH sites on the shoreline . 
 Tizard put his thoughts in a 27 April 1936 letter to Hugh Dowding , who was at that time the Air Member for Research and Development . He also sent a copy to Watt , who forwarded it to the researchers who were moving to their new research station at Bawdsey Manor . In a meeting at the Crown and Castle pub , Bowen pressed Watt for permission to form a group to study the possibility of placing a radar on the aircraft itself . This would mean the CH stations would only need to get the fighter into the general area of the bomber , the fighter would be able to use its own radar for the rest of the interception . Watt was eventually convinced that the staffing needed to support development of both CH and a new system was available , and the Airborne Group was spun off from the CH effort in August 1936 . 
 = = = Early efforts = = = 
 Bowen started the Airborne Interception radar ( AI ) efforts by discussing the issue with two engineers at nearby RAF Martlesham Heath , Fred Roland , and N.E. Rowe . He also made a number of visits to Fighter Command headquarters at RAF Bentley Priory and discussed night fighting techniques with anyone who proved interested . The first criteria for an airborne radar , operable by either the pilot or an observer , included : 
 weight not to exceed 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) , 
 installed space of 8 cubic feet ( 0 @.@ 23 m3 ) or less , 
 maximum power use of 500 W ( watts ) , and 
 antennas of 1 foot ( 30 cm ) length or less . 
 Bowen then started looking for a suitable receiver system , and immediately had a stroke of good luck ; EMI had recently constructed a prototype receiver for the experimental BBC television broadcasts on 6 @.@ 7 m wavelength ( 45 MHz ) . The receiver used seven or eight vacuum tubes ( valves ) on a chassis only 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) in height and about 18 inches ( 46 cm ) long . Combined with a CRT display , the entire system weighed only 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . Bowen later described it as " far and away better than anything which [ had ] been achieved in Britain up to that time . " 
 Only one receiver was available , which was moved between aircraft for testing . A transmitter of the required power was not available in portable form . Bowen decided to gain some familiarity with the equipment by building a ground @-@ based transmitter . Placing the transmitter in Bawdsey 's Red Tower and the receiver in the White Tower , they found they were able to detect aircraft as far as 40 to 50 miles ( 64 – 80 km ) away . 
 = = = RDF 1 @.@ 5 = = = 
 With the basic concept proven , the team then looked for a suitable aircraft to carry the receiver . Martlesham provided a Handley Page Heyford bomber , a reversal of duties from the original Daventry Experiment that led to the development of CH in which a Heyford was the target . One reason for the selection of this design was that its Rolls @-@ Royce Kestrel engines had a well @-@ shielded ignition system which gave off minimal electrical noise . 
 Mounting the receiver in the Heyford was not a trivial task ; the standard half @-@ wave dipole antenna needed to be about 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) long to detect wavelengths of 6 @.@ 7 m . The solution was eventually found by stringing a cable between the Heyford 's fixed landing gear struts . A series of dry cell batteries lining the aircraft floor powered the receiver , providing high voltage for the CRT through an ignition coil taken from a Ford . 
 When the system took to the air for the first time in the autumn of 1936 , it immediately detected aircraft flying in the circuit at Martlesham , 8 to 10 miles ( 13 – 16 km ) away , in spite of the crudity of the installation . Further tests were just as successful , with the range pushed out to 12 miles ( 19 km ) . 
 It was around this time that Watt arranged for a major test of the CH system at Bawdsey with many aircraft involved . Dowding had been promoted to Chief of Fighter Command , and was on hand to watch . Things did not go well ; for unknown reasons the radar did not pick up the approaching aircraft until they were far too close to arrange interception . Dowding was watching the screens intently for any sign of the bombers , failing to find one when he heard them pass overhead . Bowen averted total disaster by quickly arranging a demonstration of his system in the Red Tower , which picked out the aircraft as they re @-@ formed 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . 
 The system , then known as RDF 1 @.@ 5 , would require a large number of ground @-@ based transmitters to work in an operational setting . Moreover , good reception was only achieved when the target , interceptor , and transmitter were roughly in a line . Due to these limitations , the basic concept was considered unworkable as an operational system , and all effort moved to designs with both the transmitter and receiver in the interceptor aircraft . 
 Bowen would later lament this decision in his book Radar Days , where he noted his feelings about failing to follow up on the RDF 1 @.@ 5 system : 
 Another attempt to revive the RDF 1 @.@ 5 concept , today known more generally as <unk> radar , was made in March 1940 when a modified set was mounted in Bristol Blenheim <unk> . This set was tuned to the transmissions of the new Chain Home Low transmitters , dozens of which were being set up along the UK coastline . These experiments did not prove successful , with a detection range on the order of 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , and the concept was abandoned for good . 
 = = = Giant acorns , shorter wavelengths , and ASV = = = 
 The team received a number of Western Electric Type <unk> large acorn vacuum tubes in early 1937 . These were suitable for building transmitter units of about 20 W continual power for wavelengths of 1 to 10 m ( 300 to 30 MHz ) . Percy Hibberd built a prototype transmitter with pulses of a few hundred watts and fitted it to the Heyford in March 1937 . 
 In testing the transmitter proved only barely suitable in the air @-@ to @-@ air role , with short detection ranges due to its relatively low power . But to everyone 's surprise , it was able to easily pick out the wharves and cranes at the Harwich docks a few miles south of Bawdsey . Shipping appeared as well , but the team was unable to test this very well as the Heyford was forbidden to fly over water . After this success , Bowen was granted two Avro Anson patrol aircraft , K6260 and <unk> , along with five pilots stationed at Martlesham to test this ship @-@ detection role . Early tests demonstrated a problem with noise from the ignition system interfering with the receiver , but this was soon resolved by fitters at the Royal Aircraft Establishment ( RAE ) . 
 Meanwhile , Hibberd had successfully built a new push – pull amplifier using two of the same tubes but working in the 1 @.@ 25 @-@ meter band , an upper @-@ VHF band ( around 220 MHz ) ; below 1 @.@ 25 m the sensitivity dropped off sharply . Gerald Touch , originally from the Clarendon Laboratory , converted the EMI receiver to this wavelength by using the existing set as the intermediate frequency ( IF ) stage of a superheterodyne circuit . The original 45 MHz frequency would remain the IF setting for many following radar systems . On its first test on 17 August , Anson K6260 with Touch and Keith Wood aboard immediately detected shipping in the English Channel at a range of 2 to 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 8 km ) . The team later increased the wavelength slightly to 1 @.@ 5 m to improve sensitivity of the receiver , and this 200 MHz setting would be common to many radar systems of this era . 
 After hearing of the success , Watt called the team and asked if they would be available for testing in September , when a combined fleet of Royal Navy ships and RAF Coastal Command aircraft would be carrying out military exercises in the Channel . On the afternoon of 3 September the aircraft successfully detected the battleship HMS Rodney , the aircraft carrier HMS Courageous and the light cruiser HMS Southampton , receiving very strong returns . The next day they took off at dawn and , in almost complete overcast , found Courageous and Southampton at a distance of 5 to 6 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 7 km ) . As they approached the ships and eventually became visible , they could see the Courageous launching aircraft to intercept them . The promise of the system was not lost on observers ; Albert Percival Rowe of the Tizard Committee commented that " This , had they known , was the writing on the wall for the German Submarine Service . " 
 This success in what became known as the Air @-@ Surface @-@ Vessel radar ( ASV ) role , airborne radar for detecting ships at sea , led to continued demands for additional tests throughout the year . Interest continued to grow , and this would ultimately be one of the reasons that airborne intercept sets would be delayed ; the team spent a considerable time in 1937 and 1938 working on the ASV problem , and ultimately these sets went into operational use first . 
 = = = ASV emerges = = = 
 In May 1938 A.P. Rowe took over Bawdsey Manor from Watt , who had been appointed Director of Communications Development at the Air Ministry . Many members of the radar team have described Rowe as insufferably by @-@ the @-@ book and have registered their disapproval . He became infamous for a string of station orders on all facets of life , as trivial as an order to conserve razor blades by sharpening them on glass , and for considering requiring formal dress for dinner . In one infamous example , Rowe wrote a memo complaining that he was " astonished " that members of the team bought tea from a local canteen in the morning , stating that he was " strongly in favour of tea in the afternoon . " This constant stream of memos affected the AI team in particular ; Bowen , Hanbury Brown , and Lovell have all described their problematic relationship with Rowe . They were not alone ; Arnold Wilkins , the inventor of radar in the UK and Watt 's right @-@ hand @-@ man , soon left to join Watt in London . 
 Most of 1938 was taken up with practical problems and development of ASV . One change was the use of the new Western Electric <unk> tubes in place of the earlier <unk> . These allowed a further increase in power to pulses around 2 kW , which provided detection of ships at 12 to 15 miles ( 19 – 24 km ) . Their test target was the Cork Lightship , a small boat anchored about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the White Tower . This performance against such a small vessel was enough to prompt the Army to begin work on what would become the Coast Defence ( CD ) radars . The Army cell had first been set up on 16 October 1936 to develop the Gun Laying radar systems . 
 Another change was due to every part of the equipment having different power requirements . The tubes for the transmitter used 6 V to heat their filaments , but 4 V was needed for the receiver tubes and 2 V for the filament of the CRT . The CRT also needed 800 V for its electron gun , but the transmitter tubes 1000 V for their modulators ( drivers ) . At first , the team used motor @-@ generator sets placed in the Anson and Battle fuselages , or batteries connected in various ways as in the earliest sets in the <unk> . Bowen decided the solution was to build a power supply that would produce all of these DC voltages from a single 240 V 50 Hz supply using transformers and rectifiers . This would allow them to power the radar systems using mains power while the aircraft were on the ground . 
 British aero engines were normally equipped with a power take @-@ off shaft that led to the rear of the engine . In twin engine aircraft like the Anson , one of these would be used for a generator that powered the aircraft instruments at 24 V DC , the other would be left unconnected and available for use . Following a suggestion from Watt to avoid Air Ministry channels , in October Bowen flew one of the Battles to the Metropolitan @-@ Vickers ( Metrovick ) plant in Sheffield , where he pulled the DC generator off the engine , dropped it on the table , and asked for an AC alternator of similar size and shape . Arnold Tustin , Metrovick 's lead engineer , was called in to consider the problem , and after a few minutes he returned to say that he could supply an 80 V unit at 1200 to 2400 Hz and 800 W , even better than the 500 W requested . Bowen had an order for 18 pre @-@ production units placed as soon as possible , and the first units started arriving at the end of October . A second order for 400 more quickly followed . Eventually about 133 @,@ 800 of these alternators would be produced during the war . 
 = = = Working design = = = 
 To better test the needs of AI , an aircraft with the speed needed to intercept a modern bomber was needed . In October 1938 the team was provided with two Fairey Battle light bombers , which had performance and size more suited to the night fighter role . Battles <unk> and <unk> , and the crew to fly them , were sent to Martlesham ; <unk> was selected to carry the radar , while <unk> was used as a target and support aircraft . 
 By 1939 , it was clear that war was looming , and the team began to turn their primary attention from ASV back to AI . A new set , built by combining the transmitter unit from the latest ASV units with the EMI receiver , first flew in a Battle in May 1939 . The system demonstrated a maximum range that was barely adequate , around 2 to 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 – 4 @.@ 8 km ) , but the too @-@ long minimum range proved to be a far greater problem . 
 The minimum range of any radar system is due to its pulse width , the length of time that the transmitter is turned on before it turns off so the receiver can listen for reflections from targets . If the echo from the target is received while the transmitter is still sending , the echo will be swamped by <unk> of the transmitted pulse from local sources . For instance , a radar with a pulse width of 1 µs would not be able to see returns from a target less than 150 m away , because the radar signal travelling at the speed of light would cover the round trip distance of 300 m before that 1 µs interval had passed . 
 In the case of ASV this was not a problem ; aircraft would not approach a ship on the surface more closely than its altitude perhaps a few thousand feet , so a longer pulse width was fine . But in the AI role , the minimum range was pre @-@ defined by the pilot 's eyesight , at 300 m or less for night interception , which demanded sub @-@ microsecond pulse widths . This proved very difficult to arrange , and ranges under 1 @,@ 000 feet were difficult to produce . 
 Gerald Touch invested considerable effort in solving this problem and eventually concluded that a sub @-@ 1 µs transmitter pulse was possible . However , when this was attempted it was found that signals would leak through to the receiver and cause it to be blinded for a period , longer than 1 µs . He developed a solution using a time base generator that both triggered the transmitter pulse as well as cut out the front @-@ end of the receiver , causing it to become far less sensitive during this period . This concept became known as <unk> . In extensive tests in Anson K6260 , Touch finally settled on a minimum range of 800 feet ( 240 m ) as the best compromise between visibility and sensitivity . 
 Additionally , the sets demonstrated a serious problem with ground reflections . The broadcast antenna sent out the pulse over a very wide area covering the entire forward side of the aircraft . This meant that some of the broadcast energy struck the ground and reflected back to the receiver . The result was a solid line across the display at a distance equal to the aircraft 's altitude , beyond which nothing could be seen . This was fine when the aircraft was flying at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 km ) or more and the ground return was at about the maximum useful range , but meant that interceptions at lower altitudes offered increasingly shorter range . 
 = = = Dowding visits = = = 
 In May 1939 the unit was transferred to a Battle , and in mid @-@ June " Stuffy " Dowding was taken on a test flight . Bowen operated the radar and made several approaches from various points . Dowding was impressed , and asked for a demonstration of the minimum range . He instructed Bowen to have the pilot hold position once they had made their closest approach on the radar scope so they could look up and see how close that really was . Bowen relates the outcome : 
 Dowding 's version of the same events differs . He states he was " tremendously impressed " by the potential , but pointed out to Bowen that the 1 @,@ 000 foot minimum range was a serious handicap . He makes no mention of the close approach , and his wording suggests that it did not take place . Dowding reports that when they met again later in the day , Bowen stated that he had made a sensational advance , and the minimum range had been reduced to only 220 feet ( 67 m ) . Dowding reports this uncritically , but the historical record demonstrates no such advance had been made . 
 On their return to Martlesham , Dowding outlined his concerns about night interceptions and the characteristics of a proper night fighter . Since the interceptions were long affairs , the aircraft needed to have long endurance . To ensure that friendly fire was not an issue , pilots would be required to identify all targets visually . This meant a separate radar operator would be needed , so the pilot would not lose his night vision by looking at the CRTs . And finally , since the time needed to arrange an interception was so long , the aircraft required armament that could guarantee destruction of a bomber in a single pass — there was little chance a second interception could be arranged . 
 Dowding later wrote a memo considering several aircraft for the role , rejecting the Boulton Paul Defiant two @-@ seat fighter due to its cramped rear turret area . He was sure the Bristol Beaufighter would be perfect for the role , but it would not be ready for some time . So he selected the Bristol Blenheim light bomber for the immediate term , sending two of the early prototypes to Martlesham Heath to be fitted with the radar from the Battles . Blenheim <unk> was fitted with the radar , while <unk> acted as the target . Both of these aircraft lost a propeller in flight but landed safely ; <unk> propeller was never found , but <unk> 's was returned to Martlesham the next day by an irate farmer . 
 = = = Mk . I = = = 
 Even at the 1 @.@ 5 m wavelength , antennas of practical size had relatively low gain and very poor resolution ; the transmitter antenna created a fan @-@ shaped signal over 90 degrees wide . This was not useful for homing on a target , so some system of direction indication was required . The team seriously considered phase comparison as a solution , but could not find a suitable phase shifting circuit . 
 Instead , a system of multiple receiver antennas was adopted , each one located so that only a certain section of the sky was visible . Two horizontal receivers were mounted on either side of the fuselage and only saw reflections from the left or right , slightly overlapping in the middle . Two vertical receivers were mounted above and below the wing , seeing reflections above or below the aircraft . 
 Each pair of antennas was connected to a motorized switch that rapidly switched between the pairs , a technique known as lobe switching . Both signals were then sent to a cathode ray tube ( CRT ) for display , with one of them passing through a voltage inverter . If the target was to the left , the display would show a longer blip on the left than the right . When the target was dead ahead , the blips would be equal length . There was an inherently limited accuracy to such a solution , about five degrees but it was a practical solution in terms of limiting the antenna sizes . 
 By this point the Air Ministry was desperate to get any unit into service . Satisfied with his visit in May , Dowding suggested that the Mk . I was good enough for operational testing purposes . On 11 June 1939 , AI was given the highest priority and provisions were made to supply 11 additional Blenheims to No 25 squadron at RAF Hawkinge ( for a total of 21 ) . Since each of the parts came from different suppliers , and the fitters were unfamiliar with any of it , members of the AI team would have to hand @-@ assemble the components as they arrived and instruct the fitters on the sets . 
 Watt was waiting for the order , and in 1938 had arranged for production of the transmitters at Metrovick and receivers at A.C. Cossor . These turned out to be the wrong products : Metrovick had been told to directly copy ( " Chinese " ) the 1937 design by Percy Hibberd , but Bawdsey had delivered the wrong prototype to Metrovick , who copied it . The Cossor receivers were found to be unusable , weighing as much as the entire transmitter and receiver , and having sensitivity about half that of the EMI lash @-@ up . 
 = = = Pye strip = = = 
 It was at this point that the team had yet another stroke of luck . Bowen 's former thesis advisor at King 's College , London , was Edward Appleton , who had worked with Watt and Harold Pye during the 1920s . Pye had since gone on to form his own radio company , Pye Ltd . , and was active in the television field . They had recently introduced a new television set , using an innovative vacuum tube developed by Philips of Holland , the EF50 <unk> . Appleton mentioned the Pye design to Bowen , who found it to be a great improvement over the EMI version , and was happy to learn there had been a small production run that could be used for their experiments . The design became widely known as the Pye strip . 
 The Pye strip was such an advance on the EMI unit that the EF50 became a key strategic component . As a German invasion of the west loomed in 1940 , the British contacted Philips and arranged a plan to remove the company 's board of directors to the UK , along with 25 @,@ 000 more <unk> and another 250 @,@ 000 bases , onto which Mullard , Philip 's UK subsidiary , could build complete tubes . A destroyer , HMS Windsor , was dispatched to pick them up in May , and left the Netherlands only days before the German invasion on 15 May 1940 . The Pye strip , and its 45 MHz intermediate frequency , would be re @-@ used in many other wartime radar systems . 
 New Blenheims eventually arrived at Martlesham , these having been experimentally converted to heavy fighters with the addition of four .303 British Browning machine guns and four 20mm Hispano autocannon , while removing the mid @-@ upper turret to reduce weight by 800 lb ( 360 kg ) and drag by a small amount . These arrived without any of the racking or other fittings required to mount the radar , which had to be constructed by local fitters . Further deliveries were not the Blenheim Mk . IF and IIF models originally provided , but the new Mk . IVF versions with a longer and redesigned nose . The gear had to be re @-@ fitted for the new aircraft , and the receivers and CRTs were mounted in the enlarged nose , allowing the operator to indicate corrections to the pilot through hand signals as a backup if the intercom failed . 
 By September , several Blenheims were equipped with what was now officially known as AI Mk . I and training of the crews began with No. 25 Squadron at RAF Northolt . Robert Hanbury Brown , a physicist who would later work on radar in the US , and Keith Wood joined them in August 1939 , helping fitters keep the systems operational , and coming up with useful methods for interception . Near the end of August , Dowding visited the base and saw the radars in the nose and pointed out to Bowen that the enemy gunners would see the light from the CRTs and shoot the operator . The sets were re @-@ fitted once again , returning to the rear of the fuselage , which caused more delays . 
 With the units in the rear , the only communications method was via the intercom but the <unk> sets used in RAF aircraft used the channel for 15 seconds every minute for the pip @-@ squeak system , blocking communications . Even when modified sets were supplied that addressed this , the radar was found to interfere strongly with the intercom . A speaking tube was tried but found to be useless . Newer VHF radios being developed through this same period did not suffer these problems , and the Blenheims were moved to the front of the queue to receive these units . 
 = = = Emergency move = = = 
 Bawdsey , right on the eastern coast in a relatively secluded location , could not effectively be protected from air attack or even bombardment from boats offshore . The need to move the team to a more protected location on the opening of hostilities had been identified long before the war . During a visit to his alma mater at Dundee University , Watt approached the rector to ask about potentially basing the team there , on short notice . When the Germans invaded Poland and war was declared on 3 September 1939 , the research teams packed up and arrived in Dundee to find the rector only dimly recalling the conversation and having nothing prepared for their arrival . Students and professors had since returned after the summer break , and only two small rooms were available for the entire group . 
 The AI group and their experimental aircraft of D Flight , A & AEE , moved to an airport some distance away at Perth , Scotland . The airport was completely unsuitable for the fitting work , with only a single small hangar available for aircraft work while a second was used for offices and labs . This required most of the aircraft to remain outside while others were worked on inside . Nevertheless , the initial group of aircraft was completed by October 1939 . With this success , more and more aircraft arrived at the airport to have the AI team fit radars , most of these being the ASV units for patrol aircraft like the Lockheed Hudson and Short Sunderland , followed by experimental fittings to Fleet Air Arm Fairey Swordfish and Supermarine Walrus . 
 Bernard Lovell joined the radar team at the personal suggestion of P.M.S. Blackett , an original member of the Tizard Committee . He arrived at Dundee and met Sidney Jefferson , who told him he had been transferred to the AI group . The conditions at Perth were so crude that it was clearly affecting work , and Lovell decided to write to Blackett about it on 14 October . Among many concerns , he noted that ; 
 Blackett removed any direct reference to Lovell and passed it to Tizard , who discussed the issue with Rowe during his next visit to Dundee . Rowe immediately surmised who had written the letter and called Lovell in to discuss it . Lovell thought little of it at the time , but later learned that Rowe had written back to Tizard on 26 October : 
 Rowe surmised from the conversation that the main problem was that Perth was simply not suitable for the work . He decided that most of the research establishment , now known as the Air Ministry Research Establishment ( <unk> ) , would remain in Dundee while the AI team should be moved to a more suitable location . This time the chosen location was RAF St Athan , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Cardiff . St Athan was a large base that also served as an RAF training ground , and should have been an ideal location . 
 When the AI team arrived on 5 November 1939 , they found themselves being housed in a disused hangar with no office space . A small amount of relief was found by using abandoned Heyford wings as partitions , but this proved largely useless as the weather turned cold . As the main doors of the hangar were normally left open during the day , it was often too cold to hold a screwdriver . Bowen complained that the conditions " would have produced a riot in a prison farm . " 
 Ironically , Bawdsey was ignored by the Germans for the entire war , while St Athan was attacked by a Junkers Ju 88 only weeks after the team arrived . The single bomb struck the runway directly , but failed to explode . 
 = = = Mk . II = = = 
 With October 's deliveries , the Air Ministry began plans for a production AI Mk . II . This differed largely by the addition of a new timebase system , which it was hoped would reduce the minimum range to a very useful 400 feet ( 120 m ) . When the new units were installed , it was found the minimum range had increased to 1000 feet . This problem was traced to unexpectedly high capacitance in the tubes , and with further work they were only able to return to the Mk . I 's 800 feet . Blenheims from a number of squadrons were fitted with the Mk . II , with three aircraft each being allotted to No. 23 , 25 , 29 , 219 , 600 and 604 Squadrons in May 1940 . 
 Two experimental versions of the Mk . II were tested . The AIH unit used GEC <unk> <unk> valves in place of the Acorns for additional power , the H standing for high power of about 5 kW . A test unit fitted to a Blenheim IF proved promising in March and a second was delivered in early April but development was ended for unknown reasons . The AIL had a locking timebase , which improved maximum range , at the cost of a greatly increased minimum range of 3 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 500 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 – 1 @.@ 07 km ) and work was abandoned . 
 While aircraft were being delivered , Bowen , Tizard and Watt pressed the Air Ministry to appoint someone to command the entire night fighting system , from ensuring aircraft delivery and radar production to the training of pilots and ground crew . This led to the formation of the Night Interception Committee ( so @-@ named in July 1940 ) under the direction of Richard Peirse . Peirse raised the Night Interception Unit at RAF Tangmere on 10 April 1940 ; it was later renamed the Fighter Interception Unit ( FIU ) . 
 Bowen led a series of lectures at Bentley Priory , on the theory of radar guided night interception and concluded that the fighter would require a speed advantage of 20 to 25 % over its target . The main Luftwaffe bombers — the Junkers Ju 88 , Dornier Do 17Z , and Heinkel He 111 — were capable of flying at about 250 miles per hour ( 400 km / h ) , at least with a medium load . This implied a fighter would need to fly at at least 300 miles per hour ( 480 km / h ) and the Blenheim , fully loaded , was capable of only 280 miles per hour ( 450 km / h ) . Bowen 's concerns over the poor speed of the Blenheim were proved right in combat . 
 = = = Mk . III = = = 
 The Mk . II was used for only a short time when the team replaced its transmitter section with one from the ASV Mk . I , which used the new <unk> valves . The new AI Mk . III sets were experimentally fitted to about twenty Blenheim IFs in April 1940 , where they demonstrated an improved maximum range of 3 to 4 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 4 km ) . However , they still suffered from a long minimum range , from 800 to 1 @,@ 500 ft depending on how the receiver was adjusted . 
 This led to what Hanbury Brown describes as " the great minimum range controversy " . From October 1939 , working around the clock to install the remaining Mk . I sets at Perth and St Athan , the team had had no time for further development of the electronics . They were aware that the minimum range was still greater than was satisfactory but Bowen and Hanbury Brown were convinced there was a simple solution they could implement once the initial installations were completed . Meanwhile , the current sets continued to be installed , although all were aware of their problems . On 24 January 1940 Arthur Tedder admitted to Tizard that : 
 The issue of minimum range continued to be raised , working its way through the Air Ministry and eventually to Harold Lardner , head of what was then known as the Stanmore Research Centre . Rowe and his deputy Bennett Lewis were called to meet with Lardner to discuss the issue . Apparently without informing Lardner of Bowen and Hanbury Brown 's potential solution , or the fact that they could not work on it due to the ongoing installations , they agreed to have Lewis investigate the matter . Lewis then sent a contract to EMI to see what they could do . According to both Bowen and Hanbury Brown , Rowe and Lewis instigated these events deliberately to pull control of the AI project from the AI team . 
 At Dundee , Lewis raised the issue and two solutions to improving the range were considered . The Mk . IIIA consisted of a set of minor changes to the transmitter and receiver with the goal of reducing the minimum range to about 800 feet ( 240 m ) . Lewis ' own solution was the Mk . IIIB , which used a second transmitter that broadcast a signal that mixed with the main one to cancel it out during the end of the pulse . He believed this would reduce the minimum range to only 600 feet ( 180 m ) . Two copies of the IIIA entered tests in May 1940 and demonstrated little improvement , with the range reduced to only 950 feet ( 290 m ) , but at the cost of significantly reduced maximum range of only 8 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) . Tests of the IIIB waited while the AI team moved from St Athan to Worth Matravers in May , and were eventually overtaken by events . Development of both models was cancelled in June 1940 . 
 Word that Lewis was developing his own solutions to the minimum range problem reached the AI team at St Athan some time in early 1940 . Bowen was extremely upset . He had become used to the way the researchers had been put into an ill @-@ advised attempt at production but now Rowe was directly removing them from the research effort as well . Tizard heard of the complaints and visited Dundee in an attempt to smooth them over , which evidently failed . On 29 March 1940 a memo from Watt 's DCD office announced a reorganization of the Airborne Group . Gerald Touch would move to the RAE to help develop production , installation and maintenance procedures for the Mk . IV , several other members would disperse to RAF airfields to help train the ground and air crews directly on the units , while the rest of the team , including Lovell and Hodgkin , would re @-@ join the main radar research teams in Dundee . Bowen was notably left out of the reorganization ; his involvement in AI ended . In late July , Bowen was invited to join the Tizard Mission , which left for the US in August 1940 . 
 = = = Prototype use = = = 
 Mk . III went into extensive testing at No. 25 Sqn in May 1940 and another troubling problem was found . As the target aircraft moved to the sides of the fighter , the error in the horizontal angle grew . Eventually , at about 60 degrees to the side , the target was indicated as being on the other side of the fighter . Hanbury Brown concluded that the problem was due to reflections between the fuselage and engine nacelles , due to the change to the long @-@ nose IVF from the short @-@ nose IF and IIF . In previous examples they had used the fuselage of the aircraft as the reflector , positioning and angling the antennas to run along the nose or wing leading edges . 
 He tried moving the horizontal antennas to the outside of the nacelles , but this had little effect . Another attempt using vertically oriented antennas " completely cured the problem " , and allowed the antennas to be positioned anywhere along the wing . When he later tried to understand why the antennas had always been horizontal , he found this had come from the ASV trials where it was found this reduced reflections from the waves . Given the parallel development of the ASV and AI systems , this arrangement had been copied to the AI side without anyone considering other solutions . 
 At a meeting of the Night Interception Committee on 2 May it was decided that the bomber threat was greater than submarines , and the decision was made to move 80 of the 140 ASV Mk . I transmitters to AI , adding to 70 being constructed by EKCO ( E.K. Cole ) . These would be turned into 60 IIIA 's and 40 IIIB 's . At a further meeting on 23 May , Tizard , perhaps prompted by comments from Director of Signals ( Air ) , suggested that the units were not suitable for operational use , especially due to low reliability , and should be confined to daylight training missions . 
 By 26 July 70 Blenheims were equipped with Mk . III and the RAE wrote an extensive report on the system . They too had concerns about what they called " partially reliable " systems and pointed out that a significant problem was due to the unreliable antenna connections and cabling . But they went further and stated that the self @-@ exciting concept would simply not work for a production system . These systems used transmitter circuitry as an oscillator to produce the operating frequency , but they had the disadvantage of taking some time to stabilize and then shut down again . Hanbury Brown agreed with this assessment , as did Edmund Cook @-@ Yarborough who had led work on the IIIB at Dundee . 
 = = = Mk . IV = = = 
 The RAE 's comments about the self @-@ exciting transmitter were not random : they were referring to work that was just coming to fruition at EMI as a direct result of Lewis ' earlier contract . EMI engineers Alan <unk> and Eric White had developed a system that dispensed with a self @-@ exciting transmitter circuit and instead used a separate modulator that fed the signal into the transmitter for amplification . The oscillator signal was also sent to the receiver , using it to damp its sensitivity . The combined effect was to sharpen the transmitted pulse , while reducing ' ringing ' in the receiver . In a test in May 1940 , Hanbury Brown was able to clearly see the return at a range of 500 feet ( 150 m ) , and could still make it out when they approached to 400 . 
 Touch , now at RAE Farnborough and having delivered improved versions of ASV , quickly adapted the new oscillator to the existing Mk . III transmitter . Adapting the vertical transmitting " arrowhead " , folded twin @-@ dipole antenna design on the nose of the aircraft , from Hanbury Brown 's work with the Mk . III eliminated any remaining problems . In its first operational tests in July 1940 , the new AI Mk . IV demonstrated the ability to detect another Blenheim at a range of 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) and continued to track it down to a minimum of 500 . Hanbury Brown stated that " it did everything that we had originally hoped that airborne radar would do for night @-@ fighting " . He went on to note that even though Mk . IV arrived only one year after the first Mk . I 's , it felt like they had been working for ten years . 
 A production contract for 3 @,@ 000 units was immediately started at EMI , Pye , and EKCO . When they left for the USA in August , the Tizard Mission team took a Mk . IV , ASV Mk . II and IFF Mk . II with them , via the National Research Council ( Canada ) . During the following discussions , it was agreed that the US would produce AI , while Canada would produce ASV . Western Electric arranged a production license for the Mk . IV in the US , where it was known as the SCR @-@ 540 . Deliveries began for the P @-@ 70 ( A @-@ 20 Havoc ) and PV @-@ 1 aircraft in 1942 . 
 = = Operational use = = 
 = = = Early operations = = = 
 Throughout the development of the Mk . I to III , various units had been flying the systems in an effort to develop suitable interception techniques . Very early on it was decided to dispense with the full reporting chain of the Dowding system and have the radar operators at the Chain Home ( CH ) sites talk to the fighters directly , greatly reducing delays . This improved matters , and on an increasing number of occasions aircraft received direction from the CH stations towards real targets . 
 The crews were bound to get lucky eventually , and this came to pass on the night of 22 / 23 July 1940 , when a Blenheim IF of the FIU received direction from the Poling CH station and picked up the target at 8 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) range . The CH radar operator directed them until the observer visually spotted a Do 17 . The pilot closed to 400 feet ( 120 m ) before opening fire , continuing to close until they were so close that oil spewing from the target covered their windscreen . Breaking off , the Blenheim flipped upside down , and with no visibility the pilot didn 't recover until reaching 700 feet ( 210 m ) . The target crashed off Bognor Regis , on the south coast of England . This was the first confirmed successful use of airborne radar known to history . 
 In spite of this success , it was clear the Blenheim was simply not going to work as a fighter . On several occasions the CH stations directed the fighters to a successful radar capture , only to have the target slowly pull away from the fighter . In one case the Blenheim was able to see the target , but when it spotted them the aircraft increased power and disappeared . From 1 to 15 October 1940 Mk . III @-@ equipped fighters from RAF Kenley made 92 flights , performed 28 radar interceptions , and made zero kills . 
 The arrival of the Mk . IV in July 1940 improved matters , but it was the delivery of the Bristol Beaufighter starting in August that produced a truly effective system . The Beaufighter had considerably more powerful engines , speed that allowed it to catch its targets , and a powerful gun pack of four 20 mm cannon that could easily destroy a bomber in a single pass . Squadron use began in October , and its first victory came soon after on 19 / 20 November when a Beaufighter IF of No. 604 Squadron destroyed a Ju 88A @-@ 5 near Chichester , very close to the first success of the Mk . III . 
 = = = Dowding and AI = = = 
 Through August and September 1940 the Luftwaffe met the Dowding system in the Battle of Britain , and in spite of great effort , failed to defeat Fighter Command . Tizard 's letter of 1936 proved prophetic ; with their loss during the day , the Luftwaffe moved to a night campaign . The Blitz began in earnest in September . 
 Dowding had been under almost continual criticism from all quarters long before this point ; he was still in power after the normal retirement age for officers , had a prickly personality that earned him the nickname " Stuffy " , and kept tight @-@ fisted control over Fighter Command . He was also criticized for his inactivity in ending the fight between Keith Park and Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory , commanders of 11 and 12 Group around London . Nevertheless , he had the favour of Winston Churchill and the demonstrated success of the Battle of Britain , which rendered most complaints moot . 
 The Blitz changed everything . In September 1940 the Luftwaffe flew 6 @,@ 135 night sorties , leading to only four combat losses . The Dowding system was incapable of handling night interceptions in a practical manner , and Dowding continued to state that the only solution was to get AI into operation . Seeking alternatives , the Chief of the Air Staff , Cyril Newall , convened a review committee under the direction of John Salmond . Salmond built a heavyweight panel including Sholto Douglas , Arthur Tedder , Philip Joubert de la Ferté , and Wilfrid Freeman . 
 At their first series of meetings on 14 September , the Night Defence Committee began collecting a series of suggestions for improvements , which were discussed in depth on 1 October . These were passed on to Dowding for implementation , but he found that many of their suggestions were already out of date . For instance , they suggested building new radars that could be used over land , allowing the fight to continue throughout the raid . A contract for this type of radar had already been sent out in June or July . They suggested that the filter room at RAF Bentley Priory be devolved down to the Group headquarters to improve the flow of information , but Dowding had already gone a step further and devolved night interception to the Sector level at the airfields . Dowding accepted only four of the suggestions . 
 This was followed by another report at the request of Churchill , this time by Admiral Tom Phillips . Phillips returned his report on 16 October , calling for standing patrols by Hawker Hurricane fighters guided by searchlights , the so @-@ called cat 's eye fighters . Dowding replied that the speed and altitude of modern aircraft made such efforts almost useless , stating that Phillips was proposing to " merely revert to a <unk> @-@ like method of ordering them to fly about and wait for something to turn up . " He again stated that AI was the only solution to the problem . Phillips had not ignored AI , but pointed out that " At the beginning of the war , AI was stated to be a month or two ahead . After more than a year , we still hear that in a month or so it may really achieve results . " 
 Dowding 's insistence on waiting for AI led directly to his dismissal on 24 November 1940 . Many historians and writers , including Bowen , have suggested his dismissal was unwise , and that his identification of AI radar as the only practical solution was ultimately correct . While this may be true , the cat 's eye force did result in a number of kills during the Blitz , although their effectiveness was limited and quickly overshadowed by the night fighter force . In May 1941 cat 's eye fighters claimed 106 kills to the night fighters ' 79 , but flew twice as many sorties to do so . 
 = = = GCI = = = 
 In spite of best efforts , AI 's maximum range remained fixed at the aircraft 's altitude , which allowed Luftwaffe aircraft to escape interception by flying at lower altitudes . With a five @-@ mile ( 8 km ) accuracy in the ground direction , that meant anything below 25 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 km ) would be subject to this problem , which accounted for the vast majority of Luftwaffe sorties . The lack of coverage over land was another serious limitation . 
 On 24 November 1939 , Hanbury Brown wrote a memo on Suggestions for Fighter Control by RDF calling for a new type of radar that would directly display both the target aircraft and the intercepting fighter , allowing ground controllers to directly control the fighter without need for interpretation . The solution was to mount a radar on a motorized platform so it rotated continually , sweeping the entire sky . A motor in the CRT display would rotate the beam deflection plates in synchronicity , so blips seen when the antenna was at a particular angle would be displayed at the same angle on the scope display . Using a phosphor that lasted at least one rotation , blips for all targets within range would be drawn on the display at their correct relative angles , producing a map @-@ like image known as a PPI . With both the bombers and fighters now appearing on the same display , the radar operator could now direct an intercept directly , eliminating all of the delays . 
 The problem was finding a radar that was suitably small ; CH radar 's huge towers obviously could not be swung about in this fashion . By this time the Army had made considerable progress on adapting the AI electronics to build a new radar for detecting ships in the English Channel , CD , with an antenna that was small enough to be swung in bearing . In 1938 , RAF pilots noted they could avoid detection by CH while flying at low altitudes , so in August 1939 , Watt ordered 24 @-@ CD sets under the name Chain Home Low ( CHL ) , using them to fill gaps in CH coverage . These systems were initially rotated by pedalling on a bicycle frame driving a gear set . A joke of the era " was that one could always identify one of the <unk> <unk> operators by her bulging calf muscles and unusually slim figure " . Motorized controls for CHL were introduced in April 1941 . 
 By late 1939 it was realized that the rotation of the beam on the radar display could be accomplished using electronics . In December 1939 , <unk> Dummer began development of such a system , and in June 1940 a modified CHL radar was motorized to continually spin in bearing , and connected to one of these new displays . The result was a 360 degree view of the airspace around the radar . Six copies of the prototype Ground Control Interception radars ( GCI ) were hand @-@ built at <unk> ( Air Ministry Experimental Station ) and RAE during November and December 1940 , and the first went operational at RAF <unk> on New Year 's Day 1941 , with the rest following by the end of the month . Prior to their introduction in December 1940 the interception rate was 0 @.@ 5 % ; by May 1941 , with a number of operational GCI stations and better familiarity , it was 7 % , with a kill rate of around 2 @.@ 5 % . 
 = = = End of The Blitz = = = 
 It was only the combination of AI Mk . IV , the Beaufighter and GCI radars that produced a truly effective system , and it took some time for the crews of all involved to gain proficiency . As they did , interception rates began to increase geometrically : 
 In January 1941 , three aircraft were shot down 
 In February , this improved to four , including the first kill by a Beaufighter 
 In March , twenty @-@ two aircraft were shot down 
 In April , this improved to forty @-@ eight 
 In May , this improved to ninety @-@ six 
 The percentage of these attributed to the AI equipped force continued to rise ; thirty @-@ seven of the kills in May were by AI equipped <unk> or Havocs , and by June these accounted for almost all of the kills . 
 By this point , the Luftwaffe had subjected the UK to a major air campaign and caused an enormous amount of destruction and displacement of civilians . However , it failed to bring the UK to peace talks , nor had any obvious effect on economic output . At the end of May the Germans called off The Blitz , and from then on the UK would be subject to dramatically lower rates of bombing . How much of this was due to the effects of the night fighter force has been a matter of considerable debate among historians . The Germans were turning their attention eastward , and most of the Luftwaffe was sent to support these efforts . Even in May , the losses represent only 2 @.@ 4 % of the attacking force , a tiny number that was easily replaceable by the Luftwaffe . 
 = = = Baedeker Blitz = = = 
 Arthur Harris was appointed Air Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief of RAF Bomber Command on 22 February 1942 , and immediately set about implementing his plan to destroy Germany through <unk> . As part of their move to area attacks , on the night of 28 March a force dropped explosives and incendiaries on Lübeck , causing massive damage . Adolf Hitler and other Nazi leaders were enraged , and ordered retaliation . 
 On the night of 23 April 1942 , a small raid was made against Exeter , followed the next day by a pronouncement by Gustaf Braun von <unk> that they would destroy every location found in the Baedeker tourist guides that was awarded three stars . Raids of ever @-@ increasing size followed over the next week , in what became known in the UK as the Baedeker Blitz . This first series of raids ended in early May . When Cologne was greatly damaged during the first 1 @,@ 000 @-@ bomber raid , the Luftwaffe returned for another week of raids between 31 May to 6 June . 
 The first raids came as a surprise and were met by ineffective responses . On the first raid a Beaufighter from 604 Squadron shot down a single bomber , while the next three raids resulted in no kills , and the next a single kill again . But as the pattern of the attacks grew more obvious — short attacks against smaller coastal cities — the defense responded . Four bombers were shot down on the night of 3 / 4 May , two more on 7 / 8th , one on 18th , two on the 23rd . The Luftwaffe changed their tactics as well ; their bombers would approach at low altitude , climb to spot the target , and then dive again after releasing their bombs . This meant that interceptions with the Mk . IV were possible only during the bomb run . 
 In the end , the Baedeker raids failed to cause any reduction in the RAF 's raids over Germany . Civilian losses were considerable , with 1 @,@ 637 killed , 1 @,@ 760 injured , and 50 @,@ 000 homes destroyed or damaged . In comparison to The Blitz this was relatively minor ; 30 @,@ 000 civilians were killed and 50 @,@ 000 injured by the end of that campaign . Luftwaffe losses were 40 bombers and 150 aircrew . Although the night fighters were not particularly successful , accounting for perhaps 22 aircraft from late April to the end of June , their shortcomings were on the way to being addressed . 
 = = = AIS , replacement = = = 
 The Airborne Group had been experimenting with microwave systems as early as 1938 after discovering that a suitable arrangement of the acorn tubes could be operated at wavelengths as short as 30 cm . However , these had very low output , and operated well within the region of reduced sensitivity on the receiver side , so detection ranges were very short . The group gave up on further development for the time being . 
 Development continued largely at the urging of the Admiralty , who saw it as a solution to detecting the conning towers of partially submerged U @-@ Boats . After a visit by Tizard to GEC 's Hirst Research Centre in Wembley in November 1939 , and a follow @-@ up visit by Watt , the company took up development and developed a working 25 cm set using modified <unk> by the summer of 1940 . With this success , Lovell and a new addition to the Airborne Group , Alan Lloyd Hodgkin , began experimenting with horn @-@ type antennas that would offer significantly higher angular accuracy . Instead of broadcasting the radar signal across the entire forward hemisphere of the aircraft and listening to echoes from everywhere in that volume , this system would allow the radar to be used like a flashlight , pointed in the direction of observation . This would greatly increase the amount of energy falling on a target , and improve detection capability . 
 On 21 February 1940 , John Randall and Harry Boot first ran their cavity magnetron at 10 cm ( 3 GHz ) . In April , GEC was told of their work and asked if they could improve the design . They introduced new sealing methods and an improved cathode , delivering two examples capable of generating 10 kW of power at 10 cm , an order of magnitude better than any existing microwave device . At this wavelength , a half @-@ dipole antenna was only a few centimetres long , and allowed Lovell 's team to begin looking at parabolic reflectors , producing a beam only 5 degrees wide . This had the enormous advantage of avoiding ground reflections by simply not pointing the antenna downwards , allowing the fighter to see any target at its altitude or above it . 
 Through this period , Rowe finally concluded that Dundee was unsuitable for any of the researchers , and decided to move again . This time he selected Worth Matravers on the southern coast , where all of the radar teams could once again work together . Due to confused timing and better planning on the part of the AI team , they arrived at Worth Matravers from St Athan before the long convoy from Dundee could make its way south . This caused a traffic jam that further upset Rowe . Nevertheless , everything was set up by the end of May 1940 , with the AI team working primarily from huts south of Worth Matravers , and carrying out installations at a nearby airfield . With this move the entire group became the Ministry of Aircraft Production Research Establishment ( <unk> ) , only to be renamed again as the Telecommunications Research Establishment ( TRE ) in November 1940 . 
 Soon after the move , Rowe formed a new group under Herbert Skinner to develop the magnetron into an AI system , at that time known as AI , <unk> ( AIS ) . Lovell adapted his parabolic antennas to the magnetron with relative ease , and the AIS team immediately detected a passing aircraft when they turned on the set for the first time on 12 August 1940 . The next day they were asked to demonstrate the set for managers , but no airplane happened to be flying by . Instead , they had one of the workers bicycle along a nearby cliff carrying a small plate of aluminum sheet . This neatly demonstrated its ability to detect objects very close to the ground . As AIS rapidly developed into the AI Mk . VII , development of the Mk . IV 's follow @-@ ons , the Mk . V , and Mk . VI ( see below ) saw vacillating support . 
 Considerable additional development of AIS was required , with the first production version arriving in February 1942 , and subsequently requiring an extended period of installation development and testing . The first kill by a Mk . VII set was on the night of 5 / 6 June 1942 . 
 = = = Serrate = = = 
 As microwave systems entered service , along with updated versions of aircraft carrying them , the problem arose of what to do with those aircraft carrying Mk . IV that were otherwise serviceable . One possibility , suggested as early as 1942 , was homing in on the Luftwaffe 's own radar sets . The basic operational frequencies of the Luftwaffe 's counterpart to the Mk . IV , the FuG 202 Lichtenstein BC radar , had been discovered in December 1942 . On 3 April 1943 the Air Interception Committee ordered the TRE to begin considering the homing concept under the codename Serrate . As luck would have it , this proved to be perfect timing . In the late afternoon of 9 May 1943 , a crew from IV / <unk> defected to the UK by flying their fully equipped Ju <unk> @-@ 1 night fighter , D5 + EV , to RAF Dyce in Scotland , giving the TRE their first direct look at the Lichtenstein . 
 The antenna array of the original Mk . IV was limited by practical factors to be somewhat shorter than the 75 cm that would be ideal for their 1 @.@ 5 m signals . Lichtenstein operated at 75 cm , making the Mk . IV 's antennas almost perfectly suited to pick them up . Sending the signals through the existing motorized switch to a new receiver tuned to the Lichtenstein 's frequency produced a display very similar to the one created by the Mk . IV 's own transmissions . However , the signal no longer had to travel from the RAF fighter and back again ; instead , the signals would only have to travel from the German aircraft to the fighter . According to the radar equation this makes the system eight times as sensitive , and the system displayed its ability to track enemy fighters at ranges as great as 50 miles ( 80 km ) . 
 Homing on the enemy 's broadcasts meant that there was no accurate way to calculate the range to the target ; radar ranging measurements are based on timing the delay between broadcast and reception , and there was no way to know when the enemy 's signal was originally broadcast . This meant that the homing device could only be used for the initial tracking , and the final approach would have to be carried out by radar . The extra range of the Mk . VIII was not required in this role as Serrate would bring the fighter within easy tracking range , and the loss of a Mk . IV would not reveal the secret of the magnetron to the Germans . For this reason , the Mk . IV was considered superior to the newer radars for this role , in spite of any technical advantages of the newer designs . 
 Serrate was first fitted to Beaufighter Mk . <unk> aircraft of No. 141 Squadron RAF in June 1943 . They began operations using Serrate on the night of 14 June , and by 7 September had claimed 14 German fighters shot down , for 3 losses . The squadron was later handed to No. 100 Group RAF , who handled special operations within Bomber Command including jamming and similar efforts . In spite of their successes , it was clear that the Beaufighter lacked the speed needed to catch the German aircraft , and Mosquitoes began to replace them late in 1943 . 
 The Germans became aware of their losses to night fighters , and began a rush program to introduce a new radar operating on different frequencies . This led to the lower @-@ VHF band FuG 220 Lichtenstein SN @-@ 2 , which began to reach operational units in small numbers between August and October 1943 , with about 50 units in use by November . In February 1944 , No. 80 Sqn noticed a marked decrease in FuG 202 transmissions . By this time the Germans had produced 200 SN @-@ 2 sets , and this had reached 1 @,@ 000 by May . This set deliberately selected a frequency close to that of their ground @-@ based Freya radar sets , in the hopes that these sources would swamp any wide @-@ band receiver set used on RAF aircraft . Early Serrate units were effectively useless by June 1944 , and their replacements were never as successful . 
 = = Further development = = 
 = = = Mk . IVA and Mk . V = = = 
 Experience demonstrated that the final approach to the target required fast action , too quick for the radar operator to easily communicate corrections to the pilot . In 1940 , Hanbury Brown wrote a paper On Obtaining Visuals from AI Contacts which demonstrated mathematically that the time delays inherent to the interception system were seriously upsetting the approach . In the short term he suggested the fighters make their approach to dead astern while still 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) out , and then fly straight in . For the longer term , he suggested adding a pilot 's indicator that directly demonstrated the direction needed to intercept . 
 This led to Hanbury Brown 's work on the Mark IVA , which differed from the Mk . IV primarily by having an additional display unit in front of the pilot . The radar operator had an additional control , the strobe , which could be adjusted to pick out returns at a particular range . Only those returns were sent to the pilot 's display , resulting in much less clutter . Unlike the operator 's display , the pilot 's showed the target 's location as a single dot in a bore @-@ scope like fashion ; if the dot was above and to the right of the centre of the display , the pilot had to turn to the right and climb to intercept . The result was what was known as a flying spot indicator , a single selected target showing a direct indication of the target 's relative position . 
 Tests were carried out starting in October 1940 , and quickly demonstrated a number of minor problems . One of the minor issues is that the crosshairs on the tube that indicated the center would block the spot . A more serious concern was the lack of range information , which the FIU pilots considered critical . Hanbury Brown went to work on these issues , and returned an updated version in December . A U @-@ shaped reticle in the center of the display provided a centre location that left the spot visible . Additionally , the circuitry included a second timebase that produced a longer signal as the fighter approached its target . The output was timed so the line was centred horizontally on the dot . This presented the range in an easily understandable fashion ; the line looked like the wings of an aircraft , which naturally grow larger as the fighter approaches it . 
 The U @-@ shaped centring post was sized so the tips of the U were the same width as the range indication line when the target was at 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 km ) , which indicated that the pilot should throttle back and begin his final approach . Two vertical lines to the sides of the display , the goal posts , indicated that the target was 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) ahead and it was time to look up to see it . Two smaller lines indicated a range of 500 feet ( 150 m ) , at which point the pilot should have seen the target , or had to break away to avoid collision . 
 At a meeting on 30 December 1940 , it was decided to begin limited production of the new indicators as an add @-@ on unit for existing Mk . IV systems , creating the AI Mk . IVA . The first examples arrived in January 1941 , with more units from <unk> and <unk> following in early February . Hanbury Brown 's involvement with AI came to an abrupt end during testing of the new unit . During a flight in February 1941 at 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) his oxygen supply failed and he suddenly awoke in an ambulance on the ground . He was no longer allowed to fly on tests , and moved to working on radar beacon systems . 
 Continued work displayed a number of minor problems , and the decision was made to introduce a redesigned unit with significant improvements in packaging , insulation , and other practical changes . This would become the AI Mk . V , which began to arrive from Pye in late February and immediately demonstrated a host of problems . By this time the microwave units were being designed , and the Mk . V was almost cancelled . A contract for over 1 @,@ 000 units was allowed to continue in case of delays in the new units . By May the issues with the Pye design were ironed out , and the FIU 's testing revealed it to be superior to the Mk . IV , especially in terms of maintenance . An RAE report agreed . 
 The first updated Mk . V sets arrived in April 1942 and were fitted to the de Havilland Mosquito as they became available . A Mk . V equipped Mosquito claimed its first kill on 24 / 25 June , when a Mosquito <unk> from No. 151 Squadron shot down a Dornier Do <unk> @-@ 4 over the North Sea . In practice it was found that pilots had considerable difficulty looking up from the display at the last minute , and the system was used only experimentally . By this time the microwave units had started to arrive in small numbers , so Mk . V production was repeatedly delayed pending their arrival , and eventually cancelled . 
 Starting in the summer of 1942 the TRE development team began experimenting with systems to project the display onto the windscreen , and by October had combined this with an image of the existing <unk> Mk . II gyro gunsight to produce a true head @-@ up display known as the Automatic Pilot 's Indicator , or API . A single example was fitted to a Beaufighter and tested through October , and numerous modifications and follow @-@ on examples were trialled over the next year . 
 = = = Mk . VI = = = 
 As AI began to prove itself through early 1940 the RAF realised that the radar supply would soon outstrip the number of suitable aircraft available . With large numbers of single @-@ engine single @-@ seat aircraft already in the night fighter units , some way to fit these with radar was desired , and the Air Ministry formed the AI Mk . VI Design Committee to study this in the summer of 1940 . The resulting AI Mk . VI design was essentially a Mk . IVA with an additional system that automatically set the strobe range . With no target visible , the system moved the strobe from its minimum setting to a maximum range of about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) and then started over at the minimum again . This process took about four seconds . If a target was seen , the strobe would stick to it , allowing the pilot to approach the target using his C @-@ scope . The pilot would fly under ground control until the target suddenly appeared on his pilot indicator , and then intercept it . 
 A prototype of the automatic strobe unit was produced in October , along with a new Mk . IVA @-@ like radar unit with a manual strobe for testing . EMI was then asked to provide another breadboard prototype of the strobe unit for air testing , which was delivered on 12 October . A raft of problems were found and addressed . Among these , it was found that the strobe would often stick to the ground reflection , and when it did not , would not stick until it had a strong signal at shorter ranges , or might stick to the wrong target . Eventually a panacea button was added to <unk> the strobe in these cases . 
 As the Mk . IVA was modified into its improved Mk . V , the Mk . VI followed suit . But by early 1941 it was decided to make the Mk . VI an entirely new design , to more easily fit in small aircraft . EMI had already been awarded a contract for a dozen prototype units in October 1940 for delivery in February , but these continued changes made this impossible . Nevertheless , they presented a production contract for 1 @,@ 500 units in December . Between December and March , production examples began arriving and displayed an enormous number of problems , which the engineers worked through one @-@ by one . By July the systems were ready for use , and began being installed in the new Defiant Mk . II early in August , but these demonstrated a problem where the system would lock @-@ on to transmissions from other AI aircraft in the area , which resulted in further modifications . It was not until the beginning of December 1941 that these issues were fully solved and the units were cleared for squadron use . 
 By this point , supplies of the Beaufighter and the new Mosquito had improved dramatically , and the decision was made to remove all single @-@ engine designs from the night fighter force during 1942 . Two Defiant units did switch to the Mk . VI , but they operated for only about four months before converting to the Mosquito . Production for the AI role ended , and the electronics were converted to Monica tail warning radars for the bomber force , until the mid @-@ 1944 knowledge of the Germans ' Flensburg radar detector , which spotted Monica transmissions , was revealed to the British . 
 The Mk . VI had a brief overseas career . One of the early units was experimentally fitted to a Hurricane Mk . IIc , and this led to a production of a single flight of such designs starting in July 1942 . These conversions were given such a low priority that they were not complete until the spring of 1943 . Some of these aircraft were sent to Calcutta where they claimed a number of Japanese bombers . An experimental fit on Hawker Typhoon <unk> <unk> was carried out , with the system packed into a standard underwing drop tank . This was available in March 1943 and underwent lengthy trials lasting into 1944 , but nothing came of this work . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Mk . IV was a complex lash @-@ up of systems , known collectively in the RAF as the Airborne Radio Installation 5003 ( ARI 5003 ) . Individual parts included the <unk> or <unk> receiver , <unk> transmitter , Modulator Type 20 , Transmitter Aerial Type 19 , Elevation Aerial Type 25 , Azimuth Aerial Type 21 and 25 , Impedance Matching Unit Type 35 , Voltage Control Panel Type 3 , and Indicator Unit Type 20 or 48 . 
 = = = Antenna layout = = = 
 As the Mk . IV system worked on a single frequency , it naturally leant itself towards the Yagi antenna design , which had been brought to the UK when the Japanese patents were sold to the Marconi Company . " Yagi " Walters developed a system for AI use using five Yagi antennas . 
 Transmissions took place from a single arrowhead antenna mounted on the nose of the aircraft . This consisted of a folded dipole with a passive director in front of it , both bent rearward at about 35 degrees , projecting from the nosecone on a mounting rod . For vertical reception , the receiver antennas consisted of two half @-@ wave <unk> mounted above and below the wing , with a reflector behind them . The wing acted as a signal barrier , allowing the antennas to see only the portion of the sky above or below the wing as well as directly in front . These antennas were angled rearward at the same angle as the transmitter . The horizontal receivers and directors were mounted on rods projecting from the leading edge of the wing , the antennas aligned vertically . The fuselage and engine nacelles formed the barriers for these antennas . 
 All four receiver antennas were connected via separate leads to a motorized switch that selected each one of the inputs in turn , sending it into the amplifier . The output was then switched , using the same system , to one of four inputs into the CRTs . The entire radar dipole aerial setup for the AI <unk> was simple in comparison to the 32 @-@ dipole <unk> ( mattress ) <unk> array fitted to the noses of the earliest German night fighters to use AI radar , for their own UHF @-@ band Lichtenstein B / C airborne radar design from 1942 – 43 . 
 = = = Displays and interpretation = = = 
 The Mk . IV display system consisted of two 3 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) diameter cathode ray tubes connected to a common timebase generator normally set to cross the display in the time it would take to receive a signal from 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) . The displays were installed beside each other at the radar operator 's station at the rear of the Beaufighter . The tube on the left showed the vertical situation ( altitude ) and the one on the right showed the horizontal situation ( azimuth ) . 
 Each receiver antenna was sent to one of the channels of the displays in turn , causing one of the displays to refresh . For instance , at a given instant the switch might be set to send the signal to the left side of the azimuth display . The timebase generator was triggered to start sweeping the CRT dot up the screen after the transmission ended . Reflections would cause the dot to be deflected to the left , creating a blip whose vertical location could be measured against a scale to determine range . The switch would then move to the next position and cause the right @-@ hand side of the display to be redrawn , but the signal inverted so the dot moved to the right . The switching occurred fast enough that the display looked continuous . 
 Because each antenna was aimed to be sensitive primarily in a single direction , the length of the blips depended on the position of the target relative to the fighter . For instance , a target located 35 degrees above the fighter would cause the signal in the upper vertical receiver to be maximized , causing a long blip to appear on the upper trace , and none on the lower trace . Although less sensitive directly forward , both vertical antennas could see directly in front of the fighter , so a target located dead ahead caused two slightly shorter blips , one on either side of the centreline . 
 For interception , the radar operator had to compare the length of the blips on the displays . If the blip was slightly longer on the right than left side of the azimuth display , for instance , he would instruct the pilot to turn right in an effort to centre the target . Interceptions normally resulted in a stream of left / right and up / down corrections while reading out the ( hopefully ) decreasing range . 
 The trailing edge of the transmitter pulse was not perfectly sharp and caused the receiver signals to ring for a short time even if they were turned on after the pulse was ostensibly complete . This leftover signal caused a large permanent blip known as the transmitter break through which appeared at the short @-@ range end of the tubes ( left and bottom ) . A control known as the <unk> Bias allowed the exact timing of the receiver 's activation relative to the transmitter pulse to be adjusted , normally so the remains of the pulse were just visible . 
 Due to the wide pattern of the transmission antenna , some of the signal always hit the ground , reflecting some of it back at the aircraft to cause a ground return . This was so powerful that it was received on all of the antennas , even the upper vertical receiver which would otherwise be hidden from signals below it . As the shortest distance , and thus the strongest signal , was received from reflections directly below the aircraft , this caused a strong blip to appear across all the displays at the range of the fighter 's altitude . The ground further in front of the aircraft also caused returns , but these were increasingly distant ( see slant range ) and only some of the signal was reflected back at the aircraft while an increasing portion was scattered forward and away . Ground returns at further distances were thus smaller , resulting in a roughly triangular series of lines at the top or right side of the displays , known as the " Christmas tree effect " , beyond which it was not possible to see targets . 
 = = = Serrate operation = = = 
 Serrate used the Mk . IV equipment for reception and display , replacing only the receiver unit . This could be switched in or out of the circuit from the cockpit , which turned off the transmitter as well . In a typical interception , the radar operator would use Serrate to track the German fighter , using the directional cues from the displays to direct the pilot on an intercept course . Range was not supplied , but the operator could make a rough estimate by observing the signal strength and the way the signals changed as the fighter maneuvered . After following Serrate to an estimated range of 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) , the fighter 's own radar would be turned on for the final approach . 
 = = = IFF use = = = 
 Starting in 1940 , British aircraft were increasingly equipped with the IFF Mk . II system , which allowed radar operators to determine whether a blip on their screen was a friendly aircraft . IFF was a responder that sent out a pulse of radio signal immediately on reception of a radio signal from a radar system . The IFF 's transmission mixed with the radar 's own pulse , causing the blip to stretch out in time from a small peak to an extended rectangular shape . 
 The rapid introduction of new types of radars working on different frequencies meant the IFF system had to respond to an ever @-@ increasing list of signals , and the direct response of the Mk . II required an ever @-@ increasing number of sub @-@ models , each turned to different frequencies . By 1941 it was clear that this was going to grow without bound , and a new solution was needed . The result was a new series of IFF units which used the indirect interrogation technique . These operated on a fixed frequency , different from the radar . The interrogation signal was sent from the aircraft by pressing a button on the radar , which caused the signal to be sent out in pulses synchronized to the radar 's main signal . The received signal was amplified and mixed into the same video signal as the radar , causing the same extended blip to appear . 
 = = = Homing systems = = = 
 <unk> systems used on the ground provide the ability to home in on the transponder 's location , a technique that was widely used with the Mk . IV , as well as many other AI and ASV radar systems . 
 Homing transponders are similar to IFF systems in general terms , but used shorter pulses . When a signal was received from the radar , the transponder responded with a short pulse on the same frequency , the original radar pulse would not be reflected so there was no need to lengthen the signal as in the case of IFF . The pulse was sent to the Mk . IV 's display and appeared as a sharp blip . Depending on the location of the transponder relative to the aircraft , the blip would be longer on the left or right of the azimuth display , allowing the operator to guide the aircraft to the transponder using exactly the same methods as a conventional aircraft intercept . 
 Due to the physical location of the transponder , on the ground , the receiver antenna with the best view of the transponder was the one mounted under the wing . The radar operator would normally pick up the signal on the lower side of the elevation display , even at very long distances . Since the signal from the beacon was quite powerful , the Mk . IV included a switch that set the timebase to 60 miles ( 97 km ) for long @-@ distance pickup . Once they approached the general area , the signal would be strong enough to begin to appear on the azimuth ( left @-@ right ) tube . 
 = = = BABS = = = 
 Another system used with the Mk . IV was the Beam @-@ Approach Beacon System , or BABS , which indicated the runway centreline . 
 The general concept pre @-@ dated the Mk . IV and was essentially a UK version of the German Lorenz beam system . Lorenz , or Standard Beam Approach as it was known in the UK , used a single transmitter located off the far end of the active runway that was alternately connected to one of two slightly directional antennas using a motorized switch . The antennas were aimed so they sent their signals to the left and right of the runway , but their signals overlapped down the centreline . The switch spent 0 @.@ 2 seconds connected to the left antenna ( as seen from the aircraft ) and then 1 second on the right . 
 To use Lorenz , a conventional radio was tuned to the transmission , and the operator would listen for the signal and try to determine if they heard dots or dashes . If they heard dots , the short 0 @.@ 2 s pulse , they would know they were too far to the left , and turned to the right in order to reach the centreline . Dashes indicated they should turn left . In the centre the receiver could hear both signals , which merged to form a steady tone , the <unk> . 
 For BABS , the only change was to change the broadcast 's transmissions to a series of short pulses rather than a continuous signal . These pulses were sent out when triggered by the AI radar 's signals and were powerful enough that they could be picked up by the Mk . IV receiver within a few miles . On reception , the Mk . IV would receive either the dots or dashes , and the operator would see an alternating series of blips centred in the display , popping out and then disappearing as the BABS antennas switched . The duration of the blip indicated whether the aircraft was to the left or right , and became a continuous blip on the centreline . This technique was known as AI beam approach ( AIBA ) . 
 Due to it being based on the same basic equipment as the original Mk . IV AI , BABS could also be used with the Rebecca equipment , originally developed to home on ground transponders for dropping supplies over occupied Europe . The later Lucero unit was essentially an adapter for a Rebecca receiver , mating it to any existing display ; AI , ASV , or H2S . 
 = It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken = 
 It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken is a graphic novel by Canadian cartoonist Seth . It appeared in a collected volume in 1996 after serialization from 1993 to 1996 in issues # 4 – 9 of Seth 's comic book series Palookaville . The mock @-@ autobiographical story tells of its author 's obsessive search for the work of a fictional forgotten cartoonist . 
 Seth presents the fictional book as a work of autobiography and features figures from his life such as his friend and fellow cartoonist Chester Brown . The minimalist artwork draws from the styles of the early New Yorker cartoonists , rendered in thick brushstrokes with heavy blacks against a greyish @-@ blue wash . The story unfolds with a nostalgic and melancholic tone , and several wordless scenes take the reader on a tour of Southern Ontarian <unk> and landscapes . The book gained Seth a reputation as part of an autobiographical comics trend in the 1990s . It won two Ignatz Awards in 1997 and ranked No. 52 of The Comics Journal 's " 100 Best Comics of the 20th Century " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Seth , a cartoonist then based in Toronto , first drew attention to his work in 1985 when he took over art duties from the Hernandez brothers for Mister X from Toronto publisher Vortex Comics . In April 1991 he launched his own comic book , Palookaville , with Montreal publisher Drawn and Quarterly . By this time , Seth 's artwork had evolved to a style inspired by The New Yorker cartoons of the 1930s and 1940s . 
 Self @-@ revelatory autobiography was a prominent genre in alternative comics in the early 1990s , drawing influence from the works of Robert Crumb , Harvey Pekar , Art Spiegelman , and others of the earlier underground comix generation . Seth had focused on autobiographical stories since Palookaville débuted . Friends of his appeared in it , most prominently fellow Toronto @-@ based cartoonists Chester Brown and Joe Matt , who also featured each other in their own autobiographical comics . Though a work of fiction , Seth presented It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken as another autobiographical story , an approach inspired in part by Lynda Barry , who mixed autobiography with fiction in her comics . Seth showed far more restraint in the content of his work than did Matt and Brown , whose comics revealed personal details such as their authors ' masturbation habits . The three share a melancholy worldview and a self @-@ deprecatory approach . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Seth is a cartoonist <unk> with collecting cartoons and other items from bygone eras . He rants about the modern world and criticizes himself , in particular to his friend and fellow cartoonist Chester " Chet " Brown . While searching for information on cartoonist Whitney Darrow , Jr . , Seth comes across a cartoon signed " Kalo " in The New Yorker . Fond of this older style of cartooning which resembles his own , Seth sets off to find more about this obscure cartoonist . 
 Seth begins a relation with a woman named Ruthie , whom he first spots while conducting a search at the Toronto Reference Library . He remains self @-@ absorbed and pays little attention to her interests , though she shows enthusiasm for his and discovers Kalo 's real name — Jack <unk> . Seth learns Kalo had spent his life in Seth 's own childhood hometown of Strathroy in Southern Ontario ; when he makes a visit there he refuses to allow Ruthie to accompany him , and a month later breaks off the relationship , to his later regret . 
 After two years of no progress Seth finds out that Kalo had run a real estate business in Strathroy that his daughter inherited on his death in 1979 . He returns to Strathroy where he interviews Kalo 's daughter and 93 @-@ year @-@ old mother . He learns that Kalo spent years as a cartoonist in New York and gave up cartooning for real estate after returning to Strathroy and marrying . Kalo 's mother had kept a collection of her son 's work , but lost it when she moved to a nursing home . In the end , Seth has only the eleven cartoons he had found , which append the book . 
 = = Publication = = 
 It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken was serialized in issues # 4 ( December 1993 ) through # 9 ( June 1996 ) of Seth 's comic book Palookaville , published by Drawn and Quarterly . It appeared in collected form in September 1996 from the same publisher . Seth said his mother used the title phrase when he was growing up . On the cover , Seth labelled the work " a Picture @-@ Novella " ; this allowed him to avoid the term ' " graphic novel " and instead use " an antiquated @-@ sounding term " . He has used the term on all his later book @-@ length works of fiction . 
 The book has been translated into a number of languages . A French edition appeared first in 1998 , and then in an edition more faithful in production to the original English one — with blue wash on yellowed pages — and in a different translation in 2009 . An Italian version followed in 2001 . In 2004 , editions appeared in German , Spanish , and Dutch . Editions appeared in Danish in 2010 , Korean in 2012 , and Polish in 2014 . 
 = = Style and analysis = = 
 The story takes place in the 1980s and follows Seth , a cartoonist whose life revolves around cartooning and collecting nostalgic items . He feels ill @-@ at @-@ ease in the modern world and pines for bygone eras . His obsessions and cynicism alienate Seth from most of those around him . 
 By the time he began the serial , Seth had developed a style derivative of The New Yorker stylists of the 1930s and 1940s . In the book 's appendix Seth describes Peter Arno as " possibly The New Yorker 's greatest stylist " . Seth appropriates the sophisticated , jaded satirical mood , thick <unk> , and compositional sense of Arno 's work . Seth 's <unk> is simple and organic , and he gives attention to buildings , landscapes , weather conditions , and other background details . The brushstrokes broaden into thick black shadows , sometimes flattening figures to near @-@ abstract silhouettes . A greyish @-@ blue wash accents the otherwise black @-@ and @-@ white cartooning . The novel is printed on yellow paper , giving an aged feeling to the book . 
 Several wordless scenes unfold in an atmospheric panning through landscapes and cityscapes , with a particular focus on older buildings . The third section opens with such a sequence — tangential to the plot — in the Royal Ontario Museum . The detail in the buildings is much greater than in the simplified delineation of the characters . 
 In a self @-@ referential twist , the character of Seth at one point discusses his love of the New Yorker style with Chester Brown , while the story itself is drawn in such a manner . Brown expresses his appreciation for such cartoonists but disappoints Seth with his lack of enthusiasm . The cartoonist Kalo is fictional , though this is not revealed in the book . Seth produces the Kalo cartoons in a New Yorker style , yet distinct from the art in the rest of the book . Seth 's use of a real person to comment on Kalo 's work makes the fictional cartoonist 's existence seem more plausible , as does an actual photograph on the final page purporting to be of Kalo . 
 A strongly nostalgic and melancholic tone pervades the narrative as the Seth character searches for peace and meaning in his life . The narrative is presented as confessional and revelatory : it displays the protagonist 's <unk> problems and self @-@ doubts , and at one point he is depicted as naked . He often talks of his obsession with the past — his own childhood and earlier eras — either through dialogue with friends or in captions as he wanders the streets . Seth 's interpersonal encounters tend to be one @-@ sided , revealing his reactions to and judgments of those around him . 
 Seth navigates the city on foot — cars , bicycles , and public transportation rarely even appear – as he talks with friends or rifles through used book shops . For literary theorist Barbara <unk> , the character fits the archetype of Walter Benjamin 's <unk> — the wandering urban pedestrian out of touch with his own time and obsessed with the past . Seth pines for a past not his own and obsessively collects consumer items from earlier in the 20th century . His focus is primarily on the period from the 1930s to the 1950s , a time he feels particularly " Canadian " . He goes as far as to wear an old @-@ fashioned overcoat and broad @-@ rimmed hat , for which passing teenagers taunt him , saying he looks like Clark Kent or Dick Tracy . He declares to Chester : " I do think life was simpler then ... easier for people to find personal happiness . " Brown disagrees , saying , " I think it 's always been difficult for people to be happy . " Seth dreads the future and allows his memories of childhood to dominate his thoughts , but recognizes and criticizes his own obsessions : " There 's something in the decay of old things that provokes an evocative sadness for the vanished past . If those buildings were perfectly preserved it wouldn 't be the same . " Despite this consciousness , he continues to pursue his collecting . 
 Photographs recur as a motif , such as family portraits in Kalo 's scrapbooks or wedding shots in a diner on which the focus dwells . Another motif is an old apartment building , the image of which appears at moments when Seth questions his search for Kalo . For <unk> , Kalo 's neglected work is similarly " unpreserved , unnoticed , and left to decay " . 
 A male @-@ centred viewpoint dominated English @-@ language comic books throughout the 20th century and , with few exceptions , placed women in subordinate roles as victims , helpers , or sex objects . To academic Katie Mullins , Seth 's narrative viewpoint follows from this tradition , though the book superficially has little in common with the masculine adventuring generally associated with mainstream comic books . The author 's female characters play peripheral roles , and the character 's obsessive collecting and self @-@ absorption alienate him from relationships with females , who at times encourage him to find meaning in life outside comics — advice he ignores . The book highlights the overwhelmingly masculine homosociality of the collector 's world , which Seth hints at with the name of the " Book Brothers " book store the character frequents . In one panel , the store sign is obscured so that only " Book <unk> " is visible , suggesting a " Book Brothel " , and thus evoking the fetishism inherent in collecting . The intelligent Ruthie provides a love interest that nevertheless manages only to feed Seth 's self @-@ absorption : he is attracted to her physically and also to her <unk> , but she takes second place in his life to his obsession with Kalo , whose real name she discovers for him . Seth finds he does not know her well enough to give a satisfactory answer to Chester 's " So what 's she like ? " Whenever she leads the conversation to her own thoughts and interests , Seth changes the subject . She ends by leaving him . 
 In every event and conversation , the protagonist draws parallels to something he has read in comics . He has a withdrawn personality averse to risk @-@ taking ; he declares himself a " true adherent of <unk> " , and quotes the character Linus from Charles M. Schulz 's comic strip Peanuts : " No problem is so big or so complicated that it can 't be run away from . " His mother 's home , which he calls " sealed in amber " as it never changes , provides him a safe berth from the ever @-@ changing modern world . 
 To comics scholar Bart Beaty , Kalo 's giving up cartooning for familial duties provides the protagonist an opportunity to evaluate his own life : his failed romances , his obsessive collecting , and his relationship with his family — in particular his mother , whose home is an emotional safety zone for him . The Seth character declares , " I used to like to get inside cardboard boxes and close them up behind me . I enjoyed being in that safe , confined space . My mother 's place is a lot like those boxes . " 
 Seth finds it hard to understand the fact that the cartoonist he admires could give up a cartooning career and still find happiness in the last twenty years of his life ; he come to accept it after a visit to Kalo 's mother in a nursing home . He discovers that his Kalo collection may always remain incomplete — though the family once had a scrapbook filled with Kalo 's cartoons , they long ago threw it away . By the end of the story , Seth has found a mere eleven of them . When Kalo 's mother reveals Kalo 's contentment with his choice to give up cartooning , Seth must face the anxiety of his life choices and what a " good life " may mean to him . As a mother who has outlived her son yet does not mire herself in the past , Mrs <unk> provides an unsentimental contrast to how Seth views and deals with the world . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In the middle of its serialization , reviewer Kent Worcester called It 's a Good Life , If You Don 't Weaken " one of the very few essential exemplars of the potential of the medium " . On its publication , It 's a Good Life became a primary inspiration , after Art Spiegelman 's Maus , on the cartoonist Chris Ware 's efforts and thoughts on the potential for the graphic novel form . 
 The book won Seth two <unk> at the award 's inaugural ceremony in 1997 : one for Outstanding Artist and the other for Outstanding Graphic Novel or Collection . In 1999 , the book placed No. 52 on The Comics Journal 's " 100 Best Comics of the 20th Century " . The book appeared on GQ 's " 20 Graphic Novels You Should Read " list in 2009 and on the British journalist Rachel Cooke 's list of ten best graphic novels . It ranked No. 16 on the Scottish Herald 's " 50 Greatest Graphic Novels of all Time " list in 2013 and No. 25 on Rolling Stone 's list of the " 50 Best Non @-@ Superhero Graphic Novels " in 2014 . 
 Since the book 's publication , Seth has achieved a particularly high level of critical and popular recognition compared to other Canadian cartoonists . According to academic Nick Mount , it is " the first Canadian graphic novel to ... make the crossover from underground praise to mainstream praise " . In 2005 he was the first cartoonist to have a solo exhibit at the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto . By 2006 It 's a Good Life had sold 15 @,@ 000 copies in English . 
 Seth has called Charles M. Schulz his primary influence ; his reputation for design led in 2004 to Fantagraphics Books enlisting him as the designer for the Complete <unk> . The New Yorker @-@ obsessed Seth has managed to have his work published in The New Yorker itself , including the cover to the March 2004 issue . 
 Seth followed It 's a Good Life with a similar work , the nostalgic and melancholic Clyde Fans , which began serialization in the following issue of Palookaville in 1997 ; it had yet to finish as of 2013 , and during its serialization Seth published a number of stand @-@ alone books . 
 = Hydnellum = 
 Hydnellum is a genus of tooth fungi of the family Bankeraceae in the order Thelephorales . Widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , the genus contains around 40 species . The fruitbodies of its members grow by slowly enveloping nearby bits of grass and vegetation . There is great variability in the form of Hydnellum fruitbodies , which are greatly influenced by environmental conditions such as rainfall and humidity , drying winds , and temperature . They are too tough and woody to eat comfortably . Several species have become the focus of increasing conservation concern following widespread declines in abundance . 
 Hydnellum species produce pigments that have been used to dye textiles . Several chemical compounds — some with unique biological activity — have been isolated and identified from the genus . 
 One of the better @-@ known species is the unusual pinkish @-@ white Hydnellum peckii , also known as " strawberries and cream " or as the " bleeding tooth fungus " due to the red droplets that appear on the pinkish or whitish fruitbodies . Another species , H. suaveolens , has a strong odor of anise or peppermint . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Hydnellum was circumscribed by Finnish mycologist Petter Adolf Karsten in 1879 with what was then known as Hydnum suaveolens as the type species . Before then , fungi with spines ( hydnoid fungi ) had been grouped in Hydnum by Elias Fries in his 1821 work Systema <unk> . Karsten defined Hydnellum as having fruitbodies with a corky or leathery , tough cap , and a centrally attached stipe . Synonyms of Hydnellum include Calodon ( Karsten , 1881 ) , and <unk> ( Joseph Schröter , 1888 ) . 
 Hydnellum is classified in the family Bankeraceae , which was circumscribed by Marinus Anton Donk in 1961 . The genus was not in Donk 's original family concept , which included only Bankera and Phellodon , genera whose species made hyaline ( translucent ) , and ornamented spores . Donk left Hydnellum in the tribe <unk> of the family Thelephoraceae , along with Sarcodon and <unk> . In 1981 , however , Walter Jülich emended Donk 's concept of the Bankeraceae , adding hydnoid genera that produced brown , lobed spores — Hydnellum and Sarcodon . 
 The name comes the Greek <unk> meaning spongy plant or fungus . The British Mycological Society , in their recommended list of common names for fungi in the United Kingdom , name Hydnellum fungi in the form " descriptor word " plus " tooth " , such as " gold tooth " ( H. <unk> ) , " zoned tooth " ( H. concrescens ) , and " velvet tooth " ( H. spongiosipes ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hydnellum fruitbodies have caps and stipes , often with <unk> growth forms , that may grow in spurts and decay over several weeks . Neighboring fruitbodies can coalesce , forming intricately intertwined caps and partially fused stipes . The flesh has a zoned appearance and is fibrous when fresh , but becomes hard and woody when dry . Zones in the flesh reflect differences in growth during periods of low daytime and high nighttime humidity , and give a fairly accurate record of daily growth . The spines are crowded closely together and typically decurrent ( extending down the length of the stipe ) . They may be a variety of colors , such as white to yellow , olive green , shades of orange , light brown , or dark brown in age . 
 Spores of Hydnellum are almost spherical to oblong and tuberculate , and are brown in mass . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are narrowly club @-@ shaped and usually four @-@ spored ; there are no cystidia in Hydnellum . Three types of hyphae are found in the flesh of Hydnellum : generative hyphae ( thin @-@ walled , not inflated ) ; skeletal hyphae ( thick @-@ walled and narrow ) ; and thin @-@ walled <unk> @-@ like hyphae , which stain with methyl blue . 
 In conditions of high humidity , several species can form striking colored drops on the actively growing caps : red drops in H. peckii , H. diabolus , H. ferrugineum , and H. <unk> , yellow drops in H. caeruleum , and coffee @-@ colored drops in H. mirabile . The common names of H. peckii reflect its appearance : " strawberries and cream " and " bleeding tooth fungus " . Some Hydnellum species have a mealy odor ( e.g. H. mirabile and H. pineticola ) similar to freshly ground flour . H. <unk> smells like <unk> , while H. suaveolens has an sweet odor resembling anise or peppermint . All are too tough and woody to be edible , and many have an acrid taste anyway . 
 Differences between Hydnellum species tend to be more distinguishable in younger specimens . <unk> development is greatly influenced by environmental factors such as levels of rainfall , drying winds , and temperature . The blue tooth ( H. caeruleum ) , for example , develops a deeper blue color when it grows during cooler autumn weather . Optimal growth occurs during periods of frequent light rains and high humidity ; if the habitat dries out , growth will stop , but may resume after further precipitation . This intermittent growth affects the fruitbodies of different species to variable extents , leading to large variations in form , surface texture , and color . The morphological variability of fruitbodies and the dependence of their appearance upon environmental conditions has made Hydnellum a difficult group to study . Canadian mycologist Kenneth A. Harrison , who described several new species from North America , noted " [ t ] he remarkable longevity of individual <unk> of many species and the changes in appearance that occur during the long period of their development have confused all workers studying this group . " For example , H. aurantiacum , initially white , becomes in turn shades of orange , rusty @-@ brown , and brownish @-@ black . Its fruitbody initially has a <unk> ( cushion @-@ like ) shape with a lumpy surface , later becoming flattened to funnel @-@ shaped with a smooth to corrugated surface texture . 
 The caps form from the top of the short stipe by the growth and expansion of a blunt margin and later as a thickening of the upper surface . Spines start to form when the cap hangs over the stipe slightly . They are white in many species , but become brown in maturity as the brown @-@ colored spores accumulate on the surface . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Hydnellum fungi are mycorrhizal , and are usually found in coniferous and mixed woods . Favored tree hosts include members of the Fagaceae and the Pinaceae . The genus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , particularly Europe and North America , but some species are found in the tropical Asia . Harrison identified a dozen new species from North America in the 1960s . Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus recognized European 16 species in his 1975 treatment of the genus . 
 Some Hydnellum species , including H. ferrugineum and H. <unk> , form a tough mat of mycelia in the humus and upper soil of pine forests . This mycelial mat grows larger with old trees , and can cover an area of several square meters . These areas generally lack dwarf shrubs and promote the vigorous growth of mosses ; reindeer lichens often occur in the center of large mats . The presence of the fungus changes the nature of the soil , resulting in a thinner humus layer , decreased groundwater penetration , decreased soil pH , and increases in the level of root respiration as well as the quantity of roots . The fungus also decreases the organic carbon and nitrogen concentrations . Soil with the mycelium becomes more podzolized than the surrounding soil . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Some Hydnellum species have been shown to be in decline in Europe , including the Czech Republic , the Netherlands , Norway , and Scotland . In the United Kingdom , several are listed in the biodiversity action plan for stiped hydnoid fungi : H. aurantiacum is classified as critically endangered ; H. caeruleum , H. ferrugineum are listed as endangered , while H. concrescens , H. spongiosipes , H. peckii , and H. scrobiculatum are considered vulnerable . H. ferrugineum and H. peckii are sensitive to the increased nitrogen deposition resulting from clear @-@ cutting , a forestry practice used in some areas of Europe . 
 Conservation efforts for Hydnellum are hindered by the fact that some species are difficult to discriminate in the field , making it hard to determine an appropriate conservation status . Techniques based on species @-@ specific PCR primers and DNA extraction from soil have been developed to detect the mycelia of various Hydnellum species without having to rely on the presence of fruitbodies , which may help conservation efforts as well as improve understanding of below @-@ ground ecology . Similar techniques have been used to show that , in the case of H. aurantiacum and H. caeruleum , the fungus can persist below the ground for at least four years without producing fruitbodies . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Several chemical compounds — some with unique biological activity — have been isolated and identified from Hydnellum species . For example , H. peckii contains atromentin , a pigment with anticoagulant properties similar to heparin . <unk> also possesses antibacterial activity , inhibiting the enzyme enoyl @-@ acyl carrier protein reductase ( essential for the biosynthesis of fatty acids ) in the bacteria Streptococcus pneumoniae . 
 Some species are used as dyes . H. caeruleum , used in North America and Scandinavia to dye silk and wool , produces a range of colors including tan , blue , and forest @-@ green , depending on the mordant that is used . H. peckii produces gray , brown , and olive colors . <unk> and <unk> are pigments responsible for the coloration of H. ferrugineum and H. <unk> . <unk> is a yellow pigment found in H. geogenium . 
 <unk> acid is present in several Hydnellum species . This compound , derived metabolically from the shikimic acid pathway , inhibits the enzyme prolyl endopeptidase , which is involved in deteriorating certain <unk> that are believed to contribute to memory and learning . Hydnellum caeruleum and H. concrescens have several para @-@ terphenyl derivatives named <unk> , some of which can inhibit the enzyme alpha @-@ glucosidase . The compounds <unk> A and B are <unk> found in H. suaveolens and H. <unk> . The chemicals responsible for the fragrant anise @-@ like aroma of H. suaveolens have been identified as coumarin and para @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Species = = 
 Karsten 's original 1879 circumscription of Hydnellum contained 19 species . Joost Stalpers included 34 Hydnellum species in his 1993 monograph on the Thelephorales . The tenth edition of the Dictionary of the Fungi ( 2008 ) indicated 38 species in the genus . As of January 2015 , Index Fungorum lists 39 species of Hydnellum . 
 Hydnellum aurantiacum ( Batsch ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> ( <unk> . ) Maas Geest . ( 1959 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum caeruleum ( <unk> . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1975 ) – Europe 
 Hydnellum <unk> ( Pers . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Europe 
 Hydnellum <unk> Banker ( 1906 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum concrescens ( Pers . ) Banker ( 1906 ) – Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> ( Peck ) Banker ( 1906 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> ( Bres . ) Stalpers ( 1993 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1961 ) – Nova Scotia , Canada 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1971 ) – Punjab , India 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Banker ( 1906 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum ferrugineum ( Fr . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – North Africa , Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> ( <unk> . ) Banker ( 1906 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1971 ) – Australia 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1961 ) – Nova Scotia , Canada 
 Hydnellum geogenium ( Fr . ) Banker ( 1913 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum gracilipes ( P.Karst. ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Europe 
 Hydnellum <unk> Coker ( 1939 ) – United States 
 Hydnellum mirabile ( Fr . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1961 ) – Nova Scotia , Canada 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1971 ) – Papua New Guinea 
 Hydnellum peckii Banker ( 1912 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Banker ( 1913 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum scrobiculatum ( Fr . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1964 ) – North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1969 ) – Colombia 
 Hydnellum spongiosipes ( Peck ) Pouzar ( 1960 ) – Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1971 ) – Malaysia 
 Hydnellum suaveolens ( Scop . ) P.Karst. ( 1879 ) – Asia , Europe , North America 
 Hydnellum <unk> K.A.Harrison ( 1961 ) – Nova Scotia , Canada 
 Hydnellum <unk> Maas Geest . ( 1975 ) – Europe 
 = = = Cited works = = = 
 Harrison KA . ( 1961 ) . The <unk> <unk> of Nova Scotia . Publications of the Department of Agriculture Canada ( Report ) 1099 ( Ottawa , Canada : Research Branch , Canada Department of Agriculture ) . pp. 1 – 60 . 
 Stalpers JA . ( 1993 ) . " The <unk> fungi I. Keys to the species of the Thelephorales " . Studies in Mycology 35 : 1 – 168 . 
 = Sol Levi = 
 Solomon " Sol " Levi is a fictional character from EastEnders : E20 , an Internet spin @-@ off off the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Tosin Cole . Sol is a main character in series 2 , where he is joined by his older brother Asher Levi ( Heshima Thompson ) and their new friends Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) and Stevie Dickinson ( Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes ) . Sol is described as loyal , shy , thoughtful and reserved . He is dependent on his brother , who has looked after him for most of this life . Throughout the series , he has a romance with Naz but it is threatened by his bad temper , falls out but later reunites with his brother , and performs a solo dance routine in the finale . Tosin will reprise the role in series 3 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Sol arrives in Walford with his brother Asher Levi ( Heshima Thompson ) after their mother Caroline ( Sandra Yaw ) throws them out of their home . Sol helps Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) in an argument with Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) and is punched in the face by Leon Small ( Sam Attwater ) . Sol and Asher attend a dance audition for Skolla ( Tony Adigun ) but Sol messes up . They then move into Stevie Dickinson 's ( Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes ) flat with Naz . They attend a party where several people ask Sol for drugs , leaving him annoyed . Naz sells them fake drugs , but when they complain , Sol gives their money back and they leave . Back in Walford , Naz kisses Sol to avoid being seen by Ekin Beg ( Hemi Yeroham ) . Sol and Naz grow closer when she watches him do his dance routine , and they almost kiss twice but are interrupted both times , the second time by the arrival of Ekin who reveals he and Naz are engaged . Sol then argues with Naz about Ekin . He and Asher attend callbacks for the dance group but Skolla says Sol is too slow and gets him to perform solo , but Sol is put off but the audience and leaves . Asher later tells him he is a better dancer and the dance crew is their future , but Sol says it is Asher 's dream and he just wants to go home to his mother . After Asher tells Ekin to back off from Naz , Ekin asks Sol to tell Asher he is not Naz 's boyfriend , leading Sol to believe that Naz and Asher are seeing each other . Sol insults Naz and Asher who leave and go clubbing . Sol sends an apology via text message , and Stevie encourages him to find her . When he does , she is drunk . They reconcile but he is unaware that Naz and Asher have had sex . 
 Sol and Naz spend the night together but at later dance rehearsals , Asher gives Naz her necklace back , and Sol sees this . He confronts Naz about it and she reveals she had a one @-@ night stand with Asher but it meant nothing to her . Sol punches Asher , saying his brother has betrayed him , and a fight breaks out , but is broken up by Skolla and the other dancers . Skolla tells Sol and Asher they are both out of the group and reveals that Asher bought Sol 's place . Sol goes back home to his mother but a neighbour tells him she has been taken away . Back in Walford , Naz insists she did not receive Sol 's text message but he is still angry . Stevie attempts to get them to reconcile by locking them in the flat and pretending to swallow the key , but Naz reveals she is going to Turkey to meet Ekin 's family and Sol says she can stay there . Sol and Naz get close again but Asher interrupts them when he returns drunk . Stevie drops the key revealing she did not swallow it and Sol thinks Naz was in on the plan so he tells her to enjoy Turkey before leaving . Asher finds Sol with their mother in hospital , and tells Sol he is better off with him than their mother as she is schizophrenic and has stabbed Asher . Sol says Asher is the problem and leaves . Asher finds him and apologises for Naz and says she did not get Sol 's text message because he deleted it , and tells Sol that Naz loves him and he should do something about it . Sol returns to Walford again as Naz is leaving , and stops Ekin 's car . Naz gets out and they kiss . Asher tells him he can dance at the dance @-@ off , but when his name is called , he is unsure and calls for Asher , saying he needs him . Asher tells him he can do it on his own . Everyone cheers him after his routine and he is called one of the best dancers . 
 In series 3 , Naz and Sol are seen briefly together , and they are still a couple . 
 = = Creation , development and characterisation = = 
 Sol is one of four main characters from series two of EastEnders : E20 , created by its team of thirteen writers , along with Asher , Stevie and Naz . Tosin Cole was cast in the role , and said , " It 's a privilege to work on something so big but so different . Everyone is fantastic to work with . I 'm really excited . " He said that he found it exciting and weird to work with the EastEnders cast , but they made him feel comfortable . However , he admitted to feeling nervous about having to dance in front of professional dance group Flawless in the series finale , saying that learning to dance was " very , very , very stressful . " The character and casting were announced on 28 July 2010 . The show 's producer , Deborah Sathe , said " I am [ ... ] proud of what the writers have achieved . [ They ] have created four new faces for [ Albert ] Square and their reaction to Walford life is really exciting . " 
 Sol is Asher 's younger brother , and Asher has provided for him most of his life . Asher has been a father figure to Sol since a young age , and Sol depends on him . Looking after Sol takes a toll on Asher , however . Sol is loyal to his brother , but depends on him so much that he finds it difficult to function without him . Sol likes his family to be together , but they are fractured due to Asher being a troublemaker and their mother being mentally unstable and Sol wants to reunite them . Sol 's dependence on Asher also means he finds it difficult to establish his own identity . Asher is willing to put himself out to secure Sol 's success , such as being stabbed by his mother and giving away his father 's Rolex watch so Sol can get a place in the dance group , and has done things so that Sol would not have to do them himself . Thompson opined that Asher is not necessarily the best role model for Sol , but is a good brother even though the mistakes he makes override the good things he has done for Sol . Cole said that Sol is not a troublemaker but he gets into trouble without meaning to as trouble comes to him . Although he does not bring attention to himself , he has a bad temper and hides his feelings with violence . He gets into a few fights throughout the series , and makes situations worse by getting physical . Sol does not understand or think about what he is doing when he loses his temper . Cole also said that trust is an issue with Sol throughout the series . 
 Sol quickly falls for Naz when they meet , but his anger threatens their relationship . Sol has never met a girl like Naz before , and Cole said Naz probably has not met boys like Sol before either . Hussen said that there is something about Sol that attracts Naz . She is stronger than he is so Naz likes to take him in and teach him things . Cole explained that Sol is attracted to Naz because she is different from other girls and they are complete <unk> and Sol depends on him . Looking after Sol takes a toll on Asher , however . One of Cole 's first scenes to film was a kiss between Sol and Naz . Cole found it tough and awkward as the actors had only just met , and would have preferred it to be filmed later on , but said that the scene was awkward anyway so he did not have to act much for it . Sol has also been described as shy , caring , sweet , thoughtful , soft , easily hurt and reserved . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Sol also appears in extra video content on the E20 website . In one , he and Asher argue during filming of an advert for " SmasherDance " , as Sol is more interested in getting food . The full SmasherDance advert is also on YouTube . In another video , the four friends play a drinking game in the café but Sol loses and ends up being sick from too much drink . In another video he calls his mother and leaves a message saying he misses her and is worried about her . 
 = Hurricane Ethel ( 1960 ) = 
 Hurricane Ethel was one of two major hurricanes in the 1960 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth known tropical cyclone , fifth named storm , and fourth hurricane of the season , Ethel developed from a disturbance in the Gulf of Mexico on September 14 . After becoming a tropical storm , Ethel rapidly intensified and became a hurricane six hours later . By early on September 15 , the storm reached major hurricane intensity when it became a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . At 0600 UTC on September 15 , Ethel intensified to its peak as a Category 5 hurricane . However , shortly thereafter , Ethel rapidly weakened back to a Category 1 hurricane while brushing eastern Louisiana . Later on September 15 , Ethel weakened to a tropical storm . Early on the following day , Ethel made landfall in Pascagoula , Mississippi . The storm gradually weakened inland , before eventually dissipating over southern Kentucky on September 17 . 
 Because the storm rapidly weakened before landfall , a potential " worst @-@ case scenario " was avoided . In Louisiana , the western edge of the storm produced light rainfall and hurricane @-@ force winds , though no damage occurred in that state . Offshore of Mississippi , rough seas inundated Horn Island and split Ship Island . Tropical storm force winds in the southern portion of the state littered broken glass , trees , and signs across streets in Pascagoula , as well as down power lines , which caused some residents to lose electricity . In Alabama , winds damaged beach cottages in cities along the Gulf Coast , and damaged crops in five counties in the southern portion of the state . Although large amounts of precipitation fell in the extreme western portions of the state , no flooding occurred in Florida . A lightning strike to a power station near Tallahassee caused a briefly city @-@ wide blackout . The storm spawned four tornadoes in Florida , one of which destroyed 25 homes . Outside the Gulf Coast of the United States , rain fell in other states , but no damage is known to have occurred . Overall , Ethel caused 1 fatality and $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1960 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Ethel originated from a small tropical disturbance over the Gulf of Mexico on the morning of September 14 , 1960 . It is estimated that Ethel developed into a tropical storm at 1200 UTC on that day , with an initial intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The disturbance quickly developed within a region favoring intensification and the New Orleans Hurricane Warning Office issued their first advisory on the system , classifying it as an area of low pressure , at 1500 UTC . Roughly six hours after becoming a tropical storm , Ethel was upgraded to a hurricane as it underwent an intense phase of explosive deepening . By this time , gale @-@ force winds extended 150 miles ( 240 km ) to the north of the center and 80 miles ( 130 km ) to the south . Ethel further intensified into a major hurricane , as it approached the Gulf Coast of the United States . 
 Following a pass through the storm by a United States Navy reconnaissance plane , Ethel was declared a " severe hurricane " with winds reaching 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , equivalent to a modern @-@ day Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . At the time these winds were measured , a barometric pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) was recorded , the lowest in relation to the hurricane . However , shortly thereafter , cool , dry air began to entrain the storm , causing it to rapidly weaken . In a six @-@ hour span , the storm suddenly weakened to a Category 1 hurricane , a decrease of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . 
 As Ethel neared landfall , forecasters within the United States Weather Bureau were unsure of the future track and intensity of the hurricane due to the unusual strengthening and weakening . Around 1100 UTC on September 15 , the center of Ethel brushed the coastline of Plaquemines Parish , Louisiana with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Continuing northward , the hurricane further weakened to a tropical storm as it was approaching the Gulf Coast of the United States . Shortly before 0000 UTC on September 16 , Ethel made landfall in Pascagoula , Mississippi with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Gradual weakening took place as the storm moved inland over Mississippi and by 1800 UTC on September 16 , Ethel was further downgraded to a tropical depression . The remnants of the former hurricane continued moving towards the north @-@ northwest before dissipating on September 17 over southern Kentucky . 
 = = = Intensity = = = 
 Although the US Navy reconnaissance plane recorded winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , the actual peak intensity of Ethel has been in dispute since . Due to an abnormally high minimum barometric pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) , it is believed that Ethel may have only peaked as a Category 2 hurricane , which is calculated with the pressure to wind relationship . In addition , the extreme intensification and rapid weakening deems it more unlikely that Ethel had peaked as a Category 5 hurricane . Ethel is expected to be downgraded to a low @-@ end Category 3 hurricane , with peak maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , as part of the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Prior to Ethel 's arrival , adequate warning allowed roughly 12 @,@ 000 residents along the Mississippi coastline to evacuate to shelters , set up at churches and schools . Along a 200 miles ( 320 km ) stretch of the Gulf Coastline , all fishing villages fully evacuated to safer places . In Louisiana , at least 2 @,@ 000 people had been evacuated from Grand Isle . Other towns were placed under emergency evacuations where Coast Guard boats were used to move residents to safer areas . Military aircraft were also moved from Keesler Air Force Base to other airfields across the country . Numerous schools and businesses were closed on September 15 in fears of a worst @-@ case scenario , a storm with 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) winds passing directly over Mobile , Alabama , a city of roughly 150 @,@ 000 people . In Florida , the National Weather Bureau stated that preparations were not being undertaken fast enough nor as extensive as warranted . According to the Red Cross , 48 @,@ 000 people in the threatened region sought refuge in shelters ; civil defense stated that 65 @,@ 000 residents moved to shelters . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Before the storm weakened rapidly , people feared a large storm surge over much of southeastern Louisiana . Preparing for the storm induced stress , which in one person contributed a fatal heart attack . In Louisiana , a compact , rapidly weakening Hurricane Ethel brought significant wind and rain primarily east and southeast of New Orleans . However , the storm caused a maximum surge of only 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) . Although Ethel weakened significantly , the hurricane still lashed far southeastern Louisiana . At the United States Coast Guard station in Quarantine in Plaquemines Parish , Louisiana , sustained winds reached 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) . A weather station in Venice reported a sustained wind speed of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) and gusts to 105 miles per hour ( 169 km / h ) . Rainfall totals included 7 @.@ 45 inches ( 189 mm ) at Quarantine , 5 @.@ 66 inches ( 144 mm ) at Hopedale , 5 @.@ 50 inches ( 140 mm ) at Buras , 4 @.@ 85 inches ( 123 mm ) at Burrwood , and 2 @.@ 90 inches ( 74 mm ) at Port Sulfur . 
 Hurricane Ethel caused substantial beach erosion throughout the barrier islands of Mississippi but brought a relatively small storm surge of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) along the populated coastline . Roughly 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) of the east end of Horn Island ( Mississippi ) was lost . The storm also split Ship Island into two islands , east and west Ship Islands . However , few knew of this split until Hurricane Camille in 1969 Atlantic hurricane season substantially widened the split . The sustained wind reached a maximum of 56 miles per hour ( 90 km / h ) in Biloxi , Mississippi . Throughout the Mississippi Gulf Coast , winds reached gusts approached 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) . In Pascagoula , Mississippi , broken glass , fallen trees and signs covered the streets . Several areas were also flooded and power was lost in area where power lines were downed by high winds . Following the storm , Governor of Mississippi Ross Barnett ordered 100 Mississippi National Guard to Pascagoula and requested other troops in other areas . 
 High winds also affected Alabama , reaching 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) and gusts of 70 miles per hour ( 110 km / h ) at Fort Morgan ( Alabama ) . Slight damage to beach cottages occurred in Dauphin Island and Gulf Shores and along Mobile Bay . Minor crop losses were reported in Clarke , Escambia , Mobile , Monroe , and Washington counties . The storm spawned at least one tornado in the state , which demolished a barn , damaged a house , uprooted several trees , and destroyed a cotton field in Gosport . 
 Hurricane Ethel also brought heavy rains and strong winds to much of the Florida Panhandle . A maximum of 12 @.@ 94 inches ( 329 mm ) of rain fell at an agricultural experiment station near Milton , Florida , the highest total measured at an official station and attributed to this storm . Hurricane Donna struck Tampa , Florida , particularly hard earlier in the month , causing major flooding of Hillsborough River ( Florida ) at Zephyrhills , Florida on 12 September . People feared severe flooding of the Hillsborough River into Tampa , which did not occur . The highest wind gust in the state was 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) , measured in both Pensacola and Apalachicola . A thunderstorm associated with Ethel produced lightning that hit a power station near Tallahassee , causing a city @-@ wide blackout for 10 minutes ( 600 s ) . According to Florida Highway Patrol , Ethel directly caused damage of $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1960 USD ) in the state . Additionally Ethel spawned four tornadoes in Florida , one of which reached F2 intensity and damaged or destroyed 25 homes near Panama City . 
 Beyond the Gulf Coast of the United States , Ethel dropped rainfall in the states of Georgia , South Carolina , North Carolina , causing little if any damage . Throughout its path , Ethel caused $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1960 USD ) in damage and one indirect fatality . 
 = Brainwashing : The Science of Thought Control = 
 Brainwashing : The Science of Thought Control is a non @-@ fiction book analyzing brainwashing , thought reform and mind control , by neuroscientist and physiologist Kathleen Taylor . It was first published in hardcover on December 16 , 2004 by Oxford University Press . Taylor reviews the history of the term brainwashing , from its usage in 1950 by journalist Edward Hunter to its application to cults , marketing , influence , thought reform , torture and reeducation . She references the book Thought Reform and the Psychology of <unk> by psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton and cites his research on indoctrination techniques experienced by prisoners of war during the Korean War . 
 Taylor explains the neurological basis for reasoning and cognition in the brain , and proposes that the self is changeable while describing the physiology of neurological pathways . She utilizes case studies including Patty Hearst , the Manson Family , and the mass murder / suicide of members of Peoples Temple at Jonestown , and compares the techniques of influence used by cults to those of totalitarian and communist societies . She lays out a model FACET - Freedom , Agency , Complexity , Ends @-@ not @-@ means , and Thinking - which she believes can be used to negate the influence of brainwashing techniques . 
 The book was " highly commended " and runner @-@ up in the 2005 Times Higher Education Supplement Young Academic Author Award , and was shortlisted for the 2005 MIND " Book of the Year Award " . It received positive reviews in The Guardian and Skeptical Inquirer , critical reviews in The Daily Telegraph and Financial Times , and has been used as a resource in books including Marketing Dictatorship and Democracy , Lifelong Learning and the Learning Society . 
 = = Author = = 
 Kathleen Taylor attended the University of Oxford and studied physiology and philosophy . She obtained a Masters degree in psychology from Stirling University , and received her doctorate in computational neuroscience from the University of Oxford . Her postdoctoral research was in <unk> and cognitive neuroscience . She is a neuroscientist at the University of Oxford 's Department of Physiology , Anatomy and Genetics , researching physiology , psychology and the neuroscience of belief . In 2003 Taylor won first prize in both the Times Higher Education / Oxford University Press Science Essay competition and the <unk> Humanities and Social Sciences Writing Prize . She presented her research on brainwashing at the Edinburgh International Science Festival in 2005 . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Taylor provides background on the development of the term brainwashing , from its use in 1950 by journalist Edward Hunter and its later usage as applied to the spheres of cults , marketing , influence , thought reform , torture and reeducation . She references psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton 's work Thought Reform and the Psychology of <unk> as a resource throughout the book . Lifton based his research on interviews he conducted with prisoners of war who had been subjected to indoctrination and torture during the Korean War . Taylor argues that the term brainwashing is useful to when used to refer to a more coercive form of persuasion . 
 She explains the neurological basis for reasoning and cognition in the brain , and brings the point across that the self itself is changeable . She describes the physiology behind neurological pathways which include webs of neurons containing dendrites , axons , and synapses ; and explains that certain brains with more rigid pathways will be less susceptible to new information or creative stimuli . Taylor utilizes neurological science to show that brainwashed individuals have more rigid pathways , and that rigidity can make it unlikely that the individual will rethink situations or be able to later reorganize these pathways . She explains that repetition is an integral part of brainwashing techniques because connections between neurons become stronger when exposed to incoming signals of frequency and intensity . She argues that people in their teenage years and early twenties are more susceptible to persuasion . Taylor explains that brain activity in the temporal lobe , the region responsible for artistic creativity , also causes spiritual experiences in a process known as lability . 
 In the Part I of the book , titled : " Torture and seduction " , Taylor analyzes how various parties have used certain techniques in influencing and brainwashing others , including a restriction of individual freedoms , deception , and methods that conflict with one 's decision @-@ making processes . She utilizes case studies including Patty Hearst , the Manson Family , and the mass murder / suicide of members of Peoples Temple at Jonestown to illustrate the neurology she explains in Part II , " The traitor in your skull " . In the case of the Manson Family followers of Charles Manson carried out multiple murders in 1969 , and with Peoples Temple over 900 followers of charismatic leader Jim Jones died in 1978 in Jonestown , Guyana after consuming cyanide . Taylor asserts that the techniques used by cults to influence others are similar to those used by other social groups , and compares similar totalitarian aspects of cults and communist societies . These techniques include isolating the individual and controlling their access to information , challenging their belief structure and creating doubt , and repeating messages in a pressurized environment . 
 According to Taylor , cults emphasize positive aspects of the group over negative aspects of outsiders , endlessly repeat simple ideas in " highly reductive , definitive - sounding phrases " , and refer to " abstract and ambiguous " ideas associated with " huge emotional baggage " . Taylor writes that brainwashing involves a more intense version of the way the brain traditionally learns . In the final portion of the book , Part III : " Freedom and Control " , Taylor describes an individual 's susceptibility to brainwashing and lays out an acronym " FACET " , a tool to combat influence and a <unk> mindset . FACET stands for Freedom , Agency , Complexity , Ends @-@ not @-@ means , and Thinking . The FACET model is based on Lifton 's eight criteria for thought reform , and Taylor emphasizes education and freedom of thought as a way to negate some of these criteria . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Brainwashing was first published in hardcover format on December 16 , 2004 by Oxford University Press , and again in paperback format on August 24 , 2006 . The book was " highly commended " and runner @-@ up in the 2005 Times Higher Education Supplement Young Academic Author Award , and also made it to the shortlist for the 2005 MIND " Book of the Year Award " . The book also made it to the longlist of the 2005 Aventis " Science Book Prize " , where it was described as containing " elegant and accessible prose " . 
 PD Smith gave the book a positive review in The Guardian , and concluded : " Her ambitious and well @-@ written study celebrates human freedom through a history of attempts to destroy it . " Joseph <unk> reviewed the book for Skeptical Inquirer , and wrote : " I enjoyed the book as a challenge to think about a sorely neglected topic . " <unk> concluded : " Taylor 's concern is with any human venture ( be it science , religion , or politics ) that restricts brain function from creative ' stop and think ' activity , and which becomes little more than another exclusive cult . " 
 In a review of the book for The Daily Telegraph , British doctor and science writer James Le Fanu was critical , and commented that Taylor did not acknowledge " the explanatory gap " between current understanding of the brain 's structure and " what it does , how we think , feel and emote " . Le Fanu concluded , " The paradox of Brainwashing is that it would have been a much more interesting book if Dr Taylor had pursued the contrarian view of seeking to explain why that ' explanatory gap ' is not merely unbridged but , with the advance of the neurosciences , now seems to be unbridgeable . A brain that was simple enough to be fully known would be too simple to contain conscious observers who might know it . " Nigel Hawkes of The Times criticized what he saw as Taylor 's conclusion that " we are all a little bit brainwashed by our culture and experience " and noted that this assessment places Jim Jones of the Peoples Temple group in the same classification as the tabloid press . A review in Financial Times by Jerome Burne was also critical , and he commented that Taylor does not convey " a clear enough message " in the work . 
 = 1993 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1993 Football Association Charity Shield was the 71st FA Charity Shield , an annual football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup competitions . It was held at Wembley Stadium on 7 August 1993 . The match was played between Arsenal , who beat Sheffield Wednesday to win the 1993 FA Cup Final , and Manchester United , champions of the inaugural Premier League competition . Watched by a crowd of 66 @,@ 519 , Manchester United won the Shield 5 – 4 on penalties , after the match had finished at 1 – 1 after 90 minutes . 
 This was Arsenal 's 12th 's Charity Shield appearance and Manchester United 's 17th . The 1993 staging of the event was the first to feature players wearing permanent squad numbers ; this became common practise in time for the 1993 – 94 season . Roy Keane made his debut for Manchester United in the match ; he partnered Paul Ince in midfield . United began the match the brighter of the two teams and scored after eight minutes of play , through Mark Hughes . Striker Eric Cantona spurned two chances to extend United 's lead , by which point Arsenal 's midfield started to assert themselves . Five minutes before the interval , Ian Wright capitalised on a mistake by Ryan Giggs to score the equaliser . Arsenal started the second half strongly , which prompted Ferguson to tweak his formation and bring on Bryan Robson in place of Giggs . Eddie McGoldrick came on for his Arsenal debut in the 74th minute , and two minutes later , United were denied a penalty after Ince was brought down by John Jensen . 
 As there were no further goals , the match was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . Wright and Denis Irwin missed their penalties ; the decisive penalty , taken by Arsenal goalkeeper David Seaman , was saved by his opposite number , Peter Schmeichel . Arsenal manager George Graham admitted his surprise over how the game was decided and thought both clubs would share the trophy ; his counterpart Alex Ferguson , though delighted with his team 's victory , felt the sudden death aspect was unnecessary . 
 = = Background = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a contest between the top professional and amateur teams of each season . It was played between the Football League champions and FA Cup winners for the first time in 1921 ; the formation of a new top @-@ tier division , the Premier League , in 1992 meant it displaced the Football League spot . Wembley Stadium acted as the home venue of the Shield , first hosting the event in 1974 . The Arsenal players in the 1993 staging of the Charity Shield were the first in the competition 's history to wear permanent squad numbers and names on the back of their shirts , while the Manchester United players used the traditional 1 – 11 numbering system without the names , which was phased out by the start of the 1993 – 94 FA Premier League season . The Premier League intended to introduce persistent squad numbers with names at the start of the 1992 – 93 season , but Manchester United vetoed plans as their laundry room " was too small to handle all the extra shirts " . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 1993 FA Charity Shield by defeating Sheffield Wednesday in a replay match of the 1993 FA Cup Final to win the cup . The club therefore completed a domestic cup double ; earlier in the season they beat Sheffield Wednesday 2 – 1 to win the 1993 Football League Cup Final . The other Charity Shield place went to Manchester United , winners of the inaugural Premier League competition . It was their first league title in 26 years and goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel felt the signing of striker Eric Cantona was a factor in the team 's success : " He has added an element of surprise , imagination , inventiveness . " 
 This was Manchester United 's first appearance in the Charity Shield in three years ; prior to this event they won 10 Shields outright ( 1908 , 1911 , 1952 , 1956 , 1957 , 1983 ) , shared four ( 1965 , 1967 , 1977 , 1990 ) and lost three ( 1948 , 1963 , 1985 ) . By contrast , Arsenal won seven previous Shields ( 1930 , 1931 , 1933 , 1934 , 1938 , 1948 , 1953 ) , shared one with Tottenham Hotspur in 1991 and lost four ( 1935 , 1936 , 1979 , 1989 ) . Both clubs had only once met before in the Shield , when Arsenal won by four goals to three in 1948 . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Both managers approached the match with a view to win , in spite of the Shield 's friendly feel . Arsenal manager George Graham opined " Winning is a good habit , so why not start early ? " Graham lambasted those who found his team 's playing style tedious : " The criticism that we don 't pass the ball and we don 't have flair is overdone . We won two championships and in the second lost one game out of 38 . " However , Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson said " Winning means keeping your job , and it can be a delicate situation . But I tell myself I 'm not going to fail in this game . " Ferguson spoke in glowing terms of new signing Roy Keane , a midfielder who gave United " unbelievable options , a real edge to the squad " . 
 The match was scheduled for a 12 : 30pm kick off since Sky Sports televised the match in both Scotland and England ; they were unable to pick an afternoon slot because of the television blackout , which aimed to protect Scottish attendances . UEFA warned The Football Association in the lead @-@ up to the Charity Shield that a 3pm kick @-@ off would result in a minimum fine of £ 5 million . <unk> Brown of The Sunday Times wrote of the decision : " So , at least , the season is beginning as it will go on , at the mercy of television . " Tickets for the game were advertised at a cost of between £ 10 and £ 30 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Arsenal lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation ; Eddie McGoldrick was included in the matchday squad , while Kevin Campbell partnered Ian Wright up front . Ferguson deployed a 4 – 2 – 4 formation , with Paul Ince partnering debutant Keane in the midfield two . Andrei Kanchelskis was picked in favour of Lee Sharpe on the left wing . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Manchester United began the first half the better of the two teams and led from the eighth minute . Denis Irwin 's cross into Arsenal 's penalty area found Eric Cantona on the right side ; he lobbed the ball in Mark Hughes ' direction , who was surrounded by the Arsenal defenders . Hughes instinctively made a connection with the ball with an overhead shot that beat goalkeeper David Seaman at the near post . United fashioned another chance to score moments after ; Keane fed the ball to Cantona whose shot was blocked by Seaman . Kanchelskis created a further chance for Cantona ; the Frenchman 's effort once more was denied , this time by an Arsenal defender . " These proved costly misses " , opined Patrick Barclay , given United 's tempo weakened , and Arsenal 's John Jensen and Paul Davis started to impose themselves in midfield . United captain Steve Bruce coped well against Campbell and Wright , but the latter striker equalised for Arsenal in the 40th minute . A loose pass from Ryan Giggs was headed @-@ on by Davis and the ball fell to Wright . He , " some 20 yards out " , hit the ball first time , which dipped past the underside of the crossbar . 
 A tackle by Ince on Lee Dixon left the Arsenal defender with a damaged ankle ; he came off at half time and was replaced by Martin Keown . Arsenal 's performance improved after Wright 's goal ; Paul Merson , a quiet figure in the first half , influenced their play in the second . Ferguson responded to Arsenal 's newfound impetus by substituting Giggs for Bryan Robson . This tweaked United 's formation to 4 – 3 – 3 ; in spite of Ince 's well @-@ rounded performance , his partner Keane started to tire as the game went on and United 's game therefore suffered . Keane was shifted onto the right to accommodate Robson , who brought control to United 's play . In the meantime , Nigel Winterburn prevented Cantona from scoring , following good play by Kanchelskis . Arsenal 's service to Wright and Campbell was infrequent throughout the second half , but both players tested Schmeichel in goal . McGoldrick came on for his Arsenal debut in the 74th minute , a versatile player , able to " sweep , score from midfield or play wide " . Two minutes later , Seaman denied Keane from scoring with a one @-@ handed save . United continued to attack and a move was broken down after Jensen 's tackle brought Ince down in the Arsenal 's penalty area . Gerald Ashby refused to award a penalty – " the referee 's decision otherwise was not supported by television replays " . 
 No further goals meant the game was decided on a penalty shoot @-@ out . The first four penalties were scored – Ince and Bruce for United and Winterburn and Jensen for Arsenal , before Seaman saved Irwin 's effort . Wright missed his penalty , prompting jeers from the United supporters . The shoot @-@ out proceeded to sudden death ; Robson scored and Seaman " saw his gentle penalty saved by his opposite number " to give United a 5 – 4 win and thereby the Shield . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The Charity Shield was presented to Bruce by former Arsenal manager Billy Wright . Wright died barely a year later , aged 70 . Graham assumed both clubs would share the trophy , so when it came to a penalty shoot @-@ out he entrusted his players to decide their order . He described Wright 's goal as " brilliant " and felt it was " unfortunate " that Seaman missed : " For a goalkeeper , he normally takes great penalties . He normally hits them hard but he decided to try and place this one and it didn 't work . " Wright was unashamed of his penalty miss , " … just as long as I don 't do it when it is important " . 
 Ferguson remarked the Shield should not have been settled on penalties ; to him it was a " celebration of success " , though ultimately he was delighted his team won . He was pleased with the team 's start – " I thought in the first 25 minutes we were really good and could have tied the match up then " – and considered lining the team up in a 4 – 3 – 3 formation to begin with , though wanted to see " how Keane played with Ince , what the balance was like " . Ince believed he should have been awarded a penalty after Jensen fouled him : " I was past their last man and there was no way I would have dived from there . " 
 = Billboard ( magazine ) = 
 Billboard is an entertainment media brand owned by The Hollywood Reporter @-@ Billboard Media Group . It publishes news , video , opinion , reviews , events and style . It is known for music charts , including the Billboard Hot 100 and Billboard 200 , tracking the most popular songs and albums in different genres . It also hosts events , owns a publishing firm , and operates several TV shows . 
 Billboard was founded in 1894 by William Donaldson and James Hennegan as a trade publication for bill posters . Donaldson later acquired <unk> 's interest in 1900 for $ 500 . In the 1900s , it covered the entertainment industry , such as circuses , fairs and burlesque shows . It also created a mail service for travelling entertainers . Billboard began focusing more on the music industry as the jukebox , phonograph and radio became commonplace . Many topics it covered were spun @-@ off into different magazines , including Amusement Business in 1961 to cover outdoor entertainment , so that it could focus on music . 
 After Donaldson died in 1925 , Billboard was passed down to his children and their children , until it was sold to private investors in 1985 . The magazine continued to change hands to Affiliated Publications ( 1987 ) , VNU / Nielsen ( 1994 ) and its current owner , Prometheus Global Media ( 2009 ) . As of 2016 , it has been shifting to more of a consumer focus . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The first issue of Billboard was published in Cincinnati , Ohio , on November 1 , 1894 by William Donaldson and James Hennegan . Initially , it covered the advertising and bill posting industry and was called Billboard Advertising . At the time , billboards , posters and paper advertisements placed in public spaces were the primary means of advertising . Donaldson handled editorial and advertising , while Hennegan , who owned Hennegan Printing Co . , managed magazine production . The first issues were just eight pages long . The paper had columns like " The Bill Room Gossip " and " The Indefatigable and Tireless Industry of the Bill Poster . " A department for agricultural fairs was established in 1896 . It was shortened to The Billboard in 1897 . 
 After a brief departure over editorial differences , Donaldson purchased Hennegan 's interest in the business in 1900 for $ 500 , to save it from bankruptcy . That May , Donaldson changed it from a monthly to a weekly paper with a greater emphasis on breaking news . He improved editorial quality and opened new offices in New York , Chicago , San Francisco , London and Paris . He also re @-@ focused the magazine on outdoor entertainment like fairs , carnivals , circuses , vaudeville and burlesque shows . A section devoted to circuses was introduced in 1900 , followed by more prominent coverage of outdoor events in 1901 . These types of events were the antecedents to the modern entertainment industry . Billboard covered topics including regulation , a lack of professionalism , economics and new shows . It had a " stage gossip " column covering the private lives of entertainers , a " tent show " section covering traveling shows and a sub @-@ section called " Freaks to order . " According to The Seattle Times , Donaldson also published news articles " attacking censorship , praising productions exhibiting ' good taste ' and fighting yellow journalism . " 
 As railroads became more developed , Billboard set up a mail forwarding system for traveling entertainers . The location of an entertainer was tracked in the paper 's Routes Ahead column , then Billboard would receive mail on the star 's behalf and publish a notice in its " Letter @-@ Box " column that it has mail for them . This service was first introduced in 1904 . It became one of Billboard 's largest sources of profit and celebrity connections . By 1914 , there were 42 @,@ 000 people using the service . It was also used as the official address of traveling entertainers for draft letters during World War I. In the 1960s , when it was discontinued , Billboard was still processing 1 @,@ 500 letters per week . 
 In 1920 , Donaldson made a then @-@ controversial move by hiring an African @-@ American journalist James Albert Jackson to write a weekly column devoted to African @-@ American performers . According to The Business of Culture : Strategic Perspectives on Entertainment and Media , the column identified discrimination against black performers and helped validate their careers . Jackson was the first black critic at a national magazine with a predominantly white audience . According to his grandson , Donaldson also established a policy against identifying performers by their race . Donaldson died in 1925 . 
 = = = Focus on music = = = 
 Billboard 's editorial changed focus as technology in recording and playback developed . It covered " marvels of modern technology " like the phonograph , record players and wireless radios . It began covering coin operated entertainment machines in 1899 and created a dedicated section for them called " Amusement Machines " in March 1932 . Billboard began covering the motion picture industry in 1907 , but ended up focusing on music due to competition from Variety . It created a Billboard radio broadcasting station in the 1920s . 
 The jukebox industry continued to grow through the Great Depression and advertised heavily in Billboard . This led to even more editorial focus on music . The proliferation of the phonograph and radio also contributed to its growing music emphasis . Billboard introduced a " Record Buying Guide " in January 1939 . In 1940 , it introduced " Chart Line " , which tracks the best @-@ selling records . This was followed by a chart for jukebox records in 1944 called Music <unk> charts . By the 1940s , Billboard was more of a music industry specialist publication . The number of charts it published grew after World War II , due to a growing variety of music interests and genres . It had eight charts by 1987 , covering different genres and formats , and 28 charts by 1994 . 
 By 1943 , it had about 100 employees . The magazine 's offices moved to Brighton , Ohio in 1946 , then to New York City in 1948 . A five @-@ column tabloid format was adopted in November 1950 and coated paper was first used in Billboard 's print issues in January 1963 , allowing for photojournalism . Billboard Publications Inc. acquired a monthly trade magazine for candy and cigarette machine vendors called Vend and , in the 1950s , acquired an advertising trade publication called Tide . By 1969 , Billboard Publications Inc. owned eleven trade and consumer publications , a publisher called Guptill Publications , a set of self @-@ study cassette tapes and four television franchises . It also acquired Photo Weekly that year . 
 Over time , the subjects Billboard still covered outside of music were spun @-@ off into separate publications . <unk> magazine was created in 1957 to cover amusement parks and Amusement Business was created in 1961 to cover outdoor entertainment . In January 1961 , Billboard was renamed to Billboard Music Week to emphasize its new exclusive interest in music . Two years later , it was renamed to just Billboard . According to The New Business Journalism , by 1984 , Billboard Publications was a " prosperous " conglomerate of trade magazines and Billboard had become the " undisputed leader " in music industry news . In the early 1990s , Billboard introduced Billboard Airplay Monitors , a publication for disc jockeys and music programmers . By the end of the 1990s , Billboard dubbed itself the " bible " of the recording industry . 
 = = = Changes in ownership = = = 
 Billboard struggled after its founder William Donaldson died in 1925 and within three years was once again heading towards bankruptcy . Donaldson 's son @-@ in @-@ law Roger Littleford took over in 1928 and " nursed the publication back to health . " His sons , Bill and Roger , became co @-@ publishers in 1946 and inherited the publication in the late 1970s after Roger Littleford 's death . They sold it to private investors in 1985 for an estimated $ 40 million . The investors cut costs and acquired a trade publication for the Broadway theatre industry called Backstage . 
 In 1987 , Billboard was sold again to Affiliated Publications for $ 100 million . Billboard Publications Inc. became a subsidiary of Affiliated Publications called BPI Communications . As BPI Communications , it acquired The Hollywood Reporter , Adweek , Marketing Week and <unk> . It purchased Broadcast Data Systems , which is a high @-@ tech firm for tracking music airtime . Private investors from Boston Ventures and BPI executives re @-@ purchased a two @-@ thirds interest in Billboard Publications for $ 100 million and more acquisitions followed . In 1993 , it created a division called Billboard Music Group for music @-@ related publications . 
 In 1994 , Billboard Publications was sold to a Dutch media conglomerate , <unk> Nederlandse <unk> ( VNU ) , for $ 220 million . VNU acquired the Clio Awards in advertising and the National Research Group in 1997 , as well as Editor & Publisher in 1999 . In July 2000 , it paid $ 650 million for the publisher Miller Freeman . BPI was combined with other entities in VNU in 2000 to form Bill Communications Inc . By time CEO Gerald Hobbs retired in 2003 , VNU had grown substantially larger , but it had a large amount of debt from the acquisitions . An attempted $ 7 billion acquisition of IMS Health in 2005 prompted protests from shareholders that halted the deal . It eventually agreed to an $ 11 billion takeover bid from investors in 2006 . 
 VNU then changed its name to Nielsen in 2007 , the namesake of a company it acquired for $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in 1999 . New CEO Robert <unk> divested some of the previously owned publications , restructured the organization , and planned some acquisitions before dying suddenly in 2007 to be replaced by Greg Farrar . 
 Nielsen owned Billboard until 2009 , when it was one of eight publications sold to e5 Global Media <unk> e5 was formed by investment firms Pluribus Capital Management and Guggenheim Partners for the purpose of the acquisition . The following year , the new parent company was renamed to Prometheus Global Media . Three years later , Guggenheim Partners acquired Pluribus ' share of Prometheus and became the sole owner of Billboard . In December 2015 , Guggenheim Digital Media sold several media brands , including Billboard , to its own executive , Todd <unk> . He formed The Hollywood Reporter @-@ Billboard Media Group , which owns both Billboard and The Hollywood Reporter . 
 = = = 1990s – present = = = 
 Timothy White was appointed Editor in Chief in 1991 , a position he held until his unexpected death in 2002 . White wrote a weekly column promoting music with " artistic merit , " while criticizing music with violent or misogynistic themes . He reworked the publication 's music charts . Rather than rely on data from music retailers , new charts used data from store checkout scanners obtained from Nielsen SoundScan . He also wrote in @-@ depth profiles on musicians . The website , Billboard.com , was launched in 1995 . Keith Girard replaced White before being fired in May 2004 . He and a female employee filed a $ 29 million lawsuit alleging Billboard fired them unfairly with an intent to damage their reputations . The lawsuit claimed they experienced sexual harassment , a hostile work environment and a financially motivated lack of editorial integrity . Email evidence suggested human resources were given special instructions to watch minority employees . The case was settled out @-@ of @-@ court in 2006 for a non @-@ disclosed sum . 
 In the 2000s , economic decline in the music industry dramatically reduced readership and advertising from Billboard 's traditional audience . Circulation declined from 40 @,@ 000 in circulation in the 1990s to less than 17 @,@ 000 by 2014 . The publication 's staff and ownership were also undergoing frequent changes . In 2005 Billboard expanded its editorial outside the music industry into other areas of digital and mobile entertainment . 
 Bill Werde was named editorial director in 2008 , and was followed by Janice Min in January 2014 , who is also responsible for editorial at The Hollywood Reporter . The magazine has since been making changes to make it more of a general interest music news source , as opposed to solely an industry trade . It started covering more celebrity , fashion , and gossip . Min hired Tony <unk> as the publication 's editor , which was different than Billboard 's historical appointments , in that he did not have a background in the music industry . Tony <unk> was appointed Editor in Chief in April 2014 . An article in NPR covered a leaked version of Billboard 's annual survey , which it said had more gossip and focused on less professional topics than prior surveys . For example , it polled readers on a lawsuit pop @-@ star Kesha filed against her producer alleging sexual abuse . 
 = = News publishing = = 
 Billboard publishes a news website and weekly magazine that cover music , video and home entertainment . Most of the paper 's stories are written by staff writers , while some are written by industry experts . It covers news , gossip , opinion , and music reviews , but its " most enduring and influential creation " is the Billboard charts . The charts track music sales , radio airtime and other data about the most popular songs and albums . The Billboard Hot 100 chart of the top @-@ selling songs was introduced in 1955 . Since then , the Billboard 200 , which tracks the top @-@ selling albums , has become more popular as an indicator of commercial success . Billboard has also published books in collaboration with Watson @-@ Guptill and a radio and television series called American Top Forty , based on Billboard charts . A daily Billboard Bulletin was introduced in February 1997 and Billboard hosts about 20 industry events each year . 
 Billboard is considered one of the most reputable sources of music industry news . It has a print circulation of 17 @,@ 000 and an online readership of 1 @.@ 2 million unique monthly views . The website includes the Billboard Charts , news separated by music genre , videos , and a separate website . It also compiles lists , hosts a fashion website called Pret @-@ a @-@ Reporter , and publishes eight different newsletters . The print magazine 's regular sections include : 
 Hot 100 : A chart of the top 100 most popular songs that week 
 <unk> : News from the week 
 The Beat : Hitmaker interviews , gossip and trends in the music industry 
 Style : Fashion and accessories 
 Features : In @-@ depth interviews , profiles and photography 
 Reviews : Reviews of new albums and songs 
 Backstage pass : information about events and concerts 
 Charts and CODA : More information about current and historical Billboard Charts 
 = = Archives = = 
 The scanning project by Google Books , in partnership with major libraries , includes back @-@ issues of Billboard . Aspects of the project were challenged in the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals ( Authors Guild vs. Google , et al . ; 2005 ) . The upshot is that Google prevailed under the Fair Use doctrine . 
 Selected Billboard digital archives 
 1940 – 2010 archived online by Google Books 
 2005 – 2009 archived online by Billboard 
 1938 – 2009 ( missing issues ) , archived by American Radio History ( online : <unk> ) , maintained by David Gleason ( né David <unk> Gleason ; born 1946 ) of La Quinta , California 
 = Dial Meg for Murder = 
 " Dial Meg for Murder " is the 11th episode of season eight of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on January 31 , 2010 , the day of the series ' eleventh anniversary from 1999 . The episode follows teenager Meg as she dates and falls in love with an inmate at the local prison . She eventually ends up hiding the fugitive in the Griffin family home , however , and is convicted and sent to jail . After returning home , she becomes a hardened criminal , who continually tortures her family . While starting a life away from home , Meg sees the magazine article that the family dog Brian wrote about her . Touched by what he wrote , Meg returns home and thanks Brian in return . Prior to her storyline , Meg 's father Peter attempts to win a local championship rodeo competition , but his attempts to sabotage the competition to ensure his win gets the best of him after getting assaulted by the bull he rode on . 
 First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Alex Carter and Andrew Goldberg , and directed by Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland . It received mostly positive reviews for its storyline , and cultural references , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 21 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Dave Boat , Peter Chen , Chace Crawford , Camille Guaty , Victor J. Ho , Allison Janney , Rachael MacFarlane , and Lisa Wilhoit along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Dial Meg for Murder " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When the news announces a local rodeo competition in Quahog , Peter decides to enter . He trains using Chris and Meg in various ways , such as using Chris as a <unk> , or roping Meg and branding her , only to find he has been beaten to it by Mayor West , who takes her away . However , during the competition he quickly falls off his anthropomorphic bull , and ends up being raped , off @-@ screen , by the bull . 
 While that occurs , Brian meets the editor of Teen People ( Allison Janney ) , who gives him a job writing an article about the average American girl . When he starts following and spying on Meg with Stewie for research , they discover that she has fallen in love with a man in jail named Luke ( Chace Crawford ) , whom she met through a school pen @-@ pal project . 
 After Brian reveals Meg 's secret to Peter and Lois , who don 't want her seeing Luke again , he soon breaks out of jail during a prison riot and tries to hide in the Griffins ' house . When Brian comes to Meg 's room to apologize for what he did to her , he finds him just as Peter enters . Peter only knows what is happening when reading the episode 's plot synopsis in TV Guide ( the reason he entered the rodeo ) , and finds out who Luke is . As Luke escapes out the window , Peter alerts Joe , who apprehends Luke . Joe also arrests Meg for harboring a fugitive , and she is sent to prison . Luke is never heard from again in the episode . 
 Three months later , Meg returns home with the mind and attitude of a hardened criminal , complete with a new thuggish and rebellious look . She immediately begins abusing her family , retaliating to the many years of abuse she had endured under them , such as curb @-@ stomping Peter , raping him in the shower with a <unk> , and using her mother 's shirts as toilet paper ( while also keeping a " poop bucket " next to her bed and refusing to empty it until it gets full ) . In addition , she continues habits she picked up in prison , and beats up the kids who make fun of her at school ( specifically Connie D 'Amico and her friends with a bag of full soda cans which she hits them with , cracking three of the popular kids ' skulls open and tongue @-@ kissing Connie afterwards ) for which she is suspended . Wanting to start a new life away from home , Meg ambushes Brian in his car and threatens him with a gun to drive to Mort 's Pharmacy so she can rob him . Brian , however , shows her the article he wrote , in which he describes her " far sweeter and kinder " than the typical American girl . Touched by the fact that Brian actually cares for her just as she was , Meg changes her mind and returns home with Brian ; having changed back her normal personality in the process . Back at home , she makes a bad joke involving Wesley Snipes , and Peter , presumably not amused at this , ends the episode by saying " Always end on a strong joke " . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 First touched upon by actress Mila Kunis at the 2009 Comic Con in San Diego , the episode was written by Alex Carter and Andrew Goldberg , and directed by former King of the Hill director Cyndi Tang @-@ Loveland , before the conclusion of the eighth production season , in her second episode for this season . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter working as staff writers for the episode . 
 " Dial Meg for Murder " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actress Allison Janney voiced the editor for Teen People , actor Chace Crawford voiced Luke , voice actress Lisa Wilhoit voiced Connie D 'Amico , and voice actors Dave Boat , Peter Chen , Camille Guaty , Victor J. Ho , and Rachael MacFarlane guest starred as various characters in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , Johnny Brennan , writer Steve Callaghan , Chris Cox , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring guest cast members Patrick Warburton and Adam West made guest appearances as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title is a reference to the 1954 Alfred Hitchcock thriller Dial M for Murder . At the beginning of the episode , Stewie rhetorically asks whether or not he can call the television magazine TV Guide " The Guide " . In the scene where Brian spies on Meg for the Teen Journal article Stewie quickly warns Brian that " not all dogs go to heaven " , cutting to a quick scene with the Disney character Goofy from the Mickey Mouse shorts in hell with Satan claiming Goofy was part of the plotting of 9 / 11 . Goofy justified his part in the attacks by pointing out the United States ' support for Israel . Goofy is then thrown to the pit of fire , using his famous laugh . In one scene Stewie refers to Meg as " one of those crazy chicks , who hooks up with an even crazier guy , " with a photograph of Jenny McCarthy and Jim Carrey then being shown . The song " The Ballad of Billy the Kid " by singer and performer Billy Joel is used in depicting Peter 's flashbacks about being a cowboy . Meg mentions meeting Wesley Snipes in the episode , and mentions his movie Passenger 57 . The ending of the episode includes a reference to The Simpsons , in which Meg makes an unfunny joke , with Peter announcing he is not amused , responding by sarcastically stating " Always end on a strong joke . " The start of the closing credits that follow the statement is styled to match those used in The Simpsons credits . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant decrease from the previous episode , the episode was viewed in 6 @.@ 21 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The 52nd Grammy Awards and the Pro Bowl aired simultaneously to the Animation Domination block , resulting in lower than usual ratings . Despite this , the episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , surpassing The Simpsons , American Dad ! and The Cleveland Show , in both rating and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly positive , with critics finding " a lot to like about this episode . " Jason Hughes of TV Squad gave the episode a positive review , stating that " [ the writers ] finally found an angle for a Meg @-@ centric episode that was fully engaging and entertaining . " Ahsan Haque of IGN also praised the episode , saying that " the fact that the writers chose to focus on a coherent storyline that relied mostly on contextual humor always helps , " calling the ending " somewhat touching . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club criticized the storyline much more harshly , however , saying that it " relied too heavily on the show 's old <unk> of politically incorrect humor , and ostensibly funny violence . " 
 The conservative Parents Television Council , a frequent critic of Family Guy and other Seth MacFarlane @-@ produced shows , named Dial Meg for Murder its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for the week ending February 5 , 2010 , due to excessive violence in scenes featuring Meg as both the victim and the instigator . Also cited was the sequence where Peter unsuccessfully fights off an angry bull , and later is shown in a fetal position while the bull stands over him , implying rape , calling it " sickening . " 
 = Union Station ( Erie , Pennsylvania ) = 
 Union Station is an Amtrak railroad station and mixed @-@ use commercial building in downtown Erie in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The Lake Shore Limited provides passenger service between Chicago , New York City , and Boston — Erie is the train 's only stop in Pennsylvania . The station 's ground floor has been redeveloped into commercial spaces , including The Brewerie at Union Station , a brewpub . The building itself is privately owned by the global logistics and freight management company Logistics Plus and serves as its headquarters . 
 The first railroad station in Erie was established in 1851 but was replaced with the Romanesque Revival @-@ style Union Depot in 1866 . Through a series of mergers and acquisitions by competing railroad companies , which started not long after the establishment of Erie 's first railroads , Union Depot became jointly owned and operated by the New York Central and Pennsylvania railroads . To meet the changing needs of the rapidly growing city , planners designed a more modern structure to replace the original depot . The new Art Deco Union Station , dedicated on December 3 , 1927 , was the first railroad station of that style in the United States . 
 While Union Station was busy from its opening and through World War II , passenger rail service began to dwindle after the war when air and highway travel became more popular . By the 1960s , the New York Central drastically cut service , while the Pennsylvania abandoned service to Erie altogether . Both railroads were merged in 1968 to form Penn Central , and passenger rail was transferred from Penn Central to Amtrak in 1971 . At one point , from 1972 to 1975 , even Amtrak service in Erie was suspended . With reduced demand for train travel , Union Station was largely neglected and allowed to decay until Logistics Plus bought it in 2003 . Since then , it has been restored and portions re @-@ purposed as commercial and retail space . 
 = = Design = = 
 Union Station is in downtown Erie on West 14th Street between Peach and Sassafras streets . Designed by architects Alfred T. <unk> and Steward Wagner , it was the first Art Deco railroad station to be designed and built in the United States . Previously , <unk> had been influential in the design of Grand Central Terminal in New York City , and both architects collaborated on several railroad stations for the New York Central Railroad , including Buffalo Central Terminal in 1929 and Cincinnati Union Terminal in 1933 . 
 The main building of Erie 's Union Station , three @-@ stories tall , is of steel and masonry construction . The entire exterior is clad in " rough brown " brick and sandstone layered in a Flemish bond , trimmed in terracotta , and lined with granite at the ground level . The main station building has a frontage of 116 feet ( 35 m ) along Peach Street and 206 feet ( 63 m ) on 14th Street ; a two @-@ story , narrow extension continues another 403 feet ( 123 m ) towards Sassafras before terminating at a small , attached office building . The extension eased the transfer of mail , baggage , and freight between trains and street level while the offices of the freight company were housed in the attached building at the Sassafras Street end of the station complex . 
 When the station initially opened , entrances from 14th Street open into a large , octagonal rotunda where ticket offices , checked baggage , and a newsstand were located . As the railroad tracks are grade separated behind Union Station , the platforms are accessed by pedestrian tunnel under the tracks with stairs that lead to the platforms . The tunnel entrance is directly across the rotunda from the street entrance — a portion of which is now used as the kitchen for a brewpub housed inside the station . The concourse , off the rotunda , led to the Peach Street entrances , and contained space for a soda fountain , a barber shop , and telegraph offices , as well as access to the station 's 111 @-@ by @-@ 35 @-@ foot ( 34 m × 11 m ) waiting room . Facing Peach Street , a dining room and lunch counter run by the Union News Company , which operated the majority of the dining services in New York Central stations , were at the opposite end of Union Station from the rotunda . The entire ground floor was laid with terrazzo featuring a mosaic border and <unk> marble paneling along the plaster walls . A green and tan color scheme was originally used throughout the entire building . Superintendents for both the New York Central and Pennsylvania railroads , as well as other railroad officials , had offices on the second floor of Union Station . 
 The station 's low @-@ level , concrete platforms are approximately 450 feet ( 137 m ) long covered by steel , " butterfly @-@ style " canopies with wooden roof decking . New York Central made use of four tracks situated on two island platforms ; the Pennsylvania Railroad used two tracks on a single island platform . A network of tunnels beneath the station facilitated the transfer of mail to and from the former Griswold Plaza Post Office nearby . A bomb shelter , still stocked with cases of " U.S. Civil Defense All @-@ Purpose Survival Crackers " from the early 1960s , is next to the station 's boiler room and its three , coal @-@ fed furnaces . 
 = = Services and facilities = = 
 Amtrak 's Lake Shore Limited arrives at Union Station twice daily , westbound from New York Penn Station and Boston South Station , and eastbound from Chicago Union Station , with scheduled arrivals in the middle of the night and in the early morning , respectively , as of January 11 , 2016 . Union Station is on the Lake Shore Subdivision , the CSX Transportation main line from Erie to Buffalo , New York , at railroad milepost 86 @.@ 9 . It is 436 miles ( 702 km ) east of Chicago , 523 miles ( 842 km ) west of New York City , and 723 miles ( 1 @,@ 164 km ) from Boston . The next station west of Erie is Cleveland Lakefront , and eastbound is Buffalo – Depew . The station was the 13th busiest in Pennsylvania during fiscal year 2015 with an annual ridership of 16 @,@ 633 passengers , a decrease of 9 @.@ 2 percent from the previous year . 
 Service on the Lake Shore Limited consists of reserved coach seating and <unk> sleepers , as well as amenities like a dining car service . As the Erie station is not equipped with a ticket office , nor Amtrak 's Quik @-@ Trak ticket machines , all tickets from the station have to be pre @-@ paid . The station is , however , equipped with a waiting room and public restrooms . The Erie Metropolitan Transit Authority 's downtown circulator , the Bayliner Trolley , provides service between the station and downtown Erie . The trolley only operates , however , at the scheduled arrival time of the eastbound Lake Shore Limited . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 1840s and 1850s , a flurry of railroad @-@ building activity led eventually to the completion of four separate railroads converging in Erie . A break @-@ of @-@ gauge between the first two railroads — the Erie and North East Railroad and the Franklin Canal Company — ensured that the citizens of Erie profited from the delays necessary to transfer cargo between the lines . When it was proposed in 1853 to standardize the track gauge to allow through traffic , a conflict that became known as the Erie Gauge War ensued . The residents of Erie , who saw it as an affront to their desire that the city become a major lake port , dismantled railroad bridges and tore up railroad tracks in the city in an effort to prevent the impending standardization . As part of the dispute 's settlement , both railroads provided financial support for the construction of the Erie and Pittsburgh and Sunbury and Erie railroads . The Cleveland , Painesville and Ashtabula Railroad acquired the Franklin Canal Company in 1854 , and the Erie and North East was merged with the Buffalo and State Line to form the Buffalo and Erie Railroad a few years later . The Sunbury and Erie was renamed the Philadelphia and Erie Railroad in 1861 . The Pennsylvania Railroad soon acquired the Sunbury and Erie through a 999 @-@ year lease and funded completion of the line by 1864 . 
 = = = Predecessor stations = = = 
 The first railroad station in Erie was built in 1851 and consisted of a " clumsy looking " or " rude brick structure " . President @-@ elect Abraham Lincoln addressed a crowd outside of this station on February 16 , 1861 , while traveling to Washington , D.C. , for his inauguration . Construction on a new station was started in early 1865 as a joint venture between the Cleveland , Painesville and Ashtabula , and Buffalo and Erie railroads , and was completed in February 1866 . Both the Erie and Pittsburgh , and Philadelphia and Erie railroads also leased portions of the new station for their services as well . In addition to the leased space , the Philadelphia and Erie continued to maintain a freight station on State Street below Hamot Hospital for several years afterward . 
 The station , known as Union Depot , consisted of a brick , Romanesque Revival structure facing Peach Street between two sets of railroad tracks . It stood 40 feet ( 10 m ) tall , topped with a distinctive cupola , and its platforms extended 480 feet ( 150 m ) towards Sassafras Street along both sides of the depot . The depot was equipped with the modern amenities of the day including outdoor gas lighting , a barber shop , gentleman 's and ladies ' parlors , and a dining room ; the second floor contained offices and sleeping quarters for railroad officials . 
 The Cleveland , Painesville and Ashtabula became the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway in 1869 , and absorbed the Buffalo and Erie Railroad later that year . The Pennsylvania Railroad leased the Erie and Pittsburgh for 999 years in 1870 . On March 5 , 1902 , nearly 10 @,@ 000 people turned out at Union Depot to greet Prince Henry of Prussia during his tour of the United States ; the prince remained in Erie for approximately 10 minutes before his train continued to Buffalo and Niagara Falls , New York . On December 22 , 1914 , the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railroad was merged with the New York Central . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 In 1913 , the city of Erie appointed a committee of city planners and civil engineers led by John Nolen that was tasked with determining the best course of action to support the continued growth of the city . In its final report , the committee recommended , among other civic improvements , that " for the improvement of the railroad facilities in Erie " a new Union Station be constructed , as well as the " abolition of all [ railroad ] crossings " . At the time the only streets in Erie where the railroad was grade separated were State , French , and Ash Streets , and Buffalo Road , while the remainder had level crossings . The committee felt it was desirable that , on account of Erie 's topography and the existing railroad grades , the tracks be raised in the downtown to accommodate new roadway underpasses . The city signed an agreement on September 30 , 1915 , with the New York Central and the Pennsylvania railroads to eliminate every level crossing between Ash and Cascade Streets through the construction of bridges or the closing of the streets . As compensation , both railroads pledged to replace Union Depot with a new station . 
 The work to re @-@ grade and install drainage on Peach and Sassafras Streets coincided with the building of the station from 1925 to 1927 , and cost the city approximately $ 110 @,@ 000 . A temporary station was also erected at 14th and French Streets , and was used after the old Union Depot was demolished in 1925 until the completion of the new station . Union Station was dedicated on December 3 , 1927 , in a ceremony presided over by the presidents of the New York Central and Pennsylvania railroads , the mayor of Erie Joseph Williams , and former mayor William Stern who helped initiate the project . The Griswold Plaza Post Office , on the north side of 14th Street , opened in 1932 along with the tunnel connecting it to Union Station . 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 When service from Union Station was inaugurated in 1928 , both eastbound and westbound trains were departing the station almost every hour bound for destinations across the United States . Passengers in the station 's expansive waiting room could patronize its news stand , telegraph office , barber shop , shoeshine stand , or its lunch counter and soda fountain . Train schedules were handwritten on a large blackboard , while station staff announced the arrival and impending departures of the trains by megaphone . 
 In the 1930s , the New York Central provided the majority of the service in Erie with over 20 trains daily , including the original Lake Shore Limited . The famed 20th Century Limited , however , passed through Union Station nightly without stopping . Union Station was on the New York Central 's main line , often referred to as the " Water Level Route " , with trains that traveled west to Cleveland , Toledo and Chicago , and east to Buffalo , New York City , and Boston . The New York Central also had service from Erie via a branch line to Youngstown , Ohio , with connections to the Pittsburgh and Lake Erie Railroad . Conversely , the Pennsylvania Railroad ran only a few trains from Erie — mainly the Northern and Southern <unk> to Harrisburg , Philadelphia , and Washington , D.C. , as well as a daily train to Pittsburgh . 
 The Bliley Electric Company , a manufacturer of crystal oscillators used in radio transmitters and receivers , moved from 8th and Peach streets to space on the second floor of Union Station in 1933 . Despite the possibility that soot and vibrations from passing locomotives could cause calibration problems for Bliley 's quartz crystals , Union Station 's proximity to the railroad provided " efficient transfers of [ the ] heavy crystal stock from the train to the [ crystal ] slicing department . " Bliley Electric soon grew to occupy the entire second and third floors of the station . During World War II , the company operated 24 hours a day and employed local women to grind and fashion the crystals ; the crystals used in the operation were stockpiled in the rail yard , where it and the entire complex were guarded by soldiers with Great Danes . Bliley Electric eventually moved its entire operation to a larger , purpose @-@ built facility in 1966 . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The post @-@ war boom in automobile travel and the construction of the Interstate Highway System , as well as competition from commercial airlines , led to the inevitable decline of passenger rail . The Pennsylvania Railroad eliminated passenger service between Erie and Pittsburgh in April 1948 . It eventually ended through service to Philadelphia , requiring passengers to transfer in Emporium , Pennsylvania , and discontinued service from Erie altogether on March 27 , 1965 . By 1968 , the number of New York Central trains was also reduced to five per day . The two railroads were merged on February 1 , 1968 , and formed the Penn Central Transportation Company . Penn Central continued to run the former New York Central passenger trains , until the last departed Union Station on April 30 , 1971 . The newly created National Passenger Rail Corporation , more commonly known as Amtrak , took over nationwide passenger rail operations the next day . Amtrak continued to operate a New York @-@ to @-@ Chicago train until January 1972 , the Lake Shore , which had a station stop in Erie starting in November 1971 . However , the poor condition of the track between Buffalo and Chicago , as well as the service 's general lack of profitability , led to the Lake Shore 's demise . Erie remained devoid of any passenger rail service until Amtrak reintroduced the former New York Central train , the Lake Shore Limited , on November 30 , 1975 . 
 During that time , upkeep of Union Station became neglected by the railroads , and the station gradually deteriorated from its heyday . The presence of dirt , trash , and human waste were a normal occurrence at the station . At one point , in 1973 , the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry ordered Penn Central to close Union Station citing " sanitary reasons " ; at the time , it was only used by the crews of its freight trains . In the winter , the station often became an " unsanctioned shelter " for the homeless , who burned the station 's wooden doors for heat . The few passengers that did travel by train were often reluctant to use Amtrak 's makeshift waiting room in the station rotunda , due to the unsettling sights and fear of being accosted . Penn Central persisted with freight service until it declared bankruptcy and became a part of Conrail on April 1 , 1976 . Conrail , in turn , was dismantled on June 6 , 1998 , and the former New York Central rail lines were transferred to CSX , and Norfolk Southern Railway gained control of the former Pennsylvania lines . 
