 = = = Early history ( 1100 – 1153 ) = = = 
 Bedford Castle was probably built after 1100 by Henry I in the town of Bedford , overlooking the River Great Ouse . The castle was constructed inside the town itself , and many of the older Anglo @-@ Saxon streets had to be destroyed and diverted to make room for it , leaving a permanent mark in the formal grid system . The castle was built in a motte and bailey design and was probably much smaller than the later castle , just consisting of the motte and the inner bailey . 
 By the early 12th century the castle was controlled by the royal castellan , Simon de Beauchamp , the son of Hugh de Beauchamp who had helped conquer England in 1066 . Contemporaries described the castle around this time as " completely <unk> around with an immense earthen bank and ditch , girt about with a wall strong and high , strengthened with a strong and unshakeable keep " . Simon died in 1137 , and King Stephen agreed that Simon 's daughter should marry Hugh the Pauper and that the castle would be given to Hugh , in exchange for Stephen giving Miles compensatory honours and gifts . Miles and Payn de Beauchamp , the children of Simon 's brother , Robert de Beauchamp , declared that the castle was rightfully Miles ' and refused to hand it over to Hugh . 
 Meanwhile , civil war had broke out in England between King Stephen and the Empress Matilda , resulting in a period of chaos known as the Anarchy . Matilda 's uncle , David I of Scotland , invaded England during 1137 in support of her claim . Although Miles de Beauchamp declared himself in support of Stephen , the king decided to retake Bedford Castle before marching north . Stephen formed an army to besiege Bedford Castle but Miles gained advance warning of the attack and took in considerable supplies , preparing for a long siege . Stephen was unable to storm the castle and left a force under the command of Hugh to starve it into submission whilst he marched north to tackle the Scots invasion . 
 Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , intervened in an attempt to produce a negotiated solution . Henry reached an agreement whereby after five weeks , the castle finally surrendered ; the garrison were allowed to leave peacefully but the castle was handed over to the king . The deal struck by Miles and Henry appears to have left the surrounding estates in the hands of the Beauchamps , however , and in 1141 Miles returned and retook the castle itself , although no details are available as to how he achieved this . 
 Miles subsequently supported the Empress , and in 1146 , Ranulf , the Earl of Chester and temporarily on the side of the king , attacked and took the town of Bedford , but was unable to take the castle , which continued to be controlled by Miles until his death several years later . Towards the end of the war , Bedford Castle may have been attacked again ; Henry II , during the final year of the conflict in 1153 , marched through Bedford and documentary evidence shows damage to the town at this time . Historians are divided as to whether the castle was besieged at the same time . 
 = = = Mid @-@ medieval period ( 1153 – 1224 ) = = = 
 Early in 1215 tensions grew between King John and a rebel faction of his barons , which would lead to the First Barons ' War . The rebel barons attempted to besiege Northampton Castle ; unsuccessful , they turned to Bedford Castle but the castle withstood the attack and they moved south to London . Bedford was held at the time by William de Beauchamp but his loyalty came into question and he rebelled against John . Falkes de Breauté , a key Anglo @-@ Norman leader loyal to John , resisted and seized Bedford Castle back for John in 1216 . In return John gave Falkes the Honour of Bedford , and in practical terms the castle as well , although it is unclear whether he gave Falkes the role of castellan or ownership of the castle itself . As the war continued , Falkes took control of Plympton , Christchurch and Carisbrooke castles , whilst continuing to hold onto Bedford . After the death of King John in 1216 the war turned against the rebel barons and the royalist faction , including Falkes , was able to restore his son , the young Henry III to power in England . 
 After the war , Falkes made Bedford Castle his headquarters and he expanded it considerably , resulting in what David Baker has described as a " major refortification " . Falkes destroyed the neighbouring churches of St Paul 's and St Cuthbert 's to make space for a new bailey , reusing the stone for the castle . The exact form of the castle after this expansion remains uncertain . The castle appears to have been quadrangular , with the western edge running along the rear of the modern High Street and the northern edge running along the modern roads of Ram Yard and Castle Lane . The castle had a new barbican ; an outer and an inner bailey , with the inner bailey in the south @-@ east corner , protected by an internal ditch and a stone @-@ lined palisade ; further stone lined ditches lay around the castle ; and a new keep was built on the motte . Brown suspects that the new keep was probably a shell keep with a tower , similar to those built at Launceston or Bungay . The stone @-@ lined palisades and ditches built at Bedford were very unusual in England - their closest equivalent are those found at Skenfrith Castle . The castle had a postern watergate facing towards the river , and a great hall within the inner bailey in the middle , at least 13 m ( 43 feet ) wide and 40 m ( 131 feet ) long . There was possibly a large stone gatehouse positioned on the outer bailey wall . A mound in the north @-@ east corner of the castle probably supported a large tower . 
 = = = = Siege of 1224 = = = = 
 Henry III decided that Bedford Castle should be returned to its original owner , William de Beauchamp , and became increasingly frustrated with Falkes ' refusal to do so ; matters came to a head when Falkes ' castellans imprisoned Henry of Braybrooke , a royal judge who was hearing law cases against Falkes . When Falkes refused to release the judge , Henry mobilised an army , supported by the Church in the form of Stephen Langton , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and advanced to Bedford . Falkes had left the castle , along with around eighty men , in charge of his brother , William de Breauté , who refused to surrender it to the king . Falkes was probably hoping that if the castle held on long enough , his efforts to convince Pope Honorius III to intervene against Henry would succeed . The Archbishop excommunicated William and the siege began . 
 The siege of Bedford Castle required huge resources . Siege engines were brought from Lincoln , Northampton and Oxfordshire , while carpenters built others on site using timber from Northamptonshire ; ropes from London , Cambridge and Southampton ; hides from Northampton and tallow from London . Labourers from across Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire were gathered by the relevant sheriffs , and miners from Hereford and the Forest of Dean . Crossbow bolts were ordered from a depot at Corfe Castle and from the provinces ; 43 @,@ 300 crossbow bolts are known to have been ordered by the king . Local trees were cut down , and stone quarrying begun to provide ammunition for siege engines . Tents and pavilions for the king were sent from London , along with supplies of luxury foods and wine for the king . In total , Henry 's wage bill for the siege came to £ 1 @,@ 311 ; it is uncertain exactly how large Henry 's army was , but potentially there were between 1 @,@ 600 and 2 @,@ 700 men present at any one time . To support the siege , Langton instructed his bishops to mobilise one man from every 24 hectares ( 60 acres ) of land they owned and levied a special tax on the churches ' estates . 
 With these resources , Henry erected a number of siege engines around the castle ; one probable trebuchet and two mangonels were set up to the east of the castle ; two mangonels were placed on the west side , to attack the keep , and one mangonel on both the north and south sides . Two siege @-@ castles were established to observe the occupants of the castle . William was confident , however , that either his brother would return and relieve the siege , or that the pope would intervene , and held on despite the artillery attacks . The losses in the royal army began to mount ; chronicler Ralph of Coggeshall suggests that seven knights , and over 200 soldiers and labourers were killed as the siege dragged on . 
 Bedford Castle finally fell through a sequence of four attacks . Royal forces first captured the barbican and then stormed the outer bailey , seizing most of the castle 's supplies but taking considerable losses . Miners , operating under the protection of a " cat " , then gained access to the inner bailey by collapsing part of the wall . Finally , on 14 August , the miners attacked the keep itself , lighting a fire under the walls , cracking the stone and filling the building with smoke . The female members of the household , including Falkes ' wife , and Henry de Braybrooke were released , the royal standard was raised over the tower , and the next day William and the garrison surrendered . 
 A discussion ensued about the fate of the garrison ; near contemporary accounts suggest that the prisoners asked the Archbishop for assistance , but that this was declined . Henry then had all the male members of the garrison hanged , except for three knights who agreed to join the military order of the Knights Templar . Three days after the fall of Bedford Castle , the Pope wrote a letter demanding that Henry cease his campaign against Falkes , but this intervention had occurred far too late to be of use . Alexander de <unk> , the Bishop of Coventry , convinced Falkes to surrender after the fall of the castle ; he handed over his remaining castles at Plympton and <unk> and was absolved by Langton , going into exile shortly afterwards . Historian R. Brown has noted that the 1224 siege of Bedford Castle was remarkable in that the castle 's garrison was able to hold out against " the concentrated military resources of the whole kingdom " for an impressive eight weeks . David Carpenter argues that the fall of Bedford castle " concluded the triumph of central government " over the previously uncontrollable forces of the local barons . 
 = = = Later history ( 13 – 19th centuries ) = = = 
 After the siege Henry III ordered the castle to be dismantled and labourers filled in the ditches and halved the height of the stone walls . William de Beauchamp was forbidden to rebuild the castle , and instead built an unfortified house in the inner bailey . St Paul 's and St Cuthbert 's churches were rebuilt in 1224 using stone from the castle . The sudden availability of cheap stone led to the repaving of many of the town streets in Bedford in 1224 . Local tradition suggests that the first stone bridge at Bedford , the Great Bridge , was built using stone from the castle . By 1361 the castle site was described as " a void plot of old enclosed by walls " and seems to have been derelict for most of the medieval period . The antiquarian John Leland visited the site in the 16th century , and noted that the castle was " now clean down " . The early 17th century mapmaker John Speed produced a map of Bedford in 1611 , showing the motte and a fragment of bailey wall still standing on an otherwise vacant site . 
 At the outbreak of the English Civil War , Bedford sided with Parliament ; the town was temporarily captured by Prince Rupert of the Rhine in 1643 and the castle was refortified for the duration of the war . A probable wooden fort and prison were built on the remains of the motte and defended by a hundred @-@ man garrison . After the war the motte became used as a bowling green until the 19th century . In 1804 the north @-@ east tower of the castle was turned into a hexagonal building for the local militia unit . Bedford began to spread eastwards in the late 19th century and the castle baileys became desirable property for housing ; in 1851 the last parts of the barbican were destroyed to make way for the construction of cottages . 
 = = = Modern period ( 20 – 21st centuries ) = = = 
 Today only the base of the motte survives at Bedford Castle , 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 feet ) high and 49 m ( 161 feet ) wide at the top , and is a scheduled monument . Archaeological work has been conducted to develop a better understanding of the history of the castle , although excavations are difficult because of the urban nature of the site . Excavations between 1969 and 1972 established the broad form of the castle ; this was supplemented by further work in 1995 – 6 and another phase of excavations in 2007 . Following the 2007 investigations , an archaeological park was built on part of the castle site between 2007 and 2009 , forming the centre of a mixed @-@ use development of restaurants and apartments . The park incorporated one of the castle 's lime kilns , first rediscovered in 1973 , and the foundations of a hall discovered at the castle . 
 = Neil Goldschmidt = 
 Neil Edward Goldschmidt ( born June 16 , 1940 ) is an American businessman and Democratic politician from the state of Oregon who held local , state and federal offices over three decades . After serving as the governor of Oregon , Goldschmidt is widely considered the most influential figure in the state 's politics , both as an elected public official and as a lobbyist and policy consultant . His legacy and career were severely damaged by revelations that he had a sexual relationship with a young teenage girl during his first term as mayor of Portland . 
 Goldschmidt was elected to the Portland City Council in 1970 and then as mayor of Portland in 1972 , becoming the youngest mayor of any major American city . He promoted the revitalization of Downtown Portland and was influential on Portland @-@ area transportation policy , particularly with the abandonment of the Mount Hood Freeway and the establishment of the MAX Light Rail . He was appointed U.S. Secretary of Transportation by President Jimmy Carter in 1979 ; in that capacity he worked to revive the ailing automobile industry and to deregulate several industries . He served until the end of Carter 's presidency in 1981 and then served as a senior executive with Nike for several years . 
 He was elected the 33rd governor of Oregon in 1986 , serving a single term . He faced significant challenges , particularly a rising anti @-@ tax movement ( leading to 1990 's Measure 5 ) and a doubling of the state 's prison population . He worked across party lines to reduce regulation and to repair the state 's infrastructure . During his term , Oregon emerged from nearly eight years of recession . His reforms to the State Accident Insurance Fund ( SAIF ) , a state @-@ chartered worker 's compensation insurance company were heralded at the time , but drew strong criticism in later years . 
 Despite his popularity , Goldschmidt left office after only one term , becoming an influential and controversial lobbyist . Over the next dozen years or so , he was criticized by editorial boards and Oregonians for several of the causes he supported , including backing the forestry corporation , Weyerhaeuser in its hostile takeover of Oregon 's Willamette Industries and his advocacy for a private investment firm in its attempt to take over Portland General Electric , a local utility company . In 2003 , Governor Ted Kulongoski appointed him to the Oregon Board of Higher Education , a position he resigned after admitting he had a sexual relationship with a minor girl 30 years earlier . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Goldschmidt was born in Eugene , in Oregon 's Willamette Valley , on June 16 , 1940 , to Lester H. Goldschmidt and Annette Levin . He graduated from South Eugene High School . He later attended the University of Oregon , also in Eugene . He served as student body president at the school before graduating in 1963 with a Bachelor 's degree in political science . 
 He served as an intern for U.S. Senator Maurine Neuberger in 1964 in Washington , D.C. While there , he was recruited by New York Congressman Allard K. Lowenstein to do voter registration in Mississippi 's 1964 Freedom Summer civil rights campaign . Goldschmidt married Margaret Wood in 1965 . They had two children , Joshua and Rebecca , and divorced in 1990 . Goldschmidt earned a law degree from the University of California , Berkeley in 1967 . From 1967 to 1970 he worked as a legal aid lawyer in Portland , Oregon . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1970 , Neil Goldschmidt entered politics in Oregon . This began three decades of being in the public eye in the state , serving as mayor of Oregon 's most populous city and as the state 's governor . In between he served in the Cabinet of President Jimmy Carter . 
 = = = Portland City Commissioner and Mayor = = = 
 Goldschmidt won a seat on the Portland City Council in 1970 . As City Commissioner ( 1971 – 1973 ) and later as Mayor of Portland ( 1973 – 1979 ) , Goldschmidt participated in the revitalization of the downtown section of that city . He led a freeway revolt against the unpopular Mount Hood Freeway , building consensus among labor unions and other powerful entities to divert Federal funds initially earmarked for the freeway to other projects , ultimately expanding the federal funds brought to the region to include the MAX Light Rail line and the Portland Transit Mall . He is widely credited with opening up the city 's government to neighborhood activists and minorities , appointing women and African @-@ Americans in a City Hall that had been dominated by an " old @-@ boy network . " During his mayoral campaign , he questioned the benefit of expanding the city 's police force , preferring to direct resources to crime prevention . According to Nigel Jaquiss , a reporter for Willamette Week , for thirty years he was " Oregon 's most successful and charismatic leader . " 
 In 1973 , Governor Tom McCall appointed Goldschmidt to what would be known as the Governor 's Task Force , which was tasked with exploring regional transportation solutions . Goldschmidt served alongside notable leaders : Glenn Jackson , chair of the board of Portland Power and Light and chair of the Oregon Transportation Commission , was considered the state 's leading power broker on transportation issues ; and Gerard Drummond , a prominent lawyer and lobbyist , was president of Tri @-@ Met 's board of directors . The task force considered an unpopular deal that would have funded the construction of the Mount Hood Freeway , which would have bisected southeast Portland . The deal , which would have been 90 % funded by the Federal Highway Administration , was rescinded , with first the Multnomah County Commission and , later , Portland City Council reversing their positions and advising against it . Goldschmidt was initially opposed to diverting funds to light rail , instead favoring busways and more suitable local road projects ; as the 1981 deadline to reallocate the funds approached , however , light rail became a more attractive prospect . By a process not clearly documented , light rail was included in the final plan . All federal money initially intended for the Mount Hood Freeway ultimately went to other road projects , but the total amount was doubled and the first leg of MAX light rail was approved and ultimately completed in 1986 . 
 = = = U.S. Secretary of Transportation = = = 
 Goldschmidt became the sixth U.S. Secretary of Transportation in 1979 . His recess appointment by President Jimmy Carter came on July 27 of that year , as part of a midterm restructuring of the Carter administration 's cabinet positions . The United States Senate confirmed his appointment on September 21 , and he was sworn in on September 24 . In this position , Goldschmidt was known for his work to revive the auto industry , and efforts to deregulate the airline , trucking and railroad industries . 
 A newcomer to the Carter administration and to national politics , Goldschmidt traded not only on his experience in transportation planning , but on his political acumen as well ; following Carter 's unsuccessful bid for re @-@ election , Goldschmidt expressed doubts about the Democratic Party 's future if it couldn 't learn to cultivate political allies more effectively . Goldschmidt 's time in Washington , DC , informed his own understanding of politics , as well . He remained in office through the remainder of the Carter administration . In late 1979 , Republican presidential hopeful John B. Anderson called for Goldschmidt 's resignation , and members of the United States Senate Banking Committee later chastised him , for having suggested that he would withhold transportation funds from municipalities , such as Chicago and Philadelphia , whose mayors supported Ted Kennedy in his primary election bid against Carter . Goldschmidt resigned at the conclusion of Carter 's term on January 20 , 1981 . 
 Between positions in public office , Goldschmidt was a Nike executive during the 1980s , serving as international Vice President and then as president of Nike Canada . He was considered as a potential chair of the Democratic National Committee in 1984 . 
 = = = Governor of Oregon = = = 
 In June 1985 Goldschmidt announced his candidacy for Oregon Governor . His name familiarity and access to large donations through his business and political ties made him the Democratic front runner . He easily defeated Oregon State Senator Edward N. <unk> in the May 1986 Democratic primary . Goldschmidt defeated Republican Secretary of State Norma Paulus in the 1986 general election 52 % to 48 % , succeeding two @-@ term Republican Governor Vic <unk> , becoming the state 's 33rd governor . 
 Goldschmidt 's policy for economic development brought together Democratic liberals and Republican business leaders . His personal focus was on children 's rights , poverty and crime , but the challenge of meeting increasing needs with a decreasing budget overshadowed his tenure . An anti @-@ tax movement took hold during his term , passing the landmark Measure 5 in 1990 , which restricted the generation of revenue by property tax . He was credited with leading " The Oregon Comeback , " bringing the state out of nearly eight years of recession , through regulatory reform and repair of the state 's infrastructure . 
 Goldschmidt oversaw a major expansion of the state 's prison system . In May 1987 , he hired Michael Francke to modernize the state 's prisons , which an investigator had described as overcrowded and operated as " independent fiefdoms . " Francke was charged with supervising a plan to add over 1000 new beds to the prison system . Francke was murdered in the Department of Corrections parking lot in 1989 . 
 In 1990 , Goldschmidt brokered agreements between business , labor and insurance interests that changed the state 's workers ' compensation regulations . Workers ' compensation has been a contentious issue in Oregon for some time , as the state @-@ run State Accident Insurance Fund ( SAIF ) insures approximately 35 % of the workforce . The legislature passed a law as a result . The changes were considered to benefit the insurance industry and business interests , at the expense of claimants , who were required to establish more extensively that their employers were responsible for injuries . The issue was contentious for some time , involving lawsuits and various efforts to modify the law . In 2000 , Governor John Kitzhaber attempted to reform the system again . This led to a new law in the 2001 Legislature , which was complicated by an Oregon Supreme Court ruling that occurred during deliberations . 
 Goldschmidt 's Children 's Agenda was important in Oregon with its community initiatives . In 1991 , he helped create the Oregon Children 's Foundation , as well as the Start Making A Reader Today ( SMART ) literacy program , which puts 10 @,@ 000 volunteers into Oregon schools to read to children . 
 Goldschmidt declined to run for re @-@ election in 1990 , despite the widely held perception that he could have been easily re @-@ elected ; at the time , he cited marital difficulties . Bernie Giusto , who was Goldschmidt 's driver at the start of his term and later became Multnomah County Sheriff , was widely rumored to be romantically involved with Goldschmidt 's wife Margie ( and would later date her openly after they divorced ) . 
 Goldschmidt had hoped at one time to serve two terms , noting that most of predecessor Tom McCall 's accomplishments came during his second term . In his farewell address to the City Club of Portland , he stated : " After only four years , everything is left undone . Nothing is finished . " 
 = = = After leaving elected office = = = 
 Goldschmidt founded a law and consulting firm , Neil Goldschmidt , Inc . , in Portland in 1991 , four days after leaving office as governor . His clients have included Schnitzer Investment , Nike , PacifiCorp , Paul Allen , Bechtel Enterprises ( a subsidiary of Bechtel Corporation ) , and SAIF . 
 Even out of elected office , he was widely considered the most powerful political figure in the state for many years . His influence extended all over the state and the nation . As a member of the Oregon Health & Science University board , Goldschmidt was an early advocate of the controversial Portland Aerial Tram , which connected the research hospital to real estate projects by his longtime associates Homer Williams and Irving Levin near land whose owners Goldschmidt later represented . He stayed active in Portland as well , advocating an expansion of the Park Blocks ( a strip of open park space cutting through downtown Portland . ) Goldschmidt assisted in the deal that led to the construction of TriMet 's MAX Red Line to Portland International Airport that opened in 2001 . He also started the Start Making a Reader Today ( SMART ) volunteer program in Oregon schools . 
 Goldschmidt drew criticism in recent years for some of his business activities . In 2002 , he lobbied business and political leaders to support Weyerhaeuser in its hostile takeover of Willamette Industries , Inc . , then the only Fortune 500 company headquartered in Portland . In early 2004 , he backed a purchase of Portland General Electric ( PGE ) by Texas Pacific Group which , though never consummated , put on hold city and county studies to acquire PGE by condemnation . Criticism of Goldschmidt 's business activities peaked when , on November 13 , 2003 , Governor Ted Kulongoski nominated him to the Oregon State Board of Higher Education . 
 Goldschmidt 's appointment was initially expected to meet with little opposition . Several state senators , however , voiced concerns about Goldschmidt 's involvement with SAIF and possible improprieties in the dealings he and his wife had with Texas Pacific . Senator Vicki Walker , in particular , emerged as an outspoken critic of Goldschmidt . The increased scrutiny on Goldschmidt 's career , including reporters ' difficulties accessing records from his time as governor , ultimately led to the revelation of an illegal sexual relationship with a minor girl , which had occurred decades before , during his time as Mayor of Portland . These revelations ended Goldschmidt 's extensive career at the center of Oregon politics and policymaking . 
 = = Revelation of sexual abuse = = 
 In May 2004 , a rapid series of events resulted in Goldschmidt 's confession to a sexual relationship with a young teenage girl in the 1970s ; the quick demise of his political career , including resignations from several prominent organizations ; and the transfer of his many documents from the privately run Oregon Historical Society to the state @-@ run Oregon State Archives . 
 On May 6 , under pressure from Willamette Week , Goldschmidt publicly announced that he had engaged in a sexual relationship with a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl ( the victim later indicated she was 13 ) for an extended period during his first term as Mayor of Portland . Sex with a person under 16 years of age constitutes third degree rape under Oregon law , a felony punishable by up to five years in prison . By the time the relationship had become public , however , the statute of limitations had expired , making Goldschmidt immune from any prosecution over the matter . 
 Under Oregon law , Goldschmidt would have been required to register as a sex offender , had he been convicted of the crime of third degree rape . The fact that the registration law didn 't pass until 1997 , after the illicit sexual relationship ended , would not have exempted him from registration . Oregon case law has determined that the registration of offenders whose acts were committed prior to the passage of the law does not violate either Oregon ’ s Constitution or the United States Constitution ’ s prohibition on ex post facto laws . 
 Goldschmidt 's confessional letter was published on the front page of The Oregonian . It differed from the Willamette Week 's account , most notably in the length of the relationship ( " nearly a year " according to Goldschmidt , but three years according to Willamette Week ) and in Goldschmidt 's use of the term " affair " to characterize it . The Oregonian was criticized for its coverage and use of the term " affair . " Writers and editors at The Oregonian acknowledged mistakes in their handling of the story , but denied that a desire to protect Goldschmidt motivated the mistakes . The Willamette Week article , written by Nigel Jaquiss , was awarded the 2005 Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting . 
 In his initial negotiations with Willamette Week , Goldschmidt agreed to resign his positions with the Texas Pacific Group and the Board of Higher Education , which he did . His decision in 1990 not to run for a second term as governor , long the subject of speculation , was finally explained . Further developments revealed that Goldschmidt was assisted by businessman Robert K. <unk> in keeping his molestation of the girl a secret . In return , Goldschmidt gave his support to <unk> 's ( unsuccessful ) bid to extend a lease for a houseboat <unk> on the Willamette River . 
 Goldschmidt 's rabbi made an appeal in The Oregonian for forgiveness . Although Goldschmidt could no longer be prosecuted for the offense , the Oregon State Bar began an investigation into the matter . Goldschmidt submitted a Form B resignation , which was received by the bar on May 13 , where he says that he is aware that he would not be eligible for readmission . 
 Following complaints from local media over limited access to Goldschmidt 's public papers stored at the Oregon Historical Society ( OHS ) , the state archivist announced May 29 that Goldschmidt would seize the 256 boxes of documents to guarantee public access as defined in a state law passed in 1973 . That law required that public access to such records be maintained , but did not specify where the records be kept . Following Goldschmidt 's decision to put the documents in the care of the OHS , the state legislature passed a law requiring future governors to leave their documents in the state archives . Many records were published on the state archives ' Web site in early 2005 . 
 The scandal has affected numerous people and organizations associated with Goldschmidt . Many people have been accused of knowing of the crime , but failing to act accordingly . Debby Kennedy , who worked for Goldschmidt while he was governor , recalled , " I just can 't tell you how many rumors there were about him then . " Multnomah County Sheriff Bernie Giusto , who admitted knowing about the abuse , announced his early retirement in February 2008 . 
 On March 7 , 2011 , the Oregon Senate President and Speaker of the House released a statement that Goldschmidt 's Governor 's portrait had been removed from the walls of the State Capital building in Salem and put into storage , out of respect for his victim . 
 = = Articles by Goldschmidt = = 
 Goldschmidt , Neil . " The U.S. Automobile Industry , 1980 . Report to the president from the secretary of transportation " , United States Department of Transportation , January 1981 . 
 Goldschmidt , Neil ( January 21 , 1981 ) . " The Last Hurrah " . The Washington Post . 
 Goldschmidt , Neil ( March 25 , 1990 ) . " As Highways Crumble , Bush Stumbles " . The New York Times . 
 Goldschmidt , Neil ( May 7 , 2004 ) . " Statement by Neil Goldschmidt " . The Oregonian . Retrieved 2007 @-@ 07 @-@ 03 . 
 = Sam Oldham = 
 Sam Joshua Oldham ( born 17 February 1993 ) is an English artistic gymnast who represents Great Britain . He was part of the British men 's team at the 2012 Summer Olympics that won bronze in the team competition . He is also a three @-@ time junior European champion and won individual horizontal bar gold at the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics in Singapore . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sam Oldham was born on 17 February 1993 to Bob and Dawn Oldham . Oldham currently lives in Keyworth , Nottinghamshire , England with his parents and three siblings . 
 Sam 's first school was <unk> Drive Primary School in Keyworth . Oldham then attended <unk> School in West Bridgford before leaving the institution at 14 to be home @-@ taught so he could focus on training . 
 Oldham first started in gymnastics at the age of seven on the recommendation of his teacher , but was also a talented footballer . Oldham played in the Notts County F.C. Centre of Excellence as a forward until the club closed it down . Despite receiving offers from Nottingham Forest F.C. and Derby County F.C. , Oldham chose to focus on gymnastics . Oldham 's father and grandfather were both footballers , and his younger brother currently plays in the Nottingham Forest youth setup . 
 Oldham is a Manchester United F.C. fan and considers Vitaly <unk> to be the gymnast he would most like to compete against , for the latter 's performance winning six golds at the 1992 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 Oldham left <unk> School and moved to Huntingdon at the age of 14 to train with the 2008 Summer Olympics @-@ bound gymnasts , where he lodged with the family of fellow gymnast Cameron MacKenzie . His other training partners included eventual pommel horse bronze medallist Louis Smith . Smith later thanked Oldham for being his training partner leading up to Beijing . 
 At the European Gymnastics Championships in Lausanne , Switzerland in 2008 , where he was the youngest member of the British team , Oldham broke his wrist during his floor routine . However , he managed to complete his routine one @-@ handed and helped the British team to gold in the junior team event . Late in 2008 , a Castle Donington @-@ based company agreed to sponsor Oldham up to the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 Oldham was named to the British team for the 2009 Australian Youth Olympic Festival , where he won team gold . Later that year , he was selected to be in the British delegation to the European Youth Olympic Festival in Tampere , Finland , where he won two golds in the pommel horse and parallel bars events . Oldham was named BBC East Midlands ' Junior Sports Personality of the Year in 2009 for his performances in Tampere and for sweeping all seven golds available at the English national championships . 
 At the 2010 European Gymnastics Championships in Birmingham , England , Oldham won three gold medals , becoming European junior champion in the team all @-@ around , the horizontal bar , and the individual all @-@ around . By winning the individual all @-@ around , Oldham secured qualification to represent Great Britain at the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics in Singapore . 
 In Singapore , Oldham qualified second overall for the all @-@ around competition and made the finals in four other events – the floor , pommel horse , parallel bars , and horizontal bar . 
 Oldham was in the silver medal position in the all @-@ around final when he suffered a fall from the horizontal bar , his final apparatus , thus finishing fifth . However , he recovered from the setback to win silver in the pommel horse event , missing out on gold by 0 @.@ 25 points . Oldham subsequently followed that by winning gold in the horizontal bar event , on the same apparatus in which he had suffered his fall during the all @-@ around competition . Despite going first out of the eight finalists , Oldham 's score of 14 @.@ 375 points held out throughout and was enough for gold . 
 After the Games , Oldham 's coach Paul Hall described Oldham as having a chance of making the British team for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , while Smith called Oldham is an " amazing talent " and British head gymnastics coach Andre Popov predicted Oldham will " absolutely " become Olympic champion . 
 Oldham considered trying for the 2010 Commonwealth Games team . However , according to Oldham , this plan was shelved when he was selected to the British senior team for the 2010 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships . 
 For his performances in 2010 , Oldham was shortlisted for the BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year Award , and for Junior Sportsperson of the Year Award at the Nottinghamshire Sports Awards , the latter of which he won . 
 = = = Senior career = = = 
 Oldham was named as Great Britain 's reserve gymnast to participate at the 2010 senior world championships in Rotterdam . He was the youngest member of the British men 's team . The British team qualified for the final and finished seventh in the team all @-@ around , although Oldham did not ultimately take part in the competition . In 2011 , Oldham was included along with Samuel Hunter , Daniel Purvis , Theo Seager , Louis Smith and Kristian Thomas in the British squad travelling to Berlin , Germany for the 2011 European Men 's Artistic Gymnastics Championships from 6 to 10 April , again as the youngest member of the delegation representing Great Britain . Oldham qualified as the second reserve for the parallel bars final and in fourth place for the final on the horizontal bar . He came fourth in the horizontal bar final , which was his first major senior final . 
 Oldham was to have been part of the British squad at the London Prepares series gymnastics Olympic qualifier in January 2012 , but missed out after breaking his collarbone before the 2011 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships in October 2011 , and further injuring himself during that competition . Without Oldham , the British team secured qualification to the gymnastics events at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 Despite his injury setback , Oldham ended the first year of his senior career by winning all @-@ around silver at the British national championships , which doubled as the final selection trial for the Olympic Games . Oldham attributed his performance , which he said was " better than I could ever have hoped for " and was good enough to see him named to the British squad for the Olympics over Daniel Keatings , to the trials being the final chance to impress the Olympic selectors after his injury layoff . 
 At 19 , Oldham was the youngest member to be named to the British team for gymnastics at the 2012 Summer Olympics , which won a bronze medal in the men 's team all @-@ around final at the North Greenwich Arena on 30 July . 
 On 19 – 25 May 2014 , at the 2014 European Championships in Sofia . Oldham along with his teammates ( Daniel Keatings , Daniel Purvis , Max Whitlock , Kristian Thomas ) won Team Great Britain the silver medal behind Russia with a total score of 262 @.@ 087 points . In event finals , Oldham won the silver medal in high bar ( 14 @.@ 866 ) behind 2012 Olympic champion <unk> <unk> . 
 = Battle of North Walsham = 
 The Battle of North Walsham was a mediaeval battle fought on 25 or 26 June 1381 , near the town of North Walsham in the English county of Norfolk , in which a large group of rebellious local peasants was confronted by the heavily armed forces of Henry le Despenser , Bishop of Norwich . The battle is significant for being the last occurrence of any major resistance during the English Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 . 
 Despenser succeeded in suppressing the rebellion that broke out throughout East Anglia that summer . His force at first consisted of his own retinue , but men flocked to him . He moved across East Anglia towards Norwich and then onwards to North Walsham to deal with the rebels , led by Geoffrey Litster , the so @-@ called ' King of the Commons ' . At North Walsham the rebels were decisively defeated by Despenser 's men . Mediaeval chroniclers differ in their accounts of exactly what happened at North Walsham . After the battle , Litster was captured and executed by Despenser , but the fate of most of his rebel army is not known for certain . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 was a major rebellion that spread throughout mediaeval England during the summer of that year . Its causes are complex . The drop in population caused by the Black Death , which arrived in England in 1348 , resulted in an acute labour shortage and consequently , higher wages . The Statute of Labourers ( 1351 ) was a law enacted during the first parliament of Edward III , to make labour laws and their intended enforcement more precise and detailed , and also to allow the government to control wages . It had the effect of making life more difficult for peasants , but more profitable for the wealthy landowners . Further discontent erupted from the behaviour of those nobles who ruled on behalf of the boy @-@ king Richard II , and also from the position of the church ; as many priests were ill @-@ educated , and the bishops and abbots themselves were landowners , it was generally hated by the common people . Feelings were stirred up by rebellious priests such as John Ball , who criticised the church wherever the common people flocked to him to listen to his words . 
 The Revolt began in Essex , following the introduction of a succession of highly unpopular poll taxes levied against the English population . In 1377 the expense of the Hundred Years ' War had caused the government to introduce a poll tax of four pence . By 1380 this had tripled , but as many refused to pay , revenues dropped . The imposition of a third poll tax in 1381 prompted unrest in Essex and Kent , which then spread all over England . According to the Anonimalle Chronicle , the ' evil actions ' of the commons in both Essex and Kent were ' because of the exceptionally severe tenths and fifteenths and other subsidies lightly conceded in parliaments and <unk> levied from the poor people ' . Most serious of all were events that occurred in London on 13 – 15 June . During the summer , rebels from Kent and Essex marched to London and , once admitted to the city , managed to capture the Tower of London . King Richard , who had promised to agree to all the demands of the peasants , met the rebels outside the city , where the peasants ' leader , Wat Tyler , was killed and the rebellion was ended . Once they were defeated it became clear to the rebels that they had failed to gain Richard 's support . Whilst the king was at Waltham , in Essex , a proclamation was issued condemning the rebels and denying that he had ever approved of their actions . At Waltham , Richard refused to ratify the promises he made , as he believed they had been extorted by force , adding , " <unk> ye are still , and villeins ye shall remain " , and threatening vengeance upon those who had rebelled . 
 The rebellions in Essex , Kent and London spread to many other English counties . In Norfolk , the rebellion started on 14 June , when a group of rebels from Suffolk reached the county , and spread westwards towards the Fens and north @-@ eastwards towards Norwich and Yarmouth . As in other parts of the country there was widespread unrest , during which property and official documents were destroyed and several individuals were summarily executed . 
 = = The leaders = = 
 Henry le Despenser ( c . 1341 – 1406 ) was an English nobleman who in his early life had been a soldier in Italy , and who in 1370 became Bishop of Norwich . He obtained a reputation as the ' Fighting Bishop ' after playing his part in suppressing the Norfolk rebels during the Peasants ' Revolt , and later embarking on an ill @-@ fated enterprise for Pope Urban VI , who in 1382 employed him to lead a crusade in Flanders against the supporters of the anti @-@ pope Clement VII . For his defeat at the siege of Ypres ( 1383 ) , Despenser was impeached in Parliament , attainted and deprived of his lands . He later regained his lands and favour with king Richard II of England . In 1399 Henry Bolingbroke landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire and the military campaign that followed resulted in Richard 's abdication . Despenser remained true to Richard : he was subsequently imprisoned , but was afterwards reconciled with the new king . Henry le Despenser died in his diocese at North Elmham in 1406 . 
 Little is known of Geoffrey Litster ( also named by mediaeval chroniclers as <unk> <unk> and <unk> Litster ) , a moderately wealthy dyer from the village of Felmingham in Norfolk . He is first recorded in the returns made by the collectors of the 1379 poll tax in Norfolk . As peasants , he and his men would have been both untrained and unequipped to fight Despenser 's fully armed and trained force . Geoffrey Litster was captured after the battle and executed soon afterwards at North Walsham . 
 = = Events in Norfolk before the battle = = 
 During the summer of 1381 , insurrection spread from the south @-@ east of the country to other parts of England , including the diocese of Norwich , where the rebellion lasted less than a fortnight . On 14 June a group of rebels reached Thetford , and from there the revolt spread over south @-@ western Norfolk towards the Fens . At the same time the rebels , led by Geoffrey Litster , moved across the north @-@ eastern part of the county and tried to raise support throughout the local area . Over the next few days , the rebels converged on Norwich , Lynn and Swaffham . Norwich , then one of the largest and most important cities in the realm , was taken and occupied by Litster and his followers , who caused considerable damage to the property and possessions of anyone they perceived as an enemy ( such as poll tax collectors and important officials ) once they managed to enter the city . The Norwich rebels then travelled to Yarmouth , destroying legal records and landowners ' possessions , while other insurgents moving across north @-@ east Norfolk destroyed court rolls and taxation documents . There were numerous incidents of pillage and extortion across the whole county . 
 The Anonimalle Chronicle gives a clear account of the unrest in East Anglia . On hearing of the rebellion , Henry le Despenser acted swiftly , moving through Cambridgeshire , Suffolk and Norfolk from his home in Burley , Rutland . His armed force initially consisted of his personal retinue , but ultimately became a much larger force consisting of many knights and other men who had previously not dared to confront the rebels . According to the historian Edgar Powell , Henry Dispenser undertook the task of dealing with the revolt in his diocese and punishing the rebels . He was involved in crushing rebellions at Peterborough and elsewhere , before moving on to suppress the revolts in Cambridge . The authorities were alerted to the call in Norfolk for men to join the revolt in the name of Litster . On 17 June the rebels from the north and east of the county assembled on <unk> Heath , outside Norwich : shortly afterwards , Sir Robert Salle , who had come out of the city to speak with the commons , was killed . According to Thomas Walsingham , the knight died soon after he was ' knocked on the head by a rustic who was one of his own serfs ' . The rebels then entered Norwich and wreaked havoc , destroying property and killing several prominent citizens . Other houses and church properties within the county ( such as at Yarmouth ) were attacked by the rebels at this time . 
 Geoffrey Litster was at Thorpe Market on 21 June and by the next day Despenser had reached nearby Felmingham . Hearing that the rebels were close , Despenser travelled the short distance from Felmingham to North Walsham Heath , where he encountered Litster and his men . 
 = = The battle and its aftermath = = 
 There are no eye witness accounts of the battle that was fought at North Walsham on 25 or 26 June 1381 . The chronicler Thomas Walsingham related that there was a fierce engagement at North Walsham Heath , south of the town , in which " the warlike Bishop " led a successful attack on the rebels ' entrenched position . The <unk> ' Inquisitions for the period that name Litster also included the names of rebels from North Walsham who were killed , giving strong evidence that the rebels suffered a severe defeat . According to Thomas Walsingham , the rebels were routed as they fled through woodland and cut down as they were found . Writing in the 19th century , Walter Rye quoted a local man , " They dew say a <unk> ' lot of men are buried in that <unk> . " The local belief that the parish church at North Walsham was the scene of a bloodbath after the battle cannot be substantiated using historical documents . 
 According to The Book of Illustrious Henries , written by the 15th @-@ century historian John Capgrave , very little fighting took place . The chronicler related that , " But by the good management of the bishop , and of other men who had assembled there , the whole people surrendered , rejoicing that they might withdraw in peace . Jack Litster himself , leaping over a wall , hid himself in a corn @-@ field " . 
 Inevitably the rebels ' ' king ' was found . Walsingham and Capgrave agree that after Geoffrey Litster 's capture , he was taken to North Walsham and was there drawn , hung and quartered . According to Capgrave 's chronicle , " The traitor was sought and found ; he was captured and beheaded ; and , divided into four parts , he was sent through the country to Norwich , Yarmouth , and Lynn , and to the site of his mansion ; that rebels and insurgents against the peace might learn by what end they will finish their career " . Walsingham wrote an account of the mercy shown by the bishop to Litster during his execution : " After hearing his confession and absolving him by virtue of his office , he followed him to the gallows , showing , although he had overcome him , a deed of kindness and piety , for he supported his head lest it should be bruised by the ground when he was being drawn to the hanging " . 
 Litster 's widow Agnes was later pursued by the authorities and was made to settle his outstanding debts ( for the sum of 33 shillings and nine pence ) . 
 = = Commemoration of the battle = = 
 The site of the battle is one of only five battlefields in Norfolk that are recognised by Norfolk County Council . The battle was commemorated by three mediaeval stone crosses : one is on private land ; another ( now a stump ) was relocated by North Walsham Urban District Council in 1932 and can be found near the roadside by the town 's water towers ; the third cross was moved and used as a parish boundary marker . It is situated on <unk> ’ s Loke , off Norwich Road . 
 A sculpture in the Memorial Park , North Walsham , carved in 1999 by Mark Goldsworthy from the trunk of a 120 @-@ year @-@ old oak tree , commemorates the 1381 battle . 
 North Walsham 's town sign contains a mosaic depicting the Peasants ' Revolt . 
 = Get Away From My Mom = 
 " Get Away From My Mom " is the pilot episode of the American animated sitcom Home Movies . It originally aired on United Paramount Network on April 26 , 1999 . In the episode , eight @-@ year @-@ old Brendon Small discovers that his mother , Paula , is set to have a date with Brendon 's soccer coach , the lazy , profane alcoholic John McGuirk . Brendon resents McGuirk for this and expresses his outrage throughout the episode . The date goes terribly and McGuirk and Paula decide to not pursue a relationship . Meanwhile , Brendon and his friends Melissa and Jason film a new movie about a rogue police officer . 
 The episode used <unk> , a process by which the actors completely improvised all their dialogue lines , the first time this technique was used for an animated television production . Certain script material , however , was provided by series co @-@ founder Loren Bouchard , who also directed the episode . The pilot also utilized the " Squigglevision " style of animation which was used to produce the show for the entirety of its first season . In its original broadcast , " Get Away From My Mom " received a 1 @.@ 4 / 2 Nielsen Rating , the lowest UPN had ever received in that time slot . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics , particularly pertaining to its employment of improvisation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After soccer practice , eight @-@ year @-@ old aspiring filmmaker Brendon Small shows his mother Paula a self @-@ made trailer for his upcoming film , The Dark Side of the Law , a crime film about a rogue police detective . Paula expresses indifference to the production . At breakfast the next morning , Paula informs Brendon she plans to go on a date that night with Brendon 's soccer coach , John McGuirk , much to Brendon 's chagrin . Brendon seeks advice from his friend Melissa and her father Erik , but they are unable to advise him as they are late for a violin recital . 
 When McGuirk shows up at Brendon 's house for the date that night , Brendon tries to scare him off by acting as if he is his son , but it proves unsuccessful . During the date , Paula becomes agitated at McGuirk 's inappropriate , boring subject matter , and she becomes drunk in order to entertain herself . Meanwhile , Brendon , Melissa , and their friend Jason film a scene from The Dark Side of the Law in Brendon 's basement , where Brendon 's character is in a French prison , confronted by his mother , played by Melissa . They stop filming when Jason 's nose starts running , and he demonstrates how he can move the mucus up and down to their disgust . 
 At soccer practice the next day , Brendon — still upset with his mother 's decision to date his coach — is uncooperative and chastises McGuirk for dating his mother , accusing him of desires to engage in a relationship with all the soccer players ' mothers . While being driven home by Erik , Brendon asks Erik to fight McGuirk as revenge , but Erik denies his request and suggests he take his mind off the topic by playing a car game . Eventually , Brendon decides to apologize to McGuirk for his behavior , and the two reconcile . Later , McGuirk and Paula decide over the phone to end their relationship , a decision Brendon overhears using three @-@ way calling . 
 At the next soccer game , Brendon 's team plays poorly , and an opposing player injures Brendon , which causes McGuirk to yell at the referee . While sitting out , Brendon spots Erik and Paula engaging in meaningless and casual flirtation in the bleachers , which Brendon interprets as another possible relationship . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Get Away From My Mom " was the first episode of Home Movies , which was created by Brendon Small and Loren Bouchard . The episode , as with the four subsequent episodes , demonstrated a writing style known as " <unk> , " in which the cast completely improvised their lines . Main cast members Small , H. Jon Benjamin , Paula Poundstone and Melissa <unk> Galsky wrote the episodes , while Bouchard also contributed to certain dialogue material . The episode marked the first animated television production without a script . 
 Bouchard directed this first episode and the entire series . Along with the rest of the first season , the episode was animated using " <unk> , " a technique pioneered by the show 's executive producer , Tom Snyder . The animation style consists of eight frames of looped " <unk> " lines that stimulate the character 's mouth movement . This style was used to produce the series on its incredibly low budget and allow for the actors to improvise . The style was eventually changed during the second season to Flash animation , which was believed to be a more conventional style . 
 To make the young characters sound like children , instead of adults , recordings of the actors ' performances were electronically altered . Galsky was cast to play Melissa despite having no prior experience in voice acting . Galsky considers Bouchard the biggest benefactor to her career based on that decision . After recording sessions for " Get Away From My Mom " concluded , Small ( who voices Brendon ) and Benjamin ( who plays McGuirk ) went out to drink beers before going to see a concert . According to Small , the experience contributed to their understanding of the unique dynamic between the characters . 
 " Get Away From My Mom " is available on the DVD " Home Movies : The Complete First Season , " which was released on November 16 , 2004 . A bonus feature on the DVD enables an audio commentary track , recorded by Small , Bouchard , and Benjamin , to play over the episode . Though generally intended to be humorous and entertaining , the track also details actual information on the episode 's production . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Get Away From My Mom " was originally broadcast on April 26 , 1999 on UPN at 8 p.m. The episode received a 1 @.@ 4 / 2 Nielsen rating , positioning it at 133 in total viewership for 1999 's May sweeps . This marked the lowest rated telecast the network had ever aired in its timeslot at the time . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews from television critics . Writing for The Cincinnati Enquirer , John Kiesewetter criticized the show 's use of improvised dialogue : " The uneven plot and sophomoric bodily function jokes sound like these people were making it up as they went along . And they were . " Rob Owen , television critic for the Post @-@ Gazette , paralleled Kiesewetter and said that the episode was a " pitfall " of the improvisation process : " The half @-@ hour seems like a collection of scenes rather than a cohesive episode . " Owen called it " so lackadaisical , it 's hard to imagine UPN 's most recently announced target audience - young males - having any patience for the program . The entertainment value is low " , but did note that McGuirk 's scenes in the episode were " the closest to ha @-@ ha funny the show gets . " 
 Conversely , John Levesque called the show a " keeper " in his review for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer and applauded the series subtle , improvised style . Chicago Sun @-@ Times journalist Phil Rosenthal commended the episode . In his review , he wrote , " Rather than big laughs , it 's more likely to elicit the grin of bemused recognition . It 's not about sight gags or clever puns . It 's not about parodying the sitcom form . This sweet ass series [ ... ] is not always subtle - unless a child showing another how to have fun with a runny nose is intellectual - but it nicely plays off the inherent absurdities and weirdness of everyday modern life . " Dennis Landmann of DVD Freak wrote that the episode " sets up the tone quite well , for it develops the aspirations of Brendon becoming a filmmaker , " and praised the confrontational scenes that occur between McGuirk and Brendon . 
 = Epsilon Aurigae = 
 Epsilon Aurigae ( ε Aur , ε Aurigae ) is the Bayer designation for a star in the northern constellation of Auriga . It is traditionally known as Almaaz , <unk> , or Al Anz . Epsilon Aurigae is an unusual eclipsing binary system comprising an F0 supergiant and a companion which is generally accepted to be a huge dark disk orbiting an unknown object , possibly a binary system of two small B @-@ type stars . About every 27 years , Epsilon Aurigae 's brightness drops from an apparent visual magnitude of + 2 @.@ 92 to + 3 @.@ 83 . This dimming lasts 640 – 730 days . In addition to this eclipse , the system also has a low amplitude pulsation with a non @-@ consistent period of around 66 days . The distance to the system is still a subject of debate , but modern estimates place it approximately 2 @,@ 000 light years from Earth . 
 Epsilon Aurigae was first suspected to be a variable star when German astronomer Johann Heinrich Fritsch observed it in 1821 . Later observations by Eduard Heis and Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander reinforced Fritsch 's initial suspicions and attracted attention to the star . Hans Ludendorff , however , was the first to study it in great detail . His work revealed that the system was an eclipsing binary variable , a star that dims when its partner obscures its light . 
 Epsilon Aurigae 's eclipsing companion has been subject to much debate since the object does not emit as much light as is expected for an object its size . As of 2008 , the most popularly accepted model for this companion object is a binary star system surrounded by a massive , opaque disk of dust ; theories speculating that the object is a large , semitransparent star or a black hole have since been discarded . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 Although the star is easily visible to the naked eye , Johann Fritsch 's 1821 observations suggest he was the first to notice that the system was a variable . Eventually , from 1842 to 1848 , German mathematician Eduard Heis and Prussian astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander began observing it once every few years . Both Heis ' and Argelander 's data revealed that the star had become significantly dimmer by 1847 , attracting the full attention of both men at that point . Epsilon Aurigae had brightened significantly , and had returned to " normal " by the following September . As it attracted more attention , more and more data was compiled . The observational data revealed that Epsilon Aurigae did not just vary over a long period , but also experienced short @-@ term variations in brightness as well . Later eclipses took place between 1874 and 1875 and , nearly thirty years later , between 1901 and 1902 . 
 Hans Ludendorff , who had also been observing Epsilon Aurigae , was the first to conduct a detailed study of the star . In 1904 , he published in Astronomische Nachrichten an article titled Untersuchungen über den <unk> von ε Aurigae ( Investigations of the Light Changes of Epsilon Aurigae ) , where he suggested the star was an Algol variable and an eclipsing binary . 
 Epsilon Aurigae was targeted for observation by International Year of Astronomy observers from 2009 to 2011 , the three years that overlapped its most recent eclipse . 
 = = = Spitzer observations , 2009 = = = 
 At the January 2010 meeting of the American Astronomical Society , Donald Hoard of NASA 's Spitzer Science Center at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena reported that observations from NASA 's Spitzer Space Telescope along with earlier observations point to the primary being a post @-@ asymptotic giant branch star with about 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 times the mass of the Sun periodically eclipsed by just a single B class star inside a disk . This was accomplished by pointing Spitzer at the star using the corner of four of Spitzer 's pixels , instead of directly at one , to effectively reduce the telescope 's sensitivity and preventing the star from overloading it , then using exposures of one @-@ hundredth of a second , the shortest duration images that can be obtained by Spitzer . The data supports the presence of the companion star 's disk , and establish the particle sizes as being like gravel rather than like fine dust . 
 = = Nature of the system = = 
 The nature of the Epsilon Aurigae system has always been unclear . It has long been known to consist of at least two components which undergo periodic eclipses with an unusual flat @-@ bottomed dimming every 27 years . Early explanations with exceptionally large diffuse stars , black holes , and odd doughnut @-@ shaped discs are no longer accepted . There are now two main explanations that can account for the known observed characteristics : a high mass model where the primary is a yellow supergiant of around 15 M ☉ ; and a low mass model where the primary is about 2 M ☉ and a less luminous evolved star . 
 Variations on the high mass model have always been popular , since the primary star is to all appearances a large supergiant star . <unk> it is early F or late A with luminosity class Ia or Iab . Distance estimates consistently lead to luminosities expected for a bright supergiant . One exception is the Hipparcos parallax measurement , but the margin of error is as large as the value itself and so the derived distance is likely to be anything from 355 @-@ <unk> . The main problem with this model is the nature of the secondary , which is required to have a mass about the same as the primary , at odds with observations where it appears as a B @-@ type main sequence star . The secondary may be a close binary involving two lower @-@ mass main sequence stars , or a more complex system . 
 The low mass model , recently popularised by the Citizen Sky project , proposes that the primary is an evolved asymptotic giant branch star of 2 – 4 M ☉ . This relies on distance and luminosity estimates lower than most observations . The star would be an unusually large and bright giant star for the given mass , possibly as the result of very high mass loss . To match the observed eclipse and orbital data , the secondary is a fairly normal B main sequence star of about 6 M ☉ embedded in a thick disc seen nearly edge on . 
 The orbit itself is now fairly well determined , inclined at over 87 degrees to us . The primary and the disk are nearly thirty AU apart , ( in the high mass model ) which is approximately the distance of the planet Neptune from the Sun . 
 = = = Visible component = = = 
 The visible component , Epsilon Aurigae A , is a semiregular pulsating post @-@ asymptotic giant branch star belonging to the spectral class F0 . This F @-@ type star has around 135 to 190 times the diameter of the Sun , and is 70 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 times as luminous . ( Reliable sources vary considerably in their estimates of both quantities . ) If the star were in the position of the Sun , it would envelop Mercury and possibly Venus . F @-@ type stars like Epsilon Aurigae tend to glow white and display strong ionized calcium absorption lines and weak hydrogen absorption lines ; being a class above the Sun ( which is a G @-@ type star ) , F @-@ type stars are typically hotter than sunlike stars . Other F @-@ type stars include Procyon 's primary star , the brightest star in the Canis Minor constellation ; and Canopus , the second brightest star in the night sky and the brightest star in the Carina constellation . 
 = = = Eclipsing component = = = 
 The eclipsing component emits a negligible amount of light , and is not visible to the naked eye . A heated region , however , has been discovered in the center of the object . The exact form of Epsilon Aurigae 's eclipsing component is not known . Hypotheses concerning the nature of this second object have been proposed , three of which have garnered attention from the scientific community . 
 The first hypothesis , set forth in 1937 by astronomers Gerard Kuiper , Otto Struve , and Bengt Strömgren , suggested that Epsilon Aurigae was a binary star system containing an F2 supergiant and an extremely cool " semitransparent " star that would completely eclipse its companion . However , the eclipsing star would scatter light emitted by its eclipsed companion resulting in the observed decrease in magnitude . The scattered light would be detected on Earth as a star visible to the naked eye , although this light would be significantly dimmed . However , astronomer Su @-@ Shu Huang published a paper in 1965 that outlined the defects of the Kuiper @-@ Struve @-@ Strömgren model , and proposed that the companion is a large disk system , edge @-@ on from the perspective of Earth . Robert Wilson , in 1971 , proposed that a " central opening " lay in the disk , a possible reason for the system 's sudden brightening mid @-@ way through the eclipse . In 2005 , the system was observed in the ultraviolet by the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer ( <unk> ) ; as the star system was not emitting energy at rates characteristic of objects such as the neutron star binary system Circinus X @-@ 1 or black hole binary system Cygnus X @-@ 1 , the object occupying the center of the disk is not expected to be anything of the sort ; in contrast , a new hypothesis has suggested that the central object is actually a B5 @-@ type star . 
 = = Observation = = 
 The star is easily found because of its brightness and apparent proximity to the star Capella . It is the apex of the isosceles triangle forming the ' nose ' of the constellation Auriga . The star is bright enough to be seen from most urban locations with moderate amounts of light pollution . Visual variable star observers make an estimate of its brightness by comparing its brightness with nearby stars with a known brightness value . 
 = = Citizen Sky = = 
 The National Science Foundation has awarded the <unk> a three @-@ year grant to fund a citizen science project built around the 2009 @-@ 2011 eclipse . The project , called Citizen Sky , is organizing and training participants to observe the eclipse and report their data to a central database . In addition , participants will help validate and analyze the data while testing their own theories and publishing original research articles in a peer @-@ reviewed astronomical journal . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 " Epsilon Aurigae " is the system 's Bayer designation ( invented by German astronomer Johann Bayer in his 1603 atlas , Uranometria ) . The star is also known colloquially as Almaaz , <unk> or Al Anz . Both Almaaz and Al Anz derive from the Arabic <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( ( billy ) goat ) , corresponding to the name of the star Capella ( Latin for " nanny goat " ) . 
 In Chinese , <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning Pillars , refers to an asterism consisting of ε Aurigae , ζ Aurigae , η Aurigae , υ Aurigae , ν Aurigae , τ Aurigae , χ Aurigae and 26 Aurigae . Consequently , ε Aurigae itself is known as <unk> ( <unk> yī , " First Star of Pillars " ) . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness = 
 Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness is the sixth video game in the Tomb Raider series , acting as a direct sequel to Tomb Raider Chronicles and The Last Revelation . It was developed by Core Design and published by Eidos Interactive . The game was originally released in 2003 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 2 and Mac OS X and was the first Tomb Raider title to be released for the PlayStation 2 console . The storyline follows Lara Croft as she attempts to clear herself of murdering her former mentor Werner Von Croy while investigating the activities of a black magic cult . 
 The game 's development began three years before release . The intention was to create a different game from previous entries in the franchise which could compete better with newer action games , and to fully exploit the potential of the next generation of gaming platforms . The production was fraught with difficulties , and the game ended up being delayed twice . When released , the game sold 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , but was widely criticised for its poor controls and multiple bugs . In the aftermath of the game 's release , a potential trilogy was scrapped and development of the franchise was transferred to Crystal Dynamics for the next entry in the series , Tomb Raider : Legend . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness , like previous Tomb Raider games , is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure puzzle game . Players control the main series protagonist Lara Croft through the majority of the game . The majority of Lara 's basic moves are carried over from the previous instalment , such as walking , jumping , climbing , swinging on ropes and standard gunplay . Her new moves include a small hop , army @-@ crawling , hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and a " super @-@ jump " that can be performed while running . Lara can also sneak up on enemies and perform stealth attacks , flatten herself against walls and peer round corners . Lara 's ability to sprint , present in the three previous entries in the series , is only available when the player opens a cabinet containing gas masks in the ' Galleries Under Siege ' level . Her weapons arsenal is also modified from previous games , featuring new weapons such as a K2 Impactor stun gun and upgraded versions of weapons like the shotgun . 
 Unlike previous games in the series , Lara has a stamina meter which depletes while she is performing bouts of climbing : if the bar empties before reaching her destination , she falls . The rate at which the meter decrease slows if the player performs special actions that increase Lara 's strength . These actions are also necessary to progress in many of the levels . The game incorporates elements similar to a role @-@ playing game , whereby Lara can talk with various NPCs found throughout the environments and chose what kinds of answers to give : early in the game , these answers will directly affect her progress through the story . The game also features a second playable character , Kurtis Trent . Initially appearing to be an antagonist , the player assumes control of him late in the game . He features mainly identical moves to Lara , and his sections of the game are more based around combat . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Angel of Darkness follows on from events in Tomb Raider : The Last Revelation and Tomb Raider Chronicles , where Lara Croft was presumed dead . An unspecified time later , Lara arrives in Paris at the request of her former mentor , Werner Von Croy . The city , and Von Croy , are gripped with fear over a serial killer the press have dubbed the " Monstrum " . The Monstrum steals body parts and leaves distinctive signs made with the victim ’ s blood in its wake . During a confrontation with Von Croy at his apartment , a flurry of activity occurs and Lara is knocked unconscious . When she wakes , Von Croy has been murdered by the Monstrum , and Lara is the prime suspect . Fleeing the crime scene with police in pursuit , Lara tracks down Von Croy 's friend Margot Carvier , who agrees to give Lara Von Croy 's old notebook , which he had left with her for safekeeping . From Carvier , Lara discovers that Von Croy had been contracted by a client named Eckhardt to track down medieval icons called the Obscura Paintings . The next day , it is revealed Carvier has also been murdered by the Monstrum . 
 Shortly before his death , Von Croy had been in contact with a French businessman and underworld figure , Louis Bouchard . Lara must track down Bouchard through the almost @-@ deserted backstreets of Paris , discovering that Bouchard is now in hiding after several of his associates were killed by the Monstrum . When she does locate him , Bouchard reveals Von Croy had contacted him for assistance in breaking into an archaeological dig beneath the Musée du Louvre . Lara gains access to the Louvre through its storm drains , and is able to uncover more information connecting the archaeological dig to the Obscura Paintings . The paintings concern the Nephilim , a hybrid creature descended from angels and humans , which once lived in Turkey . A single dormant Nephilim now remains , the <unk> <unk> or " Sleeper " . The five Obscura Paintings , when connected , form a talisman called the Sanglyph that can be used to revive the Sleeper . To prevent this , an ancient society called the Lux Veritatis stole one of the paintings and hid it in a guarded vault beneath the Louvre . Lara must descend into the Lux Veritatis stronghold beneath the Louvre to retrieve it . While attempting to escape with the painting , Lara is disarmed by Kurtis Trent , the last of the Lux Veritatis , who wields a magical <unk> blade . Kurtis steals the painting , but both he and Lara are knocked unconscious before they can flee . 
 Upon regaining consciousness , Lara is met by Bouchard , who informs her there has been a Monstrum killing in Prague . Bouchard then betrays Lara , attempting to have her killed , but Lara survives and makes her way to the Czech Republic . Outside the Monstrum crime scene , Lara meets a Czech journalist named Luddick , who fills her in on Eckhardt , an immortal black alchemist who leads a mysterious local organisation called the Cabal , and whom Luddick believes is the Monstrum . Lara also encounters a captive Bouchard near the crime scene , who reveals Eckhardt 's full plan for reviving the Nephilim . Soon after , Lara rediscovers Bouchard dead . With Luddick 's assistance , Lara infiltrates the Cabal 's headquarters , the <unk> , and in the process accidentally frees the Proto @-@ Nephilim , the Cabal 's unsuccessful attempt to breed a new Nephilim species . Meanwhile , Lara witnesses Eckhardt murder Luddick . She again encounters Kurtis , who locks her in a compartment while he kills the Proto @-@ Nephilim using his two Periapt Shards , daggers capable of killing immortal beings . Lara and Kurtis team up to stop Eckhardt assembling the Sanglyph , with Lara retrieving the final Obscura Painting buried deep beneath the <unk> . However , Lara must surrender this painting to save Kurtis , after he is captured by Eckhardt . Kurtis gives Lara his Periapt shards , but she will need a third lost shard to defeat Eckhardt , which Eckhardt has hidden in his laboratory . While Lara flees to track this shard down , Kurtis attempts to hold off an attack from Boaz , the horribly mutated remains of a fallen Cabal member . Kurtis succeeds in killing her , but is severely wounded in the process . 
 After retrieving the final Periapt shard , Lara discovers Eckardt in the midst of attempting to revive the Sleeper , using the Sanglyph and body parts stolen from the Monstrum 's victims . She is able to stab him with two shards , but before she can deliver the final blow , she is interrupted by Eckhardt 's right @-@ hand man , Karel . Karel kills Eckhardt with the final shard , revealing that he is a Nephilim himself , and had used Eckhardt to ensure the survival of his species . He had also manipulated Lara , in the guise of Bouchard , Luddick and Kurtis , to retrieve the Obscura Paintings . He offers Lara immortality if she will help him complete the task , but Lara experiences a flashback to Von Croy ’ s murder , and sees that Karel , in Eckhardt 's form , was the Monstrum . She refuses , retrieves the Sanglyph from Eckhardt 's body , and plants it on the Sleeper , overloading it with energy and causing it to explode , taking Karel with it . In the aftermath , Lara discovers Kurtis ' <unk> blade , which directs her towards Boaz 's chamber . Smiling , she heads inside . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Angel of Darkness started development three years prior to its release under the working title Tomb Raider next generation . As part of the preparation for the game , the company conducted market research , and decided to create a new setting and story for the main character . One of the main drives behind the game was fully utilising the new platform 's potential and reinventing the character of Lara Croft , including rebuilding her character model and allowing her to perform melee combat . It was the first game in the series to be made for the PlayStation 2 platform : the previous entry in the series , Tomb Raider : Chronicles , had pushed the PlayStation to its technical limits , contributing to lower review scores and sales than previous titles in the series . Core Design separated into two teams , with a new team working on Angel of Darkness and series regulars on Tomb Raider : Chronicles . After the completion of Tomb Raider : Chronicles , lead programmer Richard Morton came over and found that the new team had gone off the rails , scrapping the entire project once already and completing only the game 's basic story . The developers later admitted to being overambitious . Jonell Elliott returned as the voice of Lara Croft . This would be the last time she provided the voice , with Keeley Hawes taking over for Tomb Raider : Legend . 
 Among the goals of the team for Angel of Darkness were to create more complicated puzzles and make the character of Lara Croft , together with the tone of the game , darker and more hard @-@ edged . They also wished to compete with some of the newer action @-@ adventure games on the market , which were providing heavy competition , and include gameplay ideas from Shenmue and the Metal Gear series . Many character movements were drawn from and based directly on movements made by real people , similar to later motion capture techniques , and the world design drew from various artists and elements of films from the likes of Luc Besson and David Fincher . Murti Schofield , who had previously worked with Core Design , was brought in to write the story and script . As part of writing the background for the organisations involved in the story , he researched historical secret societies and artefacts , and accurate translations of Latin text incorporated into the game . Schofield created the character Kurtis Trent upon a request for someone who could become the focus of a spin @-@ off franchise . Core spent two years trying to reshape the franchise as well as writing a back story in the form of a book separated into multiple chapters , with Angel of Darkness being the first of those chapters . 
 The Angel of Darkness was unveiled under its official name in March 2002 , with a fuller demonstration appearing at E3 that year . Problems with the game were sensed at an early stage , as Heath @-@ Smith forgot himself and began swearing at the game while trying to demonstrate the opening level at a buyer 's conference . A release date was announced for November 2002 , but the game got delayed into spring 2003 . Eidos believed The Angel of Darkness would benefit from additional marketing support from Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life , the sequel to the original 2001 movie . Despite the delays , the company pushed Core Design to release the game in time for the marketing support . In order to meet the deadline , areas of the game containing key narrative elements had to be cut ; one of the losses was the explanation of how the character survived the events of The Last Revelation . Among other concepts that needed to be cut were two further locations , character animations , sound bites , and unique gameplay elements involving Kurtis . Some completed environmental assets also ended up being cut by mistake . Some of those elements were also deliberately left out by the team , who wished to bring them into future games . The team at Core Design later said that they felt Eidos forced them to get the game out before it was ready . The game was also reportedly submitted eight times to Sony before its release . The game went gold on 18 June 2003 , two days before its original release date , although there was some confusion as the game had reportedly gone gold on 2 June . The game was finally released in the summer of 2003 , alongside The Cradle of Life . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music for Tomb Raider : Angel of Darkness was composed by Peter Connelly and Martin <unk> . The soundtrack , compared to earlier entries in the franchise , was far more orchestral . It was also one of the few areas of the game 's development that did not suffer setbacks or similar problems . The score was recorded live by the London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios , London , in 2002 . It was orchestrated by Peter <unk> and conducted by David Snell . The Europe @-@ exclusive ' Collector 's Edition ' of the game included eight tracks from the game 's soundtrack on the bonus documentary DVD . These tracks were later release as a stand @-@ alone Audio CD . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tomb Raider : The Angel of Darkness received strong initial sales , mostly driven by an aggressive advertising campaign . The game reached 6th place in the UK Top 20 sales charts , but dropped to 13th by the following week . It eventually went on to sell 2 @.@ 5 million copies . The game received mixed to negative reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 , the game received an average score of 52 and 49 for the PlayStation 2 and Windows version , respectively . Reviewers praised the game 's storyline , graphics , sound , and environments , while they criticised its large number of bugs and system requirements and its poor controls , combat system , and camera movement . Gaming magazines Game Informer and PlayStation Official Magazine gave it 5 @.@ 5 / 10 and 8 / 10 respectively . 
 The game 's story received positive reviews . IGN 's Douglas C. Perry praised its " compelling storyline " and " set of intriguing bit characters " , while Gamespot 's Greg Kasavin praised the story as " interesting " , expressing surprise that it did not earn a higher ESRB rating . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed called it " a cut above most gaming fodder , and an area Core has paid an enormous amount of attention to . " Game Revolution 's A. A. White was less positive , stating that while the game 's darker story was an improvement compared to its predecessors , it never " [ managed ] to build to a captivating crescendo " , while the reviewer for GamesRadar called it " bountiful but confusing and ultimately of GCSE @-@ standard creative writing . " The music and sound were also highly praised . Perry called it " beautifully scored game , plush with dramatic mood and feeling " , with minimal sound effects adding " a sense of variety and even peculiarity " , Reed called it " excellently atmospheric throughout , and easily the best yet in the series . " while <unk> praised the game for " excellent ambient effects , a perfectly suited musical score , and first @-@ rate voice acting . " 
 The reaction to the graphics were mixed to positive . Perry cited multiple examples of good level design , smooth character models , surface textures and lightning , while feeling more mixed about Lara 's unrealistic figure and hardened appearance . White cited the graphics as an improvement , but was unimpressed by Lara 's character model and noted multiple frame @-@ rate dips that seemed " almost like playing the game in slow motion . " The GamesRadar review called the graphics " a measured improvement on [ Tomb Raider : Chronicles ] , but not a clean break from the [ previous ] Croft titles . " <unk> called the detailing in textures and models " impressive " , but cited several points where the game suffered from severe framerate dips . Reed praised the game 's graphical polish , with " almost every multi @-@ tiered location crammed with detail and careful incidentals " , but critiqued the frequent loading screens and stylised or low detail for environments and characters . 
 The gameplay was heavily criticised . Perry said that those aspects of the game " pale in comparison to 90 % of the PlayStation 2 's adventure or action @-@ adventure games , and they actually hurt the rest of the game 's best qualities " , but that the new moves worked smoothly apart from the stealth actions . White criticised the new layout 's negative effect on gameplay and the poor enemy AI , and Kasavin called the experience " frustrating , difficult , and tedious " , though stating that such moments stood out because many areas of the game were " thrilling " . Reed found the controls dated and the stealth mechanics and strength upgrade system unnecessary , while the GamesRadar reviewer cited both the gameplay and control layout as dated , citing the difficulty of effectively controlling Lara at multiple points in the game because of these issues . The camera was also criticised , with White , Perry , Reed , Kasavin and the GamesRadar reviewer all citing it as awkward to control and sometimes wayward or confusing during its scripted movements . In 2010 , GameTrailers placed the game 5th in their " Top 10 Worst Sequels " list . 
 The Angel of Darkness caused multiple problems for the Tomb Raider franchise . Paramount Pictures faulted The Cradle of Life 's relatively inadequate box office performance on the poor critical reception , and backlash the video game received from its fans . The head of Core Design , Jeremy Heath @-@ Smith , resigned after the release of the game , and plans for a sequel called The Lost Dominion , part of a proposed trilogy created using the game 's engine , were scrapped . Following the poor performance of both the game and the second movie , Eidos Interactive took the production of Tomb Raider games away from Core Design and assigned them to Crystal Dynamics , noted as the developers of the Legacy of Kain series . In later years , Angel of Darkness has become noted for utilising or experimenting with multiple gameplay features that later became commonplace , such as the RPG elements , stamina metre and mixing atmospheric features from different video game genres . 
 = Hellyeah = 
 Hellyeah is an American heavy metal supergroup , consisting of Mudvayne vocalist Chad Gray , former Nothingface guitarist Tom Maxwell , bass player Kyle Sanders , guitarist Christian Brady and former Pantera and Damageplan drummer Vinnie Paul . The idea to form a supergroup originated in 2000 on the Tattoo the Earth tour , although plans were constantly put on hold due to scheduling conflicts . The summer of 2006 allowed the band to take the project seriously and record its first album . Recorded at Chasin ' Jason studio in Dimebag Darrell 's backyard , a self @-@ titled album was completed in roughly one month . Released on April 10 , 2007 , the album entered the Billboard 200 at number 9 , selling 45 @,@ 000 copies . AllMusic reviewer William Ruhlmann stated the album is " a competent example of its genre " awarding the album three and a half stars . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early days = = = 
 Hellyeah 's beginnings can be traced back to 2000 on the Tattoo the Earth tour featuring Mudvayne , Nothingface , Slayer , Slipknot and Sevendust . Nothingface guitarist Tom Maxwell became friends with Mudvayne vocalist Chad Gray , and they talked about the possibility of forming a supergroup . The following year , Nothingface toured with Mudvayne and talks to form the supergroup continued , although were constantly put on hold due to scheduling conflicts . At this time , Gray and Maxwell had brainstormed five band names . 
 Mudvayne guitarist Greg Tribbett approached Maxwell " out of the blue " and wanted to join the band . Nothingface drummer Tommy Sickles originally helmed the drum kit for the band 's demo , however , things did not work out and the search for a new drummer began . The band knew former Pantera and Damageplan drummer Vinnie Paul , and tried to persuade him to join the band as their drummer . Originally , Paul was not sure if he would return to music after the death of his brother , Dimebag Darrell and an 18 @-@ month hiatus : " It was one of those things that I didn 't think I 'd be apart of this ever again without him , and after about a year and a half had gone by , these guys called me up , Chad [ Gray ] and Tom [ Maxwell ] , they were like , ' We 're thinking about putting this band together , would you be into it ? ' First couple of times , I told them , ' No , I don 't think I 'm ready to do this yet . ' And they just were real persistent , they kept calling me . And one night , I had been drinking some red wine and listening to some KISS on 12 " vinyl record and I said , ' You know what , lets take a shot at this , lets see what happens . ' " 
 The band 's persistence paid off and Paul joined the project . Paul commented about joining the project : " Everybody had their head in the right place and that let 's @-@ tear @-@ the @-@ world @-@ a @-@ new @-@ ass attitude " . 
 In their previous bands , there had only been one guitarist , so having two was a new experience for all members . Paul felt two guitarists brought back the " old school Iron Maiden thing where they play two parts and give you a grinding rhythm part with a badass melody on top " . In 2006 , Mudvayne did not have any plans to tour and were taking most of the summer and fall off , while Nothingface was preparing to record their next album . The time over the summer allowed the band to pursue the project which had been talked about for years . 
 Gray flew into Baltimore to Nothingface 's home studio to discuss the project further . The song " Waging War " was written in two days , followed by Maxwell tracking it the next day , and Gray completing vocals . During the summer of 2006 , schedules were clear , which allowed members to take the time to record a studio album . The album was recorded at Paul 's backyard studio , Chasin ' Jason in Arlington , Texas . Filled with photos of his late brother Dimebag , Paul found it tough entering the studio where the last albums by Damageplan and Pantera , and the collaboration Rebel Meets Rebel were recorded , but felt " the dark cloud that was there went away " , due to everyone 's positive energy . Maxwell and Tribbett were the primary writers of the album , and Paul was there to " steer them in the right direction " , with Gray adding his opinion on musical arrangements . 
 Paul built the members a cabana style house on his pool deck with air conditioning , a TV , and beds so the members felt comfortable while recording . Paul produced the record and Gray felt Paul " facilitated the whole thing " . The album was completed in roughly a month , with three recording sessions . The band worked on the record for eight days and returned home for a break . A 14 @-@ day session , followed the break and then another 10 days in the studio . Gray asserts the breaks in between recording sessions were to " re charge the batteries " , and " get a fresh head " . As the line @-@ up was complete , the band started to brainstorm names . When a member thought of a name they would write it on a piece of paper and put it in an amp box outside the studio . Someone wrote " Hellyeah " , and the band thought it was a perfect choice . Paul says it 's " very affirmative and full of attitude . When your buddy asks if you want to get a beer tonight , you don 't just say ' yes , ' you say , " Hell yeah ! " . Gray attributes the name to " late teens , <unk> and chicks and AC / DC and Metallica " . 
 = = = Hellyeah ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Revolver Magazine was one of the first print publications to feature the band in March 2007 . The self @-@ titled track , " Hellyeah " , started gaining satellite radio airplay in February 2007 , and the first single " You Wouldn 't Know " hit American radio airwaves the same month . " You Wouldn 't Know " peaked at number 5 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks , and 35 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks . The album 's second single , " <unk> ' Ass " peaked at number 7 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks . The band 's self @-@ titled album , Hellyeah was released on April 10 , 2007 via Epic Records . The album debuted at No. 9 on the Billboard 200 album charts , with sales of just under 45 @,@ 000 . The album peaked on the Top Hard Rock albums at number 15 , and number 3 on the Top Rock Albums . As of October 18 , 2007 , the album has sold 204 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Hellyeah received generally positive reviews . William Ruhlmann of Allmusic awarded the album three and a half stars out of five , commenting ; " Their album is a competent example of its genre , in which Tribbett and Maxwell combine to create crushing riffs over the pummeling rhythm section of Paul , while Gray howls typically enraged , expletive @-@ littered lyrics to songs " . However , Ruhlmann believes Hellyeah is not a notable variation from members ' previous bands . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Don Kaye awarded the album 7 out of 10 , praising the track " Matter of Time " for its slashing main riff , and " One Thing " as it " marches to the finish line with a rumbling , crunching wall of guitars worthy of Dimebag himself " . Kaye thought that Hellyeah 's first studio effort was not equal to any of its members ' main output . KNAC contributor Andrew <unk> stated " it 's a set of good songs recorded by 5 accomplished musicians from diverse backgrounds not letting their pasts define them and those songs in one form or another speak to you in different ways " . 
 Bassist Montano was asked to leave Hellyeah after the album 's release party , where he assaulted guitarist Tom Maxwell and made numerous gun threats while heavily intoxicated . The band 's publicist stated his departure was due to " personal reasons on both sides " The band considered Damageplan bassist Bob Zilla as Paul thought ; " It was kind hard to go ahead and commit to this band without Bob being part of it " . Zilla was invited to audition and got the gig immediately . 
 Hellyeah embarked on their first tour on May 2007 titled Fire it Up , made an appearance at the Download Festival , and underwent Australian tour in July 2007 . The Family Values Tour with Korn and Evanescence , saw the band start touring in late July , which also consisted playing with Alter Bridge in San Antonio before passing through thirty cities before ending in Washington , D.C. A DVD titled Below the Belt was released on November 13 , 2007 , and featured a documentary , music videos , performance footage from the making of the album , first studio sessions , coverage of the band 's world tour , and personal interviews . It was produced by members of the band and Ryan Ziemba . 
 = = = Stampede ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Hellyeah headlined a tour in the spring of 2010 with : Seether , Five Finger Death Punch , Drowning Pool , and Lacuna Coil . The first date was May 11 , 2010 in Madison , WI . They were also confirmed to play the main stage at Download Festival 2010 . In 2009 , the band revealed that they were in the studio recording a new album , later revealed to be titled Stampede . 
 For Stampede , the members went to drummer Vinnie Paul 's Texas home studio , for a recording process draped in a relaxed , pressure @-@ free atmosphere , surrounded by the obligatory cocktails , good eats and familial brotherhood . “ We were doing it at my house solely . We ate , drank and <unk> together , which made the brotherhood that happened , come through in the music , " Paul said . The band members lived in bungalows on the grounds and turned Paul 's house into a studio . Drums were recorded downstairs and guitars were recorded upstairs , with video screens in each room so the members could see one another while tracking . The methods may have been unorthodox , but the result was nothing short of magical . " It ’ s a broad , diverse album that covers rock , heavy metal and Southern rock ground . That is the main thing that I like about it : it ’ s not so focused on one thing , " Paul said . The high ceilings at the Paul home allowed for the creation of a big , booming sound . They also were able to work at their own natural pace . " We slept there , so if one of us just came up with an idea , we could jump on it , " guitarist Tom Maxwell said . 
 " Cowboy Way " , a song from the new album , was released for a free download via the band 's website on April 21 , 2010 . The music video for " Cowboy Way " premiered on May 20 , 2010 . The first single , " Hell of a Time " , was released on June 1 , 2010 . The music video for " Hell of a Time " premiered on June 16 , 2010 . [ 1 ] The song , " The Debt That All Men Pay " premiered on <unk> on June 22 , 2010 . Stampede was released on July 13 , 2010 via Epic Records and sold 28 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , debuting at No. 8 on the Billboard 200 , making it the band 's highest charting album to date . 
 The group was recently confirmed to be playing the Rock Star Energy Drink Uproar Festival along with other headliners Disturbed , Avenged Sevenfold , Stone Sour and Halestorm . 
 = = = Band of Brothers ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = 
 Hellyeah finished recording a new album , titled Band of Brothers , and were extremely satisfied with the production of the record ; which was produced by Jeremy Parker , who has produced albums for Godsmack and Evanescence , and was recorded in the home of drummer Vinnie Paul 's studio in Arlington , Texas ; VP 's Upstairs Studio . The direction of the album was heavier and more metal @-@ oriented than its predecessors , fusing the different influences of the band members ( Pantera , Mudvayne , Damageplan , Nothingface ) together for a more metal approach . Band of Brothers was released everywhere on July 17 , 2012 via Eleven Seven Music , the band 's new record label home after leaving Epic Records . The digital single " War In Me " was released on iTunes on April 3 , 2012 . Debut single " Band of Brothers " was released in early May with a music video and will be released on iTunes . On May 8 , 2012 , the band 's second single off their 3rd album of the same name , " Band of Brothers " was released . 
 They played the Download Festival on Sunday 16 June 2013 and played at Graspop Metal Meeting on Sunday 30 June 2013 . 
 In July 2013 , they were on tour on the Gigantour 2013 . 
 = = = Lineup changes and Blood for Blood ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In late 2013 , the band posted updates to their Facebook page , detailing that they were in the process of writing and recording their next album . A few short clips were posted by the band showing some of the guitar work underway . 
 On February 13 , 2014 , the band announced the tracklist and title of their album to be Blood for Blood , released on June 10 . It was also announced that guitarist Greg Tribbett and bassist Bob <unk> have departed the band , and were shortly replaced by Christian Brady ( Magna @-@ Fi / <unk> ) on guitar and ( <unk> / <unk> / <unk> ) bassist Kyle Sanders . Hellyeah and Adrenaline Mob have announced a few tour dates together . On June 3 , the full album was available for streaming via YouTube . 
 On April 13 , 2015 , Hellyeah released the official video for the album 's third single , " Hush " . The song was also used to promote the " No More " campaign against domestic violence . The song supported the from ' Blood for Blood ' album . 
 Slayer was chosen to headline the 2015 Rockstar Energy Mayhem Festival . The bands <unk> , King Diamond , The Devil Wears Prada , Thy Art Is Murder , Whitechapel , Jungle Rot , Sister Sin , Sworn In , Shattered Sun , Feed Her To The Sharks , Code Orange & Kissing Candice will also be participating in the Rockstar Tour . The festival is slated for 26 stops to run from June 26th through August 2nd . 
 = = = Unden ! able ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On February 23 , 2016 , the band released a new song called " Human " from their fifth studio album . 
 On April 8 , 2016 , the band announced their fifth studio album to be titled Unden ! able , released June 3 , 2016 . Tom Maxwell has stated that included on the album will be " a lot of stuff they never tried before " , calling it " moody , dark and crushing " . 
 = = Style = = 
 Paul described the band 's sound as " a familiar groove , with a new sound " . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Done Kaye commented " with little of the complexity of Mudvayne or angularity of Nothingface and much more of the full @-@ on , pedal @-@ to @-@ the @-@ metal style of Vinnie Paul 's previous work " . However , Kaye said the songs " Star " and " Thank You " border on musical cliché . Andrew <unk> of KNAC.com stated " ' <unk> ' Ass ' showcases Gray 's hidden talent as an outlaw country and western @-@ type crooner in the intro " , although he thought the band 's lyrics were repetitive . Hellyeah has been categorized as groove metal . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Hellyeah ( 2007 ) 
 Stampede ( 2010 ) 
 Band of Brothers ( 2012 ) 
 Blood for Blood ( 2014 ) 
 Unden ! able ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 Loudwire Music Awards 
 = Weapons of Class Destruction = 
 " Weapons of Class Destruction " is the eighteenth episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars . Written by Jed Seidel and directed by John Kretchmer , the episode premiered on UPN on April 12 , 2005 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a high school student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica investigates the persistent bomb threats at her school . Meanwhile , Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) begins dating Alicia Fennel ( Erica Gimpel ) , and Veronica 's relationship with Logan ( Jason Dohring ) progresses . 
 " Weapons of Class Destruction " introduces the romantic relationship between Veronica and Logan , a romance that would continue on @-@ and @-@ off throughout the series and its subsequent film adaptation . Series creator Rob Thomas did not originally envision this relationship , but he changed his mind when he saw the chemistry between the two actors and characters . The episode received positive reviews , with discussion focusing on Veronica and Logan 's first kiss . The episode has been frequently cited as one of the best in the series . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Veronica is kissing Leo D 'Amato ( Max Greenfield ) outside her house . After Veronica goes back into her house , Keith announces that he has begun dating Wallace 's ( Percy Daggs III ) mother , Alicia , making things awkward between Veronica and Wallace . Veronica notices a sign outside which says " <unk> " . In class , there is a fire drill , and Duncan ( Teddy Dunn ) says that it is the third one this week . Veronica talks to Principal Clemmons about the fire drill issue , but he doesn 't give anything up to her . Later , she notices police officers with service dogs going through the building . Veronica , posing as the superintendent , calls Principal Clemmons , who reveals that the school has experienced several bomb threats . She prints the story in the school newspaper , causing chaos at school the next day . Principal Clemmons calls her in again and tells her to stop printing stories . Veronica and Wallace talk to each other while Keith and Alicia watch a movie . Alicia tries to convince Wallace to accept their relationship to no avail . After talking to Mac ( Tina Majorino ) , another student , Pete ( Michael McMillian ) approaches Veronica to say that he saw two students , Ben ( Jonathan Taylor Thomas ) and Norris ( Theo Rossi ) with exploding tennis balls . Wallace places the two students under more suspicion when he tells Veronica about them , and Veronica sees a mysterious timer . 
 Duncan and Meg ( Alona Tal ) approach Veronica , and she tells Meg the general overview of a case where someone has been evading capture and all the tactics they used to do so before Duncan suddenly leaves . Wallace gives Veronica the student file on one of the two students , but his high school records are clean after bullying in junior high . The other student doesn 't have a file . Veronica talks to Duncan , who says he knows about her investigation . Duncan scoffs at her findings before he realizes that she suspects him in the murder , reacting with extreme rage before dashing out of the room . Ben and Norris talk about guns and bombs , leading Veronica to track Ben , eventually seeing him buying fertilizer and taking out a rifle . Ben gets into the car and orders her to drive to the Camelot motel . There , Logan appears and beats him up before it is revealed that the " suspect " is actually an ATF agent . Ben says that he is investigating Norris , but needs her help : Norris has a crush on Veronica , and Ben asks her to get close to him . As she leaves the motel , Veronica and Logan kiss unexpectedly . 
 Veronica gets an invitation to Norris 's house , but she doesn 't find any weapons . Veronica calls Mac to help her break into the WiFi before she sees Pete in front of the house . The ATF searches Norris 's vehicle and finds fertilizer and a rifle , despite Veronica 's convictions that he is not the perpetrator . However , Veronica recognizes them as being the same ones Ben was loading into his car earlier . Veronica calls Pete , and she tells him that she knows he falsely implicated Norris ( with the help of the ATF agent ) because of terrible bullying in junior high . Meg tells Veronica that Duncan has disappeared after removing $ 10 @,@ 000 from the bank . The story involving Norris is published in the newspaper , and , although it leads to all charges against Norris being dropped , it also results in the new journalism teacher 's ( Joey Lauren Adams ) termination . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jed Seidel and directed by John Kretchmer . This episode mark 's Seidel 's fifth and final writing credit for the series , after " Meet John Smith " , " The Girl Next Door " , " Silence of the Lamb " , and " Mars vs. Mars " . In addition , this episode is the second directing credit for Kretchmer , after " Silence of the Lamb . " 
 The episode also explains the departure of journalism teacher Mallory Dent ( Sydney Tamiia Poitier ) , who made her last appearance in " The Girl Next Door " , also introducing Dent 's replacement , Geena Stafford , who is subsequently fired in the same episode . The episode introduces a romantic relationship between Veronica and Logan through their first kiss . Originally , Veronica and Logan were not intended to be a couple . At PaleyFest 2014 , series creator Rob Thomas stated that " The truth is , we never had any intention at all for Logan to end up with Veronica . [ Dohring ] was hired to be the obligatory psychotic jackass . In the writers ' room , sitting around watching dailies , we would all gather around , and it was like , ' We want to watch that . We want to watch those two onscreen together . ' " However , Dohring and Bell found out the plan for the two characters around the filming of " Return of the Kane " or " The Girl Next Door " . 
 On the reveal , Dohring said in an interview : " I ’ m actually glad , Rob told us about episode six or seven that we would get together . We were like , ‘ No way ! ’ But there was something going on there . We could feel it as actors . It was damn cool – these characters had some kind of connection . So we had to start to soften it up a little bit and break the ice somewhat [ between the characters ] . I ’ m glad he gave us that heads up . " Lead actress Kristen Bell expressed surprise over the initial decision by saying , " I love working with Jason and he 's such a great actor to work opposite , but sometimes , I feel it 's really just weird luck . Somehow people get magic dust sprinkled on them and you don 't know why . You look like you have boatloads of chemistry with someone else . " On the kiss itself , Dohring noted , " It was so funny , as an actor , to kiss this girl . I was all nervous beforehand . But you have to just let it go for the scene . It was so fun to watch [ later when it aired ] , " adding that " a lot of that emotion was real for me . " The song " Momentary Thing " by band Something Happens plays during Veronica and Logan 's first kiss . 
 Series creator Rob Thomas , was not content with the kiss scene , writing that it was not how he envisioned it . " I wasn 't actually pleased with the first Veronica / Logan kiss . Now , I may have been wrong on this front , but it wasn 't what I imagined , or really what I think was described in the script . The line of description called for Logan to " devour " Veronica . I wanted it to be — I don 't know if sexual is the right word , but — hungry , or a release , or mixed with some self @-@ loathing and confusion . Instead , it came off as singularly romantic . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , the episode received 2 @.@ 30 million viewers , ranking 114th of 120 in the weekly rankings . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received primarily positive reviews , with critical attention mostly going to Veronica and Logan 's relationship . Price Peterson of TV.com gave the episode a positive review , noting that " [ o ] <unk> the most notable aspect of this episode was the Logan @-@ Veronica hookup . Again , it seemed really sudden , but in the sense that they are both mercurial teenagers it seemed right , particularly when they didn 't know how to handle themselves afterward . " Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B + " , writing that " [ Veronica ] kisses Logan ! You heard me ! How could you not , with all the exclamation points ! " 
 Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , gave a mixed review . While calling the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " predictable " , the reviewer also called Keith and Alicia 's new relationship " perhaps the most fun " part of the episode . In addition , Kaiser commented on Veronica and Logan 's relationship . " I 'm not entirely sold on the relationship , either from a character point of view or a quality point of view . Obviously it 's just a kiss in the heat of the moment … but it doesn 't seem to have much motivation beyond [ that ] . " IGN placed the episode 2nd in its list of the top ten Veronica Mars episodes , second to only " Leave It to Beaver " . The publication praised the new Logan @-@ Veronica dynamic and said " The few episodes just before this one showed the softer , vulnerable side of Logan and just when you wonder if he 's really so bad , he saves the day and an innocent peck turned into a passionate embrace . " 
 E ! reacted to the scene by writing , " We seemed to experience the same whirlwind of emotions they did : The hesitance , the shock , the elation , the weirdness of how right it felt , and then , of course , the inevitable ' Oh crap , what did we just do and what does this mean ? ' awkwardness of it all . They , and the show , would never be the same . In the best way possible . " Buzzfeed ranked the episode as the 4th best Veronica Mars episode , behind " A Trip to the Dentist " , " Leave It to Beaver " , and " Not Pictured . " TV Line ranked the episode 6th on a similar list . Give Me My Remote ranked " Weapons of Class Destruction " as the fifth best episode of Veronica Mars , particularly noting the kiss scene between Logan and Veronica . " Veronica kisses Logan in a scene that was full of so much chemistry that it gave me chills . The episode ends with Veronica figuring out that Ben was setting Norris up , but , honestly , who was really paying attention at that point ? Veronica and Logan had finally realized that their chemistry was undeniable ! " 
 Kimberly Roots , writing for TV Line , responded to the kiss scene by stating , " What got me – and still gets me – about this kiss is how much fire it has . This isn ’ t a drunken , convenient hook @-@ up . This isn ’ t a let ’ s @-@ see @-@ how @-@ this @-@ goes peck . This is two people acting on years of something unacknowledged between them . We get a long moment of <unk> in action before they break apart and realize what just happened . " Entertainment Weekly called " Weapons of Class Destruction " one of the " 10 essential episodes of Veronica Mars " . 
 = Ímar = 
 Ímar ( Old Norse : Ívarr ; died c . 873 ) was a Viking leader in Ireland and Scotland in the mid @-@ late ninth century who founded the Uí Ímair dynasty , and whose descendants would go on to dominate the Irish Sea region for several centuries . He was the son of the king of Lochlann , identified in the non @-@ contemporary Fragmentary Annals of Ireland as Gofraid . The Fragmentary Annals name Auisle and Amlaíb Conung as his brothers . Another Viking leader , Halfdan Ragnarsson , is considered by some scholars to be another brother . The Irish Annals title Amlaíb , Ímar and Auisle " kings of the foreigners " . Modern scholars use the title " kings of Dublin " after the Viking settlement which formed the base of their power . Some scholars consider Ímar to be identical to Ivar the Boneless , a Viking commander of the Great Heathen Army named in contemporary English sources who also appears in the Icelandic sagas as a son of the legendary Viking Ragnar Lodbrok . 
 During the late 850s and early 860s Ímar was involved in a protracted conflict with Máel Sechnaill , overking of the Southern Uí Néill and the most powerful ruler in Ireland . The cause of the conflict is uncertain , but it may have been sparked by competition for control of Munster and its resources . Ímar allied successively with Cerball , King of Ossory and Áed Findliath , overking of the Northern Uí Néill against Máel Sechnaill . Máel Sechnaill died in 862 and his lands were split , effectively ending the conflict . Following this Ímar and his kin warred with several Irish leaders in an attempt to expand their kingdom 's influence . Ímar disappears from the historical record in Ireland between the years 864 and 870 ; this is consistent with Ímar being identical to Ivar the Boneless - Ivar was active in England between these two dates and he is not mentioned by English sources after 870 . In 870 the annals record that Dumbarton Rock , the chief fortress of the Kingdom of Strathclyde , was successfully captured by Ímar and Amlaíb following a four month long siege . 
 Ímar died in 873 and is given the title " King of the Norsemen of all Ireland and Britain " in contemporary annals . The Fragmentary Annals record that Ímar 's father also died that year , and it is believed that at that time their combined territory encompassed Dublin , the Isle of Man , the Western Isles , Orkney , and large parts of the northern and western Scottish coast including Argyll , Caithness and Sutherland . 
 = = Background = = 
 Norse contact with Scotland predates the first written records in the 8th century , although the nature and frequency of these contacts is unknown . Excavations on the island of Unst in Shetland indicate that Scandinavian settlers had reached there perhaps as early as the mid @-@ 7th century and from 793 onwards repeated raids by Vikings on the British Isles are recorded . " All the islands of Britain " were devastated in 794 with Iona being sacked in 802 and 806 . The Frankish Annales Bertiniani may record the conquest of the Inner Hebrides by Vikings in 847 . Scholarly interpretations of the period " have led to widely divergent reconstructions of Viking Age Scotland " , especially in the early period , and Barrett has identified several competing theories , none of which he regards as proven . Ó Corráin notes : " when and how the Vikings conquered and occupied the Isles is unknown , perhaps unknowable " . 
 The earliest recorded Viking raids in Ireland occurred in 795 . Over time , these raids increased in intensity , and they overwintered in Ireland for the first time in 840 – 841 . In 841 a <unk> was constructed at <unk> <unk> ( Irish for hurdled ford ) , a site which would later develop into the city of Dublin . <unk> were also established at other sites around Ireland , some of which developed into larger Viking settlements over time . The Viking population in Ireland was boosted in 851 with the arrival of a large group known as " dark foreigners " – a contentious term used to refer to the newly arrived Vikings , as opposed to the " fair foreigners " , i.e. the Viking population which was resident in arrival prior to this influx . A kingdom in Viking Scotland was established by the mid ninth @-@ century , and it exerted control over some of the Vikings in Ireland . By 853 a separate kingdom of Dublin had been set up which claimed control over all the Vikings in Ireland . 
 The main historical sources for this period are the Norse sagas and the Irish annals . Some of the annals , such as the Annals of Ulster are believed to be contemporary accounts , whereas the sagas were written down at dates much later than the events they describe and are considered far less reliable . A few of the annals such as the Fragmentary Annals of Ireland and the Annals of the Four Masters were also complied at later dates , in part from more contemporary material and in part from fragments of sagas . According to Downham : " apart from these additions [ of saga fragments ] , Irish chronicles are considered by scholars to be largely accurate records , albeit partisan in their presentation of events " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Arrival in Ireland = = = 
 Ímar is first mentioned in contemporary Irish annals in 857 , four years after his brother Amlaíb Conung is recorded as arriving in Ireland . The later Fragmentary Annals of Ireland suggest Ímar may have come to Ireland shortly after his brother : 
 Ímar and Amlaíb were joined in Ireland by another brother , Auisle , sometime before 863 . From this date onwards the three brothers are described as " kings of the foreigners " by the annals , but in modern texts they are usually labelled as kings of Dublin , after the Viking settlement which was the base of their power . Lochlann , originally <unk> or Lothlend , the land where Ímar 's father was king , is often identified with Norway , but it is not universally accepted that it had such a meaning in early times . Several historians have proposed instead that in early times , and certainly as late as the Battle of Clontarf in 1014 , Lochlann refers to the Norse and Norse @-@ Gael lands in the Hebrides , the Isle of Man , the Northern Isles and parts of mainland Scotland . Whatever the original sense , by the twelfth century , when Magnus Barefoot undertook his expedition to the West , it had come to mean Norway . 
 = = = War with Máel Sechnaill = = = 
 The first mention of Ímar in Irish annals in 857 concerns a war fought between Ímar and Amlaíb Conung against Máel Sechnaill , overking of the Southern Uí Néill , and a group of Vikings sometimes known as the Norse @-@ Irish . Máel Sechnaill was the most powerful king in Ireland at the time and his lands lay close to the Viking settlement of Dublin . The fighting began in the previous year : " Great warfare between the heathens and Mael Sechnaill , supported by Norse @-@ Irish " is reported by the Annals of Ulster . 
 The fighting was focused on Munster ; Máel Sechnaill sought to increase his influence over the kings there . He took hostages from the province in 854 , 856 and 858 , and the power of the over @-@ kings had been weakened in 856 by a Viking raid on the royal centre at Lough <unk> , when <unk> son of <unk> , a relative of Munster 's over @-@ king , was killed alongside a great many others . This weakness likely drew the gaze of both Máel Sechnaill and the Vikings , and their competition for Munster 's resources may have been the cause of the war . Early battles seem to have gone the way of the Vikings : Ímar and Amlaíb " inflicted a rout on Caitill the Fair and his Norse @-@ Irish in the lands of Munster " . Although there is no certain evidence to suggest that this Caitill is the same person as the Ketill Flatnose of later sagas , Anderson and Crawford have suggested that they are the same person . 
 In 858 Ímar , allied with Cerball , King of Ossory , routed a force of Norse @-@ Irish at <unk> <unk> ( east of Lough Derg and the Shannon in modern @-@ day County Tipperary ) . Ossory was a small kingdom wedged between the larger realms of Munster and Leinster . At the beginning of his reign in the 840s , Cerball 's allegiance was pledged to the over @-@ king of Munster , but as that kingdom grew weaker Ossory 's strategic location allowed opportunities for his advancement . Cerball had previously fought against the Vikings , but he allied with them to challenge the supremacy of Máel Sechnaill and his Norse @-@ Irish allies . The following year Amlaíb , Ímar and Cerball conducted a raid on Máel Sechnaill 's heartlands in Meath , and in consequence a royal conference was held at <unk> ( modern @-@ day County Westmeath ) . Following this meeting Cerball shed his allegiance to the Vikings and formally submitted to Máel Sechnaill in order to " make peace and amity between the men of Ireland " . 
 With their ally turned against them , Ímar and Amlaíb sought a new alliance with Áed Findliath , overking of the Northern Uí Néill , and rival of Máel Sechnaill . In 860 Máel Sechnaill and Cerball led a large army of men from Munster , Leinster , Connacht and the Southern Uí Néill into the lands of Áed Findliath near Armagh . While the southern forces were encamped there , Áed launched a night attack , killing some of the southern men , but his forces took many casualties and were forced to retreat . In retaliation for this invasion Amlaíb and Áed led raids into Meath in 861 and 862 , but they were driven off both times . According to the Fragmentary Annals this alliance had been cemented by a political marriage : 
 In later years , alliance between the Northern Uí Néill and the Vikings of Dublin became a regular occurrence : the Northern and Southern Uí Néill were frequent competitors for supremacy in Ireland , and the uneasy neighbourhood between Dublin and the Southern Uí Néill made the Vikings natural allies for the Northerners . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Máel Sechnaill died in 862 , and his territory in Meath was split between two rulers , Lorcán mac <unk> and Conchobar mac Donnchada . Ímar and Amlaíb , now joined in Ireland by their younger brother Auisle , sought to make use of this change to extend their influence in the lands of the Southern Uí Néill . In 863 the three brothers raided Brega in alliance with Lorcán , and the following year Amlaíb drowned Conchobar at Clonard Abbey . <unk> mac Diarmata , overking of the Uí <unk> , was killed by Vikings in 863 , probably by Ímar and his kin trying to expand into Leinster . 
 Beginning around 864 the three brothers halted their campaigns of conquest in Ireland , and instead campaigned in Britain . Ímar disappears from the Irish Annals in 864 , and does not reappear until 870 . Downham concludes he is identical to Ivar the Boneless , a Viking leader who was active in England during this period as a commander of the Great Heathen Army . According to O <unk> " Ímar has been identified with Ívarr <unk> ( the boneless ) , son of Ragnar Lodbrok , but the matter is controversial " . 
 The reappearance of Ímar in Irish annals in 870 is marked by a raid undertaken by him and Amlaíb . They laid siege to Dumbarton Rock , the chief fortress of the Kingdom of Strathclyde , and captured it following a four @-@ month siege . The pair returned to Dublin in 871 with 200 ships and they " brought with them in captivity a great prey of Angles , Britons and Picts " . According to the Fragmentary Annals Amlaíb returned to Lochlann that year to aid their father in a war , leaving Ímar to rule alone ( Auisle had died in 867 ) . The Pictish Chronicle claims Amlaíb died around 874 during a protracted campaign against Constantine I in Scotland . The Fragmentary Annals record the death of Ímar 's father , Gofraid , in 873 . The final mention of Ímar in contemporary annals is also in 873 when his death is reported . In these reports he is titled " king of the Norsemen of all Ireland and Britain " . According to Ó Corrain the evidence suggests that by his death Ímar 's kingdom ( including the territory formerly ruled by his father ) included Man , the Western Isles , Argyll , Caithness , Sutherland , Orkney , and parts of the coastline of Ross and Cromarty and Inverness . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Ivar the Boneless = = = 
 In 865 the Great Heathen Army landed in England and one of its leaders is identified by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle as " Ingvar " . Later Norse tradition records Ingvar under the name of Ivar the Boneless , and calls him a son of the legendary Ragnar Lodbrok . It is generally accepted that Ivar the Boneless and Ingvar are one and the same , though the epithet " the Boneless " is not recorded until the twelfth century and its origins are obscure . Moreover , some suppose Ivar the Boneless to be identical to Ímar , though there is no scholarly consensus one way or another . Woolf supports the connection between these two " Ivars " and writes of the Great Heathen Army that invaded East Anglia in 865 that " it is now generally agreed that they arrived in Britain directly from Ireland where Ívarr , the senior partner by 865 , had been active for at least a decade " . Ó Corrain argues that the " evidence in favour of the identification of Ímar and Inguar consists of three points : the identity of the names , the absence of any mention of Ímar in the Irish annals between 864 and the Irish account of the siege of Dumbarton in 870 , and the subsequent close connections between the dynasties of Dublin and York " . Forte , Oram , and Pedersen note that Ivar is not mentioned in any English source after 870 , when Ímar reappears in the Irish annals . 
 Ó Corrain also offers argument against the identification of Ímar and Ingvar / Ivar : " To take but one example , if Ivarr of Dublin is identical with Inguar , how are we to give any credence to Smyth 's reconstruction of Brompton ( p . 229 ) which shows Ivarr in East Anglia in 871 when we know from contemporary Irish sources that Ivarr of Dublin was besieging Dumbarton for four months in 870 and returned to Ireland in early 871 with the takings ? ... Taken all together , the genuine material on Inguar in contemporary English sources is slight " . He also states " there is nothing new in the suggestion that Ímar of Dublin and <unk> / <unk> / <unk> of English history are identical . It has frequently been put forward .... and has equally frequently been rejected or treated as a mere possibility " . Downham concludes " while medieval writers seem to have been as interested as modern historians about Ívarr ’ s origins , it is perhaps wiser to accept that we do not know what these really were " . 
 = = = Dark and fair foreigners = = = 
 In the Irish annals the terms Dubgaill ( dark foreigners ) , and Finngaill ( fair foreigners ) , are used to refer to rival groups of Vikings . The exact meaning of these terms is subject to debate , but historically the most popular interpretation has been that Dubgaill refers to Danes and Finngaill refers to Norwegians . From 917 onwards the descendants of Ímar are described as leaders of the Dubgaill . Ímar himself is not identified explicitly by the annals with the Dubgaill , but <unk> , a figure considered by some to be Ímar 's brother , is called " lord of the ' Dark Foreigners ' " . 
 However , the interpretation of " dark " Danes and " fair " Norwegians has recently been challenged . Dumville has suggested that Dubgaill and Finngaill do not refer to any cultural difference but instead distinguish between " old " and " new " Vikings , with the group arriving with Ímar being the " new " or " dark " Vikings , and the preexisting group being the " old " or " fair " Vikings . Downham agrees and goes a step further , suggesting that Dubgaill was applied " to followers the king of Laithlind ( who had become a recurrent phenomenon for the chroniclers ) as a convenient way of distinguishing them from the vikings who were already in Ireland " . 
 = = = Ynglings = = = 
 An alternative reconstruction , proposed by Alex Woolf , identifies Ímar 's grandson Ragnall with Rognvald Eysteinsson , Earl of Møre , a figure closely associated with Harald Fairhair , the first King of Norway . Woolf provides two pieces of evidence in support of this theory . Firstly , both Ragnall and Rognvald are the grandsons of ' Ivars ' - this would equate Ímar with Ívarr <unk> , a son of the legendary king Halfdan the Old . Secondly , Rognvald 's son Ivar was killed while in Scotland , as was Ragnall 's kinsman Ímar ua Ímair . Other attempts have also been made in the modern era to link the Kings of Lochlann with historical figures in Norway - Smyth has suggested that Amlaíb can be identified with Olaf <unk> @-@ Alf , King of Vestfold , ( who was the son of Gudrød the Hunter and half @-@ brother of Halfdan the Black ) , though speculation of this nature has not received much support . Ó Corrain states that there is " no good historical or linguistic evidence to link Lothlend / Laithlind with Norway , and none to link the dynasty of Dublin to the shadowy history of the Ynglings of Vestfold " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ímar 's father is identified as Gofraid by the Fragmentary Annals ; an entry dated c . 871 – 872 gives a partial genealogy for Ímar , naming him " Ímar son of Gofraid son of Ragnall son of Gofraid Conung son of Gofraid " . Ó Corrain states that this reference to Ímar 's genealogical ascent is a " construct without historical value " . Nonetheless , he accepts the existence of Ímar 's father Gofraid ( also <unk> or <unk> ) , stating " it is likely that the father of ... Ímar ( Ívarr ) is Gofraid ( Guðrøðr ) and that he is a historical person and dynastic ancestor " . 
 Amlaíb Conung came to Ireland first in 853 , with Ímar following in or before 857 , and Auisle following in or before 863 . The three are identified as " kings of the foreigners " by the Annals of Ulster in 863 , and as brothers by the Fragmentary Annals : 
 The Annals of Ulster say that Auisle was killed in 867 by " kinsmen in parricide " . The Fragmentary Annals state explicitly that Amlaíb and Ímar planned their brother 's death , though no motive is given . Although the three are not identified as brothers in any contemporary annals , the recurrence of their names among their descendants strongly suggests a familial connection . 
 Some scholars identify Halfdan Ragnarsson as another brother . This identification is contingent upon Ímar being identical to Ivar the Boneless : Halfdan and Ivar are named as brothers in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . According to the Annals of Ulster Amlaíb 's son <unk> was slain in battle by " <unk> " in 875 . This figure is generally agreed to be Halfdan . If that is correct , then it may explain the reason for the conflict : it was a dynastic squabble for control of the kingdom . One potential problem is that according to Norse tradition Ivar and Halfdan were the sons of Ragnar Lodbrok , whereas Ímar and Amlaíb are named as sons of Gofraid in the Fragmentary Annals . However , the historicity of Ragnar is uncertain and the identification of Ragnar as the father of Ivar and Halfdan is not to be relied upon . 
 Three figures later named by the annals are identifiable as sons of Ímar . These are Bárid ( d . 881 ) , Sichfrith ( d . 888 ) , and Sitriuc ( d . 896 ) , all three of whom reigned as King of Dublin . Five individuals are titled " ua Ímair " in the annals , a term usually understood to mean " grandson of Ímar " . These are Sitric Cáech , Ímar , Ragnall , Amlaíb , and Gofraid . All except for Amlaíb ruled as either King of Dublin or King of Viking Northumbria at one time or another . These five are never given a patronymic in the annals , so it is not possible to identify which of the three known sons of Ímar - if any - was their father . One possible reason for the lack of a patronym might be that they were children of a son of Ímar who never ruled Dublin , or who spent most of his time outside Ireland , thus making their legitimacy to rule dependent the identity of their grandfather , not their father . Another possibility is that they were grandsons of Ímar through a daughter , again with their right to rule dependent on their grandfather . Another grandson , <unk> , is directly identifiable as the son of Bárid . 
 Ímar and his descendants are collectively titled the Uí Ímair - translated as " descendants of Ímar " . Later members of this dynasty include multiple kings of Dublin , Northumbria and the Isles . Downham states " [ Ímar 's ] descendants dominated the major seaports of Ireland and challenged the power of kings in Britain during the later ninth and tenth centuries " . Viking power in Ireland was severely weakened by the Battle of Clontarf in 1014 , and although Ímar 's descendants maintained influence in and around the Irish sea region they did not have the strength they had had previously . The Crovan dynasty , rulers of Mann and the Isles , likely descended from Ímar through his great @-@ grandson Amlaíb Cuarán . Woolf , among others , has suggested that Somerled , King of the Isles , and progenitor of Clan Donald and Clan MacDougall , descended from Ímar and the Crovan dynasty , though perhaps only through the female line . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = Honora Sneyd = 
 Honora Sneyd ( Honora Edgeworth , née Sneyd ) ( 1751 – 1 May 1780 ) was an eighteenth @-@ century English writer , mainly known for her associations with literary figures of the day particularly Anna Seward and the Lunar Society , and for her work on children 's education . 
 Honora Sneyd was born in Bath in 1751 , and following the death of her mother in 1756 was raised by Canon Thomas Seward and his wife Elizabeth in Lichfield , Staffordshire until she returned to her father 's house in 1771 . There , she formed a close friendship with their daughter , Anna Seward . Having had a romantic engagement to John André and having declined the hand of Thomas Day , she married Richard Edgeworth as his second wife in 1773 , living on the family estate in Ireland till 1776 . There she helped raise his children from his first marriage , including Maria Edgeworth , and two children of her own . Returning to England she fell ill with tuberculosis , which was incurable , dying at Weston in Staffordshire in 1780 . She is the subject of a number of Anna Seward 's poems , and with her husband developed concepts of childhood education , resulting in a series of books , such as Practical Education , based on her observations of the Edgeworth children . She is known for her stand on women 's rights through her vigorous rejection of the proposal by Day , in which she outlined her views on equality in marriage . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life 1751 – 1773 = = = 
 Honora Sneyd was born the third daughter to Edward Sneyd , of <unk> Staffordshire and Susanna Cook of Sible Hedingham , Essex , in Bath in 1751 . Her father was a Major in the Royal Horse Guards , with an appointment at Court as a Gentleman <unk> her parents married in 1742 and she was one of eight children and the second surviving daughter of six , and only six years old when her mother died in 1757 . Her father found himself unable to take care of all of his children and various friends and relations then offered to take them in . 
 = = = = Adoption by the Seward family 1756 – 1771 = = = = 
 Honora Sneyd , who was seven years younger than the thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Anna Seward , moved into the home of family friends , Canon Thomas Seward and his wife Elizabeth and their family at Lichfield , Staffordshire , where they lived in the Bishop 's Palace in the Cathedral Close . The Sewards had lost five children after their first two daughters , and such fostering was not uncommon at the time . There she was brought up by the Sewards as one of their own , being variously described as an adopted or foster sister . Anna Seward describes how she and her younger sister Sarah first met Honora , on returning from a walk , in her poem The Anniversary ( 1769 ) . Initially Honora was more attached to Sarah , to whom she was closer in age , but Sarah died of typhus at the age of nineteen ( 1764 ) , when Honora Sneyd was thirteen . Following Sarah 's death Honora became the responsibility of Anna , the older sister . Anna consoled herself with her affection for Honora Sneyd , as she describes in Visions , written a few days after her sister 's death . In the poem she expresses the hope that Honora ( ' this transplanted flower ' ) will replace her sister ( whom she refers to as ' <unk> ' ) in her and her parents ' affections . Throughout her life Honora Sneyd 's health was fragile , experiencing the first bout of the tuberculosis that would later claim her life in 1766 , at the age of fifteen . However Anna Seward believed she detected the first signs in 1764 , at thirteen , writing presciently 
 This dear child will not live ; I am perpetually fearing it , notwithstanding the clear health which <unk> her cheek and <unk> in her eyes . Such early expansion of intelligence and sensibility partakes too much of the angelic , too little of the mortal nature , to tarry long in these low abodes of frailty and of pain , where the harshness of authority , and the impenetrability of selfishness , with the worse mischiefs of pride and envy , so frequently agitate by their storms , and chill by their damps , the more ingenious and purer spirits , scattered , not profusely , over the earth . 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 At Lichfield Honora Sneyd came under the influence of Canon Seward , who raised her , and his progressive views on female education , which he expressed in his poem The Female Right to Literature ( 1748 ) . She was described as clever and interested in science , From Anna she developed a great love of literature . 
 Honora Sneyd was an accomplished scholar , attending day school in Lichfield where she became fluent in French , translating Rousseau 's Julie for her older foster sister . Though Canon Seward 's ( but not his wife 's ) attitudes towards the education of girls was progressive relative to the times , they were " by no means excessively liberal " . Amongst the subjects he taught them were theology and numeracy , and how to read , appreciate , write and recite poetry . By omitting what were considered Although this deviated from what were considered " conventional drawing room accomplishments " , he encouraged them away from traditional female roles . However , the omissions were also notable , including languages and science , although they were left free to pursue their own inclinations in this regard . To that end they were exposed to the circle of learned men who frequented the Bishop 's Palace at Lichfield where they lived , and which became the centre of a literary circle including , David Garrick , Erasmus Darwin , Samuel Johnson and James Boswell . The children were encouraged to participate in the conversations , as Anna later relates . 
 = = = = Relationships = = = = 
 Honora Sneyd and Anna Seward lived under the same roof for thirteen years and formed a close friendship which has given rise to much speculation as to its exact nature , located as it was within the tradition of " female friendship " , and forming the basis of a body of Anna Seward 's poetical works . Various authors differ in their interpretation of the relationship between the two women , with Lillian Faderman who first suggested that it was lesbian , supported by Barrett although the term relates more to twentieth- rather than eighteenth @-@ century concepts of identity . On the other hand , Teresa Barnard argues against this based more on examination of the correspondence rather than poetry , which is generally based within the lesbian poetic canon , the relationship between these two women being frequently cited . 
 Sneyd had a reputation for both intelligence and beauty , as commented on by many , including Anna Seward and Richard Edgeworth ( see below ) . In 1764 Seward described Sneyd as " fresh and beautiful as the young day @-@ star , when he bathes his fair beams in the dews of spring " . At seventeen Honora Sneyd was briefly engaged to a Swiss born Derbyshire merchant , John André , a relationship that Seward had fostered , and wrote about in her Monody on Major André ( 1781 ) when André became a British officer in 1771 and was hanged as a spy by the Americans . The respective parents did not support this attachment for reasons of his financial status . 
 Around Christmas 1770 , Thomas Day and Richard Edgeworth , who like Thomas Seward were members of the Lunar Society that met in Lichfield amongst other places , were spending increasing amounts of time at the Seward household and both had fallen for Sneyd , although Edgeworth was already married . In 1771 she declined an offer of marriage from Thomas Day . Edgeworth gives an account of her letter of rejection stating that it " contained an excellent answer to his [ Day 's ] arguments in favour of the rights of men , and a clear dispassionate view of the rights of women " . Edgeworth continues that Sneyd had very determined views on the role of women and their rights within marriage . 
 Miss Honora Sneyd would not admit the unqualified control of a husband over all her actions ; she did not feel , that seclusion from society was indispensably necessary to preserve female virtue , or to secure domestic happiness . Upon terms of reasonable equality , she supposed , that mutual confidence might best subsist ; she said , that , as Mr Day had decidedly declared his determination to live in perfect seclusion from what is usually called the world , it was fit she should decidedly declare , that she would not change her present mode of life , with which she had no reason to be dissatisfied , for any dark and untried system , that could be proposed to her . 
 However Honora Sneyd 's father moved to Lichfield from London in 1771 , and reassembled his family of five daughters there . By now Honora was nineteen and Anna viewed her friend 's departure with considerable dismay . Although Day was much distressed by his rejection by Honora Sneyd , he transferred his affections to the fifth daughter , Elizabeth Sneyd , who had been in the care of Mr Henry Powys and his wife , Susannah Sneyd , of the Abbey , Shrewsbury , Mrs. Powys being Mr Sneyd 's niece . However Elizabeth Sneyd was not inclined to accept Day . 
 Richard Edgeworth comments on how Honora Sneyd had affected him ; 
 During this intercourse I perceived the superiority of Miss Honora Sneyd 's capacity ... her sentiments were on all subjects so just and were delivered with such blushing modesty though not without an air of conscious worth as to command attention from every one capable of appreciating female excellence . Her person was graceful her features beautiful and their expression such as to heighten the eloquence of every thing she said . I was six and twenty and now for the first time in my life I saw a woman that equalled the picture of perfection which existed in my imagination . 
 He continued , describing the unhappiness of his marriage , and how that made him vulnerable to her attributes , which were share by all the learned gentlemen of his circle . He also believed that Anna Seward had noticed the effect her friend was having on him , and would regularly place her actions in the best light for his benefit . The elimination of Day as a suitor for Honora Sneyd 's hand placed Edgeworth in a difficult situation and he resolved to end it by moving to Lyons France , to work , in the autumn of 1771 . 
 = = = Marriage to Richard Edgeworth 1773 – 1780 = = = 
 = = = = Marriage and move to Ireland 1773 – 1776 = = = = 
 On 17 March 1773 , Edgeworth 's first wife Anna Maria Elers gave birth to their fifth child , Anna Maria Edgeworth , at the age of 29 . Ten days later she died from puerperal fever . Edgeworth was still in Lyon to avoid temptation leaving his expectant wife in the care of Day . On learning of the death of his wife , Edgeworth travelled to London , where he consulted Day as to Honora Sneyd 's situation . On learning that she remained in good health and unattached , he promptly headed to Lichfield to see Honora at the Sneyds , with the intention of proposing . His offer was accepted immediately , and there was no mention of the conventional waiting period before remarrying after widowhood . Although Mr. Sneyd was opposed to his daughter 's marriage , the couple were married at Lichfield Cathedral on 17 July 1773 , officiated by Canon Thomas Seward , Anna Seward being a bridesmaid . After marrying , problems with the Edgeworth family estates in Ireland required the couple to immediately move to <unk> , County Longford in Ireland . 
 Through this marriage Sneyd became step @-@ mother to Edgeworth 's four surviving children by his first wife , Anna Maria , ranging from seven months to nine years in age ; Richard , Maria , who became a writer in her own right , Emmeline and Anna Maria . On encountering her new family she observed that Maria , then aged five , was exhibiting behavioural problems , and expressed her views that speedy and consistent punishment were the keys to ensuring good behaviour in children , a view she proceeded to practice . However she believed that such discipline needed to be imposed " before the age of 5 or 6 " , and was therefore rather late in the case of the older children , however she imposed a strict discipline . Following a period of ill health on Sneyd 's part , Maria Edgeworth was sent away to boarding school in Derby ( 1775 – 1781 ) , and later London upon the death of Honora Sneyd ( 1781 – 1782 ) . Similarly , her older brother Richard was sent to Charterhouse ( 1776 – 1778 ) and then went to sea , and she never saw him again . Later Richard Edgeworth would comment on how difficult the first two years were for Sneyd in her new role as stepmother to undisciplined children , a role her relatives had advised her against . 
 Honora Sneyd was soon pregnant , giving birth to her daughter Honora on 30 May 1774 , who died at the age of sixteen . Her second child , Lovell , who inherited the property , was born the following year on 30 June 1775 . The Edgeworth children were raised according to the system of Rousseau , as refined and modified by the Edgeworths . Richard Edgeworth considered his early educational efforts a failure , the older children from his first marriage growing up unruly and then being sent away to school , and readily concurred with his new wife 's stricter rules . However he had seen very little of them in their early years . 
 = = = = Return to England 1776 – 1780 = = = = 
 After three years in Ireland , in 1776 they moved to England again , taking up residence in Northchurch , Hertfordshire Despite Anna Seward 's despair at the loss of her friend , she and Honora had maintained regular correspondence and visits . However , these suddenly ceased , an event that Anna blamed Honora Sneyd 's father for . During a temporary absence of Edgeworth on business in Ireland in the spring of 1779 , Honora Sneyd fell ill with a fever , just as he was summoning her to let the house and join him there . On his return they consulted Dr. Erasmus Darwin at Lichfield , who was of the opinion the illness was more severe than at first thought , being a recurrence of consumption ( T.B. ) from which she had had a brief bout at the age of fifteen . He advised against returning to Ireland but rather , moving closer to Lichfield . For a while they stayed at the Sneyd house that was temporarily vacant while consulting a wide range of physicians including Dr. William Heberden ( Samuel Johnson 's physician ) , and even staying with Day near London to be close to medical <unk> but only received news of <unk> . Eventually they rented <unk> , near Shifnal , Shropshire , closer to the Sneyds , Darwin and others of their circle , where Honora Sneyd drew up her will in April . 
 = = = = Death = = = = 
 Four years after returning to England Honora Sneyd died of consumption at six in the morning on 1 May 1780 at <unk> , surrounded by her husband , her youngest sister , Charlotte and a servant . Honora Sneyd was buried in the nearby Weston church where a plaque on the wall ( see box ) bears witness to her life . Honora Sneyd died within eight years of her marriage to Richard Edgeworth , at almost the same age as her predecessor . The same disease , which had taken her the life of her mother and five maternal aunts , would soon claim the life of her young daughter Honora Edgeworth ( 1790 ) as well as her younger sister , Elizabeth seven years later ( 1797 ) as well as at least two of Elizabeth 's children , Charlotte ( 1807 ) and Henry ( 1813 ) . Honora 's brother , Lovell was also affected by the consumption . At the time it was thought this was a hereditary weakness carried by the family . 
 On Honora Sneyd 's death , Edgeworth married her younger sister , Elizabeth Sneyd , stating that this had been the dying wish of Honora . Uglow speculates that this was a marriage of convenience , for the sake of the children . Although it was technically legal to marry one 's wife 's sister , the marriage was considered scandalous , and was opposed by the Sneyds , Sewards and Edgeworths as well as the Bishop . The couple fled to London where they were married on Christmas Day with Thomas Day as witness , before proceeding to live at Northchurch . The scandal may have given rise to less charitable interpretations of Edgeworth 's actions , although there is no direct evidence to support or refute these . Honora Sneyd 's will , drawn up during the last month of her life refers only to " that Woman whom he shall think worthy to call his , for her to wear , so long as they both shall LOVE " , referring to a cameo she owned of Richard Edgeworth . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Practical Education = = = 
 The Edgeworths jointly developed the concept of " Practical Education " , a principle that would become a new paradigm by the 1820s . Having determined that after eight years , Richard Edgeworth 's attempt to raise his eldest son Richard according to the principles of Rousseau was a failure , he and Honora were determined to find better methods . After the birth of Honora 's first child ( 1774 ) , the Edgeworths embarked on a plan , partly inspired by Anna Barbauld , to write a series of books for children . After trying many other methods , Barbauld 's Lessons for Children from two to three years old was published in 1778 , and the Edgeworths used it on Anna ( 5 ) and Honora ( 4 ) , and were delighted to find that the girls learned to read in six weeks . Now back in England , at Northchurch the Edgeworths were in closer contact with the intellectuals of the Lunar society . Richard Edgeworth and Honora were determined to design a plan for the education of their children . They started by reviewing the existing literature on childhood education ( including Locke , Hartley , Priestley in addition to Rousseau ) , and then proceeded to document their observations of the behaviour of children and then developed their own " practical " system . To this end Erasmus Darwin suggested they start by reading the work of Dugald Stewart . Honora Sneyd then started recording extensive notes on her observations of the Edgeworth children . These then became the dialogues in the final book . 
 Richard and Maria Edgeworth state that " She [ Honora ] was of opinion that the art of education should be considered as an experimental science " , and that the failures of the past were due to " following theory rather than practice " . Richard Edgeworth and Honora then set about applying the emerging principles of educational psychology to the actual practice of education . From their reading of theory they determined that the reason Barbauld was successful was that the child 's reading was rewarded ( thus departing radically from Rousseau ) , because it was associated with pleasure . Honora Sneyd conceived of the title of their work therefore as Practical Education . With her husband , Honora wrote the first version of Practical Education as a children 's book Practical education : or , the history of Harry and Lucy for Honora her daughter , which was begun in 1778 and privately published in February 1780 in Lichfield as Practical Education , vol 2 . The book tells a simple story of two parents and their two model children , Harry and Lucy , who carry out domestic chores and ask their parents many questions , the answers to which may be deemed educational . The children explain their discoveries and how they learn , the whole presented as nine forms of learning . As originally conceived it was intended to be the second part of a series of three books , but the remaining parts remained unwritten . The original plan had been for a collaborative work , contributed to by various members of the Lunar <unk> it was an ambitious project designed to fill what they perceived of as major deficiencies in the field of both technical and scientific education and to introduce early ideas on morality , science and other academic disciplines into the developing mind of the young child . After Honora Sneyd 's premature death , her sister Elizabeth continued the work , in her role as the third wife of Richard Edgeworth . The final version of the book was authored by Richard and Maria Edgeworth and published after both Honora and her sister Elizabeth 's deaths , in 1798 , and further revised under Maria 's name as Early lessons ( 1801 – 1825 ) . In reality this was a family project contributed to by a number of their members that would extend over 50 years , beyond Richard Edgeworth 's death in 1817 ( c . 1774 – 1825 ) . 
 Richard Edgeworth observed on his wife 's death that being familiar with the experimental method in science , she was surprised to find that educational theory was based on very little empirical evidence , and set out to apply experimental science to child education and devised , executed and recorded experiments with children . She conceived and executed a register ( 2 volumes 1778 – 1779 ) of the reaction of children to new knowledge and experience , given her interest in applying experimental science to the field of child education . She observed the questions that children asked , what they did , and how they solved problems . An extensive example of her recorded dialogue is given by Richard and Maria Edgeworth in " Practical Education " . This formed the basis of Richard Edgeworth 's Essays on professional education ( 1809 ) . In the Bodleian Library there is a short story in manuscript dated 1787 and other fragments attributed to Honora Sneyd . Her parents ' principles of childhood education were to be a profound influence on Maria Edgeworth 's own career as a writer for children . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Honora Sneyd , through her early contact with members of the Lunar Society , had always taken a keen interest in science , an attribute that drew the intention of Richard Edgeworth who considered himself an inventor . Following their marriage , she worked on his projects with him and in his words , " became an excellent theoretic <unk> " herself . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since little of Honora Sneyd 's own words have survived , our image of her is largely through the eyes of others , in particular Anna Seward and Richard Edgeworth . Honora Sneyd is often listed amongst the members or associates of the <unk> , educated upper class literary women who disdained traditional female accomplishments and often formed close female friendships . The depiction of the effect of consumption on her has been used as a symbol of the pervasiveness of the disease in eighteenth century culture . The work she started on educational psychology would prove to be immensely influential throughout the nineteenth century . Her name is also inextricably entwined with that of Anna Seward in the literature of lesbian relationships and female friendship . 
 From growing up in the Seward household with Canon Seward and the members of the Lunar Society , Honora Sneyd and her childhood friend Anna Seward developed relatively progressive views for the times on the status of women and equality in marriage , a key to which was female education . Sneyd entered into marriage with Richard Edgeworth on the understanding that they were equal partners in his work . Anna and later Honora 's stepdaughter , Maria Edgeworth , were to take those values and promote them in late eighteenth and early nineteenth century Britain , the ancestors of modern feminists . Today Honora 's position on women 's rights is best remembered for her rebuke of Thomas Day and his theory of the " perfect wife " . 
 Anna Seward 's will mentions two likenesses of Honora Sneyd in her possession that she wished to bequeath . The first of these was a <unk> engraving after George Romney , which she had modeled for as " Serena " ( see Figure , above ) to Honora 's brother Edward . The other was a drawn miniature portrait by John André ( 1776 ) which she left to her cousin and confidante Mary Powys . A jasper medallion , after an image by John Flaxman , was issued by the Wedgwood factory in 1780 ( right ) . Honora Sneyd was the subject of many of Seward 's poems , When Sneyd married Edgeworth , she became the subject of Seward 's anger , yet the latter continued to write about Sneyd and her affection for her long after her death . In addition to being immortalised in Anna Seward 's poetry , Sneyd appears semi @-@ fictionalised as a character in a play about Major André and herself , André ; a Tragedy in Five Acts by William Dunlap , first produced in New York in 1798 . 
 The plaque in St. Andrew 's Church , Weston , where she is buried , on the north wall of the tower , reads ; 
 = = Appendix : Persons mentioned = = 
 Parents 
 Edward Sneyd ( 1711 – 1795 ) m . 1742 Susanna Cook d . 1757 , by whom ; 
 Elizabeth Sneyd ( 1753 – 1797 ) 
 Charlotte Sneyd d . 1822 
 Foster family 
 Thomas Seward ( 1708 – 1790 ) m . 1741 Elizabeth Hunter d . 1780 , by whom ; 
 Anna Seward ( 1742 – 1809 ) 
 Sarah Seward ( 1744 – 1764 ) 
 Extended family 
 Henry Powys d . 1774 m . Susannah Sneyd ( 1729 – 1791 ) , by whom 
 Mary Powys d . 1829 
 Literary acquaintances 
 David Garrick ( 1717 – 1779 ) 
 Erasmus Darwin ( 1731 – 1802 ) 
 Samuel Johnson ( 1709 – 1784 ) 
 James Boswell ( 1740 – 1795 ) 
 Suitors 
 John André ( 1750 – 1780 ) 
 Thomas Day ( 1748 – 1789 ) 
 Husband and children 
 Richard Lovell Edgeworth ( 1744 – 1817 ) 
 m . 1763 ( 1 ) Anna Maria Elers ( 1743 – 1773 ) , by whom ; 
 Richard Edgeworth ( 1765 – 1796 ) 
 Lovell Edgeworth ( 1766 – 1766 ) 
 Maria Edgeworth ( 1768 – 1849 ) 
 Emmeline Edgeworth ( 1770 – 1817 ) 
 Anna Maria Edgeworth ( 1773 – 1824 ) 
 m . 1773 ( 2 ) Honora Sneyd ( 1751 – 1780 ) , by whom 
 Honora Edgeworth ( 1774 – 1790 ) 
 Lovell Edgeworth ( 1775 – 1842 ) 
 Influences 
 Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau ( 1712 – 1778 ) 
 Anna Barbauld ( 1743 – 1825 ) 
 John Locke ( 1632 – 1704 ) 
 David Hartley ( 1705 – 1757 ) 
 Joseph Priestley ( 1733 – 1804 ) 
 Dugald Stewart ( 1753 – 1828 ) 
 Artists 
 John Flaxman ( 1755 – 1826 ) 
 James Hopwood ( c . 1740 – 1819 ) 
 George Romney ( 1734 – 1802 ) 
 Other 
 William Dunlap ( 1766 – 1839 ) 
 William Heberden ( 1710 – 1801 ) 
 = Ring @-@ tailed lemur = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur ( Lemur catta ) is a large strepsirrhine primate and the most recognized lemur due to its long , black and white ringed tail . It belongs to Lemuridae , one of five lemur families , and is the only member of the Lemur genus . Like all lemurs it is endemic to the island of Madagascar . Known locally in Malagasy as <unk> ( [ <unk> ] , spelled maki in French ) or hira , it inhabits gallery forests to spiny scrub in the southern regions of the island . It is omnivorous and the most terrestrial of extant lemurs . The animal is diurnal , being active exclusively in daylight hours . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is highly social , living in groups of up to 30 individuals . It is also female dominant , a trait common among lemurs . To keep warm and reaffirm social bonds , groups will huddle together . The ring @-@ tailed lemur will also sunbathe , sitting upright facing its underside , with its thinner white fur towards the sun . Like other lemurs , this species relies strongly on its sense of smell and marks its territory with scent glands . The males perform a unique scent marking behavior called spur marking and will participate in stink fights by impregnating their tail with their scent and wafting it at opponents . 
 As one of the most vocal primates , the ring @-@ tailed lemur uses numerous vocalizations including group cohesion and alarm calls . Experiments have shown that the ring @-@ tailed lemur , despite the lack of a large brain ( relative to <unk> primates ) , can organize sequences , understand basic arithmetic operations and preferentially select tools based on functional qualities . 
 Despite reproducing readily in captivity and being the most populous lemur in zoos worldwide , numbering more than 2 @,@ 000 individuals , the ring @-@ tailed lemur is listed as endangered by the IUCN Red List due to habitat destruction and hunting for bush meat and the exotic pet trade . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Although the term " lemur " was first intended for slender lorises , it was soon limited to the endemic Malagasy primates , which have been known as " lemurs " ever since . The name derives from the Latin term lemures , which refers to specters or ghosts that were exorcised during the Lemuria festival of ancient Rome . According to Carl Linnaeus ' own explanation , the name was selected because of the nocturnal activity and slow movements of the slender loris . Being familiar with the works of Virgil and Ovid and seeing an analogy that fit with his naming scheme , Linnaeus adapted the term " lemur " for these nocturnal primates . However , it has been commonly and falsely assumed that Linnaeus was referring to the ghost @-@ like appearance , reflective eyes , and ghostly cries of lemurs . It has also been speculated that Linnaeus may also have known that the some Malagasy people have held legends that lemurs are the souls of their ancestors , but this is unlikely given that the name was selected for slender lorises from India . The species name , catta , refers to the ring @-@ tailed lemur 's cat @-@ like appearance . Its purring vocalization is similar to that of the domestic cat . 
 Following Linnaeus ' species description , the common name " <unk> maucauco " was first penned in 1771 by Welsh naturalist Thomas Pennant , who made note of its characteristic long , striped tail . ( The term " maucauco " was a common term for lemurs at this time . ) The now universal English name " ring @-@ tailed lemur " was first used by George Shaw in his illustrated scientific publication covering the Leverian collection published between 1792 and 1796 . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 All mammalian fossils from Madagascar come from recent times . Thus , little is known about the evolution of the ring @-@ tailed lemur , let alone the rest of the lemur clade , which comprises the entire endemic primate population of the island . However , chromosomal and molecular evidence suggest that lemurs are more closely related to each other than to other Strepsirrhine primates . For this to have happened , it is thought that a very small ancestral population came to Madagascar via a single rafting event between 50 and 80 million years ago . Subsequent evolutionary radiation and speciation has created the diversity of Malagasy lemurs seen today . 
 According to analysis of amino acid sequences , the branching of the family Lemuridae has been dated to 26 @.@ 1 ± 3 @.@ 3 mya while rRNA sequences of mtDNA place the split at 24 @.@ 9 ± 3 @.@ 6 mya . The ruffed lemurs are the first genus to split away ( most basal ) in the family , a view that is further supported by analysis of DNA sequences and karyotypes . Additionally , Molecular data suggests a deep genetic divergence and sister group relationship between the true lemurs ( Eulemur ) and the remaining three genera : Lemur , Hapalemur , and Prolemur . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is thought to share closer affinities to the bamboo lemurs of the genera Hapalemur and Prolemur than to the other two genera in its family . This has been supported by comparisons in communication , chromosomes , genetics , and several morphological traits , such as scent gland similarities . However , other data concerning immunology and other morphological traits fail to support this close relationship . For example , Hapalemur and Prolemur have short snouts , while the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the rest of Lemuridae have long snouts . However , differences in the relationship between the orbit ( eye socket ) and the muzzle suggest that the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the true lemurs evolved their elongated faces independently . 
 The relationship between the ring @-@ tailed lemur and bamboo lemurs ( both Hapalemur and Prolemur ) is the least understood . Molecular analysis suggests that either the bamboo lemurs diverged from the ring @-@ tailed lemur , making the group monophyletic and supporting the current 3 @-@ genera taxonomy , or that the ring @-@ tailed lemur is nested in with the bamboo lemurs . 
 The karyotype of the ring @-@ tailed lemur has 56 chromosomes , of which four are metacentric ( arms of nearly equal length ) , four are submetacentric ( arms of unequal length ) , and 46 are acrocentric ( the short arm is hardly observable ) . The X chromosome is metacentric and the Y chromosome is acrocentric . 
 = = = Taxonomic classification = = = 
 Linnaeus first used the genus name Lemur to describe " Lemur tardigradus " ( the red slender loris , now known as Loris tardigradus ) in his 1754 catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick . In 1758 , his 10th edition of Systema Naturae listed the genus Lemur with three included species , only one of which is still considered to be a lemur while another is no longer considered to be a primate . These species include : Lemur tardigradus , Lemur catta ( the ring @-@ tailed lemur ) , and Lemur volans ( the Philippine colugo , now known as Cynocephalus volans ) . In 1911 , Oldfield Thomas made Lemur catta the type species for the genus , despite the term initially being used to describe lorises . On January 10 , 1929 , the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) formalized this decision in its publication of Opinion 122 . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur shares many similarities with ruffed lemurs ( genus Varecia ) and true lemurs ( genus Eulemur ) , and its skeleton is nearly indistinguishable from that of the true lemurs . Consequently , the three genera were once grouped together in the genus Lemur and more recently are sometimes referred to as subfamily <unk> ( within family Lemuridae ) . However , ruffed lemurs were reassigned to the genus Varecia in 1962 , and due to similarities between the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the bamboo lemurs , particularly in regards to molecular evidence and scent glands similarities , the true lemurs were moved to the genus Eulemur by Yves Rumpler and Elwyn L. Simons ( 1988 ) as well as Colin Groves and Robert H. <unk> ( 1988 ) . In 1991 , Ian Tattersall and Jeffrey H. Schwartz reviewed the evidence and came to a different conclusion , instead favoring to return the members of Eulemur and Varecia to the genus Lemur . However , this view was not widely accepted and the genus Lemur remained monotypic , containing only the ring @-@ tailed lemur . Because the differences in molecular data are so minute between the ring @-@ tailed lemur and both genera of bamboo lemurs , it has been suggested that all three genera be merged . 
 Because of the difficulty in discerning the relationships within family Lemuridae , not all authorities agree on the taxonomy , although the majority of the <unk> community favors the current classification . 
 In 1996 , researchers Steven Goodman and Olivier Langrand suggested that the ring @-@ tailed lemur may demonstrate regional variations , particularly a high mountain population at Andringitra Massif that has a thicker coat , lighter coloration , and variations in its tail rings . In 2001 , primatologist Colin Groves concluded that this does not represent a locally occurring subspecies . This decision was later supported by further fieldwork that showed that the differences fell within the normal range of variation for the species . The thicker coat was considered a local adaptation to extreme low temperatures in the region , and the fading of the fur was attributed to increased exposure to solar radiation . Additional genetic studies in 2000 further supported the conclusion that population did not vary significantly from the other ring @-@ tailed lemur populations on the island . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is a relatively large lemur . Its average weight is 2 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 4 @.@ 9 lb ) . Its head – body length ranges between 39 and 46 cm ( 15 and 18 in ) , its tail length is 56 and 63 cm ( 22 and 25 in ) , and its total length is 95 and 110 cm ( 37 and 43 in ) . Other measurements include a hind foot length of 102 and 113 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 and 4 @.@ 4 in ) , ear length of 40 and 48 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 and 1 @.@ 9 in ) , and cranium length of 78 and 88 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 and 3 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 The species has a slender frame and narrow face , fox @-@ like muzzle . The ring @-@ tailed lemur 's trademark — a long , bushy tail — is ringed in alternating black and white transverse stripes , numbering 12 or 13 white rings and 13 or 14 black rings , and always ending in a black tip . The total number of rings nearly matches the approximate number of caudal vertebrae ( ~ 25 ) . Its tail is longer than its body and is not prehensile . Instead , it is only used for balance , communication , and group cohesion . 
 The pelage ( fur ) is so dense that it can clog electric clippers . The ventral ( chest ) coat and throat are white or cream . The dorsal ( back ) coat varies from gray to rosy @-@ brown , sometimes with a brown <unk> patch around the tail region , where the fur grades to pale gray or grayish brown . The dorsal coloration is slightly darker around the neck and crown . The hair on the throat , cheeks , and ears is white or off @-@ white and also less dense , allowing the dark skin underneath to show through . The muzzle is dark grayish and the nose is black , and the eyes are encompassed by black triangular patches . Facial vibrissae ( whiskers ) are developed and found above the lips ( <unk> ) , on the cheeks ( genal ) , and on the eyebrow ( superciliary ) . Vibrissae are also found slightly above the wrist on the underside of the forearm . The ears are relatively large compared to other lemurs and are covered in hair , which has only small tufts if any . Although slight pattern variations in the facial region may be seen between individuals , there are no obvious differences between the sexes . 
 Unlike most diurnal primates , but like all <unk> primates , the ring @-@ tailed lemur has a tapetum lucidum , or reflective layer behind the retina of the eye , that enhances night vision . The tapetum is highly visible in this species because the pigmentation of the ocular fundus ( back surface of the eye ) , which is present in — but varies between — all lemurs , is very spotty . The ring @-@ tailed lemur also has a rudimentary <unk> depression on the retina . Another shared characteristic with the other strepsirrhine primates is the rhinarium , a moist , naked , glandular nose supported by the upper jaw and protruding beyond the chin . The rhinarium continues down where it divides the upper lip . The upper lip is attached to the premaxilla , preventing the lip from protruding and thus requiring the lemur to lap water rather than using suction . 
 The skin of the ring @-@ tailed lemur is dark gray or black in color , even in places where the fur is white . It is exposed on the nose , palms , soles , eyelids , lips , and genitalia . The skin is smooth , but the leathery texture of the hands and feet facilitate terrestrial movement . The anus , located at the joint of the tail , is covered when the tail is lowered . The area around the anus ( <unk> area ) and the perineum are covered in fur . In males , the scrotum lacks fur , is covered in small , horny spines , and the two sacs of the scrotum are divided . The penis is nearly cylindrical in shape and is covered in small spines , as well as having two pairs of larger spines on both sides . Males have a relatively small baculum ( penis bone ) compared to their size . The scrotum , penis , and prepuce are usually coated with a foul @-@ smelling secretion . Females have a thick , elongated clitoris that protrudes from the labia of the vulva . The opening of the urethra is closer to the clitoris than the vagina , forming a " drip tip . " 
 Females have two pairs of mammary glands ( four nipples ) , but only one pair is functional . The anterior pair ( closest to the head ) are very close to the <unk> ( armpit ) . <unk> scent glands are present on both males and females . Both genders have small , dark antebrachial ( forearm ) glands measuring 1 cm long and located on the inner surface of the forearm nearly 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) above the wrist joint . ( This trait is shared between the Lemur and Hapalemur genera . ) The gland is soft and compressible , bears fine dermal ridges ( like fingerprints ) , and is connected to the palm by a fine , 2 mm – high , hairless strip . However , only the male has a horny spur that overlays this scent gland . The spur develops with age through the accumulation of secretions from an underlying gland that may connect through the skin through as many as a thousand minuscule ducts . The males also have brachial ( arm ) glands on the axillary surface of their shoulders ( near the armpit ) . The brachial gland is larger than the antebrachial gland , covered in short hair around the periphery , and has a naked crescent @-@ shaped orifice near the center . The gland secretes a foul @-@ smelling , brown , sticky substance . The brachial gland is barely developed if present at all in females . Both genders also have apocrine and sebaceous glands in their genital or perianal regions , which are covered in fur . 
 Its fingers are slender , padded , mostly lacking webbing , and semi @-@ dexterous with flat , human @-@ like nails . The thumb is both short and widely separated from the other fingers . Despite being set at a right angle to the palm , the thumb is not opposable since the ball of the joint is fixed in place . As with all strepsirrhines , the hand is <unk> ( the axis passes through the fourth digit ) rather than <unk> ( the axis passing through the third digit ) as seen in monkeys and apes . The fourth digit is the longest , and only slightly longer than the second digit . Likewise , the fifth digit is only slightly longer than the second . The palms are long and leathery , and like other primates , they have dermal ridges to improve grip . The feet are semi @-@ digitigrade and more specialized than the hands . The big toe is opposable and is smaller than the big toe of other lemurs , which are more arboreal . The second toe is short , has a small terminal pad , and has a toilet @-@ claw ( sometimes referred to as a grooming claw ) specialized for personal grooming , specifically to rake through fur that is unreachable by the mouth . The toilet @-@ claw is a trait shared among nearly all living strepsirrhine primates . Unlike other lemurs , the ring @-@ tailed lemur 's heel is not covered by fur . 
 = = = Dentition = = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur has a dentition of 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 
 = 36 , meaning that on each side of the jaw it has two incisors , one canine tooth , three premolars , and three molar teeth . Its deciduous dentition is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 × 2 = 
 24 . The permanent teeth erupt in the following order : m 1 / 1 ( first molars ) , i 2 / 2 ( first incisors ) , i 3 / 3 ( second incisors ) , C1 ( upper canines ) , m 2 / 2 ( second molars ) , c1 ( lower canines ) , m 3 / 3 ( third molars ) , p 4 / 4 ( third premolars ) , p 3 / 3 ( second premolars ) , p 2 / 2 ( first premolars ) . 
 Its lower incisors ( i1 and i2 ) are long , narrow , and finely spaced while pointing almost straight forward in the mouth ( procumbent ) . Together with the incisor @-@ shaped ( incisiform ) lower canines ( c1 ) , which are slightly larger and also procumbent , form a structure called a toothcomb , a trait unique to nearly all strepsirrhine primates . The toothcomb is used during oral grooming , which involves licking and tooth @-@ scraping . It may also be used for grasping small fruits , removing leaves from the stem when eating , and possibly scraping sap and gum from tree bark . The toothcomb is kept clean using a sublingual organ — a thin , flat , fibrous plate that covers a large part of the base of the tongue . The first lower premolar ( p2 ) following the toothcomb is shaped like a canine ( caniniform ) and occludes the upper canine , essentially filling the role of the incisiform lower canine . There is also a diastema ( gap ) between the second and third premolars ( p2 and p3 ) . 
 The upper incisors are small , with the first incisors ( I1 ) space widely from each other , yet closely to the second incisors ( I2 ) . Both are compressed <unk> ( between the cheek and the tongue ) . The upper canines ( C1 ) are long , have a broad base , and curve down and back ( recurved ) . The upper canines exhibit slight sexual dimorphism , with males exhibiting slightly larger canines than females . Both sexes use them in combat by slashing with them . There is a small diastema between the upper canine and the first premolar ( P2 ) , which is smaller and more caniniform than the other premolars . Unlike other lemurs , the first two upper molars ( M1 and M2 ) have prominent lingual <unk> , yet do not have a <unk> . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is diurnal and semi @-@ terrestrial . It is the most terrestrial of lemur species , spending as much as 33 % of its time on the ground . However it is still considerably arboreal , spending 23 % of its time in the mid @-@ level canopy , 25 % in the upper @-@ level canopy , 6 % in the emergent layer and 13 % in small bushes . Troop travel is 70 % terrestrial . 
 Troop size , home range , and population density vary by region and food availability . Troops typically range in size from 6 to 25 , although troops with over 30 individuals have been recorded . The average troop contains 13 to 15 individuals . Home range size varies between 6 and 35 hectares ( 15 and 86 acres ) . Troops of the ring @-@ tailed lemur will maintain a territory , but overlap is often high . When encounters occur , they are agonistic , or hostile in nature . A troop will usually occupy the same part of its range for three or four days before moving . When it does move , the average traveling distance is 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) . Population density ranges from 100 individuals per 1 km2 ( 0 @.@ 39 sq mi ) in dry forests to 250 – 600 individuals per km2 in gallery and secondary forests . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur has both native and introduced predators . Native predators include the fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) , the Madagascar harrier @-@ hawk ( Polyboroides radiatus ) , the Madagascar buzzard ( Buteo brachypterus ) and the Madagascar ground boa ( Boa madagascariensis ) . Introduced predators include the small Indian civet ( Viverricula indica ) , the domestic cat and the domestic dog . 
 = = = Geographic range and habitat = = = 
 Endemic to southern and southwestern Madagascar , the ring @-@ tailed lemur ranges further into highland areas than other lemurs . It inhabits deciduous forests , dry scrub , montane humid forests , and gallery forests ( forests along riverbanks ) . It strongly favors gallery forests , but such forests have now been cleared from much of Madagascar in order to create pasture for livestock . Depending on location , temperatures within its geographic range can vary from − 12 ° C ( 10 ° F ) at Andringitra Massif to 48 ° C ( 118 ° F ) in the spiny forests of Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve . 
 This species is found as far east as Tôlanaro , inland towards the mountains of Andringitra on the southeastern plateau , among the spiny forests of the southern part of the island , and north along the west coast to the town of Belo sur Mer . Historically , the northern limits of its range in the west extended to the Morondava River near Morondava . It can still be found in Kirindy Mitea National Park , just south of Morondava , though at very low densities . It does not occur in Kirindy Forest Reserve , north of Morondava . Its distribution throughout the rest of its range is very spotty , with population densities varying widely . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur can be easily seen in five national parks in Madagascar : Andohahela National Park , Andringitra National Park , Isalo National Park , <unk> National Park , and <unk> @-@ <unk> National Park . It can also be found in Beza @-@ Mahafaly Special Reserve , Kalambatritra Special Reserve , Pic d <unk> Special Reserve , <unk> Sud , Berenty Private Reserve , Anja Community Reserve , and marginally at Kirindy Mitea National Park . Unprotected forests that the species has been reported in include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Mahazoarivo , <unk> , and Mikea . 
 Within the protected regions it is known to inhabit , the ring @-@ tailed lemur is sympatric ( shares its range ) with as many as 24 species of lemur , covering every living genus except Allocebus , Indri , and Varecia . Historically , the species used to be sympatric with the critically endangered southern black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemur ( Varecia variegata editorum ) , which was once found at Andringitra National Park ; however , no sightings of the ruffed lemur have been reported in recent years . 
 In western Madagascar , sympatric ring @-@ tailed lemurs and red @-@ fronted lemurs ( Eulemur <unk> ) have been studied together . Little interaction takes place between the two species . While the diets of the two species overlap , they eat in different proportions since the ring @-@ tailed lemur has a more varied diet and spends more time on the ground . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is an opportunistic omnivore primarily eating fruits and leaves , particularly those of the tamarind tree ( Tamarindus indica ) , known natively as <unk> . When available , tamarind makes up as much as 50 % of the diet , especially during the dry , winter season . The ring @-@ tailed lemur eats from as many as three dozen different plant species , and its diet includes flowers , herbs , bark and sap . It has been observed eating decayed wood , earth , spider webs , insect cocoons , arthropods ( spiders , caterpillars , cicadas and grasshoppers ) and small vertebrates ( birds and chameleons ) . During the dry season it becomes increasingly opportunistic . 
 = = = Social systems = = = 
 Troops are classified as multi @-@ male groups , with a matriline as the core group . As with most lemurs , females socially dominate males in all circumstances , including feeding priority . Dominance is enforced by lunging , chasing , cuffing , grabbing and biting . Young females do not always inherit their mother 's rank and young males leave the troop between three and five years of age . Both sexes have separate dominance hierarchies ; females have a distinct hierarchy while male rank is correlated with age . Each troop has one to three central , high @-@ ranking adult males who interact with females more than other group males and lead the troop procession with high @-@ ranking females . Recently transferred males , old males or young adult males that have not yet left their natal group are often lower ranking . Staying at the periphery of the group they tend to be marginalized from group activity . 
 For males , social structure changes can be seasonal . During the six @-@ month period between December and May a few males immigrate between groups . Established males transfer on average every 3 @.@ 5 years , although young males may transfer approximately every 1 @.@ 4 years . Group fission occurs when groups get too large and resources become scarce . 
 In the mornings the ring @-@ tailed lemur sunbathes to warm itself . It faces the sun sitting in what is frequently described as a " sun @-@ worshipping " posture or lotus position . However , it sits with its legs extended outward , not cross @-@ legged , and will often support itself on nearby branches . Sunning is often a group activity , particularly during the cold mornings . At night , troops will split into sleeping parties huddling closely together to keep warm . 
 Despite being quadrupedal the ring @-@ tailed lemur can rear up and balance on its hind legs , usually for aggressive displays . When threatened the ring @-@ tailed lemur may jump in the air and strike out with its short nails and sharp upper canine teeth in a behaviour termed jump fighting . This is extremely rare outside of the breeding season when tensions are high and competition for mates is intense . Other aggressive behaviours include a threat @-@ stare , used to intimidate or start a fight , and a submissive gesture known as pulled @-@ back lips . 
 Border disputes with rival troops occur occasionally and it is the dominant female 's responsibility to defend the troop 's home range . Agonistic encounters include staring , lunging approaches and occasional physical aggression , and conclude with troop members retreating toward the center of the home range . 
 = = = = Olfactory communication = = = = 
 Olfactory communication is critically important for strepsirrhines like the ring @-@ tailed lemur . Males and females scent mark both vertical and horizontal surfaces at the overlaps in their home ranges using their anogenital scent glands . The ring @-@ tailed lemur will perform a handstand to mark vertical surfaces , grasping the highest point with its feet while it applies its scent . Use of scent marking varies by age , sex and social status . Male lemurs use their antebrachial and brachial glands to demarcate territories and maintain intragroup dominance hierarchies . The thorny spur that overlays the antebrachial gland on each wrist is scraped against tree trunks to create grooves anointed with their scent . This is known as spur @-@ marking . 
 In displays of aggression , males engage in a social display behaviour called stink fighting , which involves impregnating their tails with secretions from the antebrachial and brachial glands and waving the scented tail at male rivals . 
 Ring @-@ tailed lemurs have also been shown to mark using urine . <unk> , there is a difference between regular urination , where the tail is slightly raised and a stream of urine is produced , and the urine marking behavior , where the tail is held up in display and only a few drops of urine are used . The urine @-@ marking behavior is typically used by females to mark territory , and has been observed primarily at the edges of the troop 's territory and in areas where other troops may frequent . The urine marking behavior also is most frequent during the mating season , and may play a role in reproductive communication between groups . 
 = = = = Auditory communication = = = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is one of the most vocal primates and has a complex array of distinct vocalizations used to maintain group cohesion during foraging and alert group members to the presence of a predator . Calls range from simple to complex . An example of a simple call is the purr ( listen ) , which expresses contentment . A complex call is the sequence of clicks , close @-@ mouth click series ( <unk> ) , open @-@ mouth click series ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( listen ) used during predator mobbing . Some calls have variants and undergo transitions between variants , such as an infant " whit " ( distress call ) transitioning from one variant to another ( listen ) . 
 The most commonly heard vocalizations are the moan ( listen ) ( low @-@ to @-@ moderate arousal , group cohesion ) , early @-@ high wail ( listen ) ( moderate @-@ to @-@ high arousal , group cohesion ) , and clicks ( listen ) ( " location marker " to draw attention ) . 
 = = = Breeding and reproduction = = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is polygynandrous , although the dominant male in the troop typically breeds with more females than other males . Fighting is most common during the breeding season . A receptive female may initiate mating by presenting her backside , lifting her tail and looking at the desired male over her shoulder . Males may inspect the female 's genitals to determine receptiveness . Females typically mate within their troop , but may seek outside males . 
 The breeding season runs from mid @-@ April to mid @-@ May . Estrus lasts 4 to 6 hours , and females mate with multiple males during this period . Within a troop , females stagger their receptivity so that each female comes into season on a different day during the breeding season , reducing competition for male attention . Gestation lasts for about 135 days , and parturition occurs in September or occasionally October . In the wild , one offspring is the norm , although twins may occur . Ring @-@ tailed lemur infants have a birth weight of 70 g ( 2 @.@ 5 oz ) and are carried ventrally ( on the chest ) for the first 1 to 2 weeks , then dorsally ( on the back ) . 
 The young lemurs begin to eat solid food after two months and are fully weaned after five months . Sexual maturity is reached between 2 @.@ 5 and 3 years . Male involvement in infant rearing is limited , although the entire troop , regardless of age or sex , can be seen caring for the young . Alloparenting between troop females has been reported . Kidnapping by females and infanticide by males also occur occasionally . Due to harsh environmental conditions , predation and accidents such as falls , infant mortality can be as high as 50 % within the first year and as few as 30 % may reach adulthood . The longest @-@ lived ring @-@ tailed lemur in the wild was a female at the Berenty Reserve who lived for 20 years . In the wild , females rarely live past the age of 16 , whereas the life expectancy of males is not known due to their social structure . The longest @-@ lived male was reported to be 15 years old . The maximum lifespan reported in captivity was 27 years . 
 = = = Cognitive abilities and tool use = = = 
 Historically , the studies of learning and cognition in non @-@ human primates have focused on simians ( monkeys and apes ) , while strepsirrhine primates , such as the ring @-@ tailed lemur and its allies , have been overlooked and popularly dismissed as unintelligent . A couple of factors stemming from early experiments have played a role in the development of this assumption . First , the experimental design of older tests may have favored the natural behavior and ecology of simians over that of strepsirrhines , making the experimental tasks inappropriate for lemurs . For example , simians are known for their manipulative play with non @-@ food objects , whereas lemurs are only known to manipulate non @-@ food objects in captivity . This behaviour is usually connected with food association . Also , lemurs are known to displace objects with their nose or mouth more so than with their hands . Therefore , an experiment requiring a lemur to manipulate an object without prior training would favor simians over strepsirrhines . Second , individual ring @-@ tailed lemurs accustomed to living in a troop may not respond well to isolation for laboratory testing . Past studies have reported hysterical behaviour in such scenarios . 
 The notion that lemurs are unintelligent has been perpetuated by the view that the neocortex ratio ( as a measure of brain size ) indicates intelligence . In fact , primatologist Alison Jolly noted early in her academic career that some lemur species , such as the ring @-@ tailed lemur , have evolved a social complexity similar to that of cercopithecine monkeys , but not the corresponding intelligence . After years of observations of wild ring @-@ tailed lemur populations at the Berenty Reserve in Madagascar and as well as baboons in Africa , she more recently concluded that this highly social lemur species does not demonstrate the equivalent social complexity of cercopithecine monkeys , despite general appearances . 
 Regardless , research has continued to illuminate the complexity of the lemur mind , with emphasis on the cognitive abilities of the ring @-@ tailed lemur . As early as the mid @-@ 1970s , studies had demonstrated that they could be trained through operant conditioning using standard schedules of reinforcement . The species has been shown to be capable of learning pattern , brightness and object discrimination , skills common among vertebrates . The ring @-@ tailed lemur has also been shown to learn a variety of complex tasks often equaling , if not exceeding , the performance of simians . 
 More recently , research at the Duke Lemur Center has shown that the ring @-@ tailed lemur can organize sequences in memory and retrieve ordered sequences without language . The experimental design demonstrated that the lemurs were using internal representation of the sequence to guide their responses and not simply following a trained sequence , where one item in the sequence cues the selection of the next . But this is not the limit of the ring @-@ tailed lemur 's reasoning skills . Another study , performed at the Myakka City Lemur Reserve , suggests that this species along with several other closely related lemur species understand simple arithmetic operations . 
 Since tool use is considered to be a key feature of primate intelligence , the apparent lack of this behavior in wild lemurs , as well as the lack of non @-@ food object play , has helped reinforce the perception that lemurs are less intelligent than their simian cousins . However , another study at the Myakka City Lemur Reserve examined the representation of tool functionality in both the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the common brown lemur and discovered that , like monkeys , they used tools with functional properties ( e.g. , tool orientation or ease of use ) instead of tools with nonfunctional features ( e.g. , color or texture ) . Although the ring @-@ tailed lemur may not use tools in the wild , it can not only be trained to use a tool , but will preferentially select tools based on their functional qualities . Therefore , the conceptual competence to use a tool may have been present in the common primate ancestor , even though the use of tools may not have appeared until much later . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 In addition to being listed as endangered in 2014 by the IUCN , the ring @-@ tailed lemur has been listed since 1977 by CITES under Appendix I , which makes trade of wild @-@ caught specimens illegal . Although there are more endangered species of lemur , the ring @-@ tailed lemur is considered a flagship species due to its recognizability . 
 Three factors threaten ring @-@ tailed lemurs . First and foremost is habitat destruction . Starting nearly 2 @,@ 000 years ago with the introduction of humans to the island , forests have been cleared to produce pasture and agricultural land . Extraction of hardwoods for fuel and lumber , as well mining and overgrazing , have also taken their toll . Today , it is estimated that 90 % of Madagascar 's original forest cover has been lost . Rising populations have created even greater demand in the southwest portion of the island for fuel wood , charcoal , and lumber . Fires from the clearing of grasslands , as well as slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture destroy forests . Another threat to the species is harvesting either for food ( bush meat ) or pets . Finally , periodic drought common to southern Madagascar can impact populations already in decline . In 1991 and 1992 , for example , a severe drought caused an abnormally high mortality rate among infants and females at the Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve . Two years later , the population had declined by 31 % and took nearly four years to start to recover . 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur resides in several protected areas within its range , each offering varying levels of protection . At the Beza Mahafaly Special Reserve , a holistic approach to in @-@ situ conservation has been taken . Not only does field research and resource management involve international students and local people ( including school children ) , livestock management is used at the peripheral zones of the reserve and ecotourism benefits the local people . 
 Outside of its diminishing habitat and other threats , the ring @-@ tailed lemur reproduces readily and has fared well in captivity . For this reason , along with its popularity , it has become the most populous lemur in zoos worldwide , with more than 2500 in captivity as of 2009 . It is also the most common of all captive primates . Ex situ facilities actively involved in the conservation of the ring @-@ tailed lemur include the Duke Lemur Center in Durham , NC , the Lemur Conservation Foundation in Myakka City , FL and the Madagascar Fauna Group headquartered at the Saint Louis Zoo . Due to the high success of captive breeding , reintroduction is a possibility if wild populations were to crash . Although experimental releases have met success on St. Catherines Island in Georgia , demonstrating that captive lemurs can readily adapt to their environment and exhibit a full range of natural behaviors , captive release is not currently being considered . 
 Ring @-@ tailed lemur populations can also benefit from drought intervention , due to the availability of watering troughs and introduced fruit trees , as seen at the Berenty Private Reserve in southern Madagascar . However , these interventions are not always seen favorably , since natural population fluctuations are not permitted . The species is thought to have evolved its high fecundity due to its harsh environment . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur is known locally in Malagasy as <unk> ( pronounced [ <unk> ̥ ] , and spelled maki in French ) or hira ( pronounced [ <unk> ] or colloquially [ <unk> ] ) . Being the most widely recognized endemic primate on the island , it has been selected as the symbol for Madagascar National Parks ( formerly known as <unk> ) . The Maki brand , which started by selling T @-@ shirts in Madagascar and now sells clothing across the Indian Ocean islands , is named after this lemur due to its popularity , despite the fact that the company 's logo portrays the face of a sifaka and its name uses the French spelling . 
 The first mention of the ring @-@ tailed lemur in Western literature came in 1625 when English traveler and writer Samuel Purchas described them as being comparable in size to a monkey and having a fox @-@ like long tail with black and white rings . 
 It has been popularized in Western culture by the Animal Planet television series Lemur Street , as well as by the character King Julien in the animated Madagascar film and TV franchise . The ring @-@ tailed lemur was also the focus of the 1996 Nature documentary A Lemur 's Tale , which was filmed at the Berenty Reserve and followed a troop of lemurs . The troop included a special infant named Sapphire , who was nearly albino , with white fur , bright blue eyes , and the characteristic ringed tail . 
 This species also played a role in the 1997 comedy film Fierce Creatures , starring John Cleese , who has a passion for lemurs . Cleese later hosted the 1998 BBC documentary In the Wild : Operation Lemur with John Cleese , which tracked the progress of a reintroduction of black @-@ and @-@ white ruffed lemurs back into the Betampona Reserve in Madagascar . The project had been partly funded by Cleese 's donation of the proceeds from the London premier of Fierce Creatures . 
 = Stereotype threat = 
 Stereotype threat is a situational predicament in which people are or feel themselves to be at risk of conforming to stereotypes about their social group . Since its introduction into the academic literature , stereotype threat has become one of the most widely studied topics in the field of social psychology . Stereotype threat has been shown to reduce the performance of individuals who belong to negatively stereotyped groups . If negative stereotypes are present regarding a specific group , group members are likely to become anxious about their performance , which may hinder their ability to perform at their maximum level . For example , stereotype threat can lower the intellectual performance of African Americans taking the SAT test used for college entrance in the United States , due to the stereotype that African Americans are less intelligent than other groups . Importantly , the individual does not need to subscribe to the stereotype for it to be activated . The specific mechanism through which anxiety ( induced by the activation of the stereotype ) decreases performance is by depleting working memory ( especially the phonological aspects of the working memory system ) . 
 Stereotype threat is a potential contributing factor to long @-@ standing racial and gender gaps in academic performance . It may occur whenever an individual 's performance might confirm a negative stereotype because stereotype threat is thought to arise from a particular situation , rather than from an individual 's personality traits or characteristics . Since most people have at least one social identity which is negatively stereotyped , most people are vulnerable to stereotype threat if they encounter a situation in which the stereotype is relevant . Situational factors that increase stereotype threat can include the difficulty of the task , the belief that the task measures their abilities , and the relevance of the stereotype to the task . Individuals show higher degrees of stereotype threat on tasks they wish to perform well on and when they identify strongly with the stereotyped group . These effects are also increased when they expect discrimination due to their identification with a negatively stereotyped group . Repeated experiences of stereotype threat can lead to a vicious circle of diminished confidence , poor performance , and loss of interest in the relevant area of achievement . 
 Proponents of stereotype threat have been criticized for exaggerating its importance as an explanation of real @-@ world performance gaps and misrepresenting evidence as more conclusive than it is . One review has voiced concerns that the effect has been over @-@ estimated and that the field suffers from publication bias . 
 The opposite of stereotype threat is stereotype boost , which is when people perform better than they otherwise would have , because of exposure to positive stereotypes about their social group . A variant of stereotype boost is stereotype lift , which is people achieving better performance because of exposure to negative stereotypes about other social groups . 
 = = Original study = = 
 In 1995 , Claude Steele and Joshua Aronson performed the first experiments demonstrating that stereotype threat can undermine intellectual performance . They had African @-@ American and European @-@ American college students take a difficult verbal portion of the Graduate Record Examination test . As would be expected based on national averages , the African @-@ American students did not perform as well on the test . Steele and Aronson split students into three groups : stereotype @-@ threat ( in which the test was described as being " diagnostic of intellectual ability " ) , non @-@ stereotype threat ( in which the test was described as " a laboratory problem @-@ solving task that was nondiagnostic of ability " ) , and a third condition ( in which the test was again described as nondiagnostic of ability , but participants were asked to view the difficult test as a challenge ) . All three groups received the same test . 
 Adjusted for previous SAT scores , subjects in the non @-@ diagnostic @-@ challenge condition performed significantly better than those in the non @-@ diagnostic @-@ only condition and those in the diagnostic condition . In the first experiment , the race @-@ by @-@ condition interaction was marginally significant . However , the second study reported in the same paper found a significant interaction effect of race and condition . This suggested that placement in the diagnostic condition significantly impacted African Americans compared with European Americans . 
 Steele and Aronson concluded that changing the instructions on the test could reduce African @-@ American students ' concern about confirming a negative stereotype about their group . Supporting this conclusion , they found that African @-@ American students who regarded the test as a measure of intelligence had more thoughts related to negative stereotypes of their group . Steele and Aronson measured this through a word completion task . They found that African Americans who thought the test measured intelligence were more likely to complete word fragments using words associated with relevant negative stereotypes ( e.g. , completing " _ _ mb " as " dumb " rather than as " numb " ) . 
 = = Further empirical studies = = 
 More than 300 published papers show the effects of stereotype threat on performance in a variety of domains . The strength of the stereotype threat that occurs depends on how the task is framed . If a task is framed to be neutral , stereotype threat is not likely to occur ; however , if tasks are framed in terms of active stereotypes , participants are likely to perform worse on the task . For example , a study on chess players revealed that female players performed more poorly than expected when they were told they would be playing against a male opponent . In contrast , women who were told that their opponent was female performed as would be predicted by past ratings of performance . Female participants who were made aware of the stereotype of females performing worse at chess than males performed worse in their chess games . 
 Researchers Vishal Gupta , Daniel Turban , and <unk> <unk> extended stereotype threat research to entrepreneurship , a traditionally male @-@ stereotyped profession . Their study revealed that stereotype threat can depress women 's entrepreneurial intentions while boosting men 's intentions . However , when entrepreneurship is presented as a gender @-@ neutral profession , men and women express a similar level of interest in becoming entrepreneurs . Another experiment involved a golf game which was described as a test of " natural athletic ability " or of " sports intelligence . " When it was described as a test of athletic ability , European @-@ American students performed worse , but when the description mentioned intelligence , African @-@ American students performed worse . 
 Other studies have demonstrated how stereotype threat can negatively affect the performance of European Americans in athletic situations as well as the performance of men who are being tested on their social sensitivity . Although the framing of a task can produce stereotype threat in most individuals , certain individuals appear to be more likely to experience stereotype threat than others . Individuals who highly identify with a particular group appear to be more vulnerable to experiencing stereotype threat than individuals who do not identify strongly with the stereotyped group . 
 The mere presence of other people can evoke stereotype threat . In one experiment , women who took a mathematics exam along with two other women got 70 % of the answers right , whereas women who took the same exam in the presence of two men got an average score of 55 % . 
 The goal of a study conducted by Desert , <unk> , and Jund in 2009 was to see if children from lower socioeconomic groups are affected by stereotype threat . The study compared children that were 6 – 7 years old with children that were 8 – 9 years old from multiple elementary schools . These children were presented with the Raven 's Matrices test , which is an intellectual ability test . Separate groups of children were given directions in an evaluative way and other groups were given directions in a non @-@ evaluative way . The " evaluative " group received instructions that are usually given with the Raven Matrices test , while the " non @-@ evaluative " group was given directions which made it seem as if the children were simply playing a game . The results showed that third graders performed better on the test than the first graders did , which was expected . However , the lower socioeconomic status children did worse on the test when they received directions in an evaluative way than the higher socioeconomic status children did when they received directions in an evaluative way . These results suggested that the framing of the directions given to the children may have a greater effect on performance than socioeconomic status . This was shown by the differences in performance based on which type of instructions they received . This information can be useful in classroom settings to help improve the performance of students of lower socioeconomic status . 
 There have been studies on the effects of stereotype threat based on age . A study was done on 99 senior citizens ranging in age from 60 – 75 years . These seniors were given multiple tests on certain factors and categories such as memory and physical abilities , and were also asked to evaluate how physically fit they believe themselves to be . Additionally , they were asked to read articles that contained both positive and negative outlooks about seniors , and they watched someone reading the same articles . The goal of this study was to see if priming the participants before the tests would affect performance . The results showed that the control group performed better than those that were primed with either negative or positive words prior to the tests . The control group seemed to feel more confident in their abilities than the other two groups . 
 = = Stereotype lift and stereotype boost = = 
 Stereotype threat concerns how stereotype cues can harm performance . However , in certain situations , stereotype activation can also lead to performance enhancement through stereotype lift or stereotype boost . Stereotype lift increases performance when people are exposed to negative stereotypes about another group . This enhanced performance has been attributed to increases in self @-@ efficacy and decreases in self @-@ doubt as a result of negative outgroup stereotypes . Stereotype boost suggests that positive stereotypes may enhance performance . Stereotype boost occurs when a positive aspect of an individual 's social identity is made salient in an identity @-@ relevant domain . Although stereotype boost is similar to stereotype lift in enhancing performance , stereotype lift is the result of a negative outgroup stereotype , whereas stereotype boost occurs due to activation of a positive ingroup stereotype . 
 Consistent with the positive racial stereotype concerning their superior quantitative skills , Asian American women performed better on a math test when their Asian identity was primed compared to a control condition where no social identity was primed . Conversely , these participants did worse on the math test when instead their gender identity — which is associated with stereotypes of inferior quantitative skills — was made salient , which is consistent with stereotype threat . 
 = = Mechanisms = = 
 Although numerous studies demonstrate the effects of stereotype threat on performance , questions remain as to the specific cognitive factors that underlie these effects . Steele and Aronson originally speculated that attempts to suppress stereotype @-@ related thoughts lead to anxiety and the narrowing of attention . This could contribute to the observed deficits in performance . In 2008 , Toni Schmader , Michael Johns , and Chad Forbes published an integrated model of stereotype threat that focused on three interrelated factors : 
 stress arousal ; 
 performance monitoring , which narrows attention ; and , 
 efforts to suppress negative thoughts and emotions . 
 Schmader et al. suggest that these three factors summarize the pattern of evidence that has been accumulated by past experiments on stereotype threat . For example , stereotype threat has been shown to disrupt working memory and executive function , increase arousal , increase self @-@ consciousness about one 's performance , and cause individuals to try to suppress negative thoughts as well as negative emotions such as anxiety . People have a limited amount of cognitive resources available . When a large portion of these resources are spent focusing on anxiety and performance pressure , the individual is likely to perform worse on the task at hand . 
 A number of studies looking at physiological and neurological responses support Schmader and colleagues ' integrated model of the processes that produce stereotype threat . Supporting an explanation in terms of stress arousal , one study found that African Americans under stereotype threat exhibit larger increases in arterial blood pressure . One study found increased cardiovascular activation amongst women who watched a video in which men outnumbered women at a math and science conference . Other studies have similarly found that individuals under stereotype threat display increased heart rates . Stereotype threat may also activate a neuroendocrine stress response , as measured by increased levels of cortisol while under threat . The physiological reactions that are induced by stereotype threat can often be subconscious , and can distract and interrupt cognitive focus from the task . 
 With regard to performance monitoring and vigilance , studies of brain activity have supported the idea that stereotype threat increases both of these processes . Forbes and colleagues recorded electroencephalogram ( EEG ) signals that measure electrical activity along the scalp , and found that individuals experiencing stereotype threat were more vigilant for performance @-@ related stimuli . 
 Another study used functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) to investigate brain activity associated with stereotype threat . The researchers found that women experiencing stereotype threat while taking a math test showed heightened activation in the ventral stream of the anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ) , a neural region thought to be associated with social and emotional processing . <unk> and colleagues found that women under stereotype threat showed increased activation in the ventral ACC and that the amount of this activation predicted performance <unk> on the task . When individuals were made aware of performance @-@ related stimuli , they were more likely to experience stereotype threat . 
 A study conducted by Boucher , Rydell , Loo , and Rydell has shown that stereotype threat not only affects performance , but can also affect the ability to learn new information . In the study , undergraduate men and women had a session of learning followed by an assessment of what they learned . Some participants were given information intended to induce stereotype threat , and some of these participants were later given " gender fair " information , which it was predicted would reduce or remove stereotype threat . As a result , participants were split into four separate conditions : control group , stereotype threat only , stereotype threat removed before learning , and stereotype threat removed after learning . The results of the study showed that the women who were presented with the " gender fair " information performed better on the math related test than the women who were not presented with this information . This study also showed that it was more beneficial to women for the " gender fair " information to be presented prior to learning rather than after learning . These results suggest that eliminating stereotype threat prior to taking mathematical tests can help women perform better , and that eliminating stereotype threat prior to mathematical learning can help women learn better . 
 = = Factors that affect threat perception = = 
 = = = Prototypicality = = = 
 Prototypicality is the degree to which an individual fits the prototype of a group they could be categorized within . Prototypicality relates to threat perception in that the more prototypical an individual looks , specifically focusing on blacks , the more others who associate blacks with they stereotype of dangerousness will perceive them as threatening . <unk> black targets display physical traits stereotypically associated with Blacks ( broad nose , large lips , coarse hair , darker skin tone ) . Prototypicality affected prejudice ; it was shown to impact judgments about an individual 's characteristics . For example , a study by Ma & Corell ( 2011 ) showed that individuals are more biased and prejudiced against more prototypic black targets than less prototypic targets . 
 In daily life , individuals are more likely to encounter white people as the default race within the United States as opposed to Black individuals . When encountering atypical whites ( white people with features associated with Blackness ) , individuals ultimately settle on a White response ( the general response to typical white targets is to decide not to shoot quicker and more frequently than in trials with black targets ) , in contrast to encountering Blacks with atypical features where Black cues appear to be more dominant and elicit a Black ( to decide to shoot quicker and more frequently than trials with white targets ) due to a misplaced threat perception . Lay people are more racially biased , on average , than trained individuals such as police officers . Prototypicality is shown to moderate racial bias which has been shown to be linked to a perceived threat as black people specifically are predisposed to being viewed as more threatening . Police officers show a reduced racial bias in comparison to members of the community ; however , police officers were no better than community members in their sensitivity to prototypic targets providing evidence that prototypicality is directly linked to stereotypes and threat perception which ultimately perpetuates stereotype threat . Members of the same category ( race ) become harder to distinguish from other members of the same category the more they look like a prototypical representation of their category . ( Young , Hugenberg , Bernstein , Sacco 2009 ) . 
 = = = = Racial ambiguity defies prototypicality = = = = 
 Racial ambiguity is linked to prototypicality in that racially ambiguous individuals walk a line of not always looking prototypical of either group they represent , but being a blend of the various groups . This can leave blurred lines in terms of threat perception in having difficulty categorizing a racially ambiguous individual and determining what perception is more accurate : a more threatening perception in line with black stereotypes or a less threatening perception akin to white stereotypes . ( Young , Hugenberg , Bernstein , & Sacco 2009 ) . Racially ambiguous faces get more racial bias than white faces and less racial bias than black faces , acting as an intermediate , on average . There is evidence for the implicit associations of slight differences in facial features . The degree to which racially ambiguous faces appeared most in line with the prototypical representation of a race , either black or white , directly activated and impacted the evaluations of participants associated with the respective group . This then bolstered stereotypes and the predisposition of individuals to be judges and evaluated based on stereotypes . This also has potential to breed stereotype threat into a marginalized population . In a white @-@ only context , racially ambiguous individuals are viewed as more prototypically Black , and thus more threatening , whereas in a Black @-@ only context , racially ambiguous individuals are viewed as less prototypically black . Facial features matter when associating a racially ambiguous individual with an evaluative association of a respective group . 
 Perceptions of threat based on stereotypes associated with one ’ s physicality can certainly promote stereotype threat , as a person ’ s physicality that often associates them with a race @-@ based stereotype is not easily changed . <unk> is a phenomenon that is present in a racially @-@ ambiguous individuals being categorized into the racial group associated with their more “ socially @-@ subordinate heritage . ” This concept is a demonstration of a way in which the categorization of racially ambiguous individuals can influence the longevity of a stereotype by supporting a subordinate heritage of any individual based on race . However more difficult to categorize individuals who tend to look more similar to the prototypical representation of their dominant race ( for example : 90 @-@ 10 Black : White ) than it is to distinguish a more racially ambiguous individual ( 60 @-@ 40 Black : White ) which is very ironic in that one might think the more prototypical you look , the easier it would be to assign you to a racial category to assess your perceived threat . Perceptions of racially ambiguous faces can be impacted by racial labeling and the context in which the faces are presented ( white @-@ only vs. black @-@ only environment ) . ( Ito , <unk> @-@ Jensen , Kaye , & Park 2011 ) . 
 = = = = Categorization = = = = 
 Categorization of individuals as a tool for evaluating them reduces an individual to being associated with the <unk> representation of that group . Once stereotypical associations are made , this gives rise to individuals assessing the level of threat an individual exhibits if a threatening connotation is associated with the stereotype of that group . Research suggests that things are identified by comparing its traits to an association of similar items / processes stored in their memory . When categorizing and making connections of an individual to a stereotype equating their perception of threat to the degree to which that categorized individual aligns with the stereotype can lead to stereotype threat falling on the categorized person . Lasting effects of race category activation on judgment , evaluation , and behavior that can have serious outcomes , such as biases in criminal sentences . Individuals vary in the extent to which stereotypes are associated with social categories . Strength of stereotype association impacts stereotype effect . Categorization was thought to be inevitable , a result of the perception of others ... however it is avoidable and its avoidance can hopefully reduce prejudice , reduce unjust threat perceptions , and counteract stereotype threat . 
 = = = Stereotypes = = = 
 A stereotype can be defined as the association of a group with a trait ( ex : Blacks being linked to dangerousness or criminality ) . In the United States individuals are more likely to encounter white people as the default race as opposed to Black individuals . In a White majority , perceptual systems may be more sensitive to , and also more biased toward Black features which can automatically activate stereotypes that link to threat perception . Event Related Potentials ( ERPs ) demonstrate attention is preferentially directed toward Black targets showing that there is a tendency to attend to potential threats , which black individuals have been stereotypically associated with . Descriptions of stereotypical Black behavior are more likely to be attributed to photographs of individuals who appear to be more Afrocentric . 
 The Quadruple Process Model involves a stimulus ( ex : Black male ) activating an association ( ex : threat ) in which the strength of the association ( stereotype ) prompts a behavior ( ex : shoot response ) . To survive , evolutionarily , humans must be to reliably identify threats . The stimulus , association , stereotype , behavior system prompts the identification of a threat and initiates a response to the stimulus . Threat relevant associates are emotionally saturate and essential for survival . Not only can threat perception be influenced by emotionally salient factors , cultural stereotypes , and their strength combine to disadvantage blacks to be perceived as more threatening . Recent stereotypes suggest that Blacks , even when unarmed , may be perceived as threatening . Shooter bias is a tendency to shoot armed Blacks quicker and more frequently than armed Whites , but deciding not to shoot unarmed Whites quicker and more frequently than unarmed Blacks . Individuals with greater knowledge of this cultural stereotype or a predisposition to link Blacks to violence displayed more extreme shooter bias and especially biased threat perceptions that led to especially biased behavior . 
 There are two race effects that lead to Blacks being incorrectly shot at more than Whites : 
 Perceptual sensitivity : guns are less distinguishable when held by Blacks 
 Response bias : objects held by Blacks are more likely to be treated as guns . 
 After being tasked to shoot individuals who held guns , and not to shoot if they were carrying any other object , race should technically be irrelevant to the decision to shoot or not shoot because the correct response solely depends on the object being held . Even as a nondiagnostic component to the evaluation of one ’ s perceived threat value race was still factored in to the overall judgment of threat perception . The only information the participants were obligated to attend to was the identification of a weapon or non @-@ weapon . Racial cues promote biased behavior as well as false threat perception . Any cue that implies danger , not just race , may create a predisposition to shoot , however race and the stereotype associated with it lead to a higher evaluation of threat perception , which impacted biased responses . 
 Stereotypes have the potential to create associations with positive or negative aspects of the group it is generalizing . Research shows there is general negativity / prejudice toward Blacks leading highly prejudice individuals to link Blacks to negativity that is or is not relevant to the Black stereotype ( ex : linking Blacks to words like poison or cancer ) . Black danger association and stereotypes predict that Black faces capture and hold attention faster and longer than white faces because threatening stimuli captures and holds attention faster and for longer intervals than neutral stimuli ( in this case black faces ) . The perception of the level of threat posed by a black face significantly biases attention allocation due to an unjust stereotype leading to inaccurate threat perceptions . This also suggests that as fear conditioned stimuli , individuals are taught to have a pre @-@ established instinct to associate the threat perception of a black individual as more dangerous . Attention has been shown to be biased as a result of societal stereotypes of Blacks in association with danger stereotypes of Blacks in association with danger that leads Black faces to b seen as fear conditioned stimuli . Stereotypes can be gate keepers , they can be self @-@ perpetuating by directing attention towards expected information or as an efficient information processing device that directs attention towards new information that may potentially undermine the stereotype and is dependent upon the individuals use of the stereotype . The individual use of the stereotype is also what unfairly moderates the perceived threat of blacks by way of conditioning longstanding stereotypes . 
 = = = Neuronal activity = = = 
 With the increasing strength of a stereotype , cognitively the associations we have attached to that stereotype , such as a higher rated threat perception of blacks , will be analyzed with more ease . Because people are motivated to use as little cognitive resources as possible stereotypes and the connotations attached to them , such as threat perceptions of blacks , last as the most readily available and most easily comprehensible explanation . In a White majority , the perceptual system may be more sensitive to Black faces , and more biased as well . ERPs demonstrate that attention is preferentially directed toward black targets . Participants were more biased / prejudice against prototypic Black targets that less prototypic black targets shown through fMRI and being presented with more or less prototypic individuals . Non @-@ prototypic individuals ( ex : dark skinned white males ) caused greater amygdala activation ( akin to fear response ) than did light skinned white males . The amygdala is associated with fear , threat and emotion processing . 
 Stereotypes and other expectations act as filters that increase the ease with which expectancy @-@ consistent information can be processed . People are motivated to use as little cognitive resources as possible giving the most attention to the easiest comprehensible material ( expectancy @-@ consistent information ) . As stereotype strength increases , so should the ease of processing stereotype @-@ consistent information . Attention will shift from stereotype @-@ consistent information to stereotype @-@ inconsistent information . Unexpected information is processed more extensively because it is more difficult to comprehend while consistent information can be coded as generic examples of the expectancy but inconsistent information must be uniquely coded as new information that is not aligned with expectancy . 
 = = = Environment / context = = = 
 The environment or context through which information is received impacts the threat associated with it . For example , if a man is wearing a hoodie and walking rather fast towards you in the morning , in a rich neighborhood , on a crowded street , while it is raining , threat perception is lower than encountering that same individual after dark , in a poverty stricken neighborhood with no rain on an empty street . Although this could have no threatening intentions at all , the context in which you encounter that person will dictate the level of threat associated with them . Ecological contamination hypothesis states : environment taints perceptions . Those who are in dangerous neighborhood seem more dangerous ( ex : police use more force in poverty stricken neighborhoods that have high crime rates and greater proportions of minorities ) . When the background appeared to be safe , racial bias was present ( armed Blacks were shot quicker and more frequently than armed whites ) , vs. when the background was threatening , racial bias was reduced ( demonstrated by a tendency to increase the rate at which White targets were shot increasing ) . Blacks were still treated hostile in dangerous and non dangerous contexts . Dangerous contexts proved to reduce racial bias in the decision to shoot in that Whites were treated in a similar , hostile fashion to Blacks , not that Blacks were treated with similar regard or restraint as Whites . There is an increasing racial bias from white people , racially ambiguous individuals , and Black faces . Racially ambiguous faces get more racial bias than white faces and less racial bias than black faces , acting as an intermediate , on average . In a white @-@ only context , racially ambiguous individuals are viewed as more prototypically Black , whereas in a Black @-@ only context , racially ambiguous individuals are viewed as less prototypically black . Perceptions of racially ambiguous faces can be impacted by direct @-@ racial labeling and the context in which the faces are presented ( White only vs Black only environments ) . Mixed contexts lead to a more mild bias than segregated situation . 
 Signal detection theory ( SDT ) involves a bias and reduces ability to distinguish tools from weapons after a Black prime even in situations when race was incidental ( nondiagnostic ) . The only cue the participants were obligated to attend to was the presence of a weapon or non @-@ weapon . However , unable to sever blacks from their stereotype and its related factors , unjust heightened threat perception persists . 
 = = = Strategies for change = = = 
 The bias toward threat perception evaluation of black people , caused by stereotypes , can be lessened with access to diagnostic cues ( ex : presence or absence of a weapon ) and motivation . Lay people are more racially biased , on average , than trained police officers . Target prototypicality is shown to moderate racial bias . Police officers show a reduced racial bias in comparison to members of the community , however police officers were no better than community members in their sensitivity to prototypic targets . Exposing people to stimuli where race is unrelated to the stereotype may eliminate racial bias . Initial responses were racially biased but research shows that extensive practice with race being unrelated to the task at hand worked to eliminate racial bias . As counter @-@ stereotypical information is aggregated form multiple sources , it may force a change in the stereotype decreasing its strength or negating it entirely . Exposure to counter stereotypic stimuli can reduce racial bias , making race non @-@ diagnostic and unhelpful for the decision process ; the characteristic ( violence ) is unrelated to the group ( race ) . Critical characteristics ( weapon possession ) is statistically unrelated to race therefore paying attention to race may hinder your judgment because it is non @-@ diagnostic ( unessential ) to the task at hand . It may be beneficial to expose individuals to counter stereotypic information and stereotypic stimuli to change the nature of category based responses . Racial bias appeared to be significantly reduced ( for the parameters of the study ) with training indicating that change can be made . A stereotype can be a gatekeeper , perpetuating itself by directing attention toward expected information , or as an efficient information @-@ processing device that facilitates the extraction of novel information with the potential to undermine itself . 
 = = Long @-@ term and other consequences = = 
 Decreased performance is the most recognized consequence of stereotype threat . However , research has also shown that stereotype threat can cause individuals to blame themselves for perceived failures , self @-@ handicap , discount the value and validity of performance tasks , distance themselves from negatively stereotyped groups , and disengage from situations that are perceived as threatening . 
 In the long run , the chronic experience of stereotype threat may lead individuals to <unk> with the stereotyped group . For example , a woman may stop seeing herself as " a math person " after experiencing a series of situations in which she experienced stereotype threat . This <unk> is thought to be a psychological coping strategy to maintain self @-@ esteem in the face of failure . Repeated exposure to anxiety and nervousness can lead individuals to choose to distance themselves from the stereotyped group . 
 Although much of the research on stereotype threat has examined the effects of coping with negative stereotype on academic performance , recently there has been an emphasis on how coping with stereotype threat could " spillover " to dampen self @-@ control and thereby affect a much broader category of behaviors , even in non @-@ stereotyped domains . Research by Michael <unk> and colleagues suggest that , when women cope with negative stereotype about their math ability , they perform worse on math tests , and that , after completing the math test , women may continue to show deficits even in unrelated domains . For example , women might overeat , be more aggressive , make more risky decisions , and show less endurance during physical exercise . 
 The perceived discrimination associated with stereotype threat can also have negative long @-@ term consequences on individuals ' mental health . Perceived discrimination has been extensively investigated in terms of its effects on mental health , with a particular emphasis on depression . Cross @-@ sectional studies involving diverse minority groups have found that individuals who experience more perceived discrimination are more likely to exhibit depressive symptoms . Additionally , perceived discrimination has also been found to predict depressive symptoms in children and adolescents . Other negative mental health outcomes associated with perceived discrimination include a reduced general well @-@ being , post @-@ traumatic stress disorder , anxiety , and rebellious behavior . A meta @-@ analysis conducted by Pascoe and Smart Richman has shown that the strong link between perceived discrimination and negative mental health persists even after controlling for factors such as education , socioeconomic status , and employment . 
 = = Mitigation = = 
 Additional research seeks ways to boost the test scores and academic achievement of students in negatively stereotyped groups . In one study , teaching college women about stereotype threat and its effects on performance was sufficient to eliminate the predicted gender gap on a difficult math test . Making people aware of the fact that they will not necessarily perform worse despite the existence of a stereotype can boost their performance . 
 However , other research has found the opposite effect . In one study , women were given a text " summarizing an experiment in which stereotypes , and not biological differences , were shown to be the cause of women 's underperformance in math " , and then they performed a math exercise . It was found that " women who properly understood the meaning of the information provided , and thus became knowledgeable about stereotype threat , performed significantly worse at a calculus task " . 
 Another approach involves persuading participants that intelligence is malleable and can be increased through effort . If people believe that they can improve their performance based on effort , they are more likely to believe that they can overcome negative stereotypes and perform well . 
 A third type of intervention involves having participants engage in self @-@ affirmation , which is a process in which participants write about a value that is important to them . In 2006 , researchers Geoffrey L. Cohen , Julio Garcia , Nancy <unk> , and Allison Master found that a self @-@ affirmation exercise ( in the form of a brief in @-@ class writing assignment ) significantly improved the grades of African @-@ American middle @-@ school students , and reduced the racial achievement gap by 40 % . Cohen et al. have suggested that the racial achievement gap could be at least partially ameliorated by brief and targeted social @-@ psychological interventions . One such intervention was attempted with UK medical students , who were given a written assignment and a clinical assessment . For the written assignment group , white students performed worse than minority students . For the clinical assessment , both groups improved their performance maintaining the racial difference . Allowing participants to think about a positive value or attribute about themselves prior to completing the task seemed to make them less susceptible to stereotype threat . 
 A fourth intervention for stereotype threat involves increasing participants ' feelings of social belonging within the academic world . Greg Walton and Geoffrey Cohen were able to boost the grades of African @-@ American college students , as well as eliminate the racial achievement gap over the first year of college , by telling participants that concerns about social belonging tend to lessen over time . Allowing individuals to feel as though they are welcomed into a desirable group makes them more likely to ignore stereotypes . If minority college students are welcomed into the world of academia , they are less likely to be influenced by the negative stereotypes of poor minority performance on academic tasks . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The stereotype threat explanation of achievement gaps has attracted criticism . According to Paul R. Sackett , Chaitra M. Hardison , and Michael J. Cullen , both the media and scholarly literature have wrongly concluded that eliminating stereotype threat could completely eliminate differences in test performance between European Americans and African Americans . Sackett et al. have pointed out that , in Steele and Aronson 's ( 1995 ) experiments where stereotype threat was removed , an achievement gap of approximately one standard deviation remained between the groups , which is very close in size to that routinely reported between African American and European Americans ' average scores on large @-@ scale standardized tests such as the SAT . In subsequent correspondence between Sackett et al. and Steele and Aronson , Sackett et al. wrote that " They [ Steele and Aronson ] agree that it is a misinterpretation of the Steele and Aronson ( 1995 ) results to conclude that eliminating stereotype threat eliminates the African American @-@ White test @-@ score gap . " 
 Arthur R. Jensen criticised stereotype threat theory on the basis that it invokes an additional mechanism to explain effects which could be , according to him , explained by other , well @-@ known , and well @-@ established theories , such as test anxiety and especially the Yerkes – Dodson law . In Jensen 's view , the effects which are attributed to stereotype threat may simply reflect " the interaction of ability level with test anxiety as a function of test complexity " . 
 In 2009 , Wei examined real @-@ world testing over a broad population ( rather than lab assessments with questionable external validity ) , and found the opposite of stereotype threat : randomly assigned gendered questions actually raised female students ' scores by 0 @.@ 05 standard deviations . The lack of stereotype threat replicates an earlier large experiment with Advanced Placement exams which found no stereotype threat . 
 <unk> <unk> and David C. Geary reviewed the evidence for the stereotype threat explanation of the achievement gap in mathematics between men and women . They concluded that the relevant stereotype threat research has many methodological problems , such as not having a control group , and that the stereotype threat literature on this topic misrepresents itself as " well established " . They concluded that the evidence is in fact very weak . 
 = = = Failures to replicate and publication bias = = = 
 Whether the effect occurs at all has also been questioned , with researchers failing to replicate the finding . Flore and <unk> concluded the reported effect is small , but also that the field is inflated by publication bias . They argue that , correcting for this , the most likely true effect size is near zero ( see meta @-@ analytic plot , highlighting both the restriction of large effect to low @-@ powered studies , and the plot asymmetry which occurs when publication bias is active ) . 
 Earlier meta @-@ analyses reached similar conclusions . For instance , Ganley et al . ( 2013 ) examined stereotype threat on mathematics test performance . They report a series of 3 studies , with a total sample of 931 students . These included both childhood and adolescent subjects and three activation methods , ranging from implicit to explicit . While they found some evidence of gender differences in math , these occurred regardless of stereotype threat . Importantly , they found " no evidence that the mathematics performance of school @-@ age girls was impacted by stereotype threat " . In addition , they report that evidence for stereotype threat in children appears to be subject to publication bias . The literature may reflect selective publication of false @-@ positive effects in underpowered studies , where large , well @-@ controlled studies find smaller or non @-@ significant effects : 
 <unk> findings were almost always reported in an article along with some significant stereotype threat effects found either at another age ( <unk> et al . , 2001 ; Muzzatti & Agnoli , 2007 ) , only with certain students ( Keller , 2007 ) , on certain items ( Keller , 2007 ; Neuville & <unk> , 2007 ) , or in certain contexts ( Huguet & Regner , 2007 , Study 2 ; <unk> & Stephens , 2012 ; <unk> et al . , 2011 ) . Importantly , none of the three unpublished dissertations showed a stereotype threat effect . This observation suggests the possibility that publication bias is occurring . Publication bias refers to the fact that studies with null results are often not written up for publication or accepted for publication ( Begg , 1994 ) . This bias is a serious concern , especially if these results are being used to make recommendations for interventions . 
 In a study designed to see whether incentives could overcome stereotype threat in mathematics tests , Fryer Levitt and List ( 2008 ) could not replicate the stereotype threat , finding instead a modest facilitation effect of threat for males and females . 
 = Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters = 
 Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters is a 2013 American @-@ German comedy action film written and directed by Tommy Wirkola . It is a continuation to the German folklore fairy tale " Hansel and Gretel " , in which the titular siblings are now grown up and working as a duo of witch exterminators for hire . The film stars Jeremy Renner , Gemma Arterton , Famke Janssen , Peter Stormare , Thomas Mann , and Derek Mears . 
 Originally scheduled for release in March 2012 , Hansel & Gretel was delayed for ten months to accommodate Renner 's appearances in The Avengers and The Bourne Legacy and to give Wirkola time to shoot a post @-@ credits scene . It premiered in North America on January 25 , 2013 , in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D , as well in D @-@ Box motion theaters and select international 4DX theaters , and was rated R in the United States . The film had its home media release on June 11 , including a longer , unrated version on Blu @-@ ray . 
 The film was panned by mainstream critics , particularly for what they saw as its weak script and gratuitous violence . However , many horror genre critics were more positive , viewing the film as unpretentiously entertaining . The film topped the domestic box office on its opening weekend and was a major hit in Brazil , Russia , Germany , and Mexico . Its worldwide theatrical run gross exceeded $ 226 million for the production cost of $ 50 million . Due to the commercial success of the film , which was planned as the first part of a series , its sequel is currently in development , and has been set for a 2016 release date . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Abandoned by their father deep in a forest , young Hansel and Gretel enter a gingerbread house and are captured by a cannibalistic witch . The witch forces Hansel to continuously eat candy to fatten him up , and enslaves Gretel , ordering her to prepare the oven , but the siblings outsmart her and incinerate her in the fire of the oven . In the fifteen years that follow , Hansel and Gretel become famed witch hunters , slaying hundreds of witches . The pair find that they are somehow immune to spells and curses , but the incident in the gingerbread house has left Hansel diabetic . He needs a shot of insulin every few hours or he will get sick and die . 
 Hansel and Gretel arrive in the town of Augsburg and immediately prevent Sheriff Berringer from executing a young woman named Mina for witchcraft . Mayor Englemann tells the crowd that he has hired the siblings to rescue several children presumed abducted by witches . Berringer hires trackers for the same mission in the hopes of disgracing the mayor and cementing his power . All but one of the sheriff 's party are killed that night by the powerful grand witch Muriel , who sends one man back to the town tavern as a warning to the locals . Hansel and Gretel , along with the Mayor 's deputy Jackson , capture one of Muriel 's witches and interrogate her . They discover that the witches are preparing for the coming Blood Moon , where they plan to sacrifice twelve children in order to gain an immunity to fire . Muriel , accompanied by her witches and a troll named Edward , attack the town and abduct the final child . Muriel kills Jackson and launches Gretel out a window , rendering her unconscious . Gretel is rescued by Ben , a local teenager who is a fan of theirs and plans to be a witch hunter himself . Hansel grabs onto a fleeing witch by her broomstick , but falls and is lost in the forest . 
 The next morning , Hansel is found hanging from a tree by Mina . She takes him to a nearby spring where she heals his wounds and makes love to him . Gretel searches for Hansel in the forest but is attacked by Sheriff Berringer and his posse . The men capture and beat Gretel before being stopped by Edward , who kills the sheriff and his men . Edward tends Gretel 's wounds and tells her that he helped her because trolls serve witches . Hansel and Gretel reunite at an abandoned cabin , which they discover is both a witch 's lair and their childhood home . Muriel appears in front of them , telling them the truth of their past . She reveals that Hansel and Gretel 's mother was a grand white witch named Adrianna who married a farmer . On the night of the last Blood Moon , Muriel planned to use the heart of the white witch to complete her potion . She found Adrianna too powerful and decided to use Gretel 's heart instead . To get rid of Adrianna , Muriel revealed to the townspeople that Adrianna was a witch . The townspeople burned her alive and hung Hansel and Gretel 's father . Following this revelation , the siblings battle Muriel before she stabs Hansel and abducts Gretel for the ceremony . 
 Hansel wakes up with Mina , who reveals herself to be a white witch . She heals his wounds again and uses a grimoire to bless Hansel 's arsenal of weapons . Hansel , Mina , and Ben head out to disrupt the Blood Moon Sabbath . Mina begins slaughtering dark witches with a Gatling gun , while Hansel squares off against Muriel 's witches and frees the children . Edward defies Muriel 's orders and releases Gretel before Muriel throws him off the cliff . Muriel flees on a broomstick , but Ben manages to shoot her and forces her to crash . Hansel goes after Muriel while Gretel stops to revive Edward . Hansel , Ben , and Mina follow Muriel 's trail to the original gingerbread house . Muriel wounds Ben and kills Mina before Hansel shoots her several times , knocking her into the house . Gretel arrives and the pair engage Muriel in a brutal fight that ends with Muriel being beheaded with a shovel . They burn Muriel 's body on a pyre and collect their reward for rescuing the children . They head out on their next witch hunt accompanied by Ben and Edward . 
 = = = Extended cut = = = 
 Aside from additional profanity , gore , and sexual content , and a few extra lines , the extended version features a few extra scenes . In one scene , Berringer blames the Mayor for the witches ' attack and murders him in public . The scene where Berringer and his goons assault Gretel is also extended ; it occurs in between the scene where Mina heals Hansel and has sex with him , and shows that the men plan to rape Gretel right before Edward kills them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Wirkola got the idea to create a film based on the adult lives of Hansel and Gretel in 2007 while at film school in Australia . After being discovered by Gary Sanchez Productions , Wirkola pitched the idea at a meeting with Paramount Pictures and won a contract . Production began in March 2011 at the Babelsberg Studios in Germany and included extensive use of traditional special effects . In addition , Renner and Arterton had a month of training beforehand to prepare for the physical demands of their roles . In terms of the weapons and wardrobe , Wirkola wanted an old @-@ world look with a modern touch , and he was adamant about filming outdoors in European nature rather than in a studio . The project was filmed in Germany and featured an international cast and crew . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters is the first English language film and the first big studio production of Norwegian writer and director Wirkola , up to this point best known for his 2009 Nazi zombie @-@ themed , independent horror comedy film Dead Snow . Wirkola said he was contacted by producer Kevin Messick from Gary Sanchez Productions after the screening of Dead Snow at the Sundance Film Festival : " So my first meeting , my first day in LA was with those guys and I pitched Hansel and Gretel and they loved it . And they took me to Paramount two days after and we sold it . " In 2013 , Wirkola commented , " I ’ m still surprised that they went for it , because it ’ s a crazy , rock n ’ roll script . It ’ s full throttle , there ’ s lots of blood and gore and bad language , I often wonder how I got this movie made . It ’ s all across the world now . But people really seem to respond to it , which is what we hoped , that people would enjoy this ride . " 
 An announcement of Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters sparked a production of several other " Hansel and Gretel " -based films made by different studios , including The Asylum 's <unk> Hansel & Gretel , Syfy 's <unk> Gretl , and Lionsgate Home Entertainment 's Hansel & Gretel : Warriors of Witchcraft . The film was also a part of an overall Hollywood trend of witch @-@ themed films , among them Beautiful Creatures ( which also stars Thomas Mann ) and Oz the Great and Powerful , set to be released that same season . The project was given a budget of $ 50 million , co @-@ financed by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . 
 = = = Concept and design = = = 
 Wirkola said , " I have a strong memory from my childhood of just how dark and gruesome their tale was and I wondered what would have happened to the two of them when they grew up ? They had this dark past and this intense hatred of witches . So as I thought about it , it made sense to me that of course they would be fated to become great witch hunters . We wanted it to feel like this could be happening 300 years ago but at the same time , there is a modern spin on all the action , characters and weaponry . It was a fun way to make a classical world feel fresh . " Wirkola said that he originally came with that idea in 2007 while studying film and television at Bond University in Australia , when he wanted to make it as just a short film , and that the film school director Simon Hunter advised him : " Tom , don 't ever speak of the idea again until you are in front of a Hollywood producer and I guarantee you will sell it . " 
 Gary Sanchez Productions ' Adam McKay said in 2010 , " The idea is , they 've grown up and they hunt witches . It ’ s a hybrid sort of old @-@ timey feeling , yet there ’ s pump @-@ action shotguns . Modern technology but in an old style . We heard it and we were just like , ‘ That ’ s a freakin ' franchise ! You could make three of those ! ' " Dante Harper was hired to rewrite the script , aimed for " having a gory @-@ but @-@ funny Shaun of the Dead vibe . " McKay said inspirations included Sam Raimi 's early horror comedy films like Army of Darkness but also " John Carpenter 's movies , which we all love [ and ] we 're all hugely influenced by the first Matrix — obviously a really big one — also the Bourne Supremacy movies and the way Oliver Wood shot those . You kind of throw in all those , mix ' em up in a pot and that 's what you get . " Wirkola also credited Quentin Tarantino for influencing him " in many ways " and singled out Peter Jackson 's Braindead for having been " a game @-@ changer " for him . 
 Messick said they designed " a fairy tale , mythological fantasy world " that feels like it happened long time ago but is not set in any particular time period . Marlene Stewart created the film 's costumes , using traditional leather and linen but without an antique look . Its steampunk @-@ like , retro @-@ futuristic weapons were created by the weapon designer Simon <unk> and Wirkola , who said they wanted Hansel and Gretel 's weapons to look as if the characters hand @-@ made them . Wirkola stated he " just wanted this crazy , mashed @-@ up world where you can ’ t pinpoint where it is , or when it is " and the modern elements are there to " add to the fun and tone of the film . " He said , " We wanted the movie to feel timeless and for the movie to feel like a fairy tale , but still grounded . It was a lot of fun coming up with the different weapon designs and ways of killing witches . We mixed old and new elements . But no matter how modern some of the weapons are , they all have an old @-@ fashioned feel and look like they could fit into this world . " 
 The Stone Circle witches ' looks were designed by Twilight Creations ( Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows ) . According to McKay , " the witches are awesome in it . Nasty , mean witches , and we 'll get some great actresses for them as well . " Wirkola said he wanted to reinvent witches as villains : " I do love Witches of Eastwick . We wanted to try to avoid the classical witch with the long nose stirring the pot . I really wanted them to be ... dangerous , fast – they ’ re stronger than Hansel and Gretel ... It ’ s a good basis for a villain . " He recalled that " the most fun was finding their look and sound . For the main witches , we found one animal to represent all of them , like Muriel is a wolf . It just helped us find the witches . In some ways , it feels like they 're the spawn of the dark places of nature . It should feel animalistic . " Asked if he was worried about " this perception that it might be interpreted as sexist " , Wirkola said , " For me , that ’ s a classical villain from hundreds and hundreds of years ago . Yeah , I never worried about that , to be honest . " He added , " People forget how truly dark and twisted those stories are . [ The original " Hansel & Gretel " ] talks about a witch burning alive in an oven , screaming and scratching . " Ulrich Zeidler 's concept art for some of the witches was released on the Internet . 
 = = = Casting and characters = = = 
 Jeremy Renner , who played the film 's adult Hansel , has stated that his initial attraction came from a one sheet he was given even before seeing the script , showing Hansel and Gretel walking away and a witch burning at a stake in the background , which he found " incredibly interesting " ( this scene was included in the finished film ) . He added , " When I read the script , my first thought was , ' I can ’ t believe this hasn ’ t been done yet . ' It ’ s such a great idea with so much potential . That dynamic was definitely a big thing , I loved that what Tommy [ Wirkola ] wrote left so much room for character . " Wirkola said he wanted Renner in the role after seeing him in The Hurt Locker . Wirkola , who described Hansel as the " loose cannon " of the duo , gave him an additional character flaw of diabetes , in addition to the psychological scars that Hansel shares with his sister ( in the original idea for the short film , Gretel was also suffering from eating disorder ) . Renner said it was a great escape for him " as this was a fairytale with no stress like the other action movies I 'd done recently . I was having so much fun hanging on a wire like Peter Pan , hanging onto a broom and doing other crazy stuff . " He stated , " That was one of the most fun jobs I ’ ve ever had because there ’ s something magical about that old world , fantasy thing . " 
 The role of adult Gretel , whom Wirkola wanted to be " a really , really strong and fun female character , " was originally planned for Noomi Rapace , who dropped out of consideration for the part prior to early January 2011 . Diane Kruger and Eva Green were reported to also be in talks for the role . English actress Gemma Arterton was ultimately cast in the role . She impressed Wirkola with her performance in The Disappearance of Alice Creed , and , after they have met , with her " really filthy sense of humour " as " the humour is essential to this film . " Arterton said she was attracted to Wirkola 's " strong vision " for the film , calling it " very , very dark , and bloodthirsty and there ’ s a lot of cursing . It ’ s kind of got a Tarantino feel , really . " Arterton described her character as " much more in tune with her spiritual side . Hansel is a typical action hero , cheeky , funny , a womanizer . She ’ s much more of a thinker , intense , internal and bit more open @-@ minded than he is . " She said that Gretel is " a sexual character but she 's not having sex with anybody , which is a change for me because usually in my films I 'm sleeping with somebody ! " She further explained the characters : " Hansel & Gretel have this unstoppable bond but they ’ re also so different from each other . She ’ s the brains of the operation . He ’ s the brawn . He ’ s the joker and the show @-@ off . She ’ s more the watcher , the researcher , the one who tries to really understand witchcraft . " Arterton added , " Jeremy [ Renner ] and I found within the script moments where we showed the vulnerable side of them . Often in action movies , people are scared to put that in . I think it was important . " She said that she " loved every minute " of the production and did not want it to end , also crediting it for helping her overcome her fear of getting hurt . 
 The role of the chief witch Muriel , described by Arterton as " the queen bee of witches " , was given to Dutch actress Famke Janssen . Janssen too described the film as " Tarantino @-@ esque " , with " a lot of blood , gore and exploding witches . " Wirkola said he had a crush on Janssen since he saw her in GoldenEye as Xenia Onatopp , " an amazing villain , " and that in his opinion her being not only a good actress but also a beautiful woman who is " huge " and " menacing somehow " made her " a perfect combination " of " sexy and dangerous " . Janssen said that at first the initial appeal was just money , but she quickly took a liking of the script and of Wirkola personally . She also thought the idea of playing an " evil to the core " witch " was appealing and different " , saying , " I hadn 't done anything like it … A character like a witch feels like you would have so much freedom , because there are no restrictions as to what you can do . " Later , however , she was constantly being distracted by the special effects work and felt that she " really understood the character " only in one part of the film . She found the time @-@ consuming process of applying such makeup ( taking three hours to apply and one hour to remove ) " very strange " and also felt restricted and afraid of acting over @-@ the @-@ top in her witch role . In the end , she still had " a lot of fun " playing someone who is completely evil , and felt that it was " so empowering " to have " an inner witch to get in touch with once in a while . " Janssen said the film might appeal to women and girls , too : " There 's a brother and a sister story . And there 's a romance in it too - but obviously not with the witch . Nobody falls in love with the witch . " 
 Edward , a morally conflicted troll enslaved by Muriel , was voiced by Robin Atkin Downes and played by Derek Mears ( Jason Voorhees in 2009 's Friday the 13th ) . Mears was using an elaborate animatronic suit that he compared to " kind of like NASCAR where I ’ m piloting it but I 'm not doing it by myself ... I think there ’ s like five guys controlling the individual parts of the character . There ’ s one person who does the eye brows , one person does the feet . " Janssen , who could not " say enough things about Tommy [ Wirkola ] " , said she was especially impressed at how he stuck to his specific vision and " fought " hard to hire a number of unknown European actors that would otherwise be unlikely to appear in a big studio American film , in effect making it a much more international production . 
 Several Scandinavian actors were cast in major roles , including <unk> <unk> , Peter Stormare ( who Arterton said had actually inspired her to start acting ) , Bjørn Sundquist , and Ingrid <unk> <unk> . In addition , actors from Germany and Poland ( including Thomas Mann , Rainer Bock , and Joanna <unk> ) and other parts of the world were also cast . <unk> , a self @-@ described " big fan " of Renner , said she was nervous at first , but found him " extremely " easy to approach , made a good connection , and enjoyed working with him . Wirkola said <unk> was chosen for her " piercing " eyes , adding : " There are a lot of Norwegians in the film . Minor parts , but I knew I could get great actors in small parts and Ingrid has a great physicality . " Stormare said he was only surprised at " how smart Tom [ Wirkola ] is , and how broad this fantasy is and the span of his imagination , " his favourite aspect being how " some of the witches are so sexy and cool . " He compared the film 's production to being in Disneyland , saying it felt like a dream to him . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Wirkola said , " From day one , I was very clear that I wanted to shoot this thing in Europe . I really wanted that European feel of cold mountains , big forests , that sort of spirit was important to me . Luckily we did get to shoot it in Germany which is the homeland of the fairy tale . Shooting in natural outdoor sets is very important to me , compared to working on a sound stage . " It took place in Germany , at the Babelsberg Studio in Potsdam @-@ Babelsberg , in a filming location at an old forest near Berlin ( production designer Stephen Scott said that he searched for and found what he believed looked like a " medieval forest " free of human interference ) and in the city of Braunschweig in Lower Saxony . After the film was delayed to 2013 , the crew did a " couple " of re @-@ shoots , including " a little bit " in the deserts of California ( filming the post @-@ ending scene , an extended version of which was also released in a promotional clip " The Desert Witch " ) . 
 Principal photography began in March 2011 , using digital cinematography . Wirkola said , " Hopefully – you can see what I ’ m inspired by : Raimi and Jackson . Actually I ’ m a big fan of [ Steven ] Spielberg and the way he shoots action scenes . I think in a lot of modern action movies , it ’ s hard to see what ’ s going on . Shaky cam … Hopefully what we strived for was to go a little retro in how you shoot action scenes . " The film was shot in 3 @-@ D and its real 3D shots were done by lead stereographer Florian Maier and his team from <unk> . Wirkola said : " We shot half of it in real 3D and the other half was post converted . Actually the 3D thing wasn ’ t there in the beginning . It was something the studio suggested later on . We embraced it and I think it actually really helps in getting people into this fairy tale world . " The filming process took three months . A 12 @-@ minute B @-@ roll footage was later released on the Internet . 
 Stunt coordinator and second unit director David Leitch compared it to a " Jackie Chan hybrid of comedy and action . " Prior to the filming , Leitch organized a month @-@ long boot camp in order to prepare Renner and Arterton ( who said she was also glad that at least she could use her prior training that she received while studying at RADA ) with extensive weapons , fight and stunt training . Janssen said she enjoyed " flying " , something that she always wanted to do , adding that despite her reputation as an action star it was the first film where she really had to do something physical ( including suffering a minor accident on the set ) , because she could not use a double in the close @-@ up scenes where she had the makeup on . During one of the scenes , where Gretel is thrown through a wall and falls down several meters , a stunt double for Arterton was dangerously injured when a nail got lodged in her skull close to the brain ; Arterton said she initially wanted to do this stunt herself but Wirkola would not let her . Arterton herself suffered an injury when she sprained her ankle while running through the forest . Stunts for the more aggressive witches were done by New Zealander stuntwoman and actress Zoë Bell . Renner did practically all of his stunt scenes himself . 
 = = = Visual effects and post @-@ production = = = 
 The film 's visual effects were created using mostly practical effects , supplemented by computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) created by Hammerhead VFX for about 15 % of the film 's special effects , such as the transformations . Wirkola said : " I ’ m a big believer in just using CGI to polish what you get on camera . For me that ’ s the ideal use of CGI . We have a troll in the film that is animatronic . I loved him . It took some convincing to get the studio along with the animatronic creature . There have been bad experiences with animatronics throughout various productions but I saw this company Spectral Motion . They did the Hellboy movies and I just loved it . " Wirkola added : " I come from Norway where we can ’ t afford CGI . But this is a fantastical world of witches and trolls and I wanted to ground the movie where I could . The blood should look real . " Janssen , however , despite Wirkola 's warnings , " was not entirely prepared for how involved and long that was going to be " and " actually wanted to burn the prosthetic make @-@ up by the end of the movie . " She recalled being " so overwhelmed by what this prosthetic business was all about " , saying : " Acting has been so specific for me and what I 've learned - eyes , facial expressions , all of that stuff - and with something like this , you 're robbed of all of this . Or I could no [ longer ] rely on things I 've done in the past . It was different and frustrating at times because I had this circus of people around me in case something became unglued . " Muriel and the other principal witches were prepared by Mike Elizalde 's Spectral Motion , who also created and handled the animatronic troll . Jon Farhat was the visual effects supervisor and aerial second unit director . 
 Conceptual design and production studio Picture Mill collaborated with Wirkola and Messick to create the title and opening credits sequence telling some of the early adventures of Hansel and Gretel as they grew up to become famous witch hunters . It was created with <unk> Toolbox through a combination of hand @-@ drawn illustrations , practical fire effects and CGI animation . The digital color correction was supervised by Stefan Sonnenfeld . 
 Janssen said the film is " definitely played with a bit of a wink and doesn 't take itself too seriously . " Wirkola himself described it as " a little more grounded " and action @-@ centered than Dead Snow . He recalled that he has tried to downplay comedy elements : " If you go too far , it can turn into a spoof almost ... We shot a lot more than what is in the movie of course and it ’ s just balancing it when you ’ re cutting . " Speaking of graphic violence , he said that " the first version we tested was for sure the most extreme . Some stuff stayed in , some stuff got cut out . " By August 2012 , Paramount was reportedly test screening two versions of the film , rated R and PG @-@ 13 , and the R @-@ rated cut received the positive feedback . Wirkola said , " I was afraid . I actually made sure they could never cut it to PG @-@ 13 ... We always knew it was going to be R. " McKay said that Paramount 's Adam Goodman " was perceptive enough to see the same thing and got behind it as well . " Wirkola said , " The pre @-@ production and shooting went very smooth , but the post @-@ production was very new to me and how they do things here with testing and the studio . " He said about the test screenings in particular : " I can see why they do it – there ’ s a lot of money involved and they want it to hit as broad as possible . But I think it ’ s a flawed process , I really do . " McKay said that Paramount executives might nevertheless regret the film 's R rating . 
 = = Music = = 
 Hans Zimmer worked on Witch Hunters as an executive music producer . Icelandic composer Atli Örvarsson ( co @-@ author of Zimmer 's score for Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End ) created the film score . Örvarsson had previously scored Season of the Witch so initially he was " a bit apprehensive " to work on another witchcraft film but was " too fond of the story to say no and found Tommy Wirkola 's take on the subject matter to be very refreshing . " Örvarsson found it easier to collaborate with Wirkola due to their shared Nordic heritage and said that their discussions about the music for the film " might have had some of the most cold and dark humor of any Hollywood music meetings . " 
 The film 's soundtrack , Hansel & Gretel Witch Hunters - Music from the Motion Picture , was released in MP3 format by Paramount Music on January 22 , 2013 . A physical soundtrack album was released on January 29 , 2013 from La @-@ La Land Records . The song " Bundy " by Norwegian rock band Animal Alpha is used during the film 's end credits , but is not included on the film 's soundtrack . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 Initially slated for a March 2 , 2012 release , the film was pushed by Paramount Pictures to a ten @-@ month delay for January 11 , 2013 . Co @-@ producer Kevin Messick later said : " We ’ d finished it but we were still discussing adding a coda scene , which we were able to shoot . And there was always the consideration that Jeremy [ Renner ] had Avengers and Bourne coming out . So the studio made a wise strategic move in finding a good release date for us . " Wirkola said that " the main reason is because they wanted to wait on Jeremy . He was cast before Mission : Impossible , Bourne and The Avengers . They wanted to wait until after those . I was , of course , disappointed then , but actually it helped because we came in under budget " and so the delay enabled him to re @-@ add and shoot an additional scene that is set in the desert and which was cut from his original screenplay . The first trailer for the film was released on September 5 , 2012 . 
 The film was again delayed by two weeks to January 25 , 2013 in the United States and Canada . A statement from Paramount suggested that the film was delayed to enable it to be released in IMAX 3D format . In early January 2013 , illegal copies of the film were discovered in a major anti @-@ piracy bust . Prior to its North American premiere , Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters was first released in Russia on January 17 , followed by the releases in Indonesia and the Philippines on January 23 , and in several nations across Latin America and South @-@ East Asia on January 24 . On the same day ( January 25 ) it was also released in more countries of Latin America , with the other parts of the world following between January 31 and mid @-@ March 2013 . The film was also released in the motion effects theaters using 4DX and D @-@ Box motion enhancement technologies . In Mexico , it was the first feature film to be shown in <unk> 's new <unk> Motion EFX theater format , provided by <unk> . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The " extreme version " home release was announced by Wirkola to feature more comedy and " more guts and blood and gore , stuff that didn 't make the [ theatrical ] cut . " Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters was released by Paramount Home Media Distribution on June 11 in its original theatrical cut and a longer , unrated cut " with never @-@ before @-@ seen footage that was too intense for theaters " . It is available in the versions : either a double Blu @-@ ray edition ( the 1080p AVC video and the 6 @-@ channel Dolby TrueHD audio ) or a triple Blu @-@ ray 3D / Blu @-@ ray / DVD limited edition , both coming with an UltraViolet digital copy and three behind @-@ the @-@ scenes special features : " Reinventing Hansel & Gretel " ( 15 : 41m ) , " The Witching Hours " ( 9 : <unk> ) and " Meet Edward the Troll " ( 5 : 25m ) . In addition , just the theatrical cut of the film will be made available on a single DVD . The unrated version is 10 minutes longer ( 98 minutes long ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Los Angeles Times predicted the film would become a " box @-@ office bull 's @-@ eye , with pre @-@ release audience surveys indicating an expected $ 30 million for the opening weekend in the United States . One week prior to the U.S. release , the film opened to a " huge " $ 8 @.@ 6 million in Russia ( the all @-@ time 50th best opening in Russia / CIS ) , which made its international prospects look good , according to Yahoo ! News . Entertainment Weekly predicted the film would " likely top the chart in its debut weekend " with $ 17 million ; similarly , MovieWeb predicted $ 17 @.@ 5 million . Paramount said they counted on $ 20 million . Speaking on January 31 , Wirkola claimed the film had so far " opened in 19 territories and went to number one in 18 of them . " The U.S. initial midnight screening at selected theaters made an estimated $ 500 @,@ 000 , a " so @-@ so result " . The film took the top position on its first day 's screening at 3 @,@ 373 locations across the country , earning an estimated $ 6 million and suggesting a three @-@ day total of $ 15 – 17 million , according to various estimates . 
 The film topped the weekend 's North American box office with $ 19 million , the first day 's under performance blamed on bad weather on the U.S. East Coast . In addition , it earned $ 25 million in several other territories where it had already been released ( representing about 40 % of the international market ) . However , it held well during its box office run , dropping only 52 % in its second weekend and 39 % in its third and fourth . American audiences gave it a " B " CinemaScore grade . On March 19 , Reuters reported that while the film " was no blockbuster in the United States " , it was much better received in other countries for a $ 205 @.@ 9 million total haul to date , including $ 24 @.@ 1 million in Brazil , $ 19 million in Russia , $ 14 million in Mexico and $ 12 @.@ 8 million in Germany . The film 's theatrical run ended on April 25 , with a total gross of $ 225 @.@ 7 million including $ 55 @.@ 7 million domestically . 
 Overall , Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters was Paramount 's fourth highest @-@ grossing film of 2013 , following new graphic novel and franchise entries : World War Z , Star Trek Into Darkness , and G.I. Joe : Retaliation , respectively . It is estimated that , following published production costs , marketing and advertising fees , and the percentage of overseas revenue that was lost by the domestic studio , similar fantasy reboots such as Snow White and the Huntsman , Mirror , Mirror , Jack the Giant Slayer , Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter , and I , Frankenstein fail to match the total studio winnings for Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters , which makes it one of the most financially successful films of the fantasy @-@ reboot genre , despite having the smallest estimated budget and lowest Metascore of the recent entries . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters was initially met with largely negative critical reviews , with a 15 % approval rating and an average rating of 4 / 10 from the 126 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes . The website 's critical consensus states : " Alternately bloody and silly , Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters fails as both a fantasy adventure and as a parody of same . " Metacritic rates the film at 21 out of 100 , based on 24 reviews . According to CBS , " critics have not been too kind to these witch @-@ hunting siblings . Several reviewers have blasted the film for its thin story , deliberate anachronisms , and lack of funny dialogue . " Messick commented : " We expected that . It ’ s an easy target ! It ’ s a genre film . " Renner said : " We knew this was never going to be a movie for the critics . I 'm just hoping that people go along and can have some fun with it . It 's pure escapism . " McKay said he " sort took the critical reviews as almost kind of lazy , when they said it wasn 't any good . It 's just from a distance you could tell certain critics were just going to write it off immediately . " The film was one of the top seven contenders for the 2014 Academy Award in the category Best Make @-@ Up and Hairstyling , but failed to receive a nomination . 
 Claudia Puig of USA Today wrote " this convoluted hybrid of fairy tale and fantasy / action / comedy / horror aims for campy fun , but comes off tedious and blood @-@ spattered . " Andrew Barker of Variety called the film " inconsistently acted , and somehow both underwritten and overplotted , " and while the action is " frequent and competently staged , " it might feel too repetitive " as yet another witch is ripped apart limb from limb , sending yet another wave of viscera sluicing toward the camera . " Similarly , Stephanie Merry of The Washington Post wrote that " after a while it ’ s easy to become numb to the repulsive sights and bored by action that once seemed intense and exciting " in this " rarely funny spoof that ’ s heavy on bone @-@ crushing and blood @-@ gushing , " giving it one @-@ and @-@ half star out of four . Steven Farber of The Hollywood Reporter also wrote a scathing review , saying that while " Wirkola makes the most of the 3D technology " , " the film is too fanciful to be truly revolting " for its gore effects and " despite its few wry jokes , the script is awfully thin . " Roger Moore of The Charlotte Observer gave the film one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , writing that Wirkola " focuses on the fights and flings all manner of viscera at the 3 @-@ D camera as limbs are whacked off and heads and torsos explode . Less attention was paid to the story , and the dialogue is a tad over @-@ reliant on the random f @-@ word to land a laugh . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave the film zero out of four stars , writing that " nothing makes a whole lot of sense in this incoherent movie , whose director ’ s philosophy seems to be : When in doubt , cut somebody ’ s head off . " Kat Murphy of MSN gave it one star out of four , comparing this " big @-@ budget faux fairy tale about skanky witches " to a " <unk> video game for dull @-@ eyed teens happy to lap up lame wisecracks and lots of gore . " According to Vulture 's Bilge Ebiri , " if the similarly situated Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter took itself too seriously , the problem with Hansel & Gretel is that it doesn ’ t quite take itself seriously enough . " Keith <unk> of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C- , calling it " an intermittently fun , but overexcited and predictable mish @-@ mash . " Alicia Malone of IGN rated it a 4 @.@ 5 / 10 , stating " there are a few funny moments , but overall Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters is too similar to many films we ’ ve seen before . " Calum Marsh of Slant Magazine lambasted the film 's " sub @-@ Tim Burton aesthetic " and wrote that " the result suggests A Knight 's Tale as penned by Seth MacFarlane , " giving it zero out of four stars . Scott A. Gray of Exclaim ! praised some elements of the film , such as " lush and colourful art design that recalls a Guillermo Del Toro production , sound creature makeup and special effects , decently choreographed action scenes and a pair of leads who do their damnedest to sell the limp script " , giving it a score of 4 / 10 . Chris Knight of The Vancouver Sun called it a " mess of a fairy tale " , expecting " a <unk> outcry at the film ’ s depiction — nay , endorsement — of the torture of witch @-@ folk . " Liam Lacey of The Globe and Mail gave it one star out of four , concerned how it " has an alarming number of females being strung up , burned , shot , decapitated and eviscerated . " 
 Some reception of the film , however , was much more positive , in particular by reviewers for horror outlets . Michael Gingold of Fangoria gave it two @-@ and @-@ half out of four skulls , while Jonathan Barkan of Bloody Disgusting gave it four out of five skulls , stating it " isn ’ t a movie meant to scare or make you think but it is one of the most entertaining and enjoyable movies of its kind that I ’ ve seen in years . " Scott Weinberg of <unk> wrote that " aside from some very clunky editorial missteps in the film 's second half , there 's a good deal of wit , enthusiasm , energy , and amusing attitude to be found in the dumb @-@ yet @-@ self @-@ aware Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters , " all while noting that he is " not the type to act snobbish around a ridiculous film that obviously knows it 's ridiculous . " According to Ryan Larson of Shock Till You Drop , the film " is a mixed bag " but " fortunately , the lows don ’ t appear as often as you would think , " and , " if taken at face value , Hansel & Gretel is well worth the view . " William Bibbiani of CraveOnline , who criticized the film 's inadequately " limp " marketing campaign , found the movie itself " inherently stupid " but in a good way , " played with humor , ultraviolence and anachronistic fetish . " Cinema Blend 's Sean O 'Connell stated that the film is " often mean and nasty , but that 's really its saving grace . " Peter Paras of E ! recommended this " super violent , pretty funny flick " for how it " revels in the mayhem " . Tom Russo of The Boston Globe , giving the film three out of five stars , called it a " <unk> fanboy fun . <unk> , clearly , but fun . " Jonathon <unk> of Filmink wrote : " Hansel and Gretel is not a ' film ' . It 's a ' movie ' , in all its unabashed , excitable glory ... big on blood @-@ soaked entertainment and low on pretension . " Rick Florino of Artistdirect gave it four out of five stars , stating : " This has all the elements of a classic action flick , and it 's destined for cult status . Welcome to the most fun movie of 2013 . " DVD Talk 's Jamie S. Rich summed up : " Is Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters a good movie ? Probably not . At least not in any way that is defensible by regular critical standards . Is it a hell of a good time ? Absolutely so . <unk> so . That 's all it wants to be . " 
 Neil <unk> of The New York Times wrote that " it may not stay in the public eye long because this movie is probably not going to put up Twilight @-@ like numbers , " adding that " the script doesn 't give them enough of the witty lines that can elevate these types of movies to must @-@ see status , which is odd , since the producers include Will Ferrell . " Vince Horiuchi of The Salt Lake Tribune suggested that this film should have been made 30 years ago by Sam Raimi and starring Bruce Campbell , while instead " the Hansel and Gretel we ’ re left with runs out of its magic potion far too early to let us enjoy its wicked possibilities . " A more positive comparison to Raimi and Campbell 's Army of Darkness was made by Pete Vonder Haar of the Houston Press , who gave it three out of five " witch hazels " and wrote : " I 'm not sure if witches are the next vampires / zombies , or if the hinted @-@ at franchise potential has any legs , but this was a perfectly vulgar way to spend 90 minutes . " Tim Grierson of Screen International wrote that Hansel and Gretel " works best as an unapologetic B @-@ movie action flick " and " feels like a first film in a franchise that ’ s meant to set up the main characters and conflicts , which can then be fleshed out in sequels " but " the problem is that there isn 't enough here to warrant a return trip to this semi @-@ magical land . " Richard Corliss of TIME agreed with this sentiment , stating that " one might be enough — too much , for some tastes . " 
 = = = Cult status = = = 
 At the conclusion of 2013 , Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters made multiple annual movie lists dedicated to underappreciated or underrated films . Movies.com opined it " is , hands down , the most underappreciated film of the year … ' Proper ' filmmaking or not , if you 've got me cheering at the screening , grinning big and then walking out with a little extra adrenaline , you ’ ve done something right . " Ryan Doom from JoBlo.com wrote that " while usually that ’ s the thing I mock , [ Hansel & Gretel ] somehow ended up pretty damn enjoyable … Why not ? It never takes itself serious and it knows exactly what it is : a silly film that isn 't afraid to do what the hell it wants . " Hansel and Gretel : Witch Hunters has hence been labeled as a cult film by a number of horror @-@ fantasy film fans , as well as by some critics who initially saw no merit in movie . This significant financial and fan following have led some to question the initial perception of the film in relation to its debut in January , considered to be " a refuge for films that don 't have a shot of generating good word of mouth or having a leggy run . " While Renner 's box office draw and the film 's " well @-@ articulated premise " have been listed as major factors behind its theatrical success , its ability to maintain a lasting fan following has also been attributed to its original concept , excellent gore and action sequences , Renner 's and Arterton 's tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek performances , and the film 's ability to not take itself too seriously . The film was nominated for the 40th People 's Choice Awards in the category Favorite Horror Movie , but lost to Carrie . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On March 19 , 2013 , Paramount announced that a sequel to the film is in the works due to overseas box office numbers . Hansel & Gretel producers Ferrell , McKay , Messick , and Flynn were reported to return . In June 2013 , McKay officially confirmed his involvement and said that " everyone feels like as good as the first one is , we can really jack it up a level with the second one . So , fingers crossed everyone will come back " ( including Renner and Arterton ) . McKay suggested that Paramount might insist harder to make the film rated PG @-@ 13 this time . Talking about Wirkola 's " pretty insane " ideas for the second film , McKay said this could be one of those instances where the sequel does go further than the first one . " Regarding the storyline , he offered one hint : " Think of different kinds of witchcraft . " It was revealed that the sequel will have a 2016 release date . 
 In September 2014 , Wirkola announced that he would not be returning to direct the sequel : “ I have been lately attached to a few more things , it ’ s just a matter of time and priorities . I did Dead Snow , then Hansel & Gretel , and then Dead Snow 2 . I want to do something a little bit different now and not just do sequels . I did write the script and I hope to be involved in it . But yeah , I won ’ t be directing it . ” He said " the first film was a learning curve for me working in the studio system and the script I wrote for the original was so different [ than the final movie ] . We ended up taking a lot out and altering stuff that first time . I tried taking what I learned and still delivered a sequel script that ’ s an R @-@ rated action film . " Cinema Blend reported Renner said that despite his busy schedule he agreed to reprise the role of Hansel because the first film " was a lot of fun doing the movie , " but without Wirkola directing again he might be less likely to return for the sequel . 
 On August 7 , 2015 , it was reported that Bruno Aveillan will make his feature film debut helming the sequel , with Wirkola as a writer . 
 = = Television adaptation = = 
 Deadline reports that Paramount is planning a Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters TV series . It is possible that this series may ultimately be produced in place of the proposed sequel . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Political integration of India = 
 At the time of Indian independence in 1947 , India was divided into two sets of territories , one under the control of the British Empire , and the other over which the Crown had suzerainty , but which were under the control of their hereditary rulers . In addition , there were several colonial enclaves controlled by France and Portugal . The political integration of these territories into India was a declared objective of the Indian National Congress , and the Government of India pursued this over the next decade . Through a combination of factors , Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and V. P. Menon convinced the rulers of the various princely states to accede to India . Having secured their accession , they then proceeded to , in a step @-@ by @-@ step process , secure and extend the central government 's authority over these states and transform their administrations until , by 1956 , there was little difference between the territories that had been part of British India and those that had been part of princely states . Simultaneously , the Government of India , through a combination of diplomatic and military means , acquired de facto and de jure control over the remaining colonial enclaves , which too were integrated into India . 
 Although this process successfully integrated the vast majority of princely states into India , it was not as successful for a few , notably the former princely states of Jammu and Kashmir , Tripura and Manipur , where active secessionist movements exist . 
 = = Princely states in India = = 
 The early history of British expansion in India was characterised by the co @-@ existence of two approaches towards the existing princely states . The first was a policy of annexation , where the British sought to forcibly absorb the Indian princely states into the provinces which constituted their Empire in India . The second was a policy of indirect rule , where the British assumed suzerainty and paramountcy over princely states , but conceded to them sovereignty and varying degrees of internal self @-@ government . During the early part of the 19th century , the policy of the British tended towards annexation , but the Indian Rebellion of 1857 forced a change in this approach , by demonstrating both the difficulty of absorbing and subduing annexed states , and the usefulness of princely states as a source of support . In 1858 , the policy of annexation was formally renounced , and British relations with the remaining princely states thereafter were based on subsidiary alliances , whereby the British exercised paramountcy over all princely states , with the British crown as ultimate suzerain , but at the same time respected and protected them as allies , taking control of their external relations . The exact relations between the British and each princely state were regulated by individual treaties and varied widely , with some states having complete internal self @-@ government , others being subject to significant control in their internal affairs , and some rulers being in effect little more than the owners of landed estates , with little autonomy . 
 During the 20th century , the British made several attempts to integrate the princely states more closely with British India , in 1921 creating the Chamber of Princes as a consultative and advisory body , and in 1936 transferring the responsibility for the supervision of smaller states from the provinces to the centre and creating direct relations between the Government of India and the larger princely states , superseding political agents . A more ambitious aim was a scheme of federation contained in the Government of India Act 1935 , which envisaged the princely states and British India being united under a federal government . This scheme came close to success , but was abandoned in 1939 as a result of the outbreak of the Second World War . As a result , in the 1940s the relationship between the princely states and the crown remained regulated by the principle of paramountcy and by the various treaties between the British crown and the states . 
 Neither paramountcy nor the subsidiary alliances could continue after Indian independence . The British took the view that because they had been established directly between the British crown and the princely states , they could not be transferred to the newly independent dominions of India and Pakistan . At the same time , the alliances imposed obligations on Britain that it was not prepared to continue to carry out , such as the obligation to maintain troops in India for the defence of the princely states . The British government therefore decided that paramountcy , together with all treaties between them and the princely states , would come to an end upon the British departure from India . 
 = = Reasons for integration = = 
 The termination of paramountcy would have in principle meant that all rights that flowed from the states ' relationship with the British crown would return to them , leaving them free to negotiate relationships with the new states of India and Pakistan " on a basis of complete freedom " . Early British plans for the transfer of power , such as the offer produced by the Cripps Mission , recognised the possibility that some princely states might choose to stand out of independent India . This was unacceptable to the Indian National Congress , which regarded the independence of princely states as a denial of the course of Indian history , and consequently regarded this scheme as a " <unk> " of India . The Congress had traditionally been less active in the princely states because of their limited resources which restricted their ability to organise there and their focus on the goal of independence from the British , and because Congress leaders , in particular Mohandas Gandhi , were sympathetic to the more progressive princes as examples of the capacity of Indians to rule themselves . This changed in the 1930s as a result of the federation scheme contained in the Government of India Act 1935 and the rise of socialist Congress leaders such as Jayaprakash Narayan , and the Congress began to actively engage with popular political and labour activity in the princely states . By 1939 , the Congress ' official stance was that the states must enter independent India , on the same terms and with the same autonomy as the provinces of British India , and with their people granted responsible government . As a result , it insisted on the incorporation of the princely states into India in its negotiations with British , but the British took the view that this was not in their power to grant . 
 A few British leaders , particularly Lord Mountbatten , the last British viceroy of India , were also uncomfortable with breaking links between independent India and the princely states . The development of trade , commerce and communications during the 19th and 20th centuries had bound the princely states to the British India through a complex network of interests . Agreements relating to railways , customs , irrigation , use of ports , and other similar agreements would get terminated , posing a serious threat to the economic life of the subcontinent . Mountbatten was also persuaded by the argument of Indian officials such as V. P. Menon that the integration of the princely states into independent India would , to some extent , assuage the wounds of partition . The result was that Mountbatten personally favoured and worked towards the accession of princely states to India following the transfer of power , as proposed by the Congress . 
 = = Accepting integration = = 
 = = = The princes ' position = = = 
 The rulers of the princely states were not uniformly enthusiastic about integrating their domains into independent India . Some , such as the kings of Bikaner and Jawhar , were motivated to join India out of ideological and patriotic considerations , but others insisted that they had the right to join either India or Pakistan , to remain independent , or form a union of their own . Bhopal , Travancore and Hyderabad announced that they did not intend to join either dominion . Hyderabad went as far as to appoint trade representatives in European countries and commencing negotiations with the Portuguese to lease or buy Goa to give it access to the sea , and Travancore pointed to the strategic importance to western countries of its thorium reserves while asking for recognition . Some states proposed a subcontinent @-@ wide confederation of princely states , as a third entity in addition to India and Pakistan . Bhopal attempted to build an alliance between the princely states and the Muslim League to counter the pressure being put on rulers by the Congress . 
 A number of factors contributed to the collapse of this initial resistance and to nearly all non @-@ Muslim majority princely states agreeing to accede to India . An important factor was the lack of unity among the princes . The smaller states did not trust the larger states to protect their interests , and many Hindu rulers did not trust Muslim princes , in particular Hamidullah Khan , the Nawab of Bhopal and a leading proponent of independence , whom they viewed as an agent for Pakistan . Others , believing integration to be inevitable , sought to build bridges with the Congress , hoping thereby to gain a say in shaping the final settlement . The resultant inability to present a united front or agree on a common position significantly reduced their bargaining power in negotiations with the Congress . The decision by the Muslim League to stay out of the Constituent Assembly was also fatal to the princes ' plan to build an alliance with it to counter the Congress , and attempts to boycott the Constituent Assembly altogether failed on 28 April 1947 , when the states of Baroda , Bikaner , Cochin , Gwalior , Jaipur , Jodhpur , Patiala and Rewa took their seats in the Assembly . 
 Many princes were also pressured by popular sentiment favouring integration with India , which meant their plans for independence had little support from their subjects . The Maharaja of Travancore , for example , definitively abandoned his plans for independence after the attempted assassination of his dewan , Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer . In a few states , the chief ministers or <unk> played a significant role in convincing the princes to accede to India . The key factors that led the states to accept integration into India were , however , the efforts of Lord Mountbatten , Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and V. P. Menon . The latter two were respectively the political and administrative heads of the States Department , which was in charge of relations with the princely states . 
 = = = Mountbatten 's role = = = 
 Mountbatten believed that securing the states ' accession to India was crucial to reaching a negotiated settlement with the Congress for the transfer of power . As a relative of the British King , he was trusted by most of the princes and was a personal friend of many , especially the Nawab of Bhopal , Hamidullah Khan . The princes also believed that he would be in a position to ensure the independent India adhered to any terms that might be agreed upon , because Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and Patel had asked him to become the first Governor General of the Dominion of India . 
 Mountbatten used his influence with the princes to push them towards accession . He declared that the British Government would not grant dominion status to any of the princely states , nor would it accept them into the British Commonwealth , which meant that the states would sever all connections with the British crown unless they joined either India or Pakistan . He pointed out that the Indian subcontinent was one economic entity , and that the states would suffer most if the link were broken . He also pointed to the difficulties that princes would face maintaining order in the face of threats such as the rise of communal violence and communist movements . 
 Mountbatten stressed that he would act as the trustee of the princes ' commitment , as he would be serving as India 's head of state well into 1948 . He engaged in a personal dialogue with reluctant princes , such as the Nawab of Bhopal , who he asked through a confidential letter to sign the Instrument of Accession making Bhopal part of India , which Mountbatten would keep locked up in his safe . It would be handed to the States Department on 15 August only if the Nawab did not change his mind before then , which he was free to do . The Nawab agreed , and did not renege over the deal . 
 At the time , several princes complained that they were being betrayed by Britain , who they regarded as an ally , and Sir Conrad Corfield resigned his position as head of the Political Department in protest at Mountbatten 's policies . Mountbatten 's policies were also criticised by the opposition Conservative Party . Winston Churchill compared the language used by the Indian government with that used by Adolf Hitler before the invasion of Austria . Modern historians such as Lumby and Moore , however , take the view that Mountbatten played a crucial role in ensuring that the princely states agreed to accede to India . 
 = = = Pressure and diplomacy = = = 
 By far the most significant factor that led to the princes ' decision to accede to India was the policy of the Congress and , in particular , of Patel and Menon . The Congress ' stated position was that the princely states were not sovereign entities , and as such could not opt to be independent notwithstanding the end of paramountcy . The princely states must therefore accede to either India or Pakistan . In July 1946 , Nehru pointedly observed that no princely state could prevail militarily against the army of independent India . In January 1947 , he said that independent India would not accept the divine right of kings , and in May 1947 , he declared that any princely state which refused to join the Constituent Assembly would be treated as an enemy state . Other Congress leaders , such as C. Rajagopalachari , argued that as paramountcy " came into being as a fact and not by agreement " , it would necessarily pass to the government of independent India , as the successor of the British . 
 Patel and Menon , who were charged with the actual job of negotiating with the princes , took a more conciliatory approach than Nehru . The official policy statement of the Government of India made by Patel on 5 July 1947 made no threats . Instead , it emphasised the unity of India and the common interests of the princes and independent India , reassured them about the Congress ' intentions , and invited them to join independent India " to make laws sitting together as friends than to make treaties as aliens " . He reiterated that the States Department would not attempt to establish a relationship of domination over the princely states . Unlike the Political Department of the British Government , it would not be an instrument of paramountcy , but a medium whereby business could be conducted between the states and India as equals . 
 = = = Instruments of accession = = = 
 Patel and Menon backed up their diplomatic efforts by producing treaties that were designed to be attractive to rulers of princely states . Two key documents were produced . The first was the Standstill Agreement , which confirmed the continuance of the pre @-@ existing agreements and administrative practices . The second was the Instrument of Accession , by which the ruler of the princely state in question agreed to the accession of his kingdom to independent India , granting the latter control over specified subject matters . The nature of the subject matters varied depending on the acceding state . The states which had internal autonomy under the British signed an Instrument of Accession which only ceded three subjects to the government of India — defence , external affairs , and communications , each defined in accordance with List 1 to Schedule VII of the Government of India Act 1935 . Rulers of states which were in effect estates or <unk> , where substantial administrative powers were exercised by the Crown , signed a different Instrument of Accession , which vested all residuary powers and jurisdiction in the Government of India . Rulers of states which had an intermediate status signed a third type of Instrument , which preserved the degree of power they had under the British . 
 The Instruments of Accession implemented a number of other safeguards . Clause 7 provided that the princes would not be bound to the Indian constitution as and when it was drafted . Clause 8 guaranteed their autonomy in all areas that were not ceded to the Government of India . This was supplemented by a number of promises . Rulers who agreed to accede would receive guarantees that their extra @-@ territorial rights , such as immunity from prosecution in Indian courts and exemption from customs duty , would be protected , that they would be allowed to democratise slowly , that none of the eighteen major states would be forced to merge , and that they would remain eligible for British honours and decorations . In discussions , Lord Mountbatten reinforced the statements of Patel and Menon by emphasising that the documents gave the princes all the " practical independence " they needed . Mountbatten , Patel and Menon also sought to give princes the impression that if they did not accept the terms put to them then , they might subsequently need to accede on substantially less favourable terms . The Standstill Agreement was also used as a negotiating tool , as the States Department categorically ruled out signing a Standstill Agreement with princely states that did not sign an Instrument of Accession . 
 = = The accession process = = 
 The limited scope of the Instruments of Accession and the promise of a wide @-@ ranging autonomy and the other guarantees they offered , gave sufficient comfort to many rulers , who saw this as the best deal they could strike given the lack of support from the British , and popular internal pressures . Between May 1947 and the transfer of power on 15 August 1947 , the vast majority of states signed Instruments of Accession . A few , however , held out . Some simply delayed signing the Instrument of Accession . <unk> , a small state in central India , did not accede until March 1948 . The biggest problems , however , arose with a few border states , such as Jodhpur , which tried to negotiate better deals with Pakistan , with Junagadh , which actually did accede to Pakistan , and with Hyderabad and Kashmir , which declared that they intended to remain independent . 
 = = = Border states = = = 
 The ruler of Jodhpur , Hanwant Singh , was antipathetic to the Congress , and did not see much future in India for him or the lifestyle he wished to lead . Along with the ruler of Jaisalmer , he entered into negotiations with Muhammad Ali Jinnah , who was the designated head of state for Pakistan . Jinnah was keen to attract some of the larger border states , hoping thereby to attract other Rajput states to Pakistan and compensate for the loss of half of Bengal and Punjab . He offered to permit Jodhpur and Jaisalmer to accede to Pakistan on any terms they chose , giving their rulers blank sheets of paper and asking them to write down their terms , which he would sign . Jaisalmer refused , arguing that it would be difficult for him to side with Muslims against Hindus in the event of communal problems . Hanwant Singh came close to signing . However , the atmosphere in Jodhpur was in general hostile to accession to Pakistan . Mountbatten also pointed out that the accession of a predominantly Hindu state to Pakistan would violate the principle of the two @-@ nation theory on which Partition was based , and was likely to cause communal violence in the State . Hanwant Singh was persuaded by these arguments , and somewhat reluctantly agreed to accede to India . 
 = = = Junagadh = = = 
 Although the states were in theory free to choose whether they wished to accede to India or Pakistan , Mountbatten had pointed out that " geographic compulsions " meant that most of them must choose India . In effect , he took the position that only the states that shared a border with Pakistan could choose to accede to it . 
 The Nawab of Junagadh , a princely state located on the south @-@ western end of Gujarat and having no common border with Pakistan , chose to accede to Pakistan ignoring Mountbatten 's views , arguing that it could be reached from Pakistan by sea . The rulers of two states that were subject to the suzerainty of Junagadh — <unk> and <unk> — reacted to this by declaring their independence from Junagadh and acceding to India . In response , the Nawab of Junagadh militarily occupied the states . The rulers of neighbouring states reacted angrily , sending their troops to the Junagadh frontier and appealed to the Government of India for assistance . A group of <unk> people , led by <unk> Gandhi , formed a government @-@ in @-@ exile , the <unk> <unk> ( " temporary government " ) . 
 India believed that if Junagadh was permitted to go to Pakistan , the communal tension already simmering in Gujarat would worsen , and refused to accept the accession . The government pointed out that the state was 80 % Hindu , and called for a plebiscite to decide the question of accession . Simultaneously , they cut off supplies of fuel and coal to Junagadh , severed air and postal links , sent troops to the frontier , and reoccupied the principalities of <unk> and <unk> that had acceded to India . Pakistan agreed to discuss a plebiscite , subject to the withdrawal of Indian troops , a condition India rejected . On 26 October , the Nawab and his family fled to Pakistan following clashes with Indian troops . On 7 November , Junagadh 's court , facing collapse , invited the Government of India to take over the State 's administration . The Government of India agreed . A plebiscite was conducted in February 1948 , which went almost unanimously in favour of accession to India . 
 = = = Jammu and Kashmir = = = 
 At the time of the transfer of power , the state of Jammu and Kashmir ( widely called " Kashmir " ) was ruled by Maharaja Hari Singh , a Hindu , although the state itself had a Muslim majority . Hari Singh was equally hesitant about acceding to either India or Pakistan , as either would have provoked adverse reactions in parts of his kingdom . He signed a Standstill Agreement with Pakistan and proposed one with India as well , but announced that Kashmir intended to remain independent . However , his rule was opposed by Sheikh Abdullah , the popular leader of Kashmir 's largest political party , the National Conference , who demanded his abdication . 
 Pakistan , attempting to force the issue of Kashmir 's accession , cut off supplies and transport links . The chaos in Punjab resulting from Partition had also severed transport links with India , meaning that Kashmir 's only links with the two dominions was by air . Rumours about atrocities against the Muslim population of <unk> by the Maharajah 's forces caused the outbreak of civil unrest . Shortly thereafter , Pathan tribesmen from the North @-@ West Frontier Province of Pakistan crossed the border and entered Kashmir . The invaders made rapid progress towards Srinagar . The Maharaja of Kashmir wrote to India , asking for military assistance . India required the signing of an Instrument of Accession and setting up an interim government headed by Sheikh Abdullah in return . The Maharaja complied , but Nehru declared that it would have to be confirmed by a plebiscite , although there was no legal requirement to seek such confirmation . 
 Indian troops secured Jammu , Srinagar and the valley itself during the First Kashmir War , but the intense fighting flagged with the onset of winter , which made much of the state impassable . Prime Minister Nehru , recognising the degree of international attention brought to bear on the dispute , declared a ceasefire and sought UN arbitration , arguing that India would otherwise have to invade Pakistan itself , in view of its failure to stop the tribal incursions . The plebiscite was never held , and on 26 January 1950 , the Constitution of India came into force in Kashmir , but with special provisions made for the state . India did not , however , secure administrative control over all of Kashmir . The northern and western portions of Kashmir came under Pakistan 's control in 1947 , and are today Pakistan @-@ administered Kashmir . In the 1962 Sino @-@ Indian War , China occupied Aksai Chin , the north @-@ eastern region bordering Ladakh , which it continues to control and administer . 
 = = = Hyderabad = = = 
 Hyderabad was a landlocked state that stretched over 82 @,@ 000 square miles ( over 212 @,@ 000 square kilometres ) in southeastern India . While 87 % of its 17 million people were Hindu , its ruler Nizam Osman Ali Khan was a Muslim , and its politics were dominated by a Muslim elite . The Muslim nobility and the Ittehad @-@ ul @-@ Muslimeen , a powerful pro @-@ Nizam Muslim party , insisted Hyderabad remain independent and stand on an equal footing to India and Pakistan . Accordingly , the Nizam in June 1947 issued a firman announcing that on the transfer of power , his state would be resuming independence . The Government of India rejected the firman , terming it a " legalistic claim of doubtful validity " . It argued that the strategic location of Hyderabad , which lay astride the main lines of communication between northern and southern India , meant it could easily be used by " foreign interests " to threaten India , and that in consequence , the issue involved national @-@ security concerns . It also pointed out that the state 's people , history and location made it unquestionably Indian , and that its own " common interests " therefore mandated its integration into India . 
 The Nizam was prepared to enter into a limited treaty with India , which gave Hyderabad safeguards not provided for in the standard Instrument of Accession , such as a provision guaranteeing Hyderabad 's neutrality in the event of a conflict between India and Pakistan . India rejected this proposal , arguing that other states would demand similar concessions . A temporary Standstill Agreement was signed as a stopgap measure , even though Hyderabad had not yet agreed to accede to India . By December 1947 , however , India was accusing Hyderabad of repeatedly violating the Agreement , while the Nizam alleged that India was blockading his state , a charge India denied . 
 The Nizam was also beset by the Telangana Rebellion , led by communists , which started in 1946 as a peasant revolt against feudal elements ; and one which the Nizam was not able to subjugate . The situation deteriorated further in 1948 . The Razakars ( " volunteers " ) , a militia affiliated to the Ittehad @-@ ul @-@ Muslimeen and set up under the influence of Muslim radical Qasim <unk> , assumed the role of supporting the Muslim ruling class against upsurges by the Hindu populace , and began intensifying its activities and was accused of attempting to intimidate villages . The Hyderabad State Congress Party , affiliated to the Indian National Congress , launched a political agitation . Matters were made worse by communist groups , which had originally supported the Congress but now switched sides and began attacking Congress groups . Attempts by Mountbatten to find a negotiated solution failed and , in August , the Nizam , claiming that he feared an imminent invasion , attempted to approach the UN Security Council and the International Court of Justice . Patel now insisted that if Hyderabad was allowed to continue its independence , the prestige of the Government would be tarnished and then neither Hindus nor Muslims would feel secure in its realm . 
 On 13 September , the Indian Army was sent into Hyderabad under Operation Polo on the grounds that the law and order situation there threatened the peace of South India . The troops met little resistance by the Razakars and between 13 and 18 September took complete control of the state . The operation led to massive communal violence with estimates ranging from the official one of 27 @,@ 000 @-@ 40 @,@ 000 to scholarly ones of 200 @,@ 000 or more . The Nizam was retained as the head of state in the same manner as the other princes who acceded to India . He thereupon disavowed the complaints that had been made to the UN and , despite vehement protests from Pakistan and strong criticism from other countries , the Security Council did not deal further with the question , and Hyderabad was absorbed into India . 
 = = Completing integration = = 
 The Instruments of Accession were limited , transferring control of only three matters to India , and would by themselves have produced a rather loose federation , with significant differences in administration and governance across the various states . Full political integration , in contrast , would require a process whereby the political actors in the various states were " persuaded to shift their loyalties , expectations , and political activities towards a new center " , namely , the Republic of India . This was not an easy task . While some princely states such as Mysore had legislative systems of governance that were based on a broad franchise and not significantly different from those of British India , in others , political decision @-@ making took place in small , limited aristocratic circles and governance was , as a result , at best paternalistic and at worst the result of courtly intrigue . Having secured the accession of the princely states , the Government of India between 1948 and 1950 turned to the task of welding the states and the former British provinces into one polity under a single republican constitution . 
 = = = Fast @-@ track integration = = = 
 The first step in this process , carried out between 1947 and 1949 , was to merge the smaller states that were not seen by the Government of India to be viable administrative units either into neighbouring provinces , or with other princely states to create a " princely union " . This policy was contentious , since it involved the dissolution of the very states whose existence India had only recently guaranteed in the Instruments of Accession . Patel and Menon emphasised that without integration , the economies of states would collapse , and anarchy would arise if the princes were unable to provide democracy and govern properly . They pointed out that many of the smaller states were very small and lacked resources to sustain their economies and support their growing populations . Many also imposed tax rules and other restrictions that impeded free trade , and which had to be dismantled in a united India . 
 Given that merger involved the breach of guarantees personally given by Mountbatten , initially Patel and Nehru intended to wait until after his term as Governor @-@ General ended . An <unk> uprising in Orissa in late 1947 , however , forced their hand . In December 1947 , princes from the Eastern India Agency and Chhattisgarh Agency were summoned to an all @-@ night meeting with Menon , where they were persuaded to sign Merger Agreements integrating their states into Orissa , the Central Provinces and Bihar with effect from 1 January 1948 . Later that year , 66 states in Gujarat and the Deccan were merged into Bombay , including the large states of Kolhapur and Baroda . Other small states were merged into Madras , East Punjab , West Bengal , the United Provinces and Assam . Not all states that signed Merger Agreements were integrated into provinces , however . Thirty states of the former Punjab Hill States Agency which lay near the international border and had signed Merger Agreements were integrated into Himachal Pradesh , a distinct entity which was administered directly by the centre as a Chief Commissioner 's Province , for reasons of security . 
 The Merger Agreements required rulers to cede " full and exclusive jurisdiction and powers for and in relation to governance " of their state to the Dominion of India . In return for their agreement to entirely cede their states , it gave princes a large number of guarantees . Princes would receive an annual payment from the Indian government in the form of a privy purse as compensation for the surrender of their powers and the dissolution of their states . While state property would be taken over , their private property would be protected , as would all personal privileges , dignities and titles . Succession was also guaranteed according to custom . In addition , the provincial administration was obliged to take on the staff of the princely states with guarantees of equal pay and treatment . 
 Although the Merger Agreements were principally intended for smaller , non @-@ viable states , they were also applied to a few larger states . Kutch in western India , and Tripura and Manipur in Northeast India , all of which lay along international borders , were also asked to sign Merger Agreements , despite being larger states , following which they became Chief Commissioners ' Provinces . Bhopal , whose ruler was proud of the efficiency of his administration and feared that it would lose its identity if merged with the Maratha states that were its neighbours , also became a directly administered Chief Commissioner 's Province , as did <unk> , much of which was likely to be flooded on completion of the <unk> dam . 
 = = = Four @-@ step integration = = = 
 = = = = Merger = = = = 
 The bulk of the larger states , and some groups of small states , were integrated through a different , four @-@ step process . The first step in this process was to convince groups of large states to combine to form a " princely union " through the execution by their rulers of Covenants of Merger . Under the Covenants of Merger , all rulers lost their ruling powers , save one who became the Rajpramukh of the new union . The other rulers were associated with two bodies — the council of rulers , whose members were the rulers of salute states , and a presidium , one or more of whose members were elected by the rulers of non @-@ salute states , with the rest elected by the council . The Rajpramukh and his deputy <unk> were chosen by the council from among the members of the presidium . The Covenants made provision for the creation of a constituent assembly for the new union which would be charged with framing its constitution . In return for agreeing to the extinction of their states as discrete entities , the rulers were given a privy purse and guarantees similar to those provided under the Merger Agreements . 
 Through this process , Patel obtained the unification of 222 states in the Kathiawar peninsula of his native Gujarat into the princely union of Saurashtra in January 1948 , with six more states joining the union the following year . Madhya Bharat emerged on 28 May 1948 from a union of Gwalior , Indore and eighteen smaller states . In Punjab , the Patiala and East Punjab States Union was formed on 15 July 1948 from Patiala , Kapurthala , Jind , <unk> , Faridkot , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The United State of Rajasthan was formed as the result of a series of mergers , the last of which was completed on 15 May 1949 . Travancore and Cochin were merged in the middle of 1949 to form the princely union of Travancore @-@ Cochin . The only princely states which signed neither Covenants of Merger nor Merger Agreements were Kashmir , Mysore and Hyderabad . 
 = = = = Democratisation = = = = 
 Merging the administrative machineries of each state and integrating them into one political and administrative entity was not easy , particularly as many of the merged states had a history of rivalry . In the former Central India Agency , whose princely states had initially been merged into a princely union called Vindhya Pradesh , the rivalry between two groups of states became so bad that the Government of India persuaded the rulers to sign a Merger Agreement abrogating the old Covenants of Merger , and took direct control of the state as a Chief Commissioner 's State . As such , the mergers did not meet the expectations of the Government of India or the States Department . In December 1947 , Menon suggested requiring the rulers of states to take " practical steps towards the establishment of popular government " . The States Department accepted his suggestion , and implemented it through a special covenant signed by the <unk> of the merged princely unions , binding them to act as constitutional monarchs . This meant that their powers were de facto no different from those of the Governors of the former British provinces , thus giving the people of their territories the same measure of responsible government as the people of the rest of India . 
 The result of this process has been described as being , in effect , an assertion of paramountcy by the Government of India over the states in a more pervasive form . While this contradicted the British statement that paramountcy would lapse on the transfer of power , the Congress position had always been that independent India would inherit the position of being the paramount power . 
 = = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = = 
 Democratisation still left open one important distinction between the former princely states and the former British provinces , namely , that since the princely states had signed limited Instruments of Accession covering only three subjects , they were insulated from government policies in other areas . The Congress viewed this as hampering its ability to frame policies that brought about social justice and national development . Consequently , they sought to secure to the central government the same degree of powers over the former princely states as it had over the former British provinces . In May 1948 , at the initiative of V. P. Menon , a meeting was held in Delhi between the Rajpramukhs of the princely unions and the States Department , at the end of which the Rajpramukhs signed new Instruments of Accession which gave the Government of India the power to pass laws in respect of all matters that fell within the seventh schedule of the Government of India Act 1935 . Subsequently , each of the princely unions , as well as Mysore and Hyderabad , agreed to adopt the Constitution of India as the constitution of that state , thus ensuring that they were placed in exactly the same legal position vis @-@ à @-@ vis the central government as the former British provinces . The only exception was Kashmir , whose relationship with India continued to be governed by the original Instrument of Accession , and the constitution produced by the state 's Constituent Assembly . 
 The Constitution of India classified the constituent units of India into three classes — Part A , B , and C states . The former British provinces , together with the princely states that had been merged into them , were the Part A states . The princely unions , plus Mysore and Hyderabad , were the Part B states . The former Chief Commissioners ' Provinces and other centrally administered areas , except the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , were the Part C states . The only practical difference between the Part A states and the Part B states was that the constitutional heads of the Part B states were the Rajpramukhs appointed under the terms of the Covenants of Merger , rather than Governors appointed by the central government . In addition , Constitution gave the central government a significant range of powers over the former princely states , providing amongst other things that " their governance shall be under the general control of , and comply with such particular directions , if any , as may from time to time be given by , the President " . Apart from that , the form of government in both was identical . 
 = = = = Reorganisation = = = = 
 The distinction between Part A and Part B states was only intended to last for a brief , transitional period . In 1956 , the States Reorganisation Act reorganised the former British provinces and princely states on the basis of language . Simultaneously , the Seventh Amendment to the Constitution removed the distinction between Part A and Part B states , both of which were now treated only as " states " , with Part C states being renamed " union territories " . The Rajpramukhs lost their authority , and were replaced as the constitutional heads of state by Governors , who were appointed by the central government . These changes finally brought the princely order to an end . In both legal and practical terms , the territories that had been part of the princely states were now fully integrated into India and did not differ in any way from those that had been part of British India . The personal privileges of the princes — the privy purse , the exemption from customs duty , and customary dignities — survived , only to be abolished in 1971 . 
