 = = = Renovation and restoration = = = 
 Union Station was purchased for $ 1 @.@ 5 million by the Erie @-@ based logistics and transportation firm Logistics Plus on October 30 , 2003 . The company renovated the station 's third floor and part of the second floor for use as its corporate headquarters , thus restoring a landmark and revitalizing the surrounding neighborhood . Chief executive officer of Logistics Plus , Jim Berlin , observed that the building 's transportation motif made the building ideal . " [ T ] hough Union Station will never be the center of transportation again , " he said , " it can be a place from which transportation — global transportation — can be managed " . The original proposed plan included revamping Union Station into an urban , mixed @-@ use development with retail spaces , a pedestrian mall and a museum similar to Pittsburgh 's Station Square . In May 2007 , Logistics Plus lined the parapet of Union Station with 50 flags symbolizing the locations it does business in and the home countries of its employees . 
 Since the 1990s , Union Station has also been " an incubator of Erie 's modern [ beer ] brewing " starting with the brewpub Hoppers , which operated in the station from 1994 to 1999 . When Hoppers relocated and became a full production brewery under the name of Erie Brewing Company , Porters , a fine dining restaurant and beer bar , opened in its place . The Brewerie at Union Station took over the space , and opened in October 2006 after the closure of the restaurant earlier that year . During the run @-@ up to the 2008 presidential election , Union Station was site of " whistle @-@ stop " by ABC 's Good Morning America news team on a charter Amtrak train . Sam Champion , Chris Cuomo , Robin Roberts , and Diane Sawyer , the news anchors , interviewed local residents at the Brewerie about campaign issues . The Good Morning America stop lasted about 30 minutes , and the resulting television segment aired on September 18 , 2008 . 
 As part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , the Federal Railroad Administration identified ten regions for potential development as high @-@ speed rail corridors — Erie lies in a gap near three corridors : the Chicago Hub Network , the Empire Corridor , and the Keystone Corridor . The local passenger rail advocacy group , All Aboard Erie , proposed a feasibility study in 2014 for high @-@ speed rail service to connect to the corridors at Cleveland and Buffalo . The group also wants determine if rail service would be possible using the existing tracks and right of way between Erie , Youngstown and Pittsburgh . 
 = = Commercial tenants = = 
 Union Station serves as the corporate headquarters for Logistics Plus . It was formed in 1996 to manage domestic logistics for GE Transportation , the largest employer in Erie . The company 's offices were relocated from Jamestown , New York , to the station in 2004 . Logistics Plus occupies the 16 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 500 m2 ) third floor and 5 @,@ 000 square feet ( 500 m2 ) of the second floor . The rest of the building is leased out to a variety of tenants including Amtrak , the Brewerie , a hookah lounge , a wine shop , a hair salon , a banquet hall , and an art studio . 
 The Brewerie at Union Station is a microbrewery and restaurant — officially categorized as a " brewpub " by the Brewers Association — that operates out of Union Station . The brewpub makes use of a portion of the station 's ground floor and its octagonal rotunda . In 2013 , the Brewerie produced approximately 500 barrels of beer ( 15 @,@ 500 gal ; 59 @,@ 000 l ) from its 3 @.@ 5 @-@ barrel ( 109 gal ; 410 l ) Price @-@ <unk> brewing system . 
 = Age of Empires III = 
 Age of Empires III is a real @-@ time strategy video game developed by Microsoft Corporation 's Ensemble Studios and published by Microsoft Game Studios . The Mac version was ported over and developed and published by <unk> 's MacSoft Games . The PC version was released on October 18 , 2005 in North America and November 4 , 2005 in Europe , while the Mac version was released on November 21 , 2006 in North America and September 29 , 2006 in Europe . An N @-@ Gage version of the game developed by Glu Mobile was released on April 28 , 2009 . It is the third game of the Age of Empires series and the sequel to Age of Empires II : The Age of Kings . 
 The game portrays the European colonization of the Americas , between approximately 1492 and 1876 CE . There are fourteen total civilizations to play within the game . Age of Empires III has made several innovations in the series , in particular with the addition of the " Home City " , which combines real @-@ time strategy and role @-@ playing game features . Two expansion packs have been released : the first , Age of Empires III : The WarChiefs , was released on October 17 , 2006 , and introduced three Native American civilizations ; the second , Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties , was released on October 23 , 2007 , and included three Asian civilizations . 
 Age of Empires III has sold over 2 million copies as of May 2008 . As well as receiving favorable reviews , it has garnered awards , including GameSpy 's " Best RTS game of 2005 " , and was one of the best @-@ selling games of 2005 . In 2007 , Age of Empires III was the seventh best @-@ selling computer game , with over 313 @,@ 000 copies sold that year . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players begin with a constructed town center or a wagon that will build into such , an armed explorer , and a modest number of villagers . Players explore the map and begin gathering resources used to build additional units and buildings and to research upgrades or technologies . Actions such as training units , constructing buildings , killing enemy units etc . , earn the player experience points . At certain experience point thresholds , players earn shipments that may be turned in for cards from the player 's Home City , which can include units , upgrades , or resources . The game progresses similar to most real @-@ time strategy games until one side resigns . 
 In Age of Empires III , the player advances through technological " Ages " , representing historical time periods ; these provide access to greater improvements , units , and buildings . They include the Discovery Age , which represents the discovery and exploration of the Americas by Europeans and allows the player to explore and develop their economy ; the Colonial Age , which represents the European Expansion into the " New World " and unlocks early military units ; the Fortress Age , which represents the fortification of the European colonies , unlocks forts , and allows the player to have a more complete military ; the Industrial Age , which triggers a strong economy , due in part to factories — advanced buildings that automatically produce resources or artillery — and unlocks all units and shipments ; and the Imperial Age , which unlocks all buildings and upgrades , and allows you to send unit and resource shipments a second time . All Ages cost food and coin to advance to , except the Colonial Age , which only costs food ( 800 ) . The price of age advancement is incremental , but does not vary between civilizations . 
 Similar to the " minor gods " system in Age of Mythology , Age of Empires III uses a " Politician System " to grant bonuses on a successful advancement to another age . When the player chooses to advance to the next age , who is given the choice of two or more " Politicians " that provide them with a different bonus on choosing them . The Politician is given a generalized title from the period that usually reflects the bonus that it gives : for example , " The Naturalist " gives the player four cows , while " The General " gives twelve musketeers and one piece of heavy artillery . As the player 's Home City increases in level , more Politicians are unlocked — at a rate of one for every ten Home City levels — up to level 60 . 
 = = = Nations = = = 
 Age of Empires III allows the player to play as eight different civilizations : Spanish , British , French , Portuguese , Dutch , Russian , German , and Ottoman . Each of the eight civilizations has its own strengths and weaknesses and unique units available only to that civilization . Specific units for each civilization are designated Royal Guard units , receiving greater bonuses on the Guard upgrade in the Industrial Age , but at an increased price . The player can change the name of their Home City , the Explorer name , and is given a pre @-@ named leader from part of the period ( for example , Napoleon Bonaparte for the French Colonial Empire , Suleiman the Magnificent for Ottoman Empire , and Ivan the Terrible for the Russian Empire ) . Each civilization has unique shipments to aid its economy and military ( for example , the Ottomans are able to order a shipment of gold for both them and their teammates ) . 
 There are other civilizations playable via the campaign , which include The Knights of St. John , John Black 's Mercenaries , and the United States of America , which are played as the Spanish , German and British civilizations , respectively , with slight modifications . Non @-@ playable campaign civilizations include the Pirates , Circle of Ossus and Native Americans , although these civilizations are playable using the Scenario Editor . 
 Twelve different tribes of Native Americans are in the game as well , but these are not in themselves playable factions . However , players can gain access to unique units and improvements by forming an alliance with the tribes by building a trading post at their camps . The native tribes featured are the Aztec , Carib , Cherokee , Comanche , Cree , Inca , Iroquois , Lakota , Maya , Nootka , Seminole , and Tupi . Three of these tribes were made playable in the expansion pack Age of Empires III : The WarChiefs : the Iroquois , Lakota ( under the name Sioux ) and Aztecs . These civilizations were removed as the smaller , alliance based tribes and were replaced by the Huron , Cheyenne , and Zapotec , respectively . In The Asian Dynasties another three civilizations were added , along with several new native tribes . The civilizations are the Indian , the Japanese , and the Chinese . 
 = = = Home Cities = = = 
 Age of Empires III is the first game in the series to introduce the " Home City " concept . The Home City functions as a second city , a powerhouse that is separated from the active game . It cannot be attacked or destroyed , although an Imperial Age upgrade called " Blockade " stops the player 's opponents from receiving Home City shipments . Similar to a role @-@ playing game character , the Home City is persistent between games , meaning that upgrades gained through separate games can be applied and stay applied for as long as that particular city exists . Multiple Home Cities can be created and maintained , although each supports only one civilization . 
 The Home City is composed of five main buildings from which the player chooses their new shipment cards and customizations : The New World Trading Company , the Military Academy , the Cathedral , the Manufacturing Plant and the Harbor . Players can also access the Home City during a match by clicking on the " Home City " button represented on the HUD as the nation 's flag . The Home City functions differently inside a game . Instead of customizing a Home City or choosing cards , a player can ship cards chosen before the game ( and added to a deck ) . 
 During the course of a game , players gain XP ( experience ) by completing actions such as constructing buildings , training units , killing enemies and collecting treasures . Whenever a certain amount of experience points are gained , the player can make use of a shipment from their respective Home City . Shipments slow as the game goes on , since more XP is required with every consecutive shipment . This XP is also added directly to the home city and is collected over multiple games , allowing it to level up over time . Players can gear their cards into three different combinations : " Boom " ( economic combinations ) , " Rush " ( military combinations ) , or " Turtle " ( defensive combinations ) . The first few cards chosen are automatically added to the player 's portfolio , where it can be copied onto a deck for use in a game . Later in the game , cards have to be manually chosen because of the limit of cards in one deck . Most cards are available to all civilizations , but some are unique to one . If the Home City being played has more than one deck , the player must select which to use when the first shipment is sent . During a game , players keep this initial deck ; this feature encourages players to build decks that are customized for the map being played on , or that counter other civilizations . The decks support twenty cards . As the Home City improves by level , you may gain an extra card slot for the decks for every 10 levels . 
 = = = Units = = = 
 The units of Age of Empires III are based , as in previous iterations of the game , around military classes of the historic time period . The player controls a variety of civilian and military units , and uses them to expand and develop their civilization , as well as wage war against opponents . The base unit of a game is the settler , responsible for gathering resources and constructing buildings , in order to improve the economy of the civilization . The number of units a player can control in a scenario is limited by a " population limit " , a common real @-@ time strategy game mechanic . Houses and town centers raise the starting limit , to a maximum of 200 , while each unit that is produced increases the population count . Basic units such as settlers and infantry count as 1 , but others , including most cavalry and mercenary infantry count as 2 . More powerful units , especially artillery or mercenary cavalry , can count for a population as high as 7 . Native warriors , explorers , tamed and grazing animals , hot air balloons and warships do not count towards the population limit , but generally have a build limit , allowing the player to deploy only a certain number of those specific units at a time . 
 Military units are used for combat against other players . Infantry are the cheapest unit type and all are land based , using weapons ranging from crossbows to early muskets to more advanced rifles . The heavier artillery classes also make use of ranged weapons , primarily cannon and mortars ; however , there is also artillery armed with grenades . Mounted troops are also present , and are armed with either hand weapons , such as swords , or ranged weapons , such as pistols . These units also have significant features , such as skirmishers which do bonus damage against infantry , and ranged cavalry does bonus damage against other cavalry . A new unit introduced in Age of Empires III is the explorer , which is chiefly responsible for scouting and gathering treasure but is also capable of building Trading Posts and has a special attack , used at the player 's command . This unit cannot be killed , but can be rendered unconscious , to be revived when friendly units are in range ; also , a ransom can be paid to have it reappear at the player 's town center . This ransom is credited to the player that disabled him , when applicable . Some shipment cards increase the explorer 's effectiveness in gameplay ; for example , providing it with " war dogs " can aid scouting and combat . In Age of Empires III , ships are available on most maps . Military ships makes use of cannon or flaming arrows , while some ships can collect resources or transport land units . 
 Mercenaries may aid the player in their campaigns in the New World . Mercenaries are not trained like standard units ; instead they can be shipped from the Home City or hired from saloons for much coin , so that only economically powerful players can employ them . Most are powerful , but hiring them does not provide experience points , so mercenaries cannot effectively replace the player 's standard army , and can negatively affect a player 's economy if used excessively . Incidentally , along with hero / explorer units , Mercenaries were vulnerable to assassin units such as spies , agents and ninjas . In most cases , a selection of Native American tribes populate game maps , and support their own brand of military units that can be trained once an alliance has been formed . Some Native American military units use mêlée weapons , a few use indigenous ranged weapons , such as bows and arrows or atl @-@ <unk> , while still others adopt ranged European gunpowder weapons . These units usually pertain to the infantry or cavalry classes , but , on maps with water , canoes are also available to the player through the dock . 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 Buildings play a big role in gameplay , as they are used for training civilian and military units , researching improvements , supporting population , providing structural defense or as resource providers . The buildings portrayed in Age of Empires III resemble the architectural design of that era . All of the games in the series share several buildings , including the Town Center and Docks . The appearance and attributes of a building change as the player advances through the Ages , and some civilizations have their own unique buildings . The appearance of these buildings depends on the civilization . Some buildings can only be built at certain times like the defensive towers . 
 There are certain architectural styles present in the game ; architectural styles determine the appearance of in @-@ game buildings . Each civilization is automatically assigned its architectural style . These three architectural styles are the Western European , which consists of classical styled wooden buildings and is shared by the British , French and Dutch ; the Eastern European , which consists of wooden and straw structures and is shared by the Germans and Russians , and the Mediterranean , which consists of buildings made of stucco cement and dry brick , which is shared by the Spanish , Portuguese and Ottomans . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story @-@ based campaign mode consists of related scenarios with preset objectives , such as destroying a given building . In Age of Empires III , the campaign follows the fictional Black family in a series of three " Acts " , which divide the story arc into three generations . All three acts are narrated by Amelia Black ( Tasia Valenza ) . 
 Instead of playing as one of the standard civilizations , the player takes command of a special civilization that is linked to the character or period that each Act portrays . Most units of the player civilizations speak in English language , with the exception of unique units such as Spanish <unk> , Spanish Lancers , German <unk> and German War Wagons . 
 = = = Act I : Blood = = = 
 During Act I , the player assumes command of the Knights of St. John , which resembles the Spanish civilization ( even though the faction played is actually Maltese ) . The Spanish had numerous colonies in the area played throughout the Act . 
 Set in the late 16th century , the first act of the single @-@ player campaign begins with the player in the role of Morgan Black — of the Knights of Saint John — defending the last stronghold on Malta from Sahin " The Falcon " of the Ottoman Empire ( in a telling of the Great Siege of Malta ) . Morgan is ordered by his superior Alain Magnan to hold Sahin on the beach , which he manages to do until the Ottomans bring up their great bombards . Morgan then lights a signal fire to call in supporting cavalry led by Alain , who drive the Turks back and they defend the base . 
 Using a captured Ottoman cannon , Morgan and Alain then drive the Ottomans from Malta and detonate Ottoman weapon caches in the nearby caves . Inside , they discover that the Ottomans were really interested in a hidden stone library telling the story of the Lake of the Moon , which contains the Fountain of Youth , a secret Native American relic which is told that it has the ability to give eternal life , and the secret society , called the Circle of Ossus , who seek it for their own gain . Alain orders Morgan to sail to the New World to search for the Lake , but Morgan is attacked by the Pirate <unk> Ramsey ( Lizzie the Pirate ) and is forced to land in the Caribbean islands . After re @-@ engaging and defeating Lizzie , Morgan 's men find some navigation charts which guide them safely to New Spain . 
 In Yucatan , Morgan confronts Sahin and the Ottomans searching for the Lake and destroys the Ottoman base . However the Spanish conquistador , Francisco Juan Delgado de Leon , captures Sahin and some other Ottoman soldiers before Morgan can . Morgan is then forced to fight and defeat the Spanish , who are attacking Morgan 's new allies , the Aztecs . After his battle to defend the Aztecs , Morgan realizes that Delgado and the Spanish were after the map to the Lake of the Moon disguised as the mosaic in the Aztecs ' town square . The mosaic shows the Lake of the Moon being in Florida . 
 Morgan sets sail for Florida , hoping to beat the Spanish there , but his fleet is damaged by an oncoming hurricane and he is forced to dock in Cuba , where he leaves his ship in Havana . There he earns the respect of Lizzie the Pirate and strikes a deal , promising Lizzie the gold from the Spanish treasure fleet if she takes him to Florida . 
 In Florida , Morgan and Lizzie are met by Alain Magnan , who orders Morgan to capture the Spanish treasure ships while he rushes ahead to capture the lake . Together Morgan and Lizzie capture the fleet , killing Delgado in the process , and capture Sahin . Sahin tells Morgan that the Circle believes the Lake of the Moon is the Fountain of Youth and that his intention from the beginning was to prevent the Circle from obtaining the Fountain . 
 Alain Magnan returns from the Lake and orders Morgan to execute his native allies and Sahin as heathens , but Sahin and Lizzie convince Morgan that Alain is actually the leader of the Circle of Ossus . Therefore , the knight , the Turk , and the pirate decide to work together to destroy the Fountain of Youth and stop the Circle 's plans for domination of the New World permanently . 
 Upon reaching the Lake of the Moon , the group captures and retains an enormous stationary cannon called a " Fixed Gun " from a Circle 's town across their fort . Using the Fixed Gun , Lizzie 's fleet of fire ships made from captured treasure ships loaded with Sahin 's explosives , and Morgan 's ground forces holding off the Circle 's elite Boneguard , they destroy the Fountain . As damage to the Fountain increases , Alain Magnan personally leads a force of Boneguard in a counterattack and is killed during the fighting . 
 After the Fountain is destroyed and the Circle defeated , Sahin returns to Turkey , and Lizzie , with all her Spanish gold sunk to the bottom of the lake , leaves for the Caribbean : however , it is ambiguously stated that she and Morgan reunited several years later and a romance eventually blossomed between them , implying that she was the mother of Morgan 's children , making her also an ancestor of all future Blacks featured in the campaign . Morgan is last seen wondering about the significance of the Fountain and whether it really was the Fountain of Youth , and is seen refilling his empty canteen from the water of the lake . 
 = = = Act II : Ice = = = 
 During Act II , the player plays as John Black 's Mercenaries , which is modeled after the German civilization with occasional elements of the French civilization . At the time , the French were involved in the fur trade in North America , and German mercenaries were in great use . 
 In the mid @-@ eighteenth century , Morgan 's grandson , John Black , and his Mohawk friend Kanyenke are on their way through the Carolinas to Brunswick with their band of mercenaries after being called for by the colony 's governor , John 's uncle , Stuart Black . After defending the colony against Cherokee raiders , John and Kanyenke attack the Cherokee war camps , forcing the Cherokee to arrange a peace settlement . But while John , Kanyenke , and most of the colony 's garrison are away at the negotiations both they and Brunswick are attacked by a British army under General Warwick , who capture the town . Warwick captures Stuart and begins questioning him about the location of the Lake of the Moon . 
 John and Kanyenke return and drive Warwick 's forces from Brunswick , but Warwick and Stuart are gone . John realizes that the Circle of Ossus has returned . Kanyenke believes that his sister , Nonahkee , could be in danger , too , and the pair leaves for New England . Kanyenke 's suspicions prove correct and they confront Warwick again when he attacks Nonahkee 's village hoping to extract John 's location from her . After the battle it is revealed that John Black and Nonahkee are in love , but are keeping it a secret from Kanyenke until a more peaceful time , although it is seen that Kanyenke is aware of this . 
 John and Kanyenke then take their mercenaries in pursuit of Warwick 's fleeing army , and ally with the French in the Seven Years ' War against Warwick . When Colonel George Washington tells them that Warwick is a renegade and has been hunted by the British as well , John agrees to track him down for the British . John leads his mercenaries and Washington 's forces and destroys Warwick 's base in the Great Lakes region . The presence of the Circle of Ossus ' Boneguard prove to John the existence of the Circle and that Warwick is the current Circle 's leader . In the ruins of the Circle 's base John finds the decapitated body of his uncle Stuart . John then demands that Nonahkee be kept at home while they pursue Warwick , who has again escaped and fled to the Rocky Mountains . Kanyenke agrees and reveals that he knows about John 's relationship with Nonahkee . He tells him that he would not have chosen John as her husband , but he accepts it because he knows that she decides who she loves . 
 John and Kanyenke then set out to follow Warwick , first earning the respect of the Great Plains tribes by good deeds and helping to defend them against Warwick 's forces , then they intercept Warwick 's supply train and destroy a fortified Circle base in the mountains . They soon discover that Warwick and his soldiers have fled even farther west , to act as a checkpoint at Alaska , where they notice the Circle 's new ally , the Russians . They realize that the Circle plans to capture British and French colonies and towns while their soldiers are at war with one another , and that Warwick wants the Circle of Ossus as the new leader of the New World . 
 With the help of some miners , John and Kanyenke bring down large rock bridges to stop the Russians ' large cannons from getting through . John then sends Kanyenke and the remainder of his mercenaries back east as he plants explosives to cause an avalanche and bury the Russians in the mountains . In the end , as John is setting up the dynamite , Warwick and several Boneguard approach him . Warwick attempts to kill John but John uses a barrel of gunpowder as a shield ( knowing that Warwick won 't risk detonating it by shooting at him ) , jumps to the trigger , and pushes it , detonating the mountainside ; killing himself , the soldiers , and Warwick ; and causing an avalanche . The avalanche buries the Russians and sets the Circle of Ossus back so far that they cause no problems for many years . 
 By spring , Kanyenke has returned to his village , where he learns that his sister has given birth to John 's son Nathaniel , whom he begins to help raise . 
 = = = Act III : Steel = = = 
 During Act III , the player plays as the U.S. civilization ( only available in the campaign ) , which resembles the British civilization . 
 In 1817 ( five years after Nathaniel 's funeral in 1812 , his death date according to the The WarChiefs campaign ) , the narrative shifts to Amelia Black , the granddaughter of John Black and Nathaniel 's daughter , and heiress owner of The Falcon Company ( possibly named after Sahin ) , a railroad company whose sights are set on expanding new railroad operations in the United States since the compensation given by the British and Americans for John Black 's sacrifice has been exhausted by John 's son Nathaniel financing the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War . 
 After defeating a rival railroad company and laying track to supply the US Cavalry near the Mexican border , Amelia meets a French prospector named Pierre Beaumont , who helps her and US Cavalry commander , Major Cooper , defeat a Mexican army attacking a fort . He then lures Amelia to a mine in Colorado where a surprise visit from an aged Kanyenke , who has brought Cooper and the cavalry with him , reveals Beaumont as the leader of Circle of Ossus . Amelia , Kanyenke , and Cooper chase Beaumont through the mines , where they find a map to the Lake of the Moon . 
 The three travel to Florida , but find that the Lake has dried up and is now a swamp filled with gold from the sunken treasure fleet last seen in Act I. There , they destroy a Circle base in the swamp . Cooper finds and attempts to capture Beaumont , but Beaumont commands two wolves to attack him . Cooper shoots one of them with his pistol , but the other kills him . Amelia , now wanting to avenge Cooper , learns from the local Seminoles that there is an Inca city in <unk> Valley where several barrels of the Fountain 's water have been stored . 
 Amelia and Kanyenke immediately sail to South America , where they help Simón Bolívar defeat the Spanish . Bolívar offers them guides and , with the Circle 's army close behind they make a dangerous passage through the bitingly cold Andes and discover the Inca city in <unk> Valley . After helping to defend the city from the Circle in a <unk> battle , Amelia finds that Beaumont has once again escaped , this time with the hijacked barrels of the Fountain 's water . 
 Amelia and Kanyenke next fight the Circle at their last stronghold in Cuba , and , after allying with the Spanish colony of Havana and awaiting the arrival of the U.S. Navy , they destroy the Ossuary and the fixed guns guarding it . As the battle is ending , Amelia and Kanyenke pass under an archway in which Beaumont is concealed . Beaumont jumps down and attempts to stab Amelia but Kanyenke pushes her out of the way . All three tumble to the ground . Beaumont charges at Amelia , about to stab her , but when Beaumont gets near , Amelia kicks him and pushes him backwards . He quickly charges at her again , but she grabs her shotgun and shoots him . Amelia later uses the Circle 's stored treasure to revive the Falcon Company and succeeds in building railroads to the west coast . 
 During the credits , there is a final cut scene between Amelia and an Old Coot first introduced earlier in the campaign . At first , his comments regarding how her family must be proud of her seem out of place — then he makes a reference to the Circle and how she was able to defeat them in only one lifetime , hinting that he is indeed the original Morgan Black . As the Old Coot walks away , his voice grows deeper with a more exaggerated Scottish accent , further supporting this idea . It appears he has lived longer than the average person because he drank from the Fountain of Youth after Act I. Amelia then asks what he just said , he replies with a knowing , " Don 't miss your train , " and then he walks away . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Technical features = = = 
 Age of Empires III builds on and introduces new features to the Age of Mythology engine , called Bang ! Engine . One new feature is the inclusion of the Havok physics simulation middleware engine on the Windows version and the similar PhysX engine on Mac OS X. This means that many events such as building destruction and tree falls will not be pre @-@ created animations , but will be calculated according to the physics engine , in an innovation for the series . Other graphical features of the game include bloom lighting and support for pixel shader 3 @.@ 0 . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The Age of Empires III Original Soundtrack features an original musical score composed by Ensemble Studios musicians Stephen Rippy and Kevin McMullan , whose previous work includes other games in the Age of Empires series as well as Age of Mythology . It was released on November 11 , 2005 by Sumthing Else Music Works . Stephen Rippy , music and sound director at Ensemble Studios , said , " Age of Empires III is a game with an epic topic — it covers the colonization of the Americas over a period of some three hundred years , so it needed to have an epic @-@ sounding score to match . Using a full orchestra and choir as well as some more period @-@ inspired instrumentation , the music follows the story of Morgan Black and his descendants as they battle the Circle of Ossus for a foothold in the New World . " The soundtrack also features a bonus DVD that includes fourteen tracks remixed in 5 @.@ 1 surround , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video of the studio session , the Age of Empires III cinematic trailer and five exclusive bonus tracks . 
 Unlike previous versions of Age of Empires the AI nations in single player skirmish mode will send voice messages to the player at various points in the game , taunting them if they are selected as an enemy to the player or sharing military plans with a player who is allied with them . All the AI characters have different personalities and many different quotes exist in the game . The feature can be easily removed if required . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Following the announcement of the game on January 4 , 2005 , a trial version was released on September 7 , 2005 . This contained a cut @-@ down version of the game , introducing new features , such as two campaign scenarios , two random map scenarios ( New England and Texas ) and access to two civilizations ( British and Spanish ) , and a variety of modifications . An updated demo version was made available with the game 's release on September 22 , 2005 . 
 The release of the game on September 22 , 2005 saw two separate editions being made available . The standard edition included the game and manual , a collector 's edition version in a presentation box that includes the official soundtrack , extra documentation , a hardback book titled Art of Empires that contains concept art and 3D renders from the game and a DVD entitled The Making of Age of Empires III . 
 The release of the game has been followed by a series of patches that have fixed minor bugs in the software or added new features . 
 Ensemble Studios released an expansion for the game named Age of Empires III : The WarChiefs on October 17 , 2006 . It contains three new native civilizations that can be completely controlled : The Iroquois Confederation , the Great Sioux Nation , and the Aztecs . New content for existing European civilizations , maps and gameplay additions ( such as the " revolution " feature , in which players can " revolt " from their mother country and start an active military coup in the game ) was added . Both the original game and the first expansion were made available in a single " gold " edition on October 23 , 2007 . 
 A second expansion pack , Age of Empires III : The Asian Dynasties , was announced on May 18 , 2007 and features three Asian civilizations : the Indians , Chinese , and Japanese . It was released on October 23 , 2007 . 
 A Mac OS X port of the game was released on November 13 , 2006 by MacSoft , followed by the first expansion on June 18 , 2007 . 
 In 2009 , when Ensemble Studios was closed and no support was to expect by the successor company Robot Entertainment , the game community tried to provide game support and fixes of remaining issues themselves , for instance with fan patches . 
 On November 21 , 2010 Microsoft sold the game including its two expansion packs as a part of its relaunch of its Games for Windows Live platform for 10 cents or 10 Microsoft points . The overwhelming and unanticipated demand created a shortage of account keys leaving some of those who had purchased the game through the promotion unable to install the game . Microsoft remedied this issue by assuring all customers who purchased the game that account keys would be generated within one week and automatically uploaded to each profile . As a result of this promotion the overall sales of the game have sharply increased . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Age of Empires III was well received by critics and reviewers . The game received an average score of 82 % according to Game Rankings . Age of Empires III was listed as the eighth best @-@ selling PC game of 2005 , and over two million copies of it had been sold by May 2007 . GameSpot pointed out that " Age of Empires III has some very big shoes to fill , " and GameSpy remarked that it " may not redefine real @-@ time strategy gaming , but it sets the bar so high that we will be comparing games to this for years . " IGN also commented on the game , saying " Age of Empires III is a superbly balanced and polished game , " and that " Discounting a few niggles in the interface , the whole presentation is rock solid . " Game Revolution said that it is " as detailed as a history book , and about as much fun , " while GameZone stated it is " one purchase you will not come to regret . " 
 Age of Empires III was the eighth best @-@ selling PC game of 2005 despite its late release , and sold over 2 million copies by May 2007 . 
 = = = Graphics = = = 
 The game 's visuals were highly praised by reviewers . In a preview , IGN said that " After seeing the screenshots , our jaws hit the floor at the amount of detail , " while in their review , 1UP.com described it as " one of the most beautiful games you will put on your computer for the foreseeable future ; " GameSpy agreed , stating , " Age III 's graphics are unmatched in the strategy genre . " GameSpot also admired the graphics , but had a negative comment as well ; they said , " Were it not for the awkward unit behavior ... Age of Empires III would look truly amazing . " GameSpy awarded Age of Empires III the " Best Graphics " award at GameSpy 's " Game of the Year 2005 " , mentioning that the graphics engine boasted " all the high @-@ end technology you would normally find in first @-@ person shooters . " 
 = = = Sound effects = = = 
 GameZone praised the game 's sound effects , saying that " you will feel the explosions of the cannon balls , the muskets firing their endless volleys , and the destruction of a building . It all sounds extremely realistic , and makes the game come that much more alive . " Eurogamer said " <unk> ... sounds fantastic , " while Game Revolution mentioned that " The ambient sounds , music and voice work all suit the colonial theme . " 
 = = = Single @-@ player campaign = = = 
 Reviewers were divided about the single @-@ player campaign . GameSpot thought it was " standard for a real @-@ time strategy game " , but also complained that it had " less @-@ than @-@ stellar voice work and awkward cutscenes ; " GameSpy agreed that " Age of Empires III 's campaign is not revolutionary " , but thought that " the voice acting is great . " IGN praised the campaign 's story , in that it gave the player a " nice sense of purpose " ; they thought " The 24 @-@ mission campaign is very well designed . " Eurogamer said the campaign lacked originality , stating , though " well @-@ written and imaginatively framed , " the campaign " offers exactly the same kind of challenges that RTS campaigns have been offering for years ; " Game Revolution disliked the campaign more than the other reviewers . Comparing it to Age of Empires II 's campaign , they said : " The plot actually got worse . Age of Empires III ... avoids all the interesting and prickly issues like genocide , epidemics and slavery , instead subbing in a wimpy tale of a family destined to protect the Holy Grail from a Satanic Cult . " 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Age of Empires III 's multiplayer was the first in the series to be integrated into the game interface and was highly lauded , as was the Home City concept . The topic of multiplayer was touched by GameZone , who said " this game demands multiplayer mode , and Ensemble Studios provided this for the players , " while at 1UP , the reviewer commented similarly , stating , " Multiplayer support has been significantly upgraded with a slick interface , support for clans and a number of other useful features . " GameSpy commented on the Home City as well , saying , " the ' home city ' system creates long @-@ term depth and strategy . " EuroGamer , however , stated : " Stop with the gifts ! ... You do not need to let me flick to a home city screen every few minutes so that I can select a free unit or resource windfall . I 'm not some spoilt toddler that needs to be bribed with endless <unk> . " Age of empires III uses the ESO server for multiplayer . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The game was presented with two awards by GameSpy in 2005 : " Real @-@ time strategy game of the year " and " Best Graphics " . GameSpy highly praised the game overall , giving it 5 stars in its review , which particularly noted the graphics and multiplayer experience . The game was named fifth @-@ best game of 2005 by GameSpy . 
 Other awards , including an " Outstanding " from GameZone , reflect the positive critical reception of the game . 
 The game was given an ' honorable mention ' in the ' Best Music ' category . 
 Yahoo ! ' s report differed , but still had many positive features . Like GameSpy , Yahoo ! also praised the effort put into the graphics and physics , but maintained that these are essentially eye @-@ candy . Both Yahoo ! and Eurogamer were disappointed by the traditional economics @-@ based strategy of the game and believed that this , with the lack of useful formation and tactics , meant that the game does not stand up to other modern real @-@ time strategy games . Eurogamer shared these final thoughts and described the new Home City shipments , along with all the treasures scattered around the map , as silly and childish ways of trying to complement the game 's lack of strategy and tactical choices . However , Eurogamer recognized that Ensemble Studios was brave to implement " something quite different " from other real time strategy games — the Home City concept . 
 = Hurricane Leslie ( 2012 ) = 
 Hurricane Leslie was an Atlantic tropical cyclone that had minor effects in Bermuda and Atlantic Canada in September 2012 . The twelfth tropical cyclone of the annual hurricane season , Leslie developed from a tropical wave located nearly 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) east of the Leeward Islands on August 30 . About twelve hours later , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Leslie . Tracking steadily west @-@ northwestward , it slowly intensified due to only marginally favorable conditions . By September 2 , the storm curved north @-@ northwestward while located north of the Leeward Islands . Thereafter , a blocking pattern over Atlantic Canada caused Leslie to drift for four days . Late on September 5 , Leslie was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . However , due to its slow movement , the storm causing upwelling , which decreased sea surface temperatures ( SST 's ) , weakening Leslie back to a tropical storm on September 7 . 
 The storm drifted until September 9 , when it accelerated while passing east of Bermuda . Relatively strong winds on the island caused hundreds of power outages and knocked down tree branches , electrical poles , and other debris . Slight re @-@ intensification took place , with Leslie becoming a hurricane again , before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone near Newfoundland on September 11 . In Atlantic Canada , the storm brought heavy rainfall to both Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . In the latter , localized flooding occurred , especially in the western portions of the province . Also in Newfoundland , strong winds from Leslie ripped off roofs , destroyed trees , and left 45 @,@ 000 homes without power . Additionally , a partially built house was destroyed and several incomplete homes were damaged in Pouch Cove . Overall , Hurricane Leslie caused $ 10 @.@ 1 million ( 2012 USD ) in damage and no fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave , which was accompanied by a broad surface low pressure area , emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa late on August 26 . Tracking generally westward , the system remained disorganized for the next several days . By August 29 , the system became increasingly organized as showers and thunderstorms concentrated toward the center . Based on Dvorak satellite classifications and scatterometer surface wind data , it is estimated that Tropical Depression Twelve developed at 0000 UTC on August 30 , while located about 1 @,@ 495 miles ( 2 @,@ 406 km ) east @-@ southeast of the northern Leeward Islands . Situated to the south of a subtropical ridge , the system tracked west @-@ northwestward over warm waters . As a result , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Leslie by 1200 UTC on August 30 . 
 After becoming a tropical storm on August 30 , the subtropical ridge caused Leslie to turn west @-@ northwestward . By the early on August 31 , the storm featured well @-@ define outflow in all directions and the center of circulation was close to the main area of convection . Intensity estimates around that time indicated sustained wind speeds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , intensification halted later on August 31 as wind shear increased over the storm , causing convection to become displaced from the center . Early on September 1 , an eye @-@ like feature appeared on satellite imagery ; however , there was uncertainty as to whether or not the feature was displaced from the low @-@ level center . The storm became increasingly disorganized , with the circulation displaced from the main convective area several hours later . 
 Relentless wind shear caused Leslie to weaken to slightly to a 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) tropical storm , despite sea surface temperatures ( SSTs ) exceeding 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) . Early on September 3 , the storm decelerated and curved northwestward , while approaching a weakness in Bermuda high pressure ridge . Eventually , Leslie turned to a more northerly motion . A blocking pattern over Atlantic Canada caused the storm to drift at forward speeds under 5 mph ( 8 @.@ 0 km / h ) for four days . Wind shear also decreased , allowing Leslie to re @-@ organize and strengthen into a hurricane at 1200 UTC on September 5 . Six hours later , Leslie attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . However , the slow movement of the storm caused upwelling – a process by which warm SSTs are replaced with colder waters . As a result , Leslie slowly began to weaken and fell to tropical storm intensity by early on September 8 . Despite weakening , the storm 's circulation expanded to a radius of more than 1 @,@ 150 miles ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) ; the wind field also expanded , with tropical storm force winds reaching about 175 miles ( 282 km ) in diameter from the center . 
 By early on September 9 , the blocking pattern diminished as a broad mid- to upper @-@ level trough and associated cold front moved off the East Coast of the United States . As a result , Leslie accelerated north @-@ northeastward . Later that day , the storm passed about 130 miles ( 210 km ) east of Bermuda . After leaving the region of upwelled waters , Leslie began to re @-@ strengthen and became a hurricane again at 1200 UTC on September 10 . Early on the following day , the storm reached its minimum barometric pressure of 968 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . However , a combination of cold SSTs , strong wind shear , and merging with a cold front caused the storm to become an extratropical cyclone at 0900 UTC on September 11 , while located about 85 miles ( 137 km ) south of St. Lawrence , Newfoundland . Leslie was operationally considered a tropical cyclone when it made landfall on the Burin Peninsula of Newfoundland . The remnants of Leslie moved rapidly across Newfoundland and re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic later on September 11 . At 0600 UTC on the following day , the remnants of Leslie merged with another extratropical low pressure area over the Labrador Sea . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 A few tropical cyclone warnings and watches were implemented in relation to Leslie . At 2100 UTC on September 6 , a tropical storm watch was issued for Bermuda . The watch was upgraded to a tropical storm warning at 0900 UTC on September 8 . By early on September 10 , the warning was discontinued . On September 6 , officials in Bermuda urged residents to " prepare for the worst " . Schools prepared to close Friday as residents got ready for the approaching storm . " Leslie could be a historic storm for Bermuda as it is very large and forecast to intensify rapidly as it approaches , " the Bermuda Emergency Measures Organization said . " The island could experience hurricane force winds for a sustained period of time , possibly up to two days . " 
 However , the storm passed further east of Bermuda than initially predicted , causing only minor impact . Nonetheless , sustained winds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) and a gust up to 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) was reported in St. David 's Island . At the same location , 3 @.@ 15 inches ( 80 mm ) of precipitation was recorded . Throughout Bermuda , scattered power outages affected hundreds of residents and tree branches and other debris fell on roads ; at least one street pole was toppled in Hamilton . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 At 0600 UTC on September 10 , a tropical storm watch was issued from Indian Harbour southward to Stones Cove , Newfoundland , and from Fogo Island to Charlottetown . Simultaneously , a hurricane watch was put into effect from Stones Cove to Charlottetown . By 1500 UTC on September 10 , the tropical storm watches were discontinued . Around that time , a tropical storm warning was implemented from Indian Harbour to Triton . By late on September 11 , all watches and warnings were discontinued . As a precaution , the town of Badger declared a state of emergency . 
 While still a tropical cyclone , Leslie produced 2 to 4 inches ( 51 to 102 mm ) of rain across much of Nova Scotia , peaking at 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 170 mm ) in Shubenacadie . The rainfall likely contributed to the ongoing flooding in some areas of Nova Scotia . Similarly , 2 to 4 inches ( 51 to 102 mm ) of precipitation was reported throughout much of Newfoundland , with a peak total of 4 @.@ 25 inches ( 108 mm ) in Cow Head . Localized flooding left some roads and bridges impassable and briefly isolated the Port au Port Peninsula from the mainland of Newfoundland . Due to winds up to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , Leslie ripped off roofs , destroyed trees , and left 45 @,@ 000 homes without power , particularly on the Avalon Peninsula , in the southeast portion of Newfoundland . In Pouch Cove on the Avalon Peninsula , the storm destroyed a partially built house and damaged incomplete homes in the Pleasantville neighborhood of St. John 's . Within the latter , several streets were closed , as crews cleaned up scattered debris . A portion of Memorial University of Newfoundland 's campus was closed after glass littered a pedestrian walk . Later , the remnants of Leslie brought rainfall to Nunavut , bring 1 @.@ 4 inches ( 36 mm ) of precipitation to Iqaluit during a three @-@ day period . Damage in Atlantic Canada reached 10 million CAD ( $ 10 @.@ 1 million USD ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 While passing to north of the Lesser Antilles , Leslie generated rough surf on various Leeward Islands , the Virgin Islands , and Puerto Rico . Leslie , combined with the remnants of Hurricane Isaac , also produced rip currents along the east coast of Florida , mainly from Nassau County south to Martin County . Additionally , the storm also brought rip currents to coastal Delaware and New Jersey between September 5 and September 6 . 
 = John Triscari = 
 John Triscari ( born 4 August 1957 ) is an Australian wheelchair basketball coach and school teacher . He was the coach of the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics , where the team won a silver medal . Since 2007 , he has been the coach of the Perth Western Stars , which won the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) championship in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 John Triscari was born on 4 August 1957 . He is in charge of physical education and health at Rockingham Senior High School in Perth , Western Australia . He coached the Rockingham Flames and Mandurah Magic in Western Australian State Basketball League . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 = = = Perth Western Stars = = = 
 Triscari was appointed the coach of the Perth Western Stars in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) in 2007 . " Basically , " he told the media , " my goal is to develop the women 's team to get them winning finals . " This goal proved to be elusive . Fronted by young talents Cobi Crispin and Amber Merritt , the Western Stars made the WNWBL grand final in 2008 , only to be beaten by the dominant Sydney @-@ based Hills Hornets . The Hornets delivered a second grand final loss to the Stars in 2009 . The Western Stars went into the grand final as favourites in 2010 , but suffered yet another defeat at the hands of the Sydney team , now renamed the <unk> Uni Flames . In 2012 , the Western Stars made in the grand final again , only to be defeated this time by the Victoria @-@ based Dandenong Rangers . Finally , in the 2013 grand final , the Western Stars came from being nine points down at three quarter time to claim their first ever WNWBL championship . 
 = = = Gliders = = = 
 In 2009 , Triscari was named as the coach of the Australian women 's national wheelchair basketball team , commonly known as the Gliders . At the same time , Ben Ettridge was named as head of the men 's team , the Rollers . Ettridge had worked for Triscari as a physical education teacher at Rockingham three years before , but had since become the coach of an Italian team . Ettridge had then become West Australian director of elite coaching and player development at Basketball Australia , thereby becoming Triscari 's boss . 
 Triscari 's first tournament as Gliders coach was the 2009 Osaka Cup in Japan in February 2009 . It was an auspicious start , with the Gliders beating the 2008 Summer Paralympics champions , the USA team , 57 – 38 . Despite a losses to Canada and the host nation , the Gliders came back to defeat the USA again and claim the Osaka Cup . The Gliders would win the Osaka Cup again under <unk> in 2010 and 2012 , and would be runners @-@ up in 2011 . 
 The Gliders competed in the 2010 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship in Birmingham , where they finished fourth , and the Four Nations Tournament in Canada in July and August 2010 , where they defeated the USA 55 – 37 to claim the gold medal . A major hurdle was qualifying for the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London . The team had to finish first or second at the 2011 Asia Oceania Zone Championship in <unk> , South Korea . A loss to Japan meant that the Gliders had to beat Korea to qualify for London , which they did , 84 – 11 . In the run @-@ up to the London games in 2012 , the Gliders won the Osaka Cup in Japan , came second in another four @-@ nations tournament in Frankfurt , defeated Germany in the Gliders World Challenge in Sydney , and the United States in the BT Paralympic World Cup in Manchester . 
 The Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics posted wins against Brazil , Great Britain , and the Netherlands , but lost to Canada . It was enough to advance the Gliders to the quarter @-@ finals , where they beat Mexico . The Gliders then defeated the United States by a point to set up a final clash with Germany . The Gliders lost 44 – 58 , and earned a silver medal . 
 Triscari received a Coach of the Year Award from the Western Australian Department of Sports and Recreation in 2012 , and again in 2013 . He was succeeded as head coach of the Gliders by Tom Kyle in May 2013 . 
 = HMS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree = 
 HMS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree ( Manx : " Woman of My Heart " ) was a packet steamer and a Royal Navy ( RN ) seaplane carrier of the First World War . She was originally built in 1907 by Vickers for the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company and was intended for use on the England – Isle of Man route . She was the third vessel to bear her name . To this day Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree holds the crossing speed record from Liverpool to Douglas for a steamship at under three hours . 
 She was chartered by the RN at the beginning of 1915 and participated in several abortive attacks on Germany in May . The ship was transferred to the Dardanelles in June to support the Gallipoli Campaign . One of her aircraft made the first ship @-@ launched aerial torpedo attack on a ship in August . After Gallipoli was evacuated at the end of the year , Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree became flagship of the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron that operated in the Eastern Mediterranean , performing reconnaissance missions and attacking Turkish facilities and troops . She was sunk by Turkish artillery while anchored at the recently occupied island of Kastellorizo in early 1917 , five members of her crew being injured . The ship was salvaged in 1920 and broken up in 1923 . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree also holds the distinction of being the only aviation vessel of either side to be sunk by enemy action during the war . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 SS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree had a tonnage of 2 @,@ 651 gross register tons ( GRT ) . The ship was 390 feet ( 118 @.@ 9 m ) long overall and 375 feet ( 114 @.@ 3 m ) long between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) and a depth of 18 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 64 m ) from her main deck to the top of her keel . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree had five decks and a capacity of 2 @,@ 549 passengers with a crew of 119 . 
 The ship was powered by three license @-@ built Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft . They were powered by steam provided by four cylindrical boilers at a working pressure of 170 psi ( 1 @,@ 172 kPa ; 12 kgf / cm2 ) that gave her a speed of 24 @.@ 2 knots ( 44 @.@ 8 km / h ; 27 @.@ 8 mph ) . Her engines burnt up to 95 long tons ( 97 t ) of coal a day , which made her an expensive ship to run . 
 She was ordered in 1907 by the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company and was built at the Vickers shipyard in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness at a cost of GB £ 112 @,@ 000 . The ship was launched on 23 March 1908 and completed on 8 August . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree was normally laid up , because of her expense , except for the three busiest months of the year when she had a full complement of passengers . 
 = = Royal Navy modifications and service = = 
 SS Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree was chartered by the Royal Navy on 1 January 1915 and she began her conversion into a seaplane carrier at the Cammell Laird shipyard in Birkenhead the following day . Part of her aft superstructure was removed and replaced by a hangar , aft of her rear funnel , that housed four to six seaplanes . The aircraft were lifted in and out of the water by derricks fore and aft . A <unk> 60 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 18 m ) flying @-@ off platform was installed forward of her superstructure ; it was equipped with a trolley and rails to allow a seaplane to take off . 
 In RN service the ship displaced 3 @,@ 888 long tons ( 3 @,@ 950 t ) , was 387 feet ( 118 @.@ 0 m ) long overall , and had a draught of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree 's turbines generated 14 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 10 @,@ 800 kW ) and she was credited with a speed of 24 @.@ 5 knots ( 45 @.@ 4 km / h ; 28 @.@ 2 mph ) although that speed was exceeded in service . The ship could carry 502 long tons ( 510 t ) of coal . Her crew consisted of approximately 250 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her armament consisted of four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder 18 cwt guns , and two Vickers three @-@ pounder AA guns . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree carried 130 rounds per 12 @-@ pounder and 64 rounds for each three @-@ pounder . In May 1916 , one 12 @-@ pounder AA gun , a three @-@ pounder , and a 2 @-@ pounder pom @-@ pom , each on army carriages , were added . 
 She was initially assigned to the Harwich Force , under the command of Commander Cecil L 'Estrange Malone , where on 3 May she took part in an abortive air raid on <unk> that had to be abandoned because of thick fog . On 6 May , while on another unsuccessful mission to attack <unk> , she was accidentally rammed by the destroyer Lennox in thick fog , although damage was slight . Another attempt was made on 11 May , but was again abandoned because of heavy fog . During this raid , Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree attempted to launch her Sopwith Schneider from a trolley off the fore deck , but the engine backfired , wrecking its starter , and breaking the pilot 's wrist as the starter handle was in the cockpit . 
 = = = To the Dardanelles = = = 
 In May 1915 , she sailed for the Dardanelles , carrying two Short Type 184 torpedo bombers , and arrived at Lesbos on 10 June . Her aircraft were mainly involved in spotting for ships providing naval gunfire support for troops ashore , although they also conducted reconnaissance missions of the area . On 11 August , one of these missions had spotted a Turkish ship off the north coast of the Sea of Marmora and , on the following day , Flight Commander Charles Edmonds attacked it flying a Short 184 seaplane . He left his observer behind and flew with a reduced fuel load to lighten his aircraft enough to carry a 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) , 810 @-@ pound ( 370 kg ) torpedo . He successfully dropped his aerial torpedo at a distance of about 800 yards ( 730 m ) and an altitude of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . It turned out that his target had been beached after having been torpedoed by the British submarine E14 . This was followed by a successful attack on 17 August against a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) ship by Edmonds . Flight Lieutenant George Dacre accompanied Edmonds on his flight in his own aircraft , but suffered engine troubles and had to land in the Dardanelles . He was taxiing on the water when he encountered a large steam tugboat , which he promptly torpedoed . After taxiing for several miles he was able to get airborne again and was within gliding distance of Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree when his engine failed permanently . 
 On 2 September , she helped to rescue Australian troops from the torpedoed troopship HMT Southland off Lemnos . The ship was transferred to Port Said , Egypt after the end of the Gallipoli Campaign . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree became the flagship of the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron when it was formed in January 1916 . The squadron was under the command of the General Officer Commanding , Egypt and its primary duty was to watch Turkish positions and movements in southern Palestine and the Sinai . SS Uganda collided with her on 11 February and badly damaged the ship 's bow . Permanent repairs took were made at Suez from 13 March to 25 April . Commander Charles Samson replaced L 'Estrange Malone as captain on 14 May . A few days later , Lieutenant William Benn joined the ship as an observer . Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree was based at Aden later in 1916 . 
 = = = Loss = = = 
 French troops occupied the Greek island of Kastellorizo , off the southwest coast of Turkey , on 20 December 1916 to use it as an advance base against the Turks . Not pleased at the presence of the French , the Turks secretly deployed an artillery battery of four 155 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) and twelve 77 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns within range of the island . The French commander requested a seaplane carrier to conduct reconnaissance in the area and Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree was sent in response . She arrived on 11 January 1917 and anchored in the harbor which faced the mainland . The Turkish guns opened fire about two hours later , hitting the carrier with their third shot . Subsequent shells disabled her steering and started a fire in her hangar that spread across her upper deck . 
 The crew was ordered to abandon ship after about forty minutes of the bombardment using the only remaining operable motor lifeboat of the three stowed on board . One officer and four enlisted men were injured , but no one was killed . The Turks continued their bombardment for five hours until Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree listed to starboard and sank in shallow water . Later in the day , the captain and the chief engineer returned to the ship to rescue the ship 's mascots , a cat and dog which had both survived the attack . 
 Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree 's wreck remained in place until 1920 when it was refloated by the salvage ship Vallette and towed to the port of Piraeus . The ship proved to be a constructive total loss and was broken up in Venice , Italy in 1923 . 
 During her short career she operated Sopwith Type 860 , Schneider , and Baby , as well as Short Type 830 and Type 184 floatplanes . 
 = Paper Mario : The Thousand @-@ Year Door = 
 Paper Mario : The Thousand @-@ Year Door , originally released in Japan as Paper Mario RPG ( <unk> ) , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for the GameCube . The Thousand @-@ Year Door is the second game in the Paper Mario series . 
 The Thousand @-@ Year Door borrows many gameplay elements from its predecessor , such as a paper @-@ themed universe and a turn @-@ based battle system with an emphasis on action . For the majority of the game the player controls Mario , although Bowser and Princess Peach are playable at certain points . The plot follows Mario 's quest as he tries to retrieve the seven Crystal Stars and rescue Peach from the X @-@ Nauts . 
 The game was well received by critics , attaining an average score of 88 percent from Game Rankings . Critics generally praised the game 's engaging plot and gameplay , but criticised it for not being a big progression from its predecessor . The Thousand @-@ Year Door won the " Role Playing Game of the Year " award at the 2005 Interactive Achievement Awards . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Thousand @-@ Year Door has a unique visual style . The graphics consist of a mixture of 3 @-@ Dimensional environments and 2 @-@ Dimensional characters who look as if they are made of paper . At different points in the game , Mario is " cursed " with abilities that enable special moves in the overworld , all of which are based on the paper theme . Mario can fold into a boat or a paper airplane by standing on a special activation panel , and roll up into a scroll of paper or become paper @-@ thin . The game 's environments also follow this theme ; for example , illusory objects that conceal secret items or switches can be blown away by a gust of wind due to the environment 's paper @-@ like qualities . In certain parts of the game , the player controls Bowser in multiple side @-@ scrolling levels based on the original Super Mario Bros .. Additionally , the player controls Peach in the X @-@ <unk> Fortress at the completion of most game chapters . 
 Battles in The Thousand @-@ Year Door borrow elements from the original Paper Mario and Super Mario RPG . The turn @-@ based system , in which players select an attack , defense , or item from a menu , is augmented by timed button presses that can result in substantial attack or defence bonuses when performed correctly . A similar " action command " was also used in all released Mario RPG games . In The Thousand @-@ Year Door , each of Mario 's party members now have their own heart points ( HP ) and may receive any attack that Mario can receive . When a partner 's heart points are reduced to 0 , the partner becomes inactive for the rest of that battle and later battles until recovery . If Mario 's Heart Points are reduced to 0 , however , the game ends . Flower Points — which are required for special moves — are shared among Mario and his party members . Defeating enemies awards various numbers of Star Points to Mario ; for every 100 Star Points , Mario is able to level up . Mario can choose to upgrade his heart points ( HP ) , flower points ( FP ) , or his badge points ( BP ) . The battles take place on a stage in front of an audience ; if the player performs well in a battle , the audience can assist Mario by replenishing star power , throwing helpful items on @-@ stage , or inflicting damage on the opponent . Conversely , the audience may throw damage @-@ causing items at the player or leave if the player performs poorly in a battle . For every 10 levels , the stage will increase by fifty audience members for a total of 200 after level 30 . 
 Outside of battle , the game contains some strong role @-@ playing video game traditions . For example , Mario 's strength is determined by multiple statistical fields and status @-@ boosting items that can be used in and outside of combat . The effects of these items range from healing Mario or his partner to damaging the opponent . Mario can also purchase badges from non @-@ player characters or occasionally obtain them from defeated enemies ; when equipped , these badges can permanently enhance a particular skill or aspect , or , in some cases , give Mario new moves , including Power Jump and Quake Hammer . Throughout the game , Mario is permanently assisted by a party member . Each party member has a specialised skill , some of which are required to solve puzzles to advance progression in the game . More party members are gained as the player advances through the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Thousand @-@ Year Door is not set in the Mushroom Kingdom , but in a cursed land across an unnamed ocean far away . The majority of locations are not featured in previous Mario games . Most locations consist of a set theme ; <unk> , for example , is a floating city centered around a fighting arena known as the <unk> Pit . The enemies and town inhabitants in the game range from recurring Mario characters , like Boo , to characters exclusive to the game , such as the X @-@ Nauts . For many stages in the game , the story is presented in the context of a novel , and is divided into eight chapters ( nine counting the prologue ) . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The Thousand @-@ Year Door contains several characters , the majority of whom are not playable . Progression in the game is sometimes dependent on interaction with non @-@ player characters , although many are used in the game 's various subquests . In particular , the Goomba Professor Frankly , who knows the most about the mysteries relating to Rogueport , must be visited every time Mario retrieves a Crystal Star . The game continues the tradition of Paper Mario , in which Mario can be accompanied by one assistant character at a set time . There are seven party members in total : <unk> the Goomba , Koops the Koopa , Madame <unk> the wind spirit , a Yoshi ( named by the player ) , Vivian the Shadow Siren , Admiral <unk> the Bob @-@ omb , and Ms. <unk> , who is available as an optional character . 
 Mario is the main character of The Thousand @-@ Year Door , although the game will frequently cut to Princess Peach in the X @-@ <unk> Fortress . Much time is spent on her interaction with the computer TEC , which has suffered from a glitch and has fallen in love with Peach to her surprise . The main antagonist of the Mario series , Bowser , tries to collect the Crystal Stars before Mario does instead of directly opposing Mario . Luigi 's role in the game consists of recounting his adventure , which also involves the use of secondary characters in the form of party members . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with an introduction about a seaside town which was damaged by a cataclysm and consequently sunk into the depths of the earth . A town named Rogueport was later built at this site , with the fortunes of the lost kingdom fabled to exist behind the eponymous Thousand @-@ Year Door , located in the ruins of the old town . Mario becomes involved when Princess Peach contacts him about a treasure map that she bought in Rogueport , but becomes part of a larger adventure after learning that Peach has gone missing . With the help of <unk> and Professor Frankly , Mario learns that the map can potentially reveal the location of the 7 legendary Crystal Stars , which are required to unlock the Thousand @-@ Year Door . Under the assumption that Peach herself is trying to find the Crystal Stars , he uses the map in an attempt to locate her . 
 In actuality , Peach has been kidnapped by the Secret Society of X @-@ Nauts ( " X @-@ Nauts " for short ) , a group led by Sir <unk> that are also searching for the Crystal Stars . While held captive , Peach uses e @-@ mail via the main base 's computer , TEC , to inform Mario about the quest and consequently help him to attain all 7 Crystal Stars and locate the treasure . However , the " treasure " is actually the Shadow Queen , a demon responsible for the ancient cataclysm that destroyed the original town 1 @,@ 000 years ago . The X @-@ Nauts had kept Peach so that her body could be possessed by the Shadow Queen in a bid to recover her full power . This happens , but the arcane power of the Crystal Stars is then used to separate Peach from her possessor . The game ends when Mario defeats the Shadow Queen and returns home with Peach . 
 = = Release and lawsuit = = 
 Nintendo first revealed The Thousand @-@ Year Door at the Game Developers Conference of 2003 . Before its release , the game was confirmed to be a direct sequel to the N64 game Paper Mario and was known tentatively as Mario Story 2 in Japan and Paper Mario 2 in North America . A preview of the game was available at E3 2004 ; it included <unk> Castle and a Bowser bonus level as playable stages . The game was released on October 11 , 2004 , in North America . 
 A sequel to the game , Super Paper Mario , was developed by Intelligent Systems and released for the Wii in 2007 . It has a stronger emphasis on platforming than its predecessor . Super Paper Mario 's plot is unrelated to the story of The Thousand @-@ Year Door , but it contains many easter eggs referencing characters from the previous two games . 
 In 2008 Morgan Creek Productions filed a lawsuit against Nintendo alleging that they illegally used the song " You 're So Cool " from the film True Romance in an advertisement for the game . Morgan Creek dropped the case six days later , after Nintendo revealed that the advertising agency , Leo Burnett USA , Inc . , had licensing for the song . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Paper Mario : The Thousand @-@ Year Door received largely favorable reviews from critics . They particularly praised the plot ; GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin stated that " each [ chapter ] provides a thrill of discovery . " Similarly , Eurogamer welcomed the whimsical storyline in comparison to traditional role @-@ playing games , commenting that " [ it is ] something closer to Finding Nemo than Final Fantasy , which is very much a compliment . " The game 's characters were also well received , with reviewers complimenting the use of NPCs and text . Despite this , some commentators complained that the story developed slowly in the game 's beginning stages . Eurogamer rated the high level of text as " the only major stumbling block " of the game . 
 One of The Thousand @-@ Year Door 's main features , the use of a paper @-@ based universe , was welcomed by reviewers . When referring to the paper theme , 1UP commented that " It 's a cohesive , clever approach that turns the game 's visual style into more than just a look . " Critics also commented extensively on the game 's battle system , which deviated from traditional RPGs . GameSpy praised the use of timing in the battle system , stating that " these twitch elements were designed to be fun and engaging , and they succeed wonderfully at this . " Reviewers also praised the concept of having an audience to reward or berate Mario during battle . 
 The game 's visuals received a mixed response from critics . GameSpot enjoyed the game 's presentation , writing that " it exhibits a level of visual artistry and technical prowess matched or exceeded by few other GameCube games . " Conversely , other reviewers complained that the graphics were not much of a visual upgrade from its predecessor , Paper Mario . For the game 's use of audio , IGN declared it " game music at its purest " , but proceeded to question the absence of voice acting in the text based game . RPGamer commented that the music " for the most part is done very well " , but that the perceived repetitive battle music was " one of the biggest flaws " of the game . The game won " Role Playing Game of the Year " at the 2005 Interactive Achievement Awards . The game was ranked 56th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's " 100 Greatest Nintendo Games " feature . 
 In its first week of release in Japan , The Thousand @-@ Year Door was the best @-@ selling game , selling about 159 @,@ 000 units . It proceeded to sell 409 @,@ 000 units in the country and 1 @.@ 23 million copies in North America . The game has since been included in the Player 's Choice line . 
 = Alec Douglas @-@ Home = 
 Alexander Frederick Douglas @-@ Home , Baron Home of the Hirsel , KT , PC ( / <unk> / ; 2 July 1903 – 9 October 1995 ) was a British Conservative politician who served as Prime Minister from October 1963 to October 1964 . He is notable for being the last Prime Minister to hold office while being a member of the House of Lords , before renouncing his peerage and taking up a seat in the House of Commons for the remainder of his premiership . His reputation , however , rests more on his two spells as the UK 's foreign secretary than on his brief premiership . 
 Within six years of first entering the House of Commons in 1931 , Douglas @-@ Home ( then called by the courtesy title Lord Dunglass ) became parliamentary aide to Neville Chamberlain , witnessing at first hand Chamberlain 's efforts as Prime Minister to preserve peace through appeasement in the two years before the outbreak of the Second World War . In 1940 Dunglass was diagnosed with spinal tuberculosis and was immobilised for two years . By the later stages of the war he had recovered enough to resume his political career , but lost his seat in the general election of 1945 . He regained it in 1950 , but the following year he left the Commons when , on the death of his father , he inherited the earldom of Home and thereby became a member of the House of Lords . Under the premierships of Winston Churchill , Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan he was appointed to a series of increasingly senior posts , including Leader of the House of Lords and Foreign Secretary . In the latter post , which he held from 1960 to 1963 , he supported United States resolve in the Cuban Missile Crisis and was the United Kingdom 's signatory of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in August 1963 . 
 In October 1963 Macmillan was taken ill and resigned as Prime Minister . Home ( pronounced ' Hume ' ) was chosen to succeed him . By the 1960s it was generally considered unacceptable for a Prime Minister to sit in the House of Lords , and Home renounced his earldom and successfully stood for election to the House of Commons . The manner of his appointment was controversial , and two of Macmillan 's cabinet ministers refused to take office under him . He was criticised by the Labour Party as an aristocrat , out of touch with the problems of ordinary families , and he came over stiffly in television interviews , by contrast with the Labour leader , Harold Wilson . The Conservative Party , in office since 1951 , had lost standing as a result of the Profumo affair , a sexual scandal involving a defence minister in 1963 , and at the time of Home 's appointment as Prime Minister seemed headed for heavy electoral defeat . Home 's premiership was the second briefest of the twentieth century , lasting two days short of a year . Among the legislation passed under his government was the abolition of resale price maintenance , bringing costs down for the consumer against the interests of producers of food and other commodities . 
 After narrow defeat in the general election of 1964 Douglas @-@ Home resigned the leadership of his party , having instituted a new and less secretive method of electing the party leader . From 1970 to 1974 he served in the cabinet of Edward Heath as Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office , an expanded version of the post of Foreign Secretary , which he had held earlier . After the defeat of the Heath government in 1974 he returned to the House of Lords as a life peer , and retired from front @-@ line politics . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Douglas @-@ Home was born in Mayfair , London , the first of seven children of Lord Dunglass ( the eldest son of the 12th Earl of Home ) and his wife , the Lady Lilian Lambton ( daughter of The 4th Earl of Durham ) . The boy 's first name was customarily abbreviated to " Alec " . Among the couple 's younger children was the playwright William Douglas @-@ Home . 
 In 1918 the 12th Earl of Home died , Dunglass succeeded him in the earldom , and the courtesy title passed to Alec Douglas @-@ Home , who was styled Lord Dunglass until 1951 . The young Lord Dunglass was educated at <unk> School , followed by Eton College . At Eton , his contemporaries included Cyril Connolly , who later described him as : 
 a votary of the esoteric Eton religion , the kind of graceful , tolerant , sleepy boy who is showered with favours and crowned with all the laurels , who is liked by the masters and admired by the boys without any apparent exertion on his part , without experiencing the ill @-@ effects of success himself or arousing the pangs of envy in others . In the 18th century he would have become Prime Minister before he was 30 . As it was , he appeared honourably ineligible for the struggle of life . 
 After Eton , Dunglass went to Christ Church , Oxford , where he graduated with a third @-@ class honours BA degree in modern history in 1925 . 
 Dunglass was a talented sportsman . In addition to representing Eton at Fives , he was a capable cricketer at school , club and county level , and was unique among British prime ministers in having played first @-@ class cricket . Coached by George Hirst , he became in Wisden 's phrase " a useful member of the Eton XI " that included Percy Lawrie and Gubby Allen . Wisden observed , " In the rain @-@ affected Eton @-@ Harrow match of 1922 he scored 66 , despite being hindered by a saturated outfield , and then took 4 for 37 with his medium @-@ paced out @-@ swingers " . 
 At first @-@ class level he represented the Oxford University Cricket Club , Middlesex CCC and MCC . Between 1924 and 1927 he played ten first @-@ class matches , scoring 147 runs at an average of 16 @.@ 33 with a best score of 37 not out . As a bowler he took 12 wickets at an average of 30 @.@ 25 with a best of 3 for 43 . Three of his first @-@ class games were internationals against Argentina on the MCC " representative " tour of South America in 1926 – 27 . 
 Dunglass began serving in the Territorial Army when in 1924 he was commissioned a Lieutenant in the Lanarkshire Yeomanry , then promoted Captain in 1928 , and Major in 1933 . 
 = = = Member of Parliament ( 1931 – 37 ) = = = 
 The courtesy title Lord Dunglass did not carry with it membership of the House of Lords , and Dunglass was eligible to seek election to the House of Commons . Unlike many aristocratic families , the Douglas @-@ Homes had little history of political service . Uniquely in the family the 11th earl , Dunglass 's great @-@ grandfather , had held government office , as Under @-@ secretary at the Foreign Office in Wellington 's 1828 – 30 government . Dunglass 's father stood , reluctantly and unsuccessfully , for Parliament before succeeding to the earldom . 
 Dunglass had shown little interest in politics while at Eton or Oxford . He had not joined the Oxford Union as budding politicians usually did . However , as heir to the family estates he was doubtful about the prospect of life as a country gentleman : " I was always rather discontented with this role and felt it wasn 't going to be enough . " His biographer David Dutton believes that Dunglass became interested in politics because of the widespread unemployment and poverty in the Scottish lowlands where his family lived . Later in his career , when he had become Prime Minister , Dunglass ( by then Sir Alec Douglas @-@ Home ) wrote in a memorandum : " I went into politics because I felt that it was a form of public service and that as nearly a generation of politicians had been cut down in the first war those who had anything to give in the way of leadership ought to do so " . His political thinking was influenced by that of Noel Skelton , a member of the Unionist party ( as the Conservatives were called in Scotland between 1912 and 1965 ) . Skelton advocated " a property @-@ owning democracy " , based on share @-@ options for workers and industrial democracy . Dunglass was not persuaded by the socialist ideal of public ownership . He shared Skelton 's view that " what everybody owns nobody owns " . 
 With Skelton 's support Dunglass secured the Unionist candidacy at Coatbridge for the 1929 general election . It was not a seat that the Unionists expected to win , and he lost to his Labour opponent with 9 @,@ 210 votes to Labour 's 16 @,@ 879 . It was , however , valuable experience for Dunglass , who was of a gentle and <unk> disposition and not a natural orator ; he began to learn how to deal with hostile audiences and get his message across . When a coalition " National Government " was formed in 1931 to deal with a financial crisis Dunglass was adopted as the pro @-@ coalition Unionist candidate for Lanark . The electorate of the area was mixed , and the constituency was not seen as a safe seat for any party ; at the 1929 election Labour had captured it from the Unionists . With the backing of the pro @-@ coalition Liberal party , which supported him rather than fielding its own candidate , Dunglass easily beat the Labour candidate . 
 Membership of the new House of Commons was overwhelmingly made up of pro @-@ coalition MPs , and there was therefore a large number of eligible members for the government posts to be filled . In Dutton 's phrase , " it would have been easy for Dunglass to have languished indefinitely in backbench obscurity . " However , Skelton , appointed as Under @-@ secretary at the Scottish Office , offered Dunglass the unpaid post of unofficial parliamentary aide . This was doubly advantageous to Dunglass . Any MP appointed as official Parliamentary Private Secretary ( PPS ) to a government minister was privy to the inner workings of government but was expected to maintain a discreet silence in the House of Commons . Dunglass achieved the first without having to observe the second . He made his maiden speech in February 1932 on the subject of economic policy , advocating a cautiously protectionist approach to cheap imports . He countered Labour 's objection that this would raise the cost of living , arguing that a tariff " stimulates employment and gives work [ and ] increases the purchasing power of the people by substituting wages for unemployment benefit . " 
 During four years as Skelton 's aide Dunglass was part of a team working on a wide range of issues , from medical services in rural Scotland to land settlements , fisheries , education , and industry . Dunglass was appointed official PPS to Anthony Muirhead , junior minister at the Ministry of Labour , in 1935 , and less than a year later became PPS to the Chancellor of the Exchequer , Neville Chamberlain . 
 In 1936 Dunglass married Elizabeth Alington ; her father , Cyril Alington , had been Dunglass 's headmaster at Eton , and was from 1933 Dean of Durham . The service was at Durham Cathedral , conducted by Alington together with William Temple , Archbishop of York and Hensley Henson , Bishop of Durham . In addition to the large number of aristocratic guests , the household and estate staffs of the Douglas @-@ Home properties at Douglas Castle and the Hirsel were invited . There were four children of the marriage : Caroline , Meriel , Diana and David . The last was Dunglass 's heir , inheriting the earldom of Home in 1995 . 
 = = = Chamberlain and war = = = 
 By the time of Dunglass 's appointment Chamberlain was generally seen as the heir to the premiership , and in 1937 the incumbent , Stanley Baldwin , retired , and Chamberlain succeeded him . He retained Dunglass as his PPS , a role described by the biographer D R Thorpe as " the right @-@ hand man ... the eyes and ears of Neville Chamberlain " , and by Dutton as " liaison officer with the Parliamentary party , transmitting and receiving information and [ keeping ] his master informed of the mood on the government 's back benches . " This was particularly important for Chamberlain , who was often seen as distant and aloof ; Douglas Hurd wrote that he " lacked the personal charm which makes competent administration palatable to wayward colleagues – a gift which his parliamentary private secretary possessed in abundance . " Dunglass admired Chamberlain , despite his daunting personality : " I liked him , and I think he liked me . But if one went in at the end of the day for a chat or a gossip , he would be inclined to ask ' What do you want ? ' He was a very difficult man to get to know . " 
 As Chamberlain 's aide Dunglass witnessed at first @-@ hand the Prime Minister 's attempts to prevent a second world war through appeasement of Adolf Hitler 's Germany . When Chamberlain had his final meeting with Hitler at Munich in September 1938 , Dunglass accompanied him . Having gained a short @-@ lived extension of peace by acceding to Hitler 's territorial demands at the expense of Czechoslovakia , Chamberlain was welcomed back to London by cheering crowds . Ignoring Dunglass 's urging he made an uncharacteristically grandiloquent speech , claiming to have brought back " Peace with Honour " and promising " peace for our time . " These words were to haunt him when Hitler 's continued aggression made war unavoidable less than a year later . Chamberlain remained Prime Minister from the outbreak of war in September 1939 until May 1940 , when , in Dunglass 's words , " he could no longer command support of a majority in the Conservative party . " After a vote in the Commons , in which the government 's majority fell from more than two hundred to eighty @-@ one , Chamberlain made way for Winston Churchill . He accepted the non @-@ departmental post of Lord President of the Council in the new coalition government ; Dunglass remained as his PPS , having earlier declined the offer of a ministerial post as Under @-@ secretary at the Scottish Office . Although Chamberlain 's reputation never recovered from Munich , and his supporters such as R A Butler suffered throughout their later careers from the " appeasement " tag , Dunglass largely escaped blame . Nevertheless , Dunglass firmly maintained all his life that the Munich agreement had been vital to the survival of Britain and the defeat of Nazi Germany by giving the UK an extra year to prepare for a war that it could not have contested in 1938 . 
 Within months of his leaving the premiership Chamberlain 's health began to fail ; he resigned from the cabinet , and died after a short illness in November 1940 . Dunglass had volunteered for active military service , seeking to rejoin the Lanarkshire Yeomanry shortly after Chamberlain left Downing Street . The consequent medical examination revealed that Dunglass had a hole in his spine surrounded by tuberculosis in the bone . Without surgery he would have been unable to walk within a matter of months . An innovative and hazardous operation was performed in September 1940 , lasting six hours , in which the diseased bone in the spine was scraped away and replaced with healthy bone from the patient 's shin . 
 For all of Dunglass 's humour and patience , the following two years were a grave trial . He was encased in plaster and kept flat on his back for most of that period . Although buoyed up by the sensitive support of his wife and family , as he later confessed , " I often felt that I would be better dead " . Towards the end of 1942 he was released from his plaster jacket and fitted with a spinal brace , and in early 1943 he was mobile for the first time since the operation . During his incapacity he read voraciously ; among the works he studied were Das Kapital , and works by Engels and Lenin , biographies of nineteenth and twentieth century politicians , and novels by authors from Dostoyevsky to Koestler . 
 In July 1943 Dunglass attended the House of Commons for the first time since 1940 , and began to make a reputation as a backbench member , particularly for his expertise in the field of foreign affairs . He foresaw a post @-@ imperial future for Britain and emphasised the need for strong European ties after the war . In 1944 , with the war now turning in the Allies ' favour , Dunglass spoke eloquently about the importance of resisting the Soviet Union 's ambition to dominate eastern Europe . His boldness in publicly urging Churchill not to give in to Joseph Stalin was widely remarked upon ; many , including Churchill himself , observed that some of those once associated with appeasement were determined that it should not be repeated in the face of Russian aggression . Labour left the wartime coalition in May 1945 and Churchill formed a caretaker Conservative government , pending a general election in July . Dunglass was appointed to his first ministerial post : Anthony Eden remained in charge of the Foreign Office , and Dunglass was appointed as one of his two Under @-@ secretaries of State . 
 = = = Postwar and House of Lords ( 1945 – 57 ) = = = 
 At the July 1945 general election Dunglass lost his Parliamentary seat in the landslide Labour victory . It was widely assumed that as his father , the 13th earl , was in his seventies , Dunglass 's political career was behind him , as he would soon inherit the earldom . There being at that time no provision for peers to disclaim their peerages , this would bring with it an obligatory seat in the House of Lords , with no option of remaining in the Commons , where most political power resided . Dunglass was appointed a director of the Bank of Scotland in 1946 , and although he never considered banking as a long @-@ term occupation he gained valuable first @-@ hand experience in commerce and finance . He remained with the bank until 1951 . 
 In 1950 , Clement Attlee , the Labour Prime Minister , called a general election . Dunglass was invited to stand once again as Unionist candidate for Lanark . Having been disgusted at personal attacks during the 1945 campaign by Tom Steele , his Labour opponent , Dunglass did not scruple to remind the voters of Lanark that Steele had warmly thanked the Communist Party and its members for helping him take the seat from the Unionists . By 1950 , with the Cold War at its height , Steele 's association with the communists was a crucial electoral liability . Dunglass regained the seat with one of the smallest majorities in any British constituency : 19 @,@ 890 to Labour 's 19 @,@ 205 . Labour narrowly won the general election , with a majority of five . 
 In July 1951 the 13th earl died . Dunglass succeeded him , inheriting the title of Earl of Home together with the extensive family estates , including the Hirsel , the Douglas @-@ Homes ' principal residence . The new Lord Home took his seat in the Lords ; a by @-@ election was called to appoint a new MP for Lanark , but it was still pending when Attlee called another general election in October 1951 . The Unionists held Lanark , and the national result gave the Conservatives under Churchill a small but working majority of seventeen . 
 Home was appointed to the new post of Minister of State at the Scottish Office , a middle @-@ ranking position , senior to Under @-@ secretary but junior to James Stuart , the Secretary of State , who was a member of the cabinet . Stuart , previously an influential chief whip , was a confidant of Churchill , and possibly the most powerful Scottish Secretary in any government . Thorpe writes that Home owed his appointment to Stuart 's advocacy rather than to any great enthusiasm on the Prime Minister 's part ( Churchill referred to him as " Home sweet Home " ) . In addition to his ministerial position Home was appointed to membership of the Privy Council , an honour granted only selectively to ministers below cabinet rank . 
 Throughout Churchill 's second term as Prime Minister ( 1951 – 55 ) Home remained at the Scottish Office , although both Eden at the Foreign Office and Lord Salisbury at the Commonwealth Relations Office invited him to join their ministerial teams . Among the Scottish matters with which he dealt were hydro @-@ electric projects , hill farming , sea transport , road transport , forestry , and the welfare of crofters in the Highlands and the Western Isles . These matters went largely unreported in the British press , but the question of the royal cypher on Post Office pillar boxes became front @-@ page news . Because Elizabeth I of England was never queen of Scotland , some nationalists maintained when Elizabeth II came to the British throne in 1952 that in Scotland she should be styled " Elizabeth I " . Churchill said in the House of Commons that considering the " greatness and splendour of Scotland " , and the contribution of the Scots to British and world history , " they ought to keep their silliest people in order " . Home nevertheless arranged that in Scotland new pillar boxes were decorated with the royal crown instead of the full cypher . 
 When Eden succeeded Churchill as Prime Minister in 1955 he promoted Home to the cabinet as Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations . At the time of this appointment Home had not been to any of the countries within his ministerial remit , and he quickly arranged to visit Australia , New Zealand , Singapore , India , Pakistan and Ceylon . He had to deal with the sensitive subject of immigration from and between Commonwealth countries , where a delicate balance had to be struck between resistance in some quarters in Britain and Australia to non @-@ white immigration on the one hand , and on the other the danger of sanctions in India and Pakistan against British commercial interests if discriminatory policies were pursued . In most respects , however , when Home took up the appointment it seemed to be a relatively uneventful period in the history of the Commonwealth . The upheaval of Indian independence in 1947 was well in the past , and the wave of <unk> of the 1960s was yet to come . However , it fell to Home to maintain Commonwealth unity during the Suez Crisis in 1956 , described by Dutton as " the most divisive in its history to date " . Australia , New Zealand and South Africa backed the Anglo @-@ French invasion of Egypt to regain control of the Suez Canal . Canada , Ceylon , India and Pakistan opposed it . 
 There appeared to be a real danger that Ceylon , India and , particularly , Pakistan might leave the Commonwealth . Home was firm in his support of the invasion , but used his contacts with Jawaharlal Nehru , V. K. Krishna Menon , Nan Pandit and others to try to prevent the Commonwealth from breaking up . His relationship with Eden was supportive and relaxed ; he felt able , as others did not , to warn Eden of unease about Suez both internationally and among some members of the cabinet . Eden dismissed the latter as the " weak sisters " ; the most prominent was Butler , whose perceived hesitancy over Suez on top of his support for appeasement of Hitler damaged his standing within the Conservative party . When the invasion was abandoned under pressure from the US in November 1956 , Home worked with the dissenting members of the Commonwealth to build the organisation into what Hurd calls " a modern multiracial Commonwealth " . 
 = = = Macmillan 's government = = = 
 Eden resigned in January 1957 . In 1955 he had been the obvious successor to Churchill , but this time there was no clear heir apparent . Leaders of the Conservative party were not elected by ballot of MPs or party members , but emerged after informal soundings within the party , known as " the customary processes of consultation " . The chief whip , Edward Heath , canvassed the views of backbench Conservative MPs , and two senior Conservative peers , the Lord President of the Council , Lord Salisbury , and the Lord Chancellor , Lord Kilmuir , saw members of the cabinet individually to ascertain their preferences . Only one cabinet colleague supported Butler ; the rest , including Home , opted for Macmillan . Churchill , whom the Queen consulted , did the same . Macmillan was appointed Prime Minister on 10 January 1957 . 
 In the new administration Home remained at the Commonwealth Relations Office . Much of his time was spent on matters relating to Africa , where the futures of Bechuanaland and the Central African Federation needed to be agreed . Among other matters in which he was involved were the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir , assisted emigration from Britain to Australia , and relations with Archbishop Makarios of Cyprus . The last unexpectedly led to an enhanced cabinet role for Home . Makarios , leader of the militant anti @-@ British and pro @-@ Greek movement , was detained in exile in the Seychelles . Macmillan , with the agreement of Home and most of the cabinet , decided that this imprisonment was doing more harm than good to Britain 's position in Cyprus , and ordered Makarios 's release . Lord Salisbury strongly dissented from the decision and resigned from the cabinet in March 1957 . Macmillan added Salisbury 's responsibilities to Home 's existing duties , making him Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Lords . The first of these posts was largely honorific , but the leadership of the Lords put Home in charge of getting the government 's business through the upper house , and brought him nearer to the centre of power . In Hurd 's phrase , " By the imperceptible process characteristic of British politics he found himself month by month , without any particular manoeuvre on his part , becoming an indispensable figure in the government . " 
 Home was generally warmly regarded by colleagues and opponents alike , and there were few politicians who did not respond well to him . One was Attlee , but as their political primes did not overlap this was of minor consequence . More important was Iain Macleod 's prickly relationship with Home . Macleod , Secretary of State for the Colonies from 1959 – 61 , was , like Butler , on the liberal wing of the Conservative party ; he was convinced , as Home was not , that Britain 's colonies in Africa should have majority rule and independence as quickly as possible . Their spheres of influence overlapped in the Central African Federation . 
 Macleod wished to push ahead with majority rule and independence ; Home believed in a more gradual approach to independence , accommodating both white minority and black majority opinions and interests . Macleod disagreed with those who warned that precipitate independence would lead the newly independent nations into " trouble , strife , poverty , dictatorship " and other evils . His reply was , " Would you want the Romans to have stayed on in Britain ? " He threatened to resign unless he was allowed to release the leading Nyasaland activist Hastings Banda from prison , a move that Home and others thought unwise and liable to provoke distrust of Britain among the white minority in the federation . Macleod had his way , but by that time Home was no longer at the Commonwealth Relations Office . 
 = = = Foreign Secretary ( 1960 – 63 ) = = = 
 In 1960 the Chancellor of the Exchequer , Derick Heathcoat @-@ Amory , insisted on retiring . Macmillan agreed with Heathcoat @-@ Amory that the best successor at the Treasury would be the current Foreign Secretary , Selwyn Lloyd . In terms of ability and experience the obvious candidate to take over from Lloyd at the Foreign Office was Home , but by 1960 there was an expectation that the Foreign Secretary would be a member of the House of Commons . The post had not been held by a peer since Lord Halifax in 1938 – 40 ; Eden had wished to appoint Salisbury in 1955 , but concluded that it would be unacceptable to the Commons . 
 After discussions with Lloyd and senior civil servants , Macmillan took the unprecedented step of appointing two Foreign Office cabinet ministers : Home , as Foreign Secretary , in the Lords , and Edward Heath , as Lord Privy Seal and deputy Foreign Secretary , in the Commons . With British application for admission to the European Economic Community ( EEC ) pending , Heath was given particular responsibility for the EEC negotiations as well as for speaking in the Commons on foreign affairs in general . 
 The opposition Labour party protested at Home 's appointment ; its leader , Hugh Gaitskell , said that it was " constitutionally objectionable " for a peer to be in charge of the Foreign Office . Macmillan responded that an accident of birth should not be allowed to deny him the services of " the best man for the job – the man I want at my side " . Hurd comments , " Like all such artificial <unk> it died down after a time ( and indeed was not renewed with any strength nineteen years later when Margaret Thatcher appointed another peer , Lord Carrington , to the same post ) " . The Home – Heath partnership worked well . Despite their different backgrounds and ages – Home an Edwardian aristocrat and Heath a lower @-@ middle class <unk> raised in the inter @-@ war years – the two men respected and liked one another . Home supported Macmillan 's ambition to get Britain into the EEC , and was happy to leave the negotiations in Heath 's hands . 
 Home 's attention was mainly concentrated on the Cold War , where his forcefully expressed anti @-@ communist beliefs were tempered by a pragmatic approach to dealing with the Soviet Union . His first major problem in this sphere was in 1961 when on the orders of the Soviet leader , Nikita Khrushchev , the Berlin Wall was erected to stop East Germans escaping to West Germany via West Berlin . Home wrote to his American counterpart , Dean Rusk , " The prevention of East Berliners getting into West Berlin has never been a casus belli for us . We are concerned with Western access to Berlin and that is what we must maintain . " The governments of West Germany , Britain and the US quickly reached agreement on their joint negotiating position ; it remained to persuade President de Gaulle of France to align himself with the allies . During their discussions Macmillan commented that de Gaulle showed " all the rigidity of a poker without its occasional warmth . " An agreement was reached , and the allies tacitly recognised that the wall was going to remain in place . The Soviets for their part did not seek to cut off allied access to West Berlin through East German territory . 
 The following year the Cuban Missile Crisis threatened to turn the Cold War into a nuclear one . Soviet nuclear missiles were brought to Cuba , provocatively close to the US . The American president , John F Kennedy , insisted that they must be removed , and many thought that the world was on the brink of catastrophe with nuclear exchanges between the two super @-@ powers . Despite a public image of unflappable calm , Macmillan was by nature nervous and highly strung . During the missile crisis , Home , whose calm was genuine and innate , strengthened the Prime Minister 's resolve , and encouraged him to back up Kennedy 's defiance of Soviet threats of nuclear attack . The Lord Chancellor ( Lord Dilhorne ) , the Attorney General ( Sir John Hobson ) and the Solicitor General , ( Sir Peter Rawlinson ) privately gave Home their opinion that the American blockade of Cuba was a breach of international law , but he continued to advocate a policy of strong support for Kennedy . When Khrushchev backed down and removed the Soviet missiles from Cuba , Home commented : 
 There has been a good deal of speculation about Russia 's motives . To me they are quite clear . Their motive was to test the will of the United States and to see how the President of the United States , in particular , would react against a threat of force . If the President had failed for one moment in a matter which affected the security of the United States , no ally of America would have had confidence in United States protection ever again . 
 The principal landmark of Home 's term as Foreign Secretary was also in the sphere of east – west relations : the negotiation and signature of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . He got on well with his American and Soviet counterparts , Rusk and Andrei Gromyko . The latter wrote that whenever he met Home there were " no sudden , still less brilliant , breakthroughs " but " each meeting left a civilised impression that made the next meeting easier . " Gromyko concluded that Home added sharpness to British foreign policy . Gromyko , Home and Rusk signed the treaty in Moscow on 5 August 1963 . After the fear provoked internationally by the Cuban Missile Crisis , the ban on nuclear testing in the atmosphere , in outer space and under water was widely welcomed as a step towards ending the cold war . For the British government the good news from Moscow was doubly welcome for drawing attention away from the Profumo affair , a sexual scandal involving a senior minister , which had left Macmillan 's administration looking vulnerable . 
 = = = Successor to Macmillan = = = 
 In October 1963 , just before the Conservative party 's annual conference , Macmillan was taken ill with a prostatic obstruction . The condition was at first thought more serious than it turned out to be , and he announced that he would resign as Prime Minister as soon as a successor was appointed . Three senior politicians were considered likely successors , Butler ( First Secretary of State ) , Reginald Maudling ( Chancellor of the Exchequer ) and Lord Hailsham ( Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Lords ) . The Times summed up their support : 
 Mr. Butler can no doubt be sure of a majority inside the Cabinet , where the main initiative must now be taken . Mr. Maudling , when Parliament dispersed at the beginning of August , could have commanded a majority among backbenchers in the Commons . Lord Hailsham , as his reception showed today on his first appearance before the conference , continues to be the darling of the constituency associations . 
 In the same article , Home was mentioned in passing as " a fourth hypothetical candidate " on whom the party could compromise if necessary . 
 It was assumed in the Times article , and by other commentators , that if Hailsham ( or Home ) was a candidate he would have to renounce his peerage . This had been made possible for the first time by recent legislation . The last British Prime Minister to sit in the House of Lords was the third Marquess of Salisbury in 1902 . By 1923 , having to choose between Baldwin and Lord Curzon , George V decided that " the requirements of the present times " obliged him to appoint a Prime Minister from the Commons . His private secretary recorded that the King " believed he would not be fulfilling his trust were he now to make his selection of Prime Minister from the House of Lords " . Similarly , after the resignation of Neville Chamberlain in 1940 there were two likely successors , Churchill and Halifax , but the latter ruled himself out for the premiership on the grounds that his membership of the House of Lords disqualified him . In 1963 , therefore , it was well established that the Prime Minister should be a member of the House of Commons . On 10 October Hailsham announced his intention to renounce his viscountcy . 
 The " customary processes " once again took place . The usual privacy of the consultations was made impossible because they took place during the party conference , and the potential successors made their bids very publicly . Butler had the advantage of giving the party leader 's keynote address to the conference in Macmillan 's absence , but was widely thought to have wasted the opportunity by delivering an uninspiring speech . Hailsham put off many potential backers by his extrovert , and some thought vulgar , campaigning . Maudling , like Butler , made a speech that failed to impress the conference . Senior Conservative figures such as Lord Woolton and Selwyn Lloyd urged Home to make himself available for consideration . 
 Having ruled himself out of the race when the news of Macmillan 's illness broke , Home angered at least two of his cabinet colleagues by changing his mind . Macmillan quickly came to the view that Home would be the best choice as his successor , and gave him valuable behind @-@ the @-@ scenes backing . He let it be known that if he recovered he would be willing to serve as a member of a Home cabinet . He had earlier favoured Hailsham , but changed his mind when he learned from the British ambassador to the US that the Kennedy administration was uneasy at the prospect of Hailsham as Prime Minister , and from his chief whip that Hailsham , seen as a right @-@ winger , would alienate moderate voters . 
 Butler , by contrast , was seen as on the liberal wing of the Conservatives , and his election as leader might split the party . The Lord Chancellor , Lord Dilhorne , conducted a poll of cabinet members , and reported to Macmillan that taking account of first and second preferences there were ten votes for Home , four for Maudling , three for Butler and two for Hailsham . 
 The appointment of a Prime Minister remained part of the royal prerogative , on which the monarch had no constitutional duty to consult an outgoing Prime Minister . Nevertheless , Macmillan advised the Queen that he considered Home the right choice . Little of this was known beyond the senior ranks of the party and the royal secretariat . On 18 October The Times ran the headline , " The Queen May Send for Mr. Butler Today " . The Daily Telegraph and The Financial Times also predicted that Butler was about to be appointed . The Queen sent for Home the same day . Aware of the divisions within the governing party , she did not appoint him Prime Minister , but invited him to see whether he was able to form a government . 
 Home 's cabinet colleagues Enoch Powell and Iain Macleod , who disapproved of his candidacy , made a last @-@ minute effort to prevent him from taking office by trying to persuade Butler and the other candidates not to take posts in a Home cabinet . Butler , however , believed it to be his duty to serve in the cabinet ; he refused to have any part in the conspiracy , and accepted the post of Foreign Secretary . The other candidates followed Butler 's lead and only Powell and Macleod held out and refused office under Home . Macleod commented , " One does not expect to have many people with one in the last ditch " . On 19 October Home was able to return to Buckingham Palace to kiss hands as Prime Minister . The press was not only wrong @-@ footed by the appointment , but generally highly critical . The pro @-@ Labour Daily Mirror said on its front page : 
 A nice chap and a polite peer . But Caligula 's appointment of his horse as a consul was an act of prudent statesmanship compared with this gesture of sickbed levity by Mr. Macmillan . ... Alec ( not Smart Alec – just Alec ) is playing chess with a Cabinet containing at least four members of greater stature , brain @-@ power , personality and potential than himself . Butler has been betrayed , Maudling insulted , Macleod ignored , Heath treated with contempt , and Hailsham giggled out of court by the jester in hospital . 
 The Times , generally pro @-@ Conservative , had backed Butler , and called it " prodigal " of the party to pass over his many talents . The paper praised Home as " an outstandingly successful Foreign Secretary " , but doubted his grasp of domestic affairs , his modernising instincts and his suitability " to carry the Conservative Party through a fierce and probably dirty campaign " at the general election due within a year . The Guardian , liberal in its political outlook , remarked that Home " does not look like the man to impart force and purpose to his Cabinet and the country " and suggested that he seemed too frail politically to be even a stop @-@ gap . The Observer , another liberal @-@ minded paper , said , " The overwhelming – and damaging – impression left by the events of the last two weeks is that the Tories have been forced to settle for a second @-@ best . ... The calmness and steadiness which made him a good Foreign Secretary , particularly at times of crisis like Berlin and Cuba , may also be a liability . " 
 In January 1964 , and in the absence of any other information , Macleod now editor of The Spectator , used the pretext of a review of a book by Randolph Churchill to publicise his own different and very detailed version of the leadership election . He described the " soundings " of five Tory grandees , four of whom , like Home and Macmillan had been to school at Eton , as a stitch up by an Etonian ' magic circle . ' The article received wide publicity convincing Anthony Howard , who later declared himself " deeply affronted ... and never more affronted than when Alec Douglas @-@ Home became leader of the Conservative Party . " 
 = = = Prime Minister ( 1963 – 64 ) = = = 
 On 23 October 1963 , four days after becoming Prime Minister , Home disclaimed his earldom and associated lesser peerages . Having been made a knight of the Order of the Thistle in 1962 , he was known after stepping down from the Lords as Sir Alec Douglas @-@ Home . The safe Unionist seat of Kinross and West Perthshire was vacant , and Douglas @-@ Home was adopted as his party 's candidate . Parliament was due to meet on 24 October after the summer recess , but its return was postponed until 12 November pending the by @-@ election . For twenty days Douglas @-@ Home was Prime Minister while a member of neither house of Parliament , a situation without modern precedent . He won the by @-@ election with a majority of 9 @,@ 328 ; the Liberal candidate was in second place and Labour in third . 
 The Parliamentary leader of the opposition Labour party , Harold Wilson , attacked the new Prime Minister as " an elegant anachronism " . He asserted that nobody from Douglas @-@ Home 's background knew of the problems of ordinary families . In particular , Wilson demanded to know how " a scion of an effete establishment " could lead the technological revolution that Wilson held to be necessary : " This is the counter @-@ revolution ... After half a century of democratic advance , of social revolution , the whole process has ground to a halt with a fourteenth earl ! " Douglas @-@ Home pooh @-@ <unk> this as inverted snobbery , and observed , " I suppose Mr Wilson , when you come to think of it , is the fourteenth Mr Wilson . " He called Wilson " this slick salesman of synthetic science " and the Labour party " the only relic of class consciousness in the country " . The opposition retreated , with a statement in the press that " The Labour Party is not interested in the fact that the new Prime Minister inherited a fourteenth Earldom – he cannot help his antecedents any more than the rest of us . " 
 Douglas @-@ Home inherited from Macmillan a government widely perceived as in decline , " becalmed in a sea of satire and scandal " , in Hurd 's phrase . Douglas @-@ Home was the target of satirists on BBC television and in Private Eye magazine . Unlike Wilson , he was not at ease on television , and came across as less spontaneous than his opponent . 
 In international affairs the most dramatic event during Douglas @-@ Home 's premiership was the assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 . Douglas @-@ Home , clearly moved , broadcast a tribute on television . He had liked and worked well with Kennedy , and did not develop such a satisfactory relationship with Lyndon Johnson . Their governments had a serious disagreement on the question of British trade with Cuba . Under Douglas @-@ Home the colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland gained independence , though this was as a result of negotiations led by Macleod under the Macmillan government . 
 In Britain there was economic prosperity ; exports " zoomed " , according to The Times , and the economy was growing at an annual rate of four per cent . Douglas @-@ Home made no pretence to economic expertise ; he commented that his problems were of two sorts : " The political ones are insoluble and the economic ones are incomprehensible . " On another occasion he said , " When I have to read economic documents I have to have a box of matches and start moving them into position to simplify and illustrate the points to myself . " He left Maudling in charge at the Treasury , and promoted Heath to a new business and economic portfolio . The latter took the lead in the one substantial piece of domestic legislation of Douglas @-@ Home 's premiership , the abolition of resale price maintenance . 
 The Resale Prices Bill was introduced to deny manufacturers and suppliers the power to stipulate the prices at which their goods must be sold by the retailer . At the time , up to forty per cent of goods sold in Britain were subject to such price fixing , to the detriment of competition and to the disadvantage of the consumer . Douglas @-@ Home , less instinctively liberal on economic matters than Heath , would probably not have sponsored such a proposal unprompted . However , he gave Heath his backing , in the face of opposition from some cabinet colleagues , including Butler , Hailsham and Lloyd , and a substantial number of Conservative backbenchers . They believed the change would benefit supermarkets and other large retailers at the expense of proprietors of small shops . The government was forced to make concessions to avoid defeat . Retail price maintenance would continue to be legal for some goods ; these included books , on which it remained in force until market forces led to its abandonment in 1995 . Manufacturers and suppliers would also be permitted to refuse to supply any retailer who sold their goods at less than cost price , as a loss leader . The bill had a difficult Parliamentary passage during which the Labour party generally abstained , leaving the Conservatives to vote for or against their own government . The bill received the royal assent in July 1964 , but did not become operative until 1965 , by which time Douglas @-@ Home , Heath and their colleagues were out of office . 
 A plot to kidnap Douglas @-@ Home in April 1964 was foiled by the Prime Minister himself . Two left @-@ wing students from the University of Aberdeen followed him to the house of John and Priscilla Buchan , where he was staying . He was alone at the time and answered the door , where the students told him that they planned to kidnap him . He responded , " I suppose you realise if you do , the Conservatives will win the election by 200 or 300 . " He gave his intending abductors some beer , and they abandoned their plot . 
 The term of the Parliament elected in 1959 was due to expire in October 1964 . Parliament was dissolved on 25 September and after three weeks of campaigning the general election took place on 15 October . The Conservatives under Douglas @-@ Home did much better than widely predicted , but Labour under Wilson won with a narrow majority . Labour won 317 seats , the Conservatives 304 and the Liberals 9 . 
 = = = In Opposition ( 1964 – 70 ) = = = 
 As Leader of the Opposition , Douglas @-@ Home persuaded Macleod and Powell to rejoin the Conservative front bench . Within weeks of the general election Butler retired from politics , accepting the post of Master of Trinity College , Cambridge together with a life peerage . Douglas @-@ Home did not immediately allocate shadow portfolios to his colleagues , but in January 1965 he gave Maudling the foreign affairs brief and Heath became spokesman on Treasury and economic affairs . There was no immediate pressure for Douglas @-@ Home to hand over the leadership to a member of the younger generation , but by early 1965 a new Conservative group called <unk> ( Pressure for Economic and Social Toryism ) had discreetly begun to call for a change . Douglas @-@ Home either did not know , or chose to ignore , the fact that Heath had made a donation to <unk> . He decided that the time was coming for him to retire as leader , with Heath as his preferred successor . 
 Determined that the party should abandon the " customary processes of consultation " , which had caused such rancour when he was appointed in 1963 , Douglas @-@ Home set up an orderly process of secret balloting by Conservative MPs for the election of his immediate and future successors as party leader . In the interests of impartiality the ballot was organised by the 1922 Committee , the backbench Conservative MPs . Douglas @-@ Home announced his resignation as Conservative leader on 22 July 1965 . Three candidates stood for the vacancy : Heath , Maudling and Powell . Heath won with 150 votes ( one of them cast by Douglas @-@ Home ) to 133 for Maudling and 15 for Powell . 
 Douglas @-@ Home accepted the foreign affairs portfolio in Heath 's shadow cabinet . Many expected this to be a short @-@ lived appointment , a prelude to Douglas @-@ Home 's retirement from politics . It came at a difficult time in British foreign relations : events in the self @-@ governing colony of Rhodesia ( formerly Southern Rhodesia ) , which had been drifting towards crisis for some years , finally erupted into open rebellion against British sovereignty . The predominantly white minority government there opposed an immediate transfer to black majority rule before the colony had achieved sovereign statehood , and in November 1965 it unilaterally declared independence . Douglas @-@ Home won the approval of left @-@ wing Labour MPs such as Wedgwood Benn for his unwavering opposition to the rebel government , and for ignoring those on the right wing of the Conservative party who sympathised with the rebels on racial grounds . 
 In 1966 Douglas @-@ Home became president of the MCC , which was then the governing body of English and world cricket . The presidency had generally been a largely ceremonial position , but Douglas @-@ Home became embroiled in two controversies , one of them with international implications . This was the so @-@ called " D 'Oliveira affair " , in which the inclusion of a non @-@ white player in the England team to tour South Africa led to the cancellation of the tour by the apartheid regime in Pretoria . In his account of the affair , the political journalist Peter Oborne criticises Douglas @-@ Home for his vacillating attitude towards the South African Prime Minister , B J Vorster with whom , says Oborne , " he was no more robust than Chamberlain had been with Hitler thirty years earlier " . Douglas @-@ Home 's advice to the MCC committee not to press the South Africans for advance assurances on D 'Oliveira 's acceptability , and his optimistic assurances that all would be well , became a matter of much criticism from a group of MCC members led by the Rev David Sheppard . The second controversy was not one of race but of social class . Brian Close was dropped as England captain in favour of Colin Cowdrey . Close was dropped after using delaying tactics when captaining Yorkshire in a county match , but the move was widely seen as biased towards cricketers from the old amateur tradition , which had officially ended in 1963 . 
 Wilson 's small majority after the 1964 general election had made the transaction of government business difficult , and in 1966 he called another election in which Labour gained a strong working majority of 96 . Some older members of Heath 's team , including Lloyd , retired from the front bench , making room for members of the next generation . Heath moved Maudling to the foreign affairs portfolio , and Douglas @-@ Home took over Lloyd 's responsibilities as spokesman on Commonwealth relations . Heath was widely seen as ineffective against Wilson , and as the 1970 general election approached there was concern within the party that he would lose , and that Powell would seek to replace him as leader . Maudling and the chief whip , William Whitelaw , believed that if Heath had to resign Douglas @-@ Home would be the safest candidate to keep Powell out . Douglas @-@ Home shared their view that Labour would win the 1970 election , and that Heath might then have to resign , but he declined to commit himself . To the surprise of almost everyone except Heath , the Conservatives won the election , with a majority of 31 seats . 
 Douglas @-@ Home received an Honorary Doctorate from Heriot @-@ Watt University in 1966 . 
 = = = Foreign and Commonwealth secretary ( 1970 – 74 ) = = = 
 Heath invited Douglas @-@ Home to join the cabinet , taking charge of Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs . In earlier centuries it had not been exceptional for a former Prime Minister to serve in the cabinet of a successor , and even in the previous fifty years Arthur Balfour , Stanley Baldwin , Ramsay MacDonald and Neville Chamberlain had done so . As of 2016 , Douglas @-@ Home is the last former premier to have served under a successor . Of Balfour 's appointment to Asquith 's cabinet in 1916 , Lord Rosebery , who had been Prime Minister in 1894 – 95 , said that having an ex @-@ premier in the cabinet was " a fleeting and dangerous luxury " . Thorpe writes that Heath 's appointment of Douglas @-@ Home " was not a luxury but an essential buttress to his administration . " 
 The Wilson administration had merged the Colonial Office and the Commonwealth Relations Office in 1966 into the Commonwealth Office , which , two years later , was merged with the Foreign Office , to form the Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) . Heath appointed Douglas @-@ Home to head the department , with , once again , a second cabinet minister , this time Anthony Barber , principally responsible , as Heath had been in the 1960s , for negotiations on Britain 's joining the EEC . This time , however , both ministers were in the Commons ; Barber 's cabinet post was officially Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster . 
 Within weeks of the election Barber was moved from the FCO to the Treasury to take over as Chancellor from Iain Macleod , who died suddenly on 20 July . Though they had never enjoyed an easy relationship , Douglas @-@ Home recognised his colleague 's stature , and felt his loss politically as well as personally . Some commentators have maintained that Macleod 's death and replacement by the less substantial figure of Barber fatally undermined the economic success of the Heath government . 
 Barber was replaced at the FCO by Geoffrey Rippon , who handled the day @-@ to @-@ day negotiations , under the direction of Heath . Douglas @-@ Home , as before , concentrated on east – west and Commonwealth matters . He was in agreement with Heath 's policy on the EEC , and did much to persuade doubters on the right wing of the Conservative party of the desirability of Britain 's entry . Hurd writes : 
 By temperament and background he was some distance removed from Heath 's passionate commitment to a united Europe . All the more important was his steadfast support for British entry , which he based on a clear assessment of Britain 's place in the modern world , and in particular her relationship with France and Germany on the one hand and the United States on the other ... thus providing the right of the Conservative Party with much needed assurance . 
 In east – west relations , Douglas @-@ Home continued his policy of keeping the Soviet Union at bay . In September 1971 , after receiving no satisfactory results from negotiations with Gromyko about the flagrant activities of the KGB in Britain , he expelled 105 Soviet diplomats for spying . In addition to the furore arising from this , the Soviets felt that the British government 's approach to negotiations on détente in Europe was over @-@ cautious , even sceptical . Gromyko was nonetheless realistic enough to maintain a working relationship with the British government . Within days of the expulsions from London he and Douglas @-@ Home met and discussed the Middle East and disarmament . In this sphere of foreign policy , Douglas @-@ Home was widely judged a success . 
 In negotiations on the future of Rhodesia Douglas @-@ Home was less successful . He was instrumental in persuading the rebel leader , Ian Smith , to accept proposals for a transition to African majority rule . Douglas @-@ Home set up an independent commission chaired by a senior British judge , Lord Pearce , to investigate how acceptable the proposals were to majority opinion in Rhodesia . After extensive fieldwork throughout Rhodesia , the commission reported , " We are satisfied on our evidence that the proposals are acceptable to the great majority of Europeans . We are equally satisfied ... that the majority of Africans rejected the proposals . In our opinion the people of Rhodesia as a whole do not regard the proposals as acceptable as a basis for independence . " To Douglas @-@ Home 's disappointment there was no resolution , and Rhodesia remained a rebel regime long after he left office . 
 = = = Retirement and death ( 1974 – 95 ) = = = 
 At the February 1974 general election the Heath government was narrowly defeated . Douglas @-@ Home , then aged 71 , stepped down at the second election of that year , called in October by the minority Labour government in the hope of winning a working majority . He returned to the House of Lords at the end of 1974 when he accepted a life peerage , becoming known as Baron Home of the Hirsel , of Coldstream in the County of Berwick . 
 Between 1977 and 1989 Home was Governor of I Zingari , the nomadic cricket team . In retirement he published three books : The Way The Wind Blows ( 1976 ) , described by Hurd as " a good @-@ natured autobiography , with perhaps more anecdotes than insights " , Border Reflections ( 1979 ) , and his correspondence with his grandson Matthew Darby , Letters to a Grandson ( 1983 ) . In the 1980s Home increasingly spent his time in Scotland , with his family . He was a keen fisherman and enjoyed shooting . Hurd writes that " there was no sudden moment when he abandoned politics " , rather that " his interventions became fewer and fewer . " His last speech in the House of Lords was in 1989 , when he spoke against Hurd 's proposals for prosecuting war criminals living in Britain : " After such a lapse of time justice might not be seen to be done . It would be dangerous to rely on memories of events that occurred so long ago . It was too late to reopen the issue . " His withdrawal from public affairs became more marked after the death of his wife in 1990 , after 56 years of marriage . 
 Home died on 9 October 1995 at the Hirsel , at the age of 92 . He was buried in <unk> churchyard , Coldstream . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Home 's premiership was short and not conspicuous for radical innovation . Hurd remarks , " He was not capable of Macmillan 's flights of imagination " , but he was an effective practical politician . At the Commonwealth Relations Office and the Foreign Office he played an important role in helping to manage Britain 's transition from imperial power to European partner . Both Thorpe and Hurd quote a memo that Macmillan wrote in 1963 , intended to help the Queen choose his successor : 
 Lord Home is clearly a man who represents the old governing class at its best ... He is not ambitious in the sense of wanting to scheme for power , although not foolish enough to resist honour when it comes to him ... He gives that impression by a curious mixture of great courtesy , and even if yielding to pressure , with underlying rigidity on matters of principle . It is interesting that he has proved himself so much liked by men like President Kennedy and Mr Rusk and Mr Gromyko . This is exactly the quality that the class to which he belongs have at their best because they think about the question under discussion and not about themselves . 
 Douglas Hurd , once Home 's private secretary , and many years later his successor ( after seven intermediate holders of the post ) as Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary , wrote this personal comment : " The three most courteous men I knew in politics were Lord Home , King Hussein of Jordan , and President Nelson Mandela . All three had ease of birth , in the sense that they never needed to worry about who they themselves were and so had more time to concern themselves with the feelings of others . " 
 Although some in the Conservative party agreed with Wilson ( and Jo Grimond , the Liberal leader ) that the Conservatives would have won the 1964 election if Butler had been Prime Minister , The Times observed , " it should not be overlooked that in October 1963 Home took over a Government whose morale was shattered and whose standing in the opinion polls was abysmal . A year later Labour won the general election , with an overall majority of only four seats . That [ Home ] recovered so much ground in so short a time was in itself an achievement . " However , looking back across Home 's career , The Times considered that his reputation rested not on his brief premiership , but on his two spells as Foreign Secretary : " He brought to the office ... his capacity for straight talking , for toughness towards the Soviet Union and for firmness ( sometimes interpreted as a lack of sympathy ) towards the countries of Africa and Asia . But he brought something else as well : an unusual degree of international respect . " 
 = = Cabinet ( 1963 – 64 ) = = 
 The Home cabinet , announced on 20 October 1963 , was : 
 Lord Home [ Sir Alec Douglas @-@ Home from 23 October ] : Prime Minister and First Lord of the Treasury 
 R A Butler : Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs 
 Quintin Hogg : Lord President of the Council and Minister for Science 
 Lord Dilhorne : Lord Chancellor 
 Reginald Maudling : Chancellor of the Exchequer 
 Henry Brooke : Secretary of State for the Home Department 
 Duncan Sandys : Secretary of State for the Colonies and Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations 
 Edward Heath : Secretary of State for Industry , Trade , and Regional Development and President of the Board of Trade 
 Peter Thorneycroft : Minister of Defence 
 Selwyn Lloyd : Lord Privy Seal 
 Lord <unk> : Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 
 Christopher Soames : Minister of Agriculture , Fisheries and Food 
 Ernest Marples : Minister of Transport 
 John Boyd @-@ Carpenter : Chief Secretary to the Treasury and Paymaster @-@ General 
 Michael Noble : Secretary of State for Scotland 
 Sir Edward Boyle : Minister of Education 
 Joseph Godber : Minister of Labour 
 Sir Keith Joseph : Minister of Housing and Local Government and Minister for Welsh Affairs 
 Frederick Erroll : Minister of Power 
 Anthony Barber : Minister of Health 
 Geoffrey Rippon : Minister of Public Building and Works 
 W F Deedes : Minister without Portfolio 
 Lord Carrington : Minister without Portfolio , Leader of the House of Lords 
 Changes 
 April 1964 : Quintin Hogg became Secretary of State for Education and Science . Sir Edward Boyle left the cabinet 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Pilot ( The Drew Carey Show ) = 
 " Pilot " is the first episode and the series premiere of the American sitcom The Drew Carey Show . It first aired on September 13 , 1995 on the ABC network in the United States . The premise of the show revolves around the life Drew Carey would have lived if he had not become a stand @-@ up comedian . The pilot introduces the main characters of Drew ( Carey ) , Kate ( Christa Miller ) , Lewis ( Ryan Stiles ) and Oswald ( Diedrich Bader ) , as well as Drew 's workplace , the fictional Winfred @-@ Lauder department store , and enemy Mimi Bobeck ( Kathy Kinney ) . 
 The pilot was written by series co @-@ creators Carey and Bruce Helford , while Michael Lessac directed . It was shot in April 1995 at the Warner Bros. Television studios in Burbank , California . The episode ranked joint 29th in television programs with the most viewers for the week of September 11 – 17 , 1995 . Critical response was mixed , with many comparing the show to the NBC sitcom Friends . Ray Richmond from the Los Angeles Daily News praised Carey 's performance , but thought the episode did not click , while Variety 's Tony Scott liked the opening sequence and Lessac 's " inventive " direction . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with Drew ( Drew Carey ) and his friends Lewis Kiniski ( Ryan Stiles ) and Oswald Lee Harvey ( Diedrich Bader ) in their local bar , the Warsaw Tavern , discussing Brad Pitt . The following day , Drew 's best friend Kate O 'Brien ( Christa Miller ) tells him that she has broken up with her boyfriend , who then fired her from her job as a receptionist at his body shop . Desperate for a job , Kate asks Drew to hire her at the Winfred @-@ Louder department store where he is the assistant director of personnel . Drew insists that he cannot hire his friends . At Winfred @-@ Louder , Drew 's boss Mr. Bell ( Kevin Pollak ) asks him to hire someone for a position at the cosmetics counter . While conducting interviews , Drew meets Mimi Bobeck ( Kathy Kinney ) , a hostile woman who wears too much eye shadow . Drew tries to be polite , but Mimi soon realises he is not going to give her the job and accuses Drew of being sexist . Mimi complains to Mr. Bell about Drew , getting him into trouble . 
 Later at the Warsaw Tavern , Drew is hanging out with his friends when Mimi walks in and confronts him . Drew talks to her honestly about why she did not get the job , telling her that her attitude is the problem and she has to deal with the fact that her looks might stop her from getting some jobs . Mimi does not like Drew 's advice and leaves the bar . Needing to fill the cosmetics position quickly , Drew believes he has found an ideal candidate in Natalie ( Natasha Silver ) until Kate turns up to apply for the job . Drew admits that he is worried that Kate will hate him if he has to fire her . However , Mr. Bell insists Drew hire Kate , having seen her in the lobby and Drew agrees . Kate later comes to Drew 's house to ask him , Lewis and Oswald which perfume samples to promote . The episode ends with Drew playing pool in his garden in the rain , while the others watch through the window . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Drew Carey and Bruce Helford co @-@ created The Drew Carey Show . Having worked together twice before on The Good Life and Someone Like Me , Carey joined up with Helford and told him he wanted to develop his own show . They each came up with various ideas and created The Drew Carey Show . Carey later told a group of television critics at the network launch that the series was originally going to be called The Drew F ... ing Carey Show , saying " We were going to call it The Drew F. Carey Show and see if anybody at home could figure it out ! " 
 The show revolved around the life Carey would have lived if he had not become a stand @-@ up comedian . Carey told Helford that he thought he would have been employed in a mid @-@ level management job , which was a relatable job for most Americans at the time . Carey wanted a show that was about regular people . He also wanted to set the show in Cleveland as it was his home town and it was not getting a lot of attention . Carey and Helford drove to the city together in January 1995 to do some research . They toured the local bars to try to get the right look for the show 's bar the Warsaw Tavern . Carey and Helford also heard the song " Moon Over Parma " in one of the bars and it was used during the title sequence . 
 Carey and Helford co @-@ wrote the pilot episode together . Helford had expected The Drew Carey Show to air at 8 : 30pm . When ABC placed the show in the 7 : 30pm slot , Helford agreed to soften the language in the pilot . An executive from Standards and Practices had asked for nine words deemed offensive to be removed from the script , as well as a mention of Jack Daniel 's and a line that implied one of the characters was going to buy and use drugs . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Carey plays a fictionalized version of himself . Drew is an assistant director of personnel at the Winfred @-@ Lauder department store . Carey explained " I wanted a white @-@ collar job with no authority and a bad boss . Someone to do all the work and get no credit . He could 've worked in a bank , in insurance . " Carey said it was " a no @-@ brainer " on settling on the character , saying " It 's just me . " While Christa Miller was trying out for the role of Drew 's close friend Kate O 'Brien , ABC thought she might be too inexperienced for the role and they asked to see her appearance in the Seinfeld episode " The Doodle " . The episode had yet to be aired and Miller had to beg the show 's co @-@ creator Larry David for a rough cut to show to ABC . Miller went on to secure the role of Kate and Helford considered her to be the only person right for the role . 
 Ryan Stiles won the role of " hapless janitor " Lewis Kiniski . Despite being well known for his role on the British improve show Whose Line Is It Anyway ? , Stiles still had to go through the audition process along with everybody else . He said , " I don 't even think Drew was really even aware of Whose Line at that time because it hadn 't been on the air ( in the U.S. ) that many years . I think it was only on Comedy Central at that time . " Stiles admitted that he liked to have fun with his character and not <unk> him . Following his appearance in The Beverly Hillbillies , Diedrich Bader realised he needed a regular income and decided to return to television . He tested out for The Drew Carey Show , but did not initially want to be cast in it . He told Kevin Smith that he wanted to drive up his price for the pilot of Partners . Bader lost out on the role of Bob to Jon Cryer and then learned The Drew Carey Show wanted to hire him to play Oswald Lee Harvey . 
 The role of Mimi Bobeck went to Kathy Kinney . The actress was originally intended to be a one episode guest star , but became a series regular when Helford noticed during editing of the pilot that the funniest scenes were those featuring Mimi . Kinney was hired for a further seven episodes , but eventually appeared in every episode . Robin <unk> , writing for The Sun @-@ Herald , branded Mimi " a moving visual assault with a personality to match " because of her painted @-@ on eyebrows , bright eyeshadow and gaudy clothes . After relocating from Chicago , Ian Gomez spent a year auditioning for various shows , before being cast in the recurring role of Larry Almada in 1995 . Other actors who appear in the pilot are Alaina Reed Hall , David St. James , Lauren Katz , Vic Helford and Natasha Silver . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The pilot was shot in April 1995 and directed by Michael Lessac . Although set in Cleveland , the show was actually filmed at the Warner Bros. Television studios in Burbank , California . Helford had noticed that the cast did not look at each other while saying their lines and he tried to encourage them to look at one another , so they would laugh . Helford told Lessac to bring the cast in on a weekend , where there was no pressure , so they could " goof around " and relax . Drew 's job required him to work from a cubicle and Helford stated that no one had really done a show dealing with that situation , as producers and networks felt it was too confined . Helford disagreed and had a set where an accessible cubicle was the center piece designed and built . The Memphis Plaza Lounge in Old Brooklyn was the inspiration for the show 's bar The Warsaw Tavern . The owner of the Lounge refused to sell the naming rights to Warner Bros , but he did agree that they could film the front of the building . The crew shot the building in 1995 and temporarily replaced The Memphis Plaza Lounge sign with their own Warsaw Tavern one . The sign was hung in the front window for two years before Warner Bros. took it down . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode finished joint 29th among 108 prime @-@ time shows in the Nielsen ratings for the week of September 11 – 17 , 1995 . It came second both in households and among adults 18 – 49 with a 10 @.@ 8 / 18 and 7 @.@ 2 rating / share , respectively . 
 " Pilot " received mixed reviews from television critics . Ray Richmond from the Los Angeles Daily News branded the show a " Friends clone " , but praised Carey , calling him " the season 's quirkiest , most uproarious talent " . He also thought that he was " immensely lovable " . Richmond added " The pilot never quite clicks , but you can feel the potential . And spread inside an Ellen / Grace Under Fire sandwich , it 'll be difficult for it to miss . " Lon Grahnke from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times thought the show would be a " probable hit " based on the " Pilot " . He also observed that the show is " a Cleveland variation of Friends , and thought the early time slot was a turn off , as it required the language to be toned @-@ down . David Zurawik from The Baltimore Sun awarded the episode a C + and branded it " a blue @-@ collar Friends . 
 The Boston Globe 's Frederic M. Biddle gave the episode one and a half stars and commented " Carey always keeps you watching , although he 's always threatening to be funnier than he is . But more than any other Friends ripoff , this show 's supporting actors slow down the central character – they 're set decoration . Comic scenes involving the full cast build , then trip over themselves . " Alan Pergament , writing for The Buffalo News , included The Drew Carey Show in his Top 10 new shows , noting " Carey is a lovable goof and his male buddy show has the chance of becoming the male version of Designing Women . " Pergament cited the lack of prominent female characters and " a reliance on too many risque @-@ language jokes " as the weaknesses of the show . The Washington Post 's Tom Shales found the episode funny , adding " The Drew Carey Show bucks all the prevailing sitcom trends and does it endearingly . " 
 Tony Scott , a critic for Variety , thought the characters were " amiable enough " , but they needed " sharper dialogue and fresher observations . " Scott did not think the car pool segment worked , but he liked the opening sequence in the bar . He also praised Lessac 's direction , calling it " inventive " . Peter <unk> from The Age was prepared to give the series a chance based on the episode , saying " Like most American sitcoms , The Drew Carey Show has its share of snappy one @-@ liners but it gives the impression of trying a little too hard . To be fair , this is the first of a series , and we have yet to see the characters develop . Even Seinfeld took a little time to become essential viewing . " 
 = Army of the Rhine and Moselle = 
 The Army of the Rhine and Moselle ( French : Armée de Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle ) was one of the field units of the French Revolutionary Army . It was formed on 20 April 1795 by merging the Army of the Rhine and the Army of the Moselle . 
 The army figured in two principal campaigns in the War of the First Coalition , although the unsuccessful 1795 campaign concluded with the removal of Jean @-@ Charles Pichegru from command . In 1796 , the army , under command of Jean Victor Marie Moreau , proved itself more successful . By this time , many of the changes inaugurated by the French military reform of 1794 had taken hold . 
 On 29 September 1797 the Army of the Rhine and Moselle merged with the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse to form the Army of Germany . 
 = = Purpose and formation = = 
 Military planners in Paris understood that the upper Rhine Valley , the south @-@ western German territories , and Danube river basin were strategically important for the defense of the Republic . The Rhine was a formidable barrier to what the French perceived as Austrian aggression , and the state that controlled its crossings controlled the river itself . Finally , ready access across the Rhine and along the Rhine bank between the German states and Switzerland , or through the Black Forest , gave access to the upper Danube river valley . For the French , control of the Upper Danube or any point in between , offered an immense strategic value and would give the French a reliable approach to Vienna . 
 Undoubtedly by 1793 the armies of the French Republic were in a state of disruption ; experienced soldiers of the Ancien Régime fought side by side with raw volunteers , urged on by revolutionary fervor from the special representatives , agents of the legislature sent to insure cooperation among the military . Many of the old officer class had emigrated , and the cavalry in particular suffered from their departure . The artillery arm , considered by the old nobility to be an inferior assignment , was less affected by emigration , and survived intact . The problems would become even more acute following the introduction of mass conscription , the levée en <unk> , in 1793 . French commanders walked a fine line between the security of the frontier and clamor for victory ( which would protect the regime in Paris ) on the one hand , and the desperate condition of the army on the other , while they themselves were constantly under suspicion from the representatives of the new regime . The price of failure or disloyalty was the guillotine . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 After successes , particularly in 1792 and 1794 , in the northern theater of war ( Flanders Campaign ) , the right flank of the armies of the Center ( later the army of the Moselle ) , the army of the North and the army of the Ardennes were combined to form the Army of Sambre & Meuse . The remaining center and left flank of the Army of the Moselle and the Army of the Rhine were united , initially on 29 November 1794 , and formally on 20 April 1795 , under command of Pichegru . 
 = = Order of Battle = = 
 At its formation , the Army included 66 battalions and 79 squadrons , for a total of 65 @,@ 103 men ( 56 @,@ 756 infantry , 6 @,@ 536 cavalry and 1 @,@ 811 artillery ) . This was its standing on 1 June 1796 : 
 Commander in Chief ( 1796 ) Jean Victor Marie Moreau 
 Chief of Staff : Jean Louis <unk> Reynier 
 Commander of Artillery : Jean @-@ Baptiste Eblé 
 Commander of Engineers : Dominique @-@ André de <unk> 
 = = Campaign of 1795 = = 
 The Rhine Campaign of 1795 ( April 1795 to January 1796 ) saw two Habsburg Austrian armies under the overall command of François Sébastien Charles Joseph de Croix , Count of Clerfayt defeat an attempt by two Republican French armies to cross the Rhine River and capture the Fortress of Mainz . At the start of the campaign the French Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse led by Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan confronted Clerfayt 's Army of the Lower Rhine in the north , while the French Army of Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle under Jean @-@ Charles Pichegru lay opposite Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser 's Army of the Upper Rhine in the south . In August Jourdan crossed and quickly seized Düsseldorf . The Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse advanced south to the Main River , completely isolating Mainz . Pichegru 's army made a surprise capture of Mannheim so that both French armies held significant footholds on the east bank of the Rhine . The French fumbled away the promising start to their offensive . Pichegru bungled at least one opportunity to seize Clerfayt 's supply base in the Battle of Handschuhsheim . With Pichegru strangely inert , Clerfayt massed against Jourdan , beat him at <unk> in October and forced most of the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse to retreat to the west bank of the Rhine . About the same time , Wurmser sealed off the French bridgehead at Mannheim . With Jourdan temporarily out of the picture , the Austrians defeated the left wing of the Army of Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle at the Battle of Mainz and moved down the west bank . In November , Clerfayt gave Pichegru a drubbing at <unk> and successfully wrapped up the Siege of Mannheim . In January 1794 , Clerfayt concluded an armistice with the French , allowing the Austrians to retain large portions of the west bank . During the campaign Pichegru entered into traitorous contact with French Royalists . It is debatable whether Pichegru 's treason or his bad generalship was the actual cause of the French failure . 
 = = Campaign in 1796 = = 
 The armies of the First Coalition included the imperial contingents and the infantry and cavalry of the various states , amounting to about 125 @,@ 000 ( including the three autonomous corps ) , a sizable force by eighteenth century standards but a moderate force by the standards of the Revolutionary wars . In total , though , Charles ’ troops stretched in a line from Switzerland to the North Sea and Wurmser ’ s troops stretched from the Swiss @-@ Italian border to the Adriatic ; furthermore , a portion of the troops in Fürstenberg ’ s corps were pulled in July to support Wurmser ’ s activities in Italy . Habsburg troops comprised the bulk of the army but the thin white line of Habsburg infantry could not cover the territory from Basel to Frankfurt with sufficient depth to resist the pressure of the opposition . In spring 1796 , drafts from the free imperial cities , and other imperial estates , augmented the Habsburg force with perhaps 20 @,@ 000 men at the most . It was largely guesswork where they would be placed , and Charles did not like to use the militias , which were untrained and unseasoned . Compared to French coverage , Charles had half the number of troops covering a 211 @-@ mile front , stretching from Renchen near Basel to Bingen . Furthermore , he had concentrated the bulk of his force , commanded by Count Baillet Latour , between Karlsruhe and Darmstadt , where the confluence of the Rhine and the Main river made an attack most likely , as it offered a gateway into eastern German states and ultimately to Vienna , with good bridges crossing the relatively well @-@ defined river bank . To the north , Wilhelm von Wartensleben ’ s autonomous corps stretched in a thin line between Mainz and Giessen . 
 The French citizen ’ s army , created by mass conscription of young men and systematically divested of old men who might have tempered the rash impulses of teenagers and young adults , had already made itself onerous , by reputation and rumor at least , throughout France . Furthermore , it was an army entirely dependent for support upon the countryside . After April 1796 , pay was made in metallic value , but pay was still in arrears . Throughout the spring and early summer , the unpaid French army was in almost constant mutiny : in May 1796 , in the border town of Zweibrücken , the 74th revolted . In June , the 17th was insubordinate ( frequently ) and in the 84th , two companies rebelled . An assault into the German states was essential , as far as French commanders understood , not only in terms of war aims , but also in practical terms : the French Directory believed that war should pay for itself , and did not budget for the payment or feeding of its troops . 
 At the battles of Altenkirchen ( 4 June 1796 ) and at Wetzlar saw two Republican French divisions commanded by Jean Baptiste Kléber attack a wing of the Habsburg army led by Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg . A frontal attack combined with a flanking maneuver forced the Austrians to retreat . Three future Marshals of France played significant roles in the engagement at Altenkirchen : François Joseph Lefebvre as a division commander , Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult as a brigadier and Michel Ney as leader of a flanking column . The battle occurred during the War of the First Coalition , part of a larger conflict called the Wars of the French Revolution . Altenkirchen is located in the state of Rhineland @-@ Palatinate in Germany about 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) east of Bonn . Wetzlar is located in the <unk> of Hesse @-@ Kassel , a distance of 66 kilometers ( 41 mi ) north of Frankfurt . 
 The opening of the Rhine Campaign of 1796 began with Kléber 's attack south out of his bridgehead at Düsseldorf . After Kléber won sufficient maneuver room on the east bank of the Rhine River , Jean Baptiste Jourdan was supposed to join him with the remainder of the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse . But this was only a distraction . When the Austrians under Archduke Charles , Duke of Teschen moved north to oppose Jourdan , Jean Victor Marie Moreau would cross the Rhine far to the south with the Army of Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle . Kléber carried out his part of the scheme to perfection , allowing Jourdan to cross the Rhine at Neuwied on 10 June . This was part of a plan to lure Archduke Charles to the north so that the Army of Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle under Jean Victor Marie Moreau could breach the Rhine defenses in the south . The strategy worked as designed . When Charles came north with heavy forces to drive back Jourdan , Moreau successfully mounted an assault crossing of the Rhine at Kehl near Strasbourg . 
 On 22 June , the French executed simultaneous crossings at Kehl and Hüningen . At Kehl , Moreau ’ s advance guard , 10 @,@ 000 , preceded the main force of 27 @,@ 000 infantry and 3 @,@ 000 cavalry directed at the several hundred Swabian pickets on the bridge . The Swabian force consisted of recruits provided by the members of the Swabian Circle and most of them were literally raw recruits , field hands and day laborers drafted for service in the spring of that year . The Swabians were hopelessly outnumbered and could not be reinforced . Most of the Imperial Army of the Rhine was stationed further north , by Mannheim , where the river was easier to cross , but too far away to support the smaller force at Kehl . Neither the Condé ’ s troops in Freiburg nor Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg 's force in Rastatt could reach Kehl in time to relieve the Swabian troops . Within a day , Moreau had four divisions across the river . <unk> thrust out of Kehl , the Swabian contingent reformed at Rastatt by 5 July . There they managed to hold the city until reinforcements arrived , although Charles could not move much of his army away from Mannheim or Karlsruhe , where the French had also formed across the river . 
 At Hüningen , near Basel , Ferino executed a full crossing , and advanced east along the German shore of the Rhine with the 16th and 50th Demi @-@ brigades , the 68th , 50th and 68th line infantry , and six squadrons of cavalry that included the 3rd and 7th Hussars and the 10th Dragoons . The Habsburg and Imperial armies were in danger of encirclement : the French pressed hard at Rastatt and Ferino moved quickly east along the shore of the Rhine via which they could encircle the Coalition army from the east . 
 To prevent this , Charles executed an orderly withdrawal in four columns through the Black Forest , across the Upper Danube valley , and toward Bavaria , trying to maintain consistent contact with all flanks as each column withdrew through the Black Forest and the Upper Danube . By mid @-@ July , the column encamped near Stuttgart . The third column , which included the Condé ’ s Corps , retreated through Waldsee to Stockach , and eventually Ravensburg . The fourth Austrian column , the smallest ( three battalions and four squadrons ) , under General Wolff , marched the length of the Bodensee ’ s northern shore , via Überlingen , Meersburg , Buchhorn , and the Austrian city of Bregenz . 
 Given the size of the attacking force , Charles had to withdraw far enough into Bavaria to align his northern flank in a perpendicular line with Wartensleben 's autonomous corps . His own front would prevent Moreau from flanking Wartensleben from the south and together they could resist the French onslaught . In the course of this withdrawal , most of the Swabian Circle was abandoned to the French . At the end of July , eight thousand of Charles ' men executed a dawn attack on the camp of the remaining three thousand Swabian and French immigrant troops , disarmed them , and impounded their weapons . As Charles withdrew further east , the neutral zone expanded , eventually encompassing most of southern German states and the Ernestine Duchies . 
 = = = Summer of 1796 = = = 
 The summer and fall included various conflicts throughout the southern territories of the German states as the armies of the Coalition and the armies of the Directory sought to flank each <unk> mid @-@ summer , the situation looked grim for the Coalition : Wartensleben continued to withdraw to the east @-@ northeast despite Charles ' orders to unite with him . It appeared probable that Jourdan or Moreau would succeed in flanking Charles or driving a wedge between his force and that of Wartensleben . At Neresheim on 11 August , Moreau crushed Charles ' force , forcing him to withdraw further east . At last , however , Wartensleben recognized the danger and changed direction , moving his corps to join at Charles ' northern flank . At Amberg on 24 August , Charles inflicted a defeat on the French ; that same day , his commanders lost a battle to the French at Friedberg . Regardless , the tide had turned in the Coalition 's favor . Both Jourdan and Moreau had overstretched their lines , moving far into the German states , and were separated too far from each other for one to offer the other aid or security . The Coalition 's concentration of troops forced a wider wedge between the two armies of Jourdan and Moreau , similar to what the French had tried to do to Charles and Wartensleben . As the French withdrew toward the Rhine , Charles and Wartensleben pressed forward . On 3 September at Würzburg , Jourdan attempted to halt the retreat . Once Moreau received word of this defeat , he had to withdraw from southern Germany . He pulled his troops back through the Black Forest , with Ferino supervising the rear guard . The Austrian corps commanded by Latour drew too close to Moreau at Biberach and lost 4000 prisoners , some standards and artillery , and Latour followed at a more sensible distance . The two armies clashed again at Emmendingen , where Wartensleben was mortally wounded in the Coalition victory . After Emmendingen , the French withdrew to the south and west , and formed for battle by Schliengen . 
 = = = Principal actions of Summer – Fall 1796 = = = 
 = = Organizational and command problems = = 
 The Army of the Rhine and Moselle experienced excruciating command problems in its early operations . The campaign of 1795 was entirely a French failure and the difficulties the army faced , especially in 1795 , had much to do with Pichegru 's own situation : his competition with both Moreau and Jourdan and his disaffection with the direction in which the revolution was headed . Originally a dedicated Jacobin , by 1794 , his own intrigues had placed him in command after he had undermined Lazare Hoche the previous year , insuring his own appointment as commander of this army . As the revolution waxed and waned in its <unk> , so did Pichegru : by late 1794 , he was leaning heavily toward the royalist cause . The Directory replaced him with Desaix , and later Moreau . Pichegru 's actions sometimes seemed inexplicable : although an associate , even a friend , of the recently executed Saint @-@ Just , Pichegru offered his services to the Thermidorian Reaction , and , after having received the title of Sauveur de la Patrie ( " Saviour of the Motherland " ) from the National Convention , subdued the sans @-@ culottes of Paris , when they rose in insurrection against the Convention on the bread riots of 1 April 1795 . 
 Undeniably a capable , possibly brilliant , and popular commander , Pichegru began his second campaign by crossing the Meuse on 18 October , and , after taking Nijmegen , drove the Austrians back across the Rhine . Then , instead of going into winter quarters , he prepared his army for a winter campaign , always a difficult proposition in the eighteenth century . On 27 December , three brigades crossed the Meuse on the ice , and stormed the <unk> . On 10 January the army crossed the Waal near <unk> , entered Utrecht on 13 January , which surrendered on the 16th . The Prussian and the British armies withdrew behind the IJssel and then fled to the safety of Hanover and Bremen . Pichegru , who succeeded in avoiding the frozen Dutch Water Line arrived in Amsterdam on 20 January , after its revolution . The French occupied the rest of the Dutch Republic in the next month . This major victory , the expulsion of the Coalition from the Low Countries and the successful occupation and alliance with the new Batavian Republic , was marked by unique episodes , such as the capture of the Dutch fleet , which was frozen in Den Helder , by French hussars , and exceptional discipline of the French battalions in Amsterdam , who , although faced with the opportunity of plundering the richest city in Europe , showed remarkable self @-@ restraint . Consequently , when Pichegru then took united command of the armies of the North , the Sambre @-@ and @-@ Meuse , and the Rhine , and crossed the Rhine in force in May 1795 , he held the enviable position as hero of the Revolution . He took Mannheim in May 1795 , but inexplicably he allowed his colleague Jourdan to be defeated ; by 1797 it was well @-@ understood in Paris that he betrayed all his plans to the enemy , and , over the following eighteen months , participated in a conspiracy for the return and coronation of Louis XVIII as King of France . 
 = = = School for marshals = = = 
 The campaigns in which the Army of the Rhine and Moselle participated also provided exception experience for a cadre of extraordinary young officers . In his five volume analysis of the Revolutionary Armies , Ramsey Weston Phipps emphasized the importance of experience under these conditions . His object was to show how the training received in the early years of the war varied not only with the theater in which they served but also with the character of the army to which they belonged . The experience of young officers under the tutelage of such experienced men as Pichegru , Moreau , Lazar Hoche , Lefebvre , Jourdan , and even the unfortunate Nicolas Luckner , Adam Philippe , comte de Custine , and Jean Nicolas <unk> ( all had been arrested and guillotined in 1794 ) . Participation in this army , particularly in the contrasting campaigns of 1795 , which was a disaster , and 1796 , which had mixed success , provided young officers – some , like Ney , only captains at the time – with valuable experience . Furthermore , they had been tested against first class enemy commanders : Wurmser , Clerfayt , Archduke Charles , Wartensleben , for example . 
 Phipps ' analysis is not singular , although his lengthy volumes address in detail the value of this " school for marshals . " In 1895 , Richard Phillipson Dunn @-@ Pattison had also singled out the French Revolutionary army as " the finest school the world has yet seen for an apprenticeship in the trade of arms . " The resurrection of the <unk> , the ancien regime civil dignity allowed Emperor Napoleon I to strengthen his newly created power by rewarding the most valuable of the generals who had served under his command during his campaigns in Italy and Egypt or soldiers who had held significant commands during the French Revolutionary Wars . Subsequently , other senior generals were promoted on six different occasions , mainly following major battlefield victories . 
 Of the members of the Army of the Rhine and Moselle , and its subsequent incarnations , Jourdan , de Soult , and Massena were among the first to be named as Marshals in Napoleon 's regime in 1804 . The army included five future Marshals of France : Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , its commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Jean @-@ Baptiste Drouet , Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr , and Édouard Adolphe Casimir Joseph Mortier . François Joseph Lefebvre , by 1804 an old man , was named an honorary marshal , but not awarded a field position . Michel Ney , in the 1795 – 1799 campaigns an intrepid cavalry commander , came into his own command under the tutelage of Moreau and Massena in the south German and Swiss campaigns . Jean de Dieu Soult had served under Moreau and Massena , becoming the latter 's right @-@ hand man during the Swiss campaign of 1799 – 1800 . Jean Baptiste <unk> , like Ney , had been a competent and sometimes inspired regimental commander in 1796 . MacDonald , Oudinot and Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr , participants in the 1796 campaign , all received honors in the third , fourth and fifth promotions ( 1809 , 1811 , 1812 ) . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 = Orchestral Works by Tomas Svoboda = 
 Orchestral Works by Tomas Svoboda ( sometimes abridged as Orchestral Works ) is a classical music album by the Oregon Symphony under the artistic direction of James DePreist , released by the record label Albany in 2003 . The album was recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon during three performances in January and June 2000 . It contains three works by Tomáš Svoboda , a Czech @-@ American composer who taught at Portland State University for more than 25 years : Overture of the Season , Op. 89 ; Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra , Op. 148 ; and Symphony No. 1 ( of Nature ) , Op. 20 . The album 's executive producers were Peter Kermani , Susan Bush , and Mark B. <unk> ; Blanton Alspaugh served as the recording producer . 
 Overture of the Season and Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra were commissioned by the Oregon Symphony . The latter was dedicated to principal percussionist Niel DePonte , who encouraged Svoboda to compose the work and who is featured on marimba ; it was the first concerto commissioned by the orchestra for one of its musicians . Though the album received a mixed critical reception , DePonte 's performance earned him a Grammy Award nomination for Best Instrumental Soloist Performance with Orchestra . Selected tracks from the album have been broadcast by classical music radio stations throughout the United States . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Orchestral Works by Tomas Svoboda , released by Albany Records in July 2003 , was recorded under the artistic direction of James DePreist and contains three works by Czech @-@ American composer Tomáš Svoboda : Overture of the Season , Op. 89 ; Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra , Op. 148 ; and Symphony No. 1 ( of Nature ) , Op. 20 . Svoboda has been regarded as Oregon 's " most prolific and performed " classical composer . Following his education at the Prague Conservatory ( 1954 – 1962 ) , the Academy of Music in Prague ( 1962 – 1964 ) and the University of Southern California ( 1966 – 1969 ) , Svoboda taught composition and music theory at Portland State University for more than 25 years . 
 Overture of the Season and Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra were recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in downtown Portland on January 9 – 10 , 2000 ; Symphony No. 1 was recorded at the same venue on June 13 , 2000 . Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra features principal percussionist Niel DePonte , who joined the orchestra in 1977 at age 24 , on marimba . Peter Kermani , Susan Bush and Mark B. <unk> served as the album 's executive producers . Blanton Alspaugh served as the recording producer . John Newton was the recording engineer , and mastering was conducted by Mark Donahue . Svoboda is credited for the album 's cover art . The album 's liner notes also credit Wendy <unk> , <unk> <unk> @-@ Summers and Henry Hillman for photography , and Dave McLaughlin for graphic design . Mixing console mastering occurred at Soundmirror , based in Massachusetts . 
 The recording was funded by Mary <unk> Tooze , a longtime philanthropist and patron of Portland 's arts community , who specifically requested the inclusion of Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra for being a " good , solid piece and one you find out more about each time you hear it " . Tooze considered the concerto the " real star " of the recording . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Overture of the Season was commissioned by the Oregon Symphony for its 83rd season ; the work 's world premiere was presented by the orchestra on October 7 , 1978 . In 1994 , the classical music writer for Philadelphia Daily News said the composition had been performed by 55 orchestras within the three previous seasons . According to Svoboda 's website , as of May 2013 the work has been performed 270 times by 141 orchestras , under the direction of 93 conductors . The " festive " overture , which is approximately eight minutes in length , employs flutes , piccolo , oboes , clarinets , bassoons , horns , trumpets , trombones , tuba , timpani , percussion , and strings . 
 Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra was commissioned by the orchestra in 1993 in conjunction with its centennial celebration . It features solo marimba and a " keyboard " quintet ( piano , harp , celeste , orchestra bells and crotales ) , with parts for flutes , piccolo , oboes , clarinets , bassoons , horns , trumpets , trombones , tuba , timpani , and strings . According to Svoboda , the work took a year to compose and marks the first concerto commissioned by the Oregon Symphony for one of its musicians . Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra is dedicated to DePonte , who encouraged Svoboda to compose a marimba concerto . For the album 's liner notes , Svoboda wrote : 
 " My approach to this work is to expose the beauty of the marimba . The gentle and majestic sounds found in the instrumental mixture within the orchestra is always respectful of the somewhat limited powers of projection of the solo instrument . Overall the concerto is stylistically lyrical and neo @-@ romantic . The energy and vitality of the marimba is highlighted through the rhythmic vitality of the composition , while marimba 's warm and resonant sound , emanating from its rosewood keyboard , is ideally suited for the lyrical sections of the piece . " 
 When the concerto is performed , according to Svoboda , instruments on stage are separated into three contrasting sections : the solo marimba , the quintet , and the remainder of the orchestra . The quintet is placed near the conductor and solo marimba , " which is the prominent voice of this uncommon ensemble " . The composition contains several instances where the quintet plays for extended periods , referred to as " islands " by Svoboda , which create " concerto grosso @-@ like interplay " with the orchestra . 
 Symphony No. 1 was completed in 1956 and premiered in Prague on September 7 , 1957 . Inspired by Svoboda 's exposure to nature within a pastoral setting , the composition was commissioned anonymously 25 years later ( 1982 ) , providing Svoboda an opportunity to make revisions . The work was influenced by Ludwig van Beethoven , Antonín Dvořák , and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ; it features polyphonic textures and asymmetrical and harmonic rhythmic elements . The symphony consists of four movements : " Moderato " , " Presto " , " Andante " , and " Allegro – Moderato " . The first , considered a chorale , is in the key of C @-@ sharp minor and features a theme performed by flute . The second movement , a scherzo , features a " quick , motoric " triple rhythm and meter . The third is a pastorale that highlights the woodwind section and incorporates a piece called " The Bird " , composed by Svoboda in 1949 at age nine . The final movement , a rondo , was influenced by Czech folk music and mixes themes supplied by earlier movements . 
 = = Reception and broadcasts = = 
 The album received a mixed reception . Blair Sanderson of AllMusic found Svoboda 's compositions to be imitative , specifically comparing Over of the Season to work by Leoš Janáček and Symphony No. 1 to " equal parts " of Hugo Alfvén and Jean Sibelius , with " just a dash " of Carl Nielsen . Sanderson criticized the harmonic language of Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra and found DePonte 's performance to be admirable but " weakly planned " . Similarly , Robert Dettmer of Classical CD Review found Svoboda 's work to be derivative and " expressively sterile " , and " no more engaging than any other marimba concerto " . However , Dettmer acknowledged that the marimba was one of his least favorite solo instruments . Dettmer wrote that DePriest " serves the composer dutifully , but not as <unk> as one might have expected " . 
 For his marimba performance , DePonte earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Instrumental Soloist Performance with Orchestra , the first time that the Oregon Symphony or any of its musicians had been recognized by the Recording Academy . Following the announcement , DePonte admitted that he was surprised by the nomination and had not felt similar emotions since learning of his invitation to join the orchestra 26 years earlier : " I am completely overwhelmed . I had no idea the recording had been submitted . " DePriest said : " The credit goes to Mary Tooze for making the recording possible , to Niel for his fine playing and to Tomas for writing such a wonderful piece . I am thrilled for everyone concerned . " Svoboda said of the nomination : " The prestige goes to the orchestra . This is a great moment for our symphony . " The Oregon Symphony 's director of public relations commented : " The running joke is that forever more , the name of this organization is ' The Grammy @-@ nominated Oregon Symphony Orchestra . ' The Grammy acknowledgment is recognized as a mark of great artistic achievement . To be nominated is about as good as it gets . " 
 Selected tracks from the album have been broadcast by classical music radio stations . Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra was aired by WFMT ( Chicago ) in March 2012 , <unk> ( Trenton , New Jersey ) in September 2013 , and <unk> ( Fayetteville , Arkansas ) in November 2013 . Symphony No. 1 was broadcast by Interlochen Public Radio in August 2012 and by <unk> ( Philadelphia ) in November 2013 . WNYC ( New York City ) has aired the marimba concerto and Symphony No. 1 as recently as January 2011 and January 2014 , respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All works by Tomáš Svoboda . 
 Overture of the Season , Op. 89 – 8 : 42 
 Concerto for Marimba and Orchestra , Op. 148 
 " Con moto " – 8 : 48 
 " Adagio " – 8 : 08 
 " Vivace " – 8 : 39 
 Symphony No. 1 ( of Nature ) , Op. 20 
 " Moderato " – 10 : 08 
 " Presto " – 8 : 13 
 " Andante " – 6 : 56 
 " Allegro – Moderato " – 10 : 18 
 Track listing adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = = Orchestra roster = = = 
 Orchestra roster adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 " * " designates acting orchestra members ; " * * " designates musicians on a leave of absence ; " * * * " designates extra musicians ; " * * * * " designates contract musicians . 
 = Confiscated Armenian properties in Turkey = 
 The confiscation of Armenian properties by the Ottoman and Turkish governments involved seizure of the assets , properties and land of the country 's Armenian community . Starting with the Hamidian massacres in the mid @-@ 1890s and peaking during the Armenian Genocide , the confiscation of the Armenian property lasted continuously until the Istanbul pogrom of 1955 and with renewed efforts in 1974 . Much of the confiscations during the Armenian Genocide were made after the Armenians were deported into the Syrian Desert with the government declaring their goods and assets left behind as " abandoned " . Virtually all properties owned by Armenians living in their ancestral homeland in Western Armenia were confiscated and later distributed among the local Muslim population . Renewed efforts were introduced in 1974 where the property acquired by the Armenian community after the property declaration of 1936 was confiscated . 
 Historians argue that the mass confiscation of Armenian properties was an important factor in forming the economic basis of the Turkish Republic while endowing Turkey 's economy with capital . The appropriation led to the formation of a new Turkish bourgeoisie and an exclusive middle class . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Confiscation as part of the Armenian Genocide = = = 
 On 16 May 1915 , while the Armenian Genocide was underway , a secret directive was promulgated entitled " administrative instruction regarding movable and immovable property abandoned by Armenians deported as a result of the war and unusual political circumstances . " Once enacted , the directive established special commissions , known as the " Abandoned Property Commissions " ( Turkish : <unk> @-@ i <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and the " Liquidation Commissions " ( Turkish : <unk> Komisyonu ) , which were tasked with providing detailed information and appraising the value of assets " abandoned " by deportees under the guise of " safeguarding " them . The number of these commissions rose to 33 by January 1916 . After the departure of the deportees , goods and livestock that were deemed " perishable " were prioritized as the first items that must be sold using public auctions , while the profits from these auctions were to be safeguarded under the entitlement of the owners . After providing documentation of the property ( copies provided to the owners and the Ottoman Treasury ) , the directive specified that <unk> ( Turkish refugees mainly from the Balkan wars ) were to be settled in the vacant lands and properties belonging to the deportees . Once settled , the refugees had to register the land and houses , while other assets that were affixed to the property , such as olive groves and vineyards , were to be allocated amongst them . Unwanted items and assets were to be sold in public auctions . According to historian <unk> <unk> , the settlement of <unk> into the lands and properties of deported Armenians implies that local authorities had firsthand knowledge that the deportees were to never return . 
 On 29 May 1915 , the Committee of Union and Progress ( CUP ) Central Committee passed the Tehcir Law authorizing the deportation of " persons judged to be a threat to national security . " The Tehcir Law emphasized that the deportees must not sell their assets , but instead provide a detailed list and submit the list to the local authorities : 
 Leave all your belongings — your furniture , your <unk> , your artifacts . Close your shops and businesses with everything inside . Your doors will be sealed with special stamps . On your return , you will get everything you left behind . Do not sell property or any expensive item . Buyers and sellers alike will be liable for legal action . Put your money in a bank in the name of a relative who is out of the country . Make a list of everything you own , including livestock , and give it to the specified official so that all your things can be returned to you later . You have ten days to comply with this ultimatum . 
 While the Tehcir law was being carried out , the Directorate for the Settlement of Tribes and Refugees ( Turkish : <unk> @-@ i <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , under the Ministry of Internal Affairs , was tasked in June 1915 to deal with the property left behind by deported or killed Armenians . This commission , whose salaries were provided by property confiscated by Armenians , produced the " Temporary Law of <unk> and Confiscation ( " Abandoned Properties " law ) and published in the official register on 27 September ( 13 September according to the Islamic calendar ) and passed a further directive for implementation of the law on 8 November . The objectives of the laws were simultaneously to reduce Armenian property ownership , enrich national politicians , and to resettle Turkish Muslim refugees in property which was seized . The property confiscated included personal property ( including land , buildings , and bank accounts ) , businesses , and also community property ( e.g. churches ) . Items that were considered useful for the immediacy of the war effort were prioritized and immediately confiscated with a separate decree . Under the law , property and asset transactions were forbidden prior to the deportation thereby preventing the owners from having the opportunity to keep his or her property . Although the law was called " Temporary " , the provisions within it seemed to aim toward the permanent transformation of the ethnicity of communities from Armenian to Turkish Muslim . 
 These resettlement laws did contain formal reporting of property to national authorities and contained procedures for those who had property taken to sue , but the specifics of the law made these provisions serve the larger goal to " <unk> " regions and economic sectors . The property records and revenue generated from the sale or rent of confiscated property were all recorded and deposited with the Ministry of Financial Affairs to provide for the possible return of property to owners . In addition , the law provided that those whose property had been confiscated to sue for return of the property ( and payment for any damages which occurred ) . However , the law required property owners to sue and be present themselves ( not allowing the power of attorney ) , an impossibility when property owners had been killed or deported . In addition , the defendant in any case would be the state which made the chances of success in any lawsuit extremely unlikely . Finally , the law provided that the confiscated property be sold at auction ; however , because the law specified that " anybody other than Turkish Muslim refugees can only acquire property in Turkey with the approval of the Ministry of Internal Affairs " , the result was that non @-@ Turkish Muslims were effectively excluded . Property was provided often to national and local political elites , who eventually gave them to Turkish Muslim refugees . 
 The impacts of these laws were immediate . According to a report in June 1916 by the German ambassador stationed in Constantinople , the goods of the Armenians " have long since been confiscated , and their capital has been liquidated by a so @-@ called commission , which means that if an Armenian owned a house valued at , say , £ <unk> , a Turk – a friend or member [ of the Ittihad and <unk> ] – could have it for around £ T2 . " 
 The only notable domestic opposition was by Ottoman parliamentary representative Ahmed Riza , who stated : 
 It is unlawful to designate the Armenian assets as " abandoned goods " for the Armenians , the proprietors , did not abandon their properties voluntarily ; they were forcibly , compulsorily removed from their domiciles and exiled . Now the government through its efforts is selling their goods ... Nobody can sell my property if I am unwilling to sell it . Article 21 of the Constitution forbids it . If we are a constitutional regime functioning in accordance with constitutional law we can 't do this . This is atrocious . Grab my arm , eject me from my village , then sell my goods and properties , such a thing can never be permissible . Neither the conscience of the Ottomans nor the law can allow it . 
 Formal directives were made to have much of the properties and businesses confiscated from the Armenians to be transferred into the hands of Muslims . On 6 January 1916 , Talaat Pasha , the Interior Minister of the Ottoman Empire , decreed : 
 The movable property left by the Armenians should be conserved for long @-@ term preservation , and for the sake of an increase of Muslim businesses in our country , companies need to be established strictly made up of Muslims . Movable property should be given to them under suitable conditions that will guarantee the business 's steady consolidation . The founder , the management , and the representatives should be chosen from honorable leaders and the elite , and to allow tradesmen and agriculturists to participate in its dividends , the vouchers need to be half a lira or one lira and registered to their names to preclude that the capital falls in foreign hands . The growth of entrepreneurship in the minds of Muslim people needs to be monitored , and this endeavor and the results of its implementation need to be reported to the ministry step by step . 
 In addition to churches and monasteries , other community owned properties confiscated were schools and educational facilities . The Interior Ministry had ordered such educational facilities to be assigned to Muslims : 
 It is necessary to appropriate the schools of the towns and villages that have been emptied of Armenians to Muslim immigrants to be settled there . However , the present value of the buildings , the amount and value of its educational materials needs to be registered and sent to the department of general recordkeeping . 
 Following the decree , private Armenian schools became Ottoman Turkish schools and school supplies were distributed to the Turkish Muslim population . Abraham <unk> , a priest living in Zeitun , notes in his memoirs that the school in Zeitun was confiscated by the government and that " the Armenians no longer had any right to education , and the campus was now filled with hundreds of Turkish children . " 
 By the early 1930s , all properties belonging to Armenians who were subject to deportation had been confiscated . Since then , no restitution of property confiscated during the Armenian Genocide has taken place . The laws concerning abandoned property remained in effect for 73 years until it was finally abolished on 11 June 1986 . The mass confiscation of properties provided the opportunity for ordinary lower class Turks ( i.e. peasantry , soldiers , and laborers ) to rise to the ranks of the middle class . Contemporary Turkish historian <unk> <unk> <unk> asserts that " the elimination of the Armenian population left the state an infrastructure of Armenian property , which was used for the progress of Turkish ( settler ) communities . In other words : the construction of an <unk> Turkish " national economy " was unthinkable without the destruction and expropriation of Armenians . " 
 = = = = Extent of Ottoman confiscation = = = = 
 Although the exact extent of confiscated property during the Armenian Genocide is unknown , according to Talaat Pasha 's private documents , the chief initiator of the Tehcir Law , a total of 20 @,@ 545 buildings were confiscated including 267 @,@ 536 acres of land along with other parcels of agricultural and <unk> lands such as 76 @,@ 942 acres of vineyards , 703 @,@ 941 acres of olive groves , and 4 @,@ 573 acres of mulberry gardens . 
 During the Paris Peace Conference , the Armenian delegation presented an assessment of $ 3 @.@ 7 billion ( about $ 51 billion today ) worth of material losses owned solely by the Armenian church . During the conference in February 1920 , the Armenian community presented an additional demand for the restitution of property and assets seized by the Ottoman government . The joint declaration , which was submitted to the Supreme Council by the Armenian delegation and prepared by the religious leaders of the Armenian community , claimed that the Ottoman government had destroyed 2 @,@ 000 churches and 200 monasteries and had provided the legal system for giving these properties to other parties . The declaration also provided a financial assessment of the total losses of personal property and assets of both Turkish and Russian Armenia with 14 @,@ 598 @,@ 510 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 532 @,@ 472 @,@ 000 Francs respectively ; totaling to an estimated $ 328 billion today . Furthermore , the Armenian community asked for the restitution of church owned property and reimbursement of its generated income . The Ottoman government never responded to this declaration and so restitution did not occur . 
 The issue of confiscated Armenian property came about in a number of treaties signed between the First Republic of Armenia and the Ottoman Empire . Both the Treaty of Batum ( signed 4 June 1918 ) and the Treaty of Sevres ( signed 10 August 1920 ) contained provisions related to the restitution for confiscated properties of Armenians . The Treaty of Sevres under Article 144 specified that the Abandoned Property commissions and Liquidation commissions must be abolished and the laws of confiscation be annulled . Meanwhile , however , those who seized the assets and properties of Armenians turned to support the Turkish national movement since the dissolution of the Ottoman government would mean that the properties and assets would be protected under their name . Thus , on 8 May 1920 , the first law promulgated by the newly established parliament was to pardon those charged of massacre and expropriation of property by the Turkish Courts @-@ Martial of 1919 @-@ 20 . Furthermore , with the establishment of the Turkish republic and the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne ( 24 July 1923 ) , the provisions of the Treaty of Sevres eventually never took effect and the liquidation committees involved with the confiscation of Armenian property resumed operations . 
 In addition to confiscated property , large sums of money and precious metals belonging to Armenians were also seized and deposited into the treasuries of the Ottoman government or in various German or Austrian banks during the war . Such sums were believed to be withdrawn from the bank accounts of deported and killed Armenians . An official memorandum prepared by former British Prime Ministers Stanley Baldwin and H. H. Asquith was sent to then Prime Minister of Great Britain Ramsay MacDonald describing such seizures and deposits : 
 The sum of 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Turkish gold pounds ( representing about 30 @.@ 000 kilograms of gold ) deposited by the Turkish government at the Reichsbank in Berlin in 1916 , and taken over by the Allies after the Armistice , was in large part ( perhaps wholly ) Armenian money . After the forced deportation of the Armenians in 1915 , their current and deposit accounts were transferred , by government order , to the State Treasury in Constantinople . 
 Much of the money deposits into banks and other financial institutions have also been subsequently seized in the immediate aftermath of the deportations . Once a deposit was made , a certificate was given to the depositor as a proof of deposit . However , once the deportations began , withdrawals were prohibited . Much of the deportees who had held deposits were left with only certificates in their possession . Many of the depositors still carry the certificates of deposit today . Historian Kevork <unk> states that the worth of these deposits " should rise to astronomical sums today , " with the " deposited capital and interests combined . " 
 = = = Confiscation during the Turkish Republic = = = 
 Following the Turkish War of Independence and the creation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923 , the confiscation resumed with most Armenians having been deported or killed . During the early Republican era , the legal terminology was changed from " transported persons " to " persons who lost or fled from the country . " 
 On 15 April 1923 , just before the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne , the Turkish government enacted the " Law of Abandoned Properties " which confiscated properties of any Armenian who was not present on their property , regardless of the circumstances of the reason . While local courts were authorized to appraise the value of any property and provide an avenue for property owners to make claims , the law prohibited the use of any power of attorney by absent property holders , preventing them from filing suit without returning to the country . In addition , the defendant in the case would be the state of Turkey which had created specially tasked committees to deal with each case . 
 In addition to this law , the Turkish government continued revoking the citizenship of many people with a law on 23 May 1927 which stated that " Ottoman subjects who during the War of Independence took no part in the National movement , kept out of Turkey and did not return from 24 July 1923 to the date of the publication of this law , have forfeited Turkish nationality . " Additionally , a further law passed on 28 May 1928 stipulated that those who had lost their citizenship would be expelled from Turkey , not allowed to return , and that their property would be confiscated by the Turkish government , and Turkish migrants would be resettled in the properties . 
 In the preparation for possible entry into World War II , the Turkish government introduced a tax , the <unk> <unk> , which disproportionately targeted Turkey 's non @-@ Muslim residents . Many Armenians , and other non @-@ Muslim populations , were forced to sell their property at significantly reduced prices through public auctions in order to pay for the sudden tax hike or have the properties confiscated by the state . In addition , the law allowed authorities to confiscate the property of any relative of a taxed person in order to pay the tax . From this tax , the Turkish government collected 314 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 liras or about US $ 270 million ( 80 % of the state budget ) from the confiscation of non @-@ Muslim assets . 
 This period coincided with further confiscations of private property belonging to Armenians . Special commissions were created to separate the evictions of non @-@ Muslims from others . The investigators of this commission usually expedited the evacuation and eventual confiscation of the non @-@ Muslim property in question . 
 The <unk> <unk> was followed by the Istanbul pogrom a few years later , where an organized mob attacked Greeks and Armenians on 6 – 7 September 1955 . The material damage was considerable , with damage to <unk> properties ( including <unk> homes , 1004 businesses , 73 churches , 2 monasteries , 1 synagogue , and 26 schools ) . Estimates of the economic cost of the damage range from the Turkish government 's estimate of 69 @.@ 5 million Turkish lira ( equivalent to 24 @.@ 8 million US $ ) , the British estimate of 100 million GBP ( about 200 million US $ ) , the World Council of Churches ' estimate of 150 million US $ , and the Greek government 's estimate of 500 million US $ . The pogrom eventually lead to an exodus of non @-@ Muslims out of the country , resulting in a significant amount of " abandoned " properties . The property left behind by those who fled were confiscated by the Turkish state after ten years . 
 In the 1960s , new laws were passed , which made it impossible for Armenians to establish new foundations nor to buy or bequeath additional properties . One such law code ( Law no . 903 ) adopted in 1967 , along with a second paragraph amended to the Turkish Civil Code ( no . 743 ) declared that , " The registration of foundations that are in violation of law , morality , tradition or national interests , or that were established to support a political belief , a certain race or members of a minority will not be approved . " Such laws are considered by legal experts as a violation of articles concerning minority rights found in the Treaty of <unk> , the Turkish constitution , and Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which grants the " freedom to establish foundations and hold meetings . " The new amendment and law code became the basis for a new series of confiscations that significantly obstructed the daily lives of Armenians in Turkey . 
 In 1974 new legislation was passed that stated that non @-@ Muslim trusts could not own more property than that which had been registered under their name in 1936 . As a result , more than 1 @,@ 400 assets ( included churches , schools , residential buildings , hospitals , summer camps , cemeteries , and orphanages ) of the Istanbul Armenian community since 1936 were retrospectively classified as illegal acquisitions and seized by the state . Under the legislation , the Turkish courts rendered Turkish citizens of non @-@ Turkish descent as " foreigners " , thereby placing them under the same legal regulations of any foreign company or property holder living outside of Turkey who was not a Turkish national . The provisions further provided that foundations belonging to non @-@ Muslims are a potential " threat " to national security . The process involved returning any property acquired after 1936 , whether through lottery , will , donation , or purchase , to their former owners or inheritors . If former owners had died leaving no inheritors , the property was to be transferred to specified governmental agencies such as the Treasury or the Directorate General of Foundations . 
 On 11 June 1986 , the laws concerning " abandoned " properties during the Armenian Genocide were abrogated , which ended 73 years of effectiveness . Throughout the Republican period , the laws continued to provide a legal basis for the confiscation of additional property that belonged to the deportees . Though the laws were abolished in 1986 , the General Directorate of Land Registry and Cadastre ( Turkish : Tapu ve <unk> <unk> <unk> ) issued an order on 29 June 2001 which effectively transferred all the leftover " abandoned " properties to the government . The order also forbid the disclosure of any information regarding the title or the documentation of the properties . As a result , the owners or their heirs could not make claims to the property since it was now securely sanctioned under Turkish law and had become property of the state . 
 = = = Current developments = = = 
 Terminology of former legislation and civil codes have not significantly changed since the 1960s and 70s , ultimately subjugating the assets and properties of the Armenian community to further confiscations . Though terminology has slightly changed , the current civil codes still have enough executive powers to confiscate property under the basis of protecting the " national unity " of the Republic of Turkey . 
 Due to such regulations and law codes , no church was ever constructed in the history of the Republic of Turkey . All churches in existence today were built before the establishment of the Republic in 1923 . A permit for the construction of a Syriac church was granted in December 2012 , however , it was refused by the Assyrian community since the land used to be a Latin cemetery . 
 In an attempt by the ruling Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) to comply with European Union standards , the opening up of the Ottoman land registry and deed records to the public were considered . However , on 26 August 2005 , the National Security Committee of the Turkish Armed Forces forbid such attempts by stating : 
 The Ottoman records kept at the Land Register and <unk> Surveys General Directorate offices must be sealed and not available to the public , as they have the potential to be exploited by alleged genocide claims and property claims against the State Charitable Foundation assets . Opening them to general public use is against state interests . 
 On 15 June 2011 , the United States House Foreign Affairs Committee of the 112th Congress passed House Resolution 306 by a vote of 43 to one which demanded from the Republic of Turkey " to safeguard its Christian heritage and to return confiscated church properties . " Turkish @-@ American organizations attempted to block the bill from passing but ultimately failed . 
 = = Contemporary analysis = = 
 = = = Istanbul = = = 
 After two years of research , the Hrant Dink Foundation published a book , some 400 pages long , describing the current situation of seized assets and properties of the Armenian community . With the help of government deed and title records , the members of the Hrant Dink foundation have uncovered the title records of all the properties owned by various foundations and have produced the book replete with photographs , charts , maps , and other illustrations which describe the seized properties and assets and its current status . The Hrant Dink foundation states that 661 properties in Istanbul alone were confiscated by the Turkish government , leaving only 580 of the 1 @,@ 328 properties owned by the 53 Armenian foundations ( schools , churches , hospitals , etc . ) . The current circumstances of the remaining 87 could not be determined . Out of the 661 confiscated properties , 143 ( 21 @.@ 6 % ) have been returned to the Armenian foundation . 
 The Hrant Dink foundation researched confiscations and provided descriptions , photographs and boundary lines on its online interactive mapping resource . 
 = = Notable confiscations = = 
 = Old Money ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " Old Money " is the seventeenth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 28 , 1991 . In the episode , Grampa 's wealthy girlfriend at the Retirement Castle passes away and leaves him with $ 106 @,@ 000 . He heads for a casino to spend the money , but is stopped by Homer , so he decides to spend the inheritance money on renovating the retirement home instead . 
 The episode was written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky and directed by David Silverman . Audrey Meadows guest starred in it as Beatrice " Bea " Simmons , Grampa 's new girlfriend . Professor Frink also makes his debut in the episode . It features cultural references to films such as Tom Jones and If I Had a Million , and the Star Wars and Batman film franchises . Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 3 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After another Sunday with the Simpsons , Grampa meets Beatrice " Bea " Simmons , a resident at the Springfield Retirement Castle . They go on a date and fall in love . When Bea 's birthday arrives on a Sunday , Homer makes Grampa come on a family outing . The outing causes Grampa to miss Bea 's birthday . Grampa returns home expecting to see Bea . However , Jasper tells Grampa that Bea died of a burst ventricle while Grampa was out with the family . Left deeply depressed by her death , Grampa attends her funeral , where he angrily lashes out at Homer and refuses to speak to him . 
 Grampa receives Bea 's inheritance of $ 106 @,@ 000 . After time contemplating how to spend the money , Grampa soon forgives Homer , and decides to spend the inheritance on improving the retirement home . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky and directed by David Silverman . The discount lion safari in the episode that the Simpson family visits was based on the drive @-@ through Lion Country Safari , located in Loxahatchee , Palm Beach County , Florida , that Kogen used to visit when he was younger . " Old Money " was the first episode to feature Grampa 's full name , Abraham Simpson . Matt Groening , creator of The Simpsons , named the main characters after his own family members ( except for Bart , an anagram of brat , which he substituted for his own name ) , but refused to name Grampa after his grandfather , Abram Groening . He left it to the writers to choose a name and they chose " Abraham " , not knowing that it was also the name of Groening 's grandfather . 
 The now recurring character Professor Frink makes his first appearance on the show in this episode . Frink was originally written as a mad scientist , but when cast member Hank Azaria ad @-@ libbed a voice for Frink , he did an impression of Jerry Lewis 's The Nutty Professor character , and the writing staff started making Frink more of a parody of Lewis . Frink was named after The Simpsons writer John Frink ; however , that was before he became a writer for the show . The episode features a guest appearance from American actress Audrey Meadows as Bea . Al Jean , a writer on the show , said Meadows was perfect for the role because she was very sweet , and the staff had a lot of fun during the recording sessions with her . This is the only episode to date where the closing credits actually states which characters each actor voices . This was done because the staff often received questions from fans regarding what characters each voice actor provided the voice for . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The scene with Grampa and Bea eating their pills seductively is a reference to the 1963 film Tom Jones . Two of the people waiting in line to ask for Grampa 's money are Darth Vader and the Joker . When the family is suggesting places they could go , Homer suggests the Springfield Mystery Spot , a reference to the Mystery Spot in California — although Lisa says that the Springfield Spot is simply a puddle of mud . They eventually decide to go the Discount Lion Safari , however . The Diz @-@ Nee @-@ Land amusement park that Grampa visits with Bea 's money has a sign that reads " Diz @-@ Nee @-@ Land — Not affiliated with Disneyland , Walt Disney World , or anything else from the Walt Disney Company " . The shot of Grampa sitting at a diner resembles the 1942 American painting Nighthawks . Before Grampa attempts to bet all of his money on Roulette he quotes the poem " If — " by Rudyard Kipling . The climax scenes , where Grampa uses the money to fix up the Springfield Retirement Castle , is a reference to the ending of the 1932 film If I Had a Million . Dr. Marvin Monroe 's ' Monroe Box ' is meant to be a spoof of B. F. Skinner 's Skinner Box . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Old Money " finished thirty @-@ sixth in the ratings for the week of March 25 – 31 , 1991 , with a Nielsen Rating of 12 @.@ 4 . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . The episode was released in video collection on May 4 , 1994 , called The Simpsons Collection , together with the episode " Dancin ' Homer " . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " A wonderful episode , very sad but ultimately uplifting , with great one @-@ liners ( particularly from Grampa ) . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide was not as positive . He said , " With ' Old Money ' , we find easily the <unk> episode of season two . Actually , I ’ d call this clunker the only bad show of the year . " He went on to say , " I guess ' Old Money ' wasn ’ t a truly terrible episode , as it included a few funny moments . However , it seemed like one of the <unk> Simpsons episodes ever . The program became inundated with sentiment , and it did little to leaven that tide . In a generally strong season , ' Old Money ' stands out as the only real clunker . " 
 = Kansas Saloon Smashers = 
 Kansas Saloon Smashers is a 1901 comedy short film produced and distributed by Edison Studios . Directed by Edwin S. Porter , it is a satire of American activist Carrie Nation . The film portrays Nation and her followers entering and destroying a saloon . After the bartender retaliates by spraying Nation with water , policemen order them out ; the identities of the actors are not known . Inspiration for the film was provided by an editorial cartoon which appeared in the New York Evening Journal . 
 Kansas Saloon Smashers became a success upon its March release , and inspired other films about Nation to be produced by Lubin Manufacturing Company and Biograph Company . It was not the only film produced by Edison Studios to mock Nation ; released the same year , Why Mr. Nation Wants a Divorce parodied the relationship between Nation and her husband . A print of the film is preserved in the Library of Congress , and it was released on DVD in 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A bartender is working at a saloon , serving drinks to customers . After he fills a stereotypically Irish man 's bucket with beer , Carrie Nation and her followers burst inside . They assault the Irish man , pulling his hat over his eyes and then dumping the beer over his head . The group then begin wrecking the bar , smashing the fixtures , mirrors , and breaking the cash register . The bartender then sprays seltzer water in Nation 's face before a group of policemen appear and order everybody to leave . 
 = = Production = = 
 After American activist Carrie Nation first attacked a saloon in December 1900 , silent motion pictures dealing with the subject of alcohol began to be produced , a testament to Nation 's national notoriety and her influence over studios at the time . Kansas Saloon Smashers was produced by Edison Studios as a parody of Nation 's crusade . Charles Musser , a film historian , writes that " the front page of the New York Journal was an excellent indicator of events considered worthy of the Kinetograph Department 's attention throughout 1901 @-@ 1902 . " 
 The director of Kansas Saloon Smashers was Edwin S. Porter , a projectionist who came to work for Edison as a cameraman in 1900 . Eventually , Porter became the director responsible for all of Edison Studios ' output . Porter based the set off of a photograph of a wrecked saloon which appeared in the Journal , while the characters and plot were based on editorial cartoons published in the paper . Porter frequently read the publication when he wanted inspiration on topics that filmgoers would be interested in . 
 With production supervised by James H. White , Porter was assisted by George S. Fleming during the creation of Kansas Saloon Smashers . Fleming was an actor and scenic designer at Edison Studios , who had joined the studio in January 1901 . Porter operated the camera for the film , and also developed the footage . Kansas Saloon Smashers marked one of the first short films to be created under Fleming and Porter 's partnership . While none of the identities of the people who appeared in the picture are recorded , it is known the women in the film were played by men in drag , rendering them sexually unattractive . 
 Kansas Saloon Smashers features stop action techniques , used to portray Nation destroying the bar ; it was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white . A copyright was filed for the film on February 2 , 1903 . The finished product comprised around 60 to 65 feet ( around 18 m ) of 35 mm film . Kansas Saloon Smashers was not the only satire of Nation to be produced by Edison Studios . Why Mr. Nation Wants a Divorce , a comedy picture released the same year , was inspired by news articles on Nation 's husband requesting a divorce . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Kansas Saloon Smashers has been categorized as burlesque , re @-@ enactment , and political satire . Being based on a recent news event , it is noted as helping further the " visual newspaper " style of film . The short portrays saloons as positive , sanitary places rather than immoral establishments . In Musser 's book The Emergence of Cinema , he writes that " the women 's invasion of a male refuge is seemingly attributed to sexual frustration and the concomitant need for revenge , " while author Karen Blumenthal opined that Kansas Saloon Smashers suggests women were only attacking due to a few miscreants being present in the establishments . 
 Film critic Dave Kehr noted in a 2007 The New York Times article that , along with Why Mr. Nation Wants a Divorce , the film now seems dated due to the fact that " the evil influence of liquor is no longer the burning question it was " . Critic Alan Scherstuhl wrote in Village Voice that the film worked as " evidence that the first things our visual mass @-@ media culture sold to its audience were comic licentiousness — and the impulse to clean such filth up . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Initially advertised as Mrs. Carrie Nation and Her Hatchet Brigade , Kansas Saloon Smashers was distributed by Edison Studios and first released on March 16 , 1901 . A unique publicity still was created for the film , a rare occasion at the time . Upon release , the film was screened at <unk> 's Ninth and Arch Street Museum in Philadelphia , where it received an entire bill . Nevertheless , the short made Nation and her followers incensed , and Nation found the view of saloons Porter 's film offered to be " disturbing " . 
 The film proved to be very successful , inspiring other films about Nation to be produced by other studios ; Biograph Company made Carrie Nation Smashing a Saloon in April , while Lubin Manufacturing Company had produced a film entitled Mrs. Nation and Her Hatchet Brigade by early March . Siegmund Lubin had attempted to capitalize on the success of Kansas Saloon Smashers by making a film where Nation herself appeared ; when he was unable to contact her , an actress was hired to play her . Lubin arranged with a Camden bar owner to film a staged destruction scene ; however , the actress proved so convincing that bystanders began to destroy the bar for real and Lubin was forced to pay up to seven hundred dollars damage . 
 Kansas Saloon Smashers film is now in the public domain , and a paper print is preserved in the Library of Congress . This paper print was used to recover the film for a 2007 DVD release , as part of the compilation Social Issues in American Film 1900 – 1934 . The compilation , part of the Treasures from American Film Archives produced by the National Film Preservation Foundation , features several films from the period which had particular focus on common issues at their releases . The other Edison @-@ produced Nation film , Why Mr. Nation Wants a Divorce , is also included . 
 = Père Goriot = 
 Le Père Goriot ( French pronunciation : ​ [ lə <unk> <unk> ] , Old Goriot or Father Goriot ) is an 1835 novel by French novelist and playwright Honoré de Balzac ( 1799 – 1850 ) , included in the Scènes de la vie privée section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine . Set in Paris in 1819 , it follows the intertwined lives of three characters : the elderly doting Goriot ; a mysterious criminal @-@ in @-@ hiding named Vautrin ; and a naive law student named Eugène de Rastignac . 
 Originally published in serial form during the winter of 1834 / 35 , Le Père Goriot is widely considered Balzac 's most important novel . It marks the first serious use by the author of characters who had appeared in other books , a technique that distinguishes Balzac 's fiction . The novel is also noted as an example of his realist style , using minute details to create character and subtext . 
 The novel takes place during the Bourbon Restoration , which brought profound changes to French society ; the struggle by individuals to secure a higher social status is a major theme in the book . The city of Paris also impresses itself on the characters – especially young Rastignac , who grew up in the provinces of southern France . Balzac analyzes , through Goriot and others , the nature of family and marriage , providing a pessimistic view of these institutions . 
 The novel was released to mixed reviews . Some critics praised the author for his complex characters and attention to detail ; others condemned him for his many depictions of corruption and greed . A favorite of Balzac 's , the book quickly won widespread popularity and has often been adapted for film and the stage . It gave rise to the French expression " Rastignac " , a social climber willing to use any means to better his situation . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 Le Père Goriot begins in June 1819 , following Napoleon 's defeat at Waterloo , after the House of Bourbon had been restored to the throne of France . Tension was mounting between the aristocracy , which had returned with King Louis XVIII , and the bourgeoisie produced by the Industrial Revolution . During this era , France saw a tightening of social structures , with a lower class steeped in overwhelming poverty . By one estimate , almost three @-@ quarters of Parisians did not make the 500 – 600 francs a year required for a minimal standard of living . At the same time , this upheaval made possible a social mobility unthinkable during the Ancien Régime of previous centuries . Individuals willing to adapt themselves to the rules of this new society could sometimes ascend into its upper echelons from modest backgrounds , much to the distaste of the established wealthy class . 
 = = = Literary background = = = 
 When Balzac began writing Le Père Goriot in 1834 , he had written several dozen books , including a stream of pseudonymously published potboiler novels . In 1829 he published Les Chouans , the first novel to which he signed his own name ; this was followed by Louis Lambert ( 1832 ) , Le Colonel Chabert ( 1832 ) , and La Peau de chagrin ( 1831 ) . Around this time , Balzac began organizing his work into a sequence of novels that he eventually called La Comédie humaine , divided into sections representing various aspects of life in France during the early 19th century . 
 One of these aspects which fascinated Balzac was the life of crime . In the winter of 1828 – 29 , a French grifter @-@ turned @-@ policeman named Eugène François Vidocq published a pair of sensationalized memoirs recounting his criminal exploits . Balzac met Vidocq in April 1834 , and used him as a model for a character named Vautrin he was planning for an upcoming novel . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 In the summer of 1834 Balzac began to work on a tragic story about a father who is rejected by his daughters . His journal records several undated lines about the plot : " Subject of Old Goriot – A good man – middle @-@ class lodging @-@ house – 600 fr. income – having stripped himself bare for his daughters who both have 50 @,@ 000 fr. income – dying like a dog . " He wrote the first draft of Le Père Goriot in forty autumn days ; it was published as a serial in the Revue de Paris between December and February . It was released as a novel in March 1835 by the publishing house of <unk> , who also published the second edition in May . A much @-@ revised third edition was published in 1839 by Charpentier . As was his custom , Balzac made copious notes and changes on proofs he received from publishers , so that the later editions of his novels were often significantly different from the earliest . In the case of Le Père Goriot , he changed a number of the characters into persons from other novels he had written , and added new paragraphs filled with detail . 
 The character Eugène de Rastignac had appeared as an old man in Balzac 's earlier philosophical fantasy novel La Peau de chagrin . While writing the first draft of Le Père Goriot , Balzac named the character " <unk> " , but he decided to use the same character from La Peau de chagrin . Other characters were changed in a similar fashion . It was his first structured use of recurring characters , a practice whose depth and rigor came to characterize his novels . 
 In 1843 Balzac placed Le Père Goriot in the section of La Comédie humaine entitled " Scènes de la vie parisienne " ( " Scenes of life in Paris " ) . Quickly thereafter , he reclassified it – due to its intense focus on the private lives of its characters – as one of the " Scènes de la vie privée " ( " Scenes of private life " ) . These categories and the novels in them were his attempt to create a body of work " depicting all society , sketching it in the immensity of its turmoil " . Although he had prepared only a small predecessor for La Comédie humaine , entitled Études de Mœurs , at this time , Balzac carefully considered each work 's place in the project and frequently rearranged its structure . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel opens with an extended description of the Maison Vauquer , a boarding house in Paris ' rue Neuve @-@ Sainte @-@ Geneviève covered with vines , owned by the widow Madame Vauquer . The residents include the law student Eugène de Rastignac , a mysterious agitator named Vautrin , and an elderly retired vermicelli @-@ maker named Jean @-@ Joachim Goriot . The old man is ridiculed frequently by the other boarders , who soon learn that he has bankrupted himself to support his two well @-@ married daughters . 
 Rastignac , who moved to Paris from the south of France , becomes attracted to the upper class . He has difficulty fitting in , but is tutored by his cousin , Madame de Beauséant , in the ways of high society . Rastignac endears himself to one of Goriot 's daughters , Delphine , after extracting money from his own already @-@ poor family . Vautrin , meanwhile , tries to convince Rastignac to pursue an unmarried woman named Victorine , whose family fortune is blocked only by her brother . He offers to clear the way for Rastignac by having the brother killed in a duel . 
 Rastignac refuses to go along with the plot , <unk> at the idea of having someone killed to acquire their wealth , but he takes note of Vautrin 's machinations . This is a lesson in the harsh realities of high society . Before long , the boarders learn that police are seeking Vautrin , revealed to be a master criminal nicknamed Trompe @-@ la @-@ Mort ( " <unk> of Death " ) . Vautrin arranges for a friend to kill Victorine 's brother , in the meantime , and is captured by the police . 
 Goriot , supportive of Rastignac 's interest in his daughter and furious with her husband 's tyrannical control over her , finds himself unable to help . When his other daughter , Anastasie , informs him that she has been selling off her husband 's family jewelry to pay her lover 's debts , the old man is overcome with grief at his own impotence and suffers a stroke . 
 Delphine does not visit Goriot as he lies on his deathbed , and Anastasie arrives too late , only once he has lost consciousness . Before dying , Goriot rages about their disrespect toward him . His funeral is attended only by Rastignac , a servant named Christophe , and two paid mourners . Goriot 's daughters , rather than being present at the funeral , send their empty coaches , each bearing their families ' respective coat of arms . After the short ceremony , Rastignac turns to face Paris as the lights of evening begin to appear . He sets out to dine with Delphine de Nucingen and declares to the city : " À nous deux , <unk> ! " ( " It 's between you and me now ! " ) 
 = = Style = = 
 Balzac 's style in Le Père Goriot is influenced by the American novelist James Fenimore Cooper and Scottish writer Walter Scott . In Cooper 's representations of Native Americans , Balzac saw a human barbarism that survived through attempts at civilization . In a preface to the second edition in 1835 , Balzac wrote that the title character Goriot – who made his fortune selling vermicelli during a time of widespread hunger – was an " Illinois of the flour trade " and a " Huron of the grain market " . Vautrin refers to Paris as " a forest of the New World where twenty varieties of savage tribes clash " – another sign of Cooper 's influence . 
 Scott was also a profound influence on Balzac , particularly in his use of real historical events as the backdrop for his novels . Although history is not central to Le Père Goriot , the post @-@ Napoleonic era serves as an important setting , and Balzac 's use of meticulous detail reflects the influence of Scott . In his 1842 introduction to La Comédie humaine , Balzac praises Scott as a " modern troubadour " who " vivified [ literature ] with the spirit of the past " . At the same time , Balzac accused the Scottish writer of romanticizing history , and tried to distinguish his own work with a more balanced view of human nature . 
 Although the novel is often referred to as " a mystery " , it is not an example of whodunit or detective fiction . Instead , the central puzzles are the origins of suffering and the motivations of unusual behavior . Characters appear in fragments , with brief scenes providing small clues about their identity . Vautrin , for example , slips in and out of the story – offering advice to Rastignac , ridiculing Goriot , bribing the housekeeper Christophe to let him in after hours – before he is revealed as a master criminal . This pattern of people moving in and out of view mirrors Balzac 's use of characters throughout La Comédie humaine . 
 Le Père Goriot is also recognized as a bildungsroman , wherein a naive young person matures while learning the ways of the world . Rastignac is tutored by Vautrin , Madame de Beauséant , Goriot , and others about the truth of Parisian society and the coldly dispassionate and brutally realistic strategies required for social success . As an everyman , he is initially repulsed by the gruesome realities beneath society 's gilded surfaces ; eventually , however , he embraces them . Setting aside his original goal of mastering the law , he pursues money and women as instruments for social climbing . In some ways this mirrors Balzac 's own social education , reflecting the distaste he acquired for the law after studying it for three years . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Le Père Goriot , especially in its revised form , marks an important early instance of Balzac 's trademark use of recurring characters : persons from earlier novels appear in later works , usually during significantly different times of life . Pleased with the effect he achieved with the return of Rastignac , Balzac included 23 characters in the first edition of Le Père Goriot that would recur in later works ; during his revisions for later editions the number increased to 48 . Although Balzac had used this technique before , the characters had always reappeared in minor roles , as nearly identical versions of the same people . Rastignac 's appearance shows , for the first time in Balzac 's fiction , a novel @-@ length backstory that illuminates and develops a returning character . 
 Balzac experimented with this method throughout the thirty years he worked on La Comédie humaine . It enabled a depth of characterization that went beyond simple narration or dialogue . " When the characters reappear " , notes the critic Samuel Rogers , " they do not step out of nowhere ; they emerge from the privacy of their own lives which , for an interval , we have not been allowed to see . " Although the complexity of these characters ' lives inevitably led Balzac to make errors of chronology and consistency , the mistakes are considered minor in the overall scope of the project . Readers are more often troubled by the sheer number of people in Balzac 's world , and feel deprived of important context for the characters . Detective novelist Arthur Conan Doyle said that he never tried to read Balzac , because he " did not know where to begin " . 
 This pattern of character reuse had repercussions for the plot of Le Père Goriot . Baron de Nucingen 's reappearance in La Maison Nucingen ( 1837 ) reveals that his wife 's love affair with Rastignac was planned and coordinated by the baron himself . This new detail sheds considerable light on the actions of all three characters within the pages of Le Père Goriot , complementing the evolution of their stories in the later novel . 
 = = = Realism = = = 
 Balzac uses meticulous , abundant detail to describe the Maison Vauquer , its inhabitants , and the world around them ; this technique gave rise to his title as the father of the realist novel . The details focus mostly on the penury of the residents of the Maison Vauquer . Much less intricate are the descriptions of wealthier homes ; Madame de Beauséant 's rooms are given scant attention , and the Nucingen family lives in a house sketched in the briefest detail . 
 At the start of the novel , Balzac declares ( in English ) : " All is true " . Although the characters and situations are fictions , the details employed – and their reflection of the realities of life in Paris at the time – faithfully render the world of the Maison Vauquer . The rue Neuve @-@ Sainte @-@ Geneviève ( where the house is located ) presents " a grim look about the houses , a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls " . The interiors of the house are painstakingly described , from the shabby sitting room ( " Nothing can be more depressing " ) to the coverings on the walls depicting a feast ( " papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained " ) – an ironic decoration in a house known for its wretched food . Balzac owed the former detail to the expertise of his friend Hyacinthe de Latouche , who was trained in the practice of hanging wallpaper . The house is even defined by its repulsive smell , unique to the poor boardinghouse . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Social stratification = = = 
 One of the main themes in Le Père Goriot is the quest to understand and ascend society 's strata . The Charter of 1814 granted by King Louis XVIII had established a " legal country " which allowed only a small group of the nation 's most wealthy men to vote . Thus , Rastignac 's drive to achieve social status is evidence not only of his personal ambition but also of his desire to participate in the body politic . As with Scott 's characters , Rastignac epitomizes , in his words and actions , the Zeitgeist in which he lives . 
 Through his characters and narration , Balzac lays bare the social Darwinism of this society . In one particularly blunt speech , Madame de Beauséant tells Rastignac : 
 The more cold @-@ blooded your calculations , the further you will go . Strike ruthlessly ; you will be feared . Men and women for you must be nothing more than post @-@ horses ; take a fresh relay , and leave the last to drop by the roadside ; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition . You will be nothing here , you see , unless a woman interests herself in you ; and she must be young and wealthy , and a woman of the world . Yet , if you have a heart , lock it carefully away like a treasure ; do not let any one suspect it , or you will be lost ; you would cease to be the executioner , you would take the victim 's place . And if ever you should love , never let your secret escape you ! 
 This attitude is further explored by Vautrin , who tells Rastignac : " The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been discovered , because it was properly executed . " This sentence has been frequently – and somewhat inaccurately – paraphrased as : " Behind every great fortune is a great crime . " 
 = = = Influence of Paris = = = 
 The novel 's representations of social stratification are specific to Paris , perhaps the most densely populated city in Europe at the time . Traveling only a few blocks – as Rastignac does continually – takes the reader into vastly different worlds , distinguished by their architecture and reflecting the class of their inhabitants . Paris in the post @-@ Napoleonic era was split into distinct neighborhoods . Three of these are featured prominently in Le Père Goriot : the aristocratic area around the Boulevard Saint @-@ Germain , the newly upscale quarter of the rue de la <unk> @-@ d <unk> , and the run @-@ down area on the eastern slope of the Montagne Sainte @-@ Geneviève . 
 These quartiers of the city serve as <unk> which Rastignac seeks to master ; Vautrin , meanwhile , operates in stealth , moving among them undetected . Rastignac , as the naive young man from the country , seeks in these worlds a new home . Paris offers him a chance to abandon his far @-@ away family and remake himself in the city 's ruthless image . His urban exodus is like that of many people who moved into the French capital , doubling its population between 1800 and 1830 . The texture of the novel is thus inextricably linked to the city in which it is set ; " Paris " , explains critic Peter Brooks , " is the looming presence that gives the novel its particular tone " . 
 = = = Corruption = = = 
 Rastignac , Vautrin , and Goriot represent individuals corrupted by their desires . In his thirst for advancement , Rastignac has been compared to Faust , with Vautrin as Mephistopheles . Critic Pierre <unk> calls Vautrin 's lecture to Rastignac " one of the great moments of the Comédie humaine , and no doubt of all world literature " . France 's social upheaval provides Vautrin with a playground for an ideology based solely on personal advancement ; he encourages Rastignac to follow suit . 
 Still , it is the larger social structure that finally overwhelms Rastignac 's soul – Vautrin merely explains the methods and causes . Although he rejects Vautrin 's offer of murder , Rastignac succumbs to the principles of brutality upon which high society is built . By the end of the novel , he tells Bianchon : " I 'm in Hell , and I have no choice but to stay there . " 
 While Rastignac desires wealth and social status , Goriot longs only for the love of his daughters : a longing that borders on idolatry . Because he represents bourgeois wealth acquired through trade – and not aristocratic primitive accumulation – his daughters are happy to take his money , but will see him only in private . Even as he is dying in extreme poverty , at the end of the book , he sells his few remaining possessions to provide for his daughters so that they might look splendid at a ball . 
 = = = Family relations = = = 
 The relations between family members follow two patterns : the bonds of marriage serve mostly as Machiavellian means to financial ends , while the obligations of the older generation to the young take the form of sacrifice and deprivation . Delphine is trapped in a loveless marriage to Baron de Nucingen , a money @-@ savvy banker . He is aware of her extramarital affairs , and uses them as a means to extort money from her . Anastasie , meanwhile , is married to the comte de <unk> , who cares less about the illegitimate children she has than the jewels she sells to provide for her lover – who is conning her in a scheme that Rastignac has heard was popular in Paris . This depiction of marriage as a tool of power reflects the harsh reality of the unstable social structures of the time . 
 Parents , meanwhile , give endlessly to their children ; Goriot sacrifices everything for his daughters . Balzac refers to him in the novel as the " Christ of paternity " for his constant suffering on behalf of his children . That they abandon him , lost in their pursuit of social status , only adds to his misery . The end of the book contrasts Goriot 's deathbed moments with a festive ball hosted by Madame de Beauséant – attended by his daughters , as well as Rastignac – suggesting a fundamental schism between society and the family . 
 The betrayal of Goriot 's daughters is often compared to that of the characters in Shakespeare 's King Lear ; Balzac was even accused of plagiarism when the novel was first published . Discussing these similarities , critic George Saintsbury claims that Goriot 's daughters are " as surely <unk> of their father as [ Lear 's daughters ] Goneril and Regan " . As Herbert J. Hunt points out in Balzac 's Comédie humaine , however , Goriot 's tale is in some ways more tragic , since " he has a Regan and a Goneril , but no Cordelia " . 
 The narrative of Goriot 's painful relations with his children has also been interpreted as a tragicomic parable of Louis XVI 's decline . At a crucial moment of filial sentiment in Balzac 's novel , Vautrin breaks in singing " O Richard , O mon roi " — the royalist anthem that precipitated the October Days of 1789 and the eventual downfall of Louis XVI — a connection that would have been powerful to Balzac 's readers in the 1830s . An ill @-@ founded faith in paternal legitimacy follows both Goriot and Louis XVI into the grave . 
 Rastignac 's family , off @-@ stage , also sacrifices extensively for him . Convinced that he cannot achieve a decent status in Paris without a considerable display of wealth , he writes to his family and asks them to send him money : " Sell some of your old jewelry , my kind mother ; I will give you other jewels very soon . " They do send him the money he requests , and – although it is not described directly in the novel – endure significant hardship for themselves as a result . His family , absent while he is in Paris , becomes even more distant despite this sacrifice . Although Goriot and Vautrin offer themselves as father figures to him , by the end of the novel they are gone and he is alone . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Le Père Goriot is widely considered Balzac 's essential novel . Its influence on French literature has been considerable , as shown by novelist Félicien Marceau 's remark : " We are all children of Le Père Goriot . " Brooks refers to its " perfection of form , its economy of means and ends " . Martin Kanes , meanwhile , in his book Le <unk> Goriot : Anatomy of a Troubled World , calls it " the keystone of the Comédie humaine " . It is the central text of Anthony Pugh 's voluminous study Balzac 's Recurring Characters , and entire chapters have been written about the detail of the Maison Vauquer . Because it has become such an important novel for the study of French literature , Le Père Goriot has been translated many times into many languages . Thus , says Balzac biographer Graham Robb , " Goriot is one of the novels of La Comédie humaine that can safely be read in English for what it is . " 
 Initial reviews of the book were mixed . Some reviewers accused Balzac of plagiarism or of overwhelming the reader with detail and painting a simplistic picture of Parisian high society . Others attacked the questionable morals of the characters , implying that Balzac was guilty of legitimizing their opinions . He was condemned for not including more individuals of honorable intent in the book . Balzac responded with disdain ; in the second preface of 1835 , he wrote with regard to Goriot : " Poor man ! His daughters refused to recognize him because he had lost his fortune ; now the critics have rejected him with the excuse that he was immoral . " 
 Many critics of the time , though , were positive : a review in Le Journal des femmes proclaimed that Balzac 's eye " penetrates everywhere , like a cunning serpent , to probe women 's most intimate secrets " . Another review , in La Revue du théâtre , praised his " admirable technique of details " . The many reviews , positive and negative , were evidence of the book 's popularity and success . One publisher 's critique dismissed Balzac as a " boudoir writer " , although it predicted for him " a brief career , but a glorious and enviable one " . 
 Balzac himself was extremely proud of the work , declaring even before the final installment was published : " Le Père Goriot is a raging success ; my fiercest enemies have had to bend the knee . I have triumphed over everything , over friends as well as the envious . " As was his custom , he revised the novel between editions ; compared to other novels , however , Le Père Goriot remained largely unchanged from its initial version . 
 In the years following its release , the novel was often adapted for the stage . Two theatrical productions in 1835 – several months after the book 's publication – sustained its popularity and increased the public 's regard for Balzac . In the 20th century , a number of film versions were produced , including adaptations directed by Travers Vale ( 1915 ) , Jacques de Baroncelli ( 1922 ) , and Paddy Russell ( 1968 ) . The name of Rastignac , meanwhile , has become an iconic sobriquet in the French language ; a " Rastignac " is synonymous with a person willing to climb the social ladder at any cost . 
 Another well known line of this book by Balzac is when Vautrin tells Eugene , " In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline . " This has been reworked by Mario Puzo in the novel The Godfather ( 1969 ) and its film adaptation ( 1972 ) ; " I 'm gonna make him an offer he can 't refuse " . It was ranked as the second most significant cinematic quote in AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes ( 2005 ) by the American Film Institute . 
 = Hurricane Cindy ( 1959 ) = 
 Hurricane Cindy impacted the Carolinas , the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , New England , and the Canadian Maritime Provinces during the 1959 Atlantic hurricane season . The third storm of the season , Cindy originated from a low @-@ pressure area associated with a cold front located east of northern Florida . The low developed into a tropical depression on July 5 while tracking north @-@ northeastward , and became Tropical Storm Cindy by the next day . Cindy turned westward because of a high @-@ pressure area positioned to its north , and further intensified into a weak hurricane off the coast of the Carolinas on July 8 . Early on July 9 , Cindy made landfall near McClellanville , South Carolina , and re @-@ curved to the northeast along the fall line as a tropical depression . It re @-@ entered the Atlantic on July 10 , quickly restrengthening into a tropical storm while it began to move faster . On July 11 , Cindy passed over Cape Cod , while several other weather systems helped the storm maintain its intensity . Cindy transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on July 12 as it neared the Canadian Maritime Provinces . 
 Overall structural damage from Cindy was minimal . One driver was killed in Georgetown , South Carolina after colliding with a fallen tree , and five indirect deaths were caused by poor road conditions wrought by the storm in New England . Many areas experienced heavy rains , and several thousand people evacuated . Other than broken tree limbs , shattered windows and power outages , little damage occurred . Cindy brought a total of eleven tornadoes with it , of which two caused minor damage in North Carolina . The heaviest rainfall occurred in north central South Carolina , where rainfall amounted to 9 @.@ 79 inches ( 249 mm ) . Tides ranged from 1 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal along the coast . As drought @-@ like conditions were present in the Carolinas at the time , the rainfall produced by Hurricane Cindy in the area was beneficial . After becoming extratropical over the Canadian Maritimes , the cyclone produced heavy rains and strong winds that sunk one ship . Damage caused by Cindy was estimated at $ 75 @,@ 000 ( 1959 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cindy can be attributed to a deepening low @-@ pressure area that tracked from the Great Lakes as a related cold front traveled southeastward and became stationary over the Atlantic , extending from northern Florida to Bermuda . On July 5 , the front spawned a separate cut @-@ off cold @-@ core low off the coast of the Carolinas . This complex scenario resulted in the formation of a tropical depression later during the day , which slowly meandered north @-@ northeastward . Tropical cyclones of this origin typically remain at a small size and evolve slowly , and Cindy complied to this pattern . 
 Convection began to increase on July 6 , supported on the basis that many showers were observed to the north of the depression . An anticyclone — a large mass of air rotating clockwise — intensified within the depression 's vicinity , resulting in a tighter pressure gradient and increasing winds to the north of the center of the depression . The depression intensified into Tropical Storm Cindy early on July 7 , and a reconnaissance flight into the storm late during the afternoon observed maximum sustained winds of 60 – 65 mph ( 95 – 100 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 997 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 44 inHg ) . Cindy began to curve westward late on July 7 as it reached peak intensity , with a minimum central pressure of 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) , and drifted due west early on July 8 as a result of a maturing surface high to its north . Steady intensification continued throughout the day , and the storm attained hurricane status during the morning of July 8 . 
 At approximately 2 : 45 UTC on July 9 , the hurricane made landfall near McClellanville , South Carolina . Shortly thereafter , Cindy began re @-@ curving northwestward along the fall line , and eventually weakened to a tropical depression . The depression abruptly turned toward the east @-@ northeast over North Carolina during the afternoon hours of July 9 . Cindy then began to accelerate as it curved slightly towards the northeast , and eventually regained tropical storm status late on July 10 as it emerged into the Atlantic . Cindy scraped the southern fringe of the Delmarva Peninsula near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay at approximately 00 : 00 UTC on July 11 , and rapidly traveled northeastward during the day . Cindy passed over Cape Cod near the mid @-@ morning of July 11 , during which a series of shortwave troughs passed near the storm , producing high @-@ level outflow that helped Cindy maintain intensity . Later on July 11 , Cindy moved ashore in New Brunswick and made landfall over Prince Edward Island the following day . The storm subsequently moved over Quebec and Labrador , where it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Cindy prompted a hurricane watch and gale warnings for areas extending from Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , to Charleston , South Carolina , and a hurricane warning for areas between Beaufort and Georgetown , South Carolina , on July 8 . A preliminary alert was issued for naval and marine areas in the Carolinas from Norfolk , Virginia . Special forecasts from the Weather Bureau office in Columbia , South Carolina were activated on the radio at 16 : 50 UTC on July 8 . Several thousand people evacuated in areas of South Carolina , including Folly Beach , Sullivan 's Island , Isle of Palms , and <unk> Island . The issuance of an emergency flood forecast for Columbia , South Carolina occurred as a result of Cindy . 
 The highest rainfall total measured was 9 @.@ 79 inches ( 249 mm ) in Winnsboro , South Carolina , although unofficial sources east of Columbia , South Carolina , measured rainfall totals of up to 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . Tides ranged from 1 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal . A total of eleven tornadoes were reported in association with Cindy . Only one direct death was caused by Cindy , in addition to five indirect deaths . Little damage was attributed to the hurricane , other than downed tree limbs and broken windows . Damage from Cindy was estimated at $ 75 @,@ 000 ( 1959 USD ) . 
 = = = South Carolina = = = 
 A driver was killed in Georgetown on U.S. Route 17 after colliding with a fallen tree . Along the main street of Georgetown , the Sampit River topped its banks , resulting in flooding that impacted business in the area . At Georgetown , tides were about 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) above normal during Cindy , while at McClellanville , the point of landfall , tides were approximately 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal . At Folly Beach , Sullivan 's Island , and Isle of Palms , only 600 people of the normal population of approximately 6 @,@ 500 chose not to evacuate . Strong winds that accompanied Cindy snapped tree limbs , shattered a few windows , damaged roofs , and knocked power out in Charleston , but little other damage was wrought . Several points throughout the state measured at least 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of rainfall , including Columbia , Charleston , Myrtle Beach , and Sumter . 
 The Congaree River rose dramatically near Columbia during the hurricane , where rainfall totaled 5 @.@ 82 inches ( 148 mm ) , although some reliable unofficial sources state the figure to be 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . Several thousand sought safety in Red Cross shelters in schools and armories , though the Weather Bureau announced it was safe for evacuees in Charleston to return to their homes shortly after the storm came ashore . Most of the rainfall produced by Cindy was beneficial to drought @-@ stricken regions , albeit not enough to provide significant relief . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 As Cindy moved inland , tornadoes touched down in North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland along the outer bands of the storm . A tornado was observed near Nags Head around 17 : 40 UTC on July 10 , and a second was observed 25 minutes later . Both tornadoes caused minimal damage – the first damaged four buildings and the second uprooted trees and toppled power poles . In addition , two waterspouts were noted offshore North Carolina , of which one was near New Topsail Beach in the mid @-@ morning of July 8 and another near <unk> Ferry . No damage was reported from the waterspouts . 
 Prior to the storm 's landfall in the Carolinas , tides at Wilmington , North Carolina , were 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) above normal ; tides were near the same level at other areas of the southern fringes of North Carolina . In New England , five indirect deaths resulted from traffic accidents on highways as a result of the slippery conditions on roads wrought by Cindy 's rains . At Boston , 2 @.@ 37 inches ( 60 mm ) of rainfall was measured , while 2 @.@ 85 inches ( 72 mm ) fell at Bedford . Between the cities of Atlantic City , New Jersey , and Eastport , Maine , tides were 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal . Rainfall in the Mid @-@ Atlantic peaked at 8 @.@ 43 inches ( 214 mm ) at <unk> State Forest in New Jersey , while rainfall in New England peaked at 3 @.@ 85 inches ( 98 mm ) at Lake <unk> , Connecticut . Rainfall was also recorded in Georgia , Delaware , Pennsylvania , New York , Connecticut , Rhode Island , Vermont , New Hampshire , and Maine . 
 Most impacts in Canada occurred after the hurricane transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Cindy brought strong winds and downpours along the coast of Nova Scotia . Many small vessels sought safety , but the ship Lady Godiva sank near North West Arm ; the two people on board were later rescued . No damage was reported on the island itself . In New Brunswick , up to 2 inches ( 50 mm ) of rainfall was produced by Cindy , although no damage is known to have been reported . 
 = Eight Miles High = 
 " Eight Miles High " is a song by the American rock band the Byrds , written by Gene Clark , Jim McGuinn ( a.k.a. Roger McGuinn ) , and David Crosby and first released as a single on March 14 , 1966 ( see 1966 in music ) . Musically influenced by Ravi Shankar and John Coltrane , " Eight Miles High " , along with its McGuinn and Crosby @-@ penned B @-@ side " Why " , was influential in developing the musical styles of psychedelic rock , raga rock , and psychedelic pop . Accordingly , critics often cite " Eight Miles High " as being the first bona fide psychedelic rock song , as well as a classic of the counterculture era . 
 The song was subject to a U.S. radio ban shortly after its release , following allegations published in the broadcasting trade journal the Gavin Report regarding perceived drug connotations in its lyrics . The band strenuously denied these allegations at the time , but in later years both Clark and Crosby admitted that the song was at least partly inspired by their own drug use . The failure of " Eight Miles High " to reach the Billboard Top 10 is usually attributed to the broadcasting ban , but some commentators have suggested that the song 's complexity and uncommercial nature were greater factors . 
 " Eight Miles High " reached number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and number 24 in the UK Singles Chart . The song was also included on the band 's third album , Fifth Dimension , which was released on July 18 , 1966 . " Eight Miles High " became the Byrds ' third and final U.S. Top 20 hit , and was also their last release before the departure of Gene Clark , the band 's principal songwriter at the time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The song 's lyrics are , for the most part , about the group 's flight to London in August 1965 and their accompanying English tour , as hinted at by the opening couplet : " Eight miles high and when you touch down , you 'll find that it 's stranger than known . " Although commercial airliners fly at an altitude of six to seven miles , it was felt that " eight miles high " sounded more poetic than six and also recalled the title of the Beatles ' song " Eight Days a Week " . 
 According to Clark , the lyrics were primarily his creation , with a minor contribution being David Crosby 's line , " Rain grey town , known for its sound " , a reference to London as home to the British Invasion , which was then dominating U.S. music charts . Other lyrics in the song that explicitly refer to the Byrds ' stay in England include the couplet : " Nowhere is there warmth to be found / Among those afraid of losing their ground " , which is a reference to the hostile reaction of the UK music press and to the English group the Birds serving the band with a copyright infringement writ , due to the similarities in name . In addition , " Round the squares , huddled in storms / Some laughing , some just shapeless forms " describes fans waiting for the band outside hotels , while the line " Sidewalk scenes and black limousines " refers to the excited crowds that jostled the band as they exited their chauffeur @-@ driven cars . 
 Although the basic idea for the song had been discussed during the band 's flight to England , it didn 't actually begin to take shape until the Byrds ' November 1965 tour of the U.S. To alleviate the boredom of traveling from show to show during the tour , Crosby had brought along cassette recordings of Ravi Shankar 's music and the John Coltrane albums Impressions and Africa / Brass , which were on constant rotation on the tour bus . The influence of these recordings on the band would manifest itself in the music of " Eight Miles High " and its B @-@ side " Why " . 
 Clark began writing the song 's lyrics on November 24 , 1965 , when he scribbled down some rough ideas for later development , following a discussion with guitarist Brian Jones , before the Byrds made a concert appearance supporting the Rolling Stones . Over the following days , Clark expanded this fragment into a full poem , eventually setting the words to music and giving them a melody . Clark then showed the song to McGuinn and Crosby , with the former suggesting that the song be arranged to incorporate Coltrane 's influence . Since Clark 's death , however , McGuinn has contended that it was he who conceived the initial idea of writing a song about an airplane ride and that he and Crosby both contributed lyrics to Clark 's unfinished draft . In his book , Mr. Tambourine Man : The Life and Legacy of the Byrds ' Gene Clark , author John Einarson disputes this claim and ponders whether McGuinn 's story would be the same were Clark still alive . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The master recording of " Eight Miles High " was recorded on January 24 and 25 , 1966 , at Columbia Studios in Hollywood , with record producer Allen Stanton guiding the band through the recording process . John Einarson has noted that the influence of Coltrane 's saxophone playing and , in particular , his song " India " from the Impressions album , can be clearly heard in " Eight Miles High " — most noticeably in McGuinn 's recurring twelve @-@ string guitar solo . In addition to this striking guitar motif , the song is also highlighted by Chris Hillman 's driving and hypnotic bass line , Crosby 's chunky rhythm guitar playing and the band 's ethereal harmonies . 
 " Eight Miles High " also exhibits the influence of sitarist Ravi Shankar , particularly in the droning quality of the song 's vocal melody and in McGuinn 's guitar playing . However , the song does not actually feature the sound of the sitar , despite the Byrds having appeared brandishing the instrument at a contemporary press conference held to promote the single . In a 1966 promotional interview , which was added to the expanded CD reissue of the Fifth Dimension album , Crosby said that the song 's ending made him " feel like a plane landing . " 
 An earlier version of " Eight Miles High " was recorded at RCA Studios in Los Angeles on December 22 , 1965 , but Columbia Records refused to release that recording because it had not been produced at a Columbia @-@ owned studio . McGuinn has since stated that he believes this original version of the song to be more spontaneous sounding than the better known Columbia release . That opinion was echoed by Crosby , who commented " It was a stunner , it was better , it was stronger . It had more flow to it . It was the way we wanted it to be . " This original version of " Eight Miles High " initially saw release on the 1987 archival album Never Before and was also included as a bonus track on the 1996 Columbia / Legacy CD reissue of Fifth Dimension . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 = = = U.S. radio ban = = = 
 " Eight Miles High " was released on March 14 , 1966 in the U.S. and May 29 , 1966 in the UK , reaching number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and number 24 on the UK Singles Chart . Following its release , the band faced allegations of advocating the use of recreational drugs from Bill Gavin 's Record Report , a weekly newsletter circulated to U.S. radio stations . This resulted in " Eight Miles High " being banned in a number of states within a week of the report being published , a factor which contributed to the single 's failure to break into the Billboard Top 10 . The Byrds and their publicist , Derek Taylor , countered by strenuously denying that the song was drug @-@ related , with Taylor issuing an indignant press release unequivocally stating that the song was about the band 's trip to England and not drug use . However , by the early 1980s , both Crosby and Clark were prepared to admit that the song was not entirely as innocent as they had originally declared , with the former stating " Of course it was a drug song ! We were stoned when we wrote it . " Clark was less blunt , explaining in interview that " it was about a lot of things . It was about the airplane trip to England , it was about drugs , it was about all that . A piece of poetry of that nature is not limited to having it have to be just about airplanes or having it have to be just about drugs . It was inclusive because during those days the new experimenting with all the drugs was a very vogue thing to do . " 
 Research analyst Mark Teehan , writing for Popular Musicology Online , has challenged the widely held view among critics , music historians and the Byrds themselves that the U.S. radio ban hurt sales of " Eight Miles High " . Having examined the local music surveys and the Billboard regional retail sales charts , as they relate to the national charting of " Eight Miles High " , Teehan has uncovered evidence suggesting that the progressive and uncommercial nature of the song was a much bigger factor in its failure to reach the Billboard Top 10 . The author 's research revealed that " Eight Miles High " failed to reach the Top Five in any of his sample of 23 regional markets , and most telling , among the thirty radio stations included within this sample , it reached the Top 10 on only seven of them ( 23 % ) . 
 Teehan points out that although the Gavin Report recommended that radio stations withdraw the single from airplay , many stations did not comply with this request . In addition , Teehan notes that the radio ban was not suggested by the Gavin Report until April 29 , 1966 , almost seven weeks after the single had initially been released — ample time for it to have made its mark on the charts . Teehan has uncovered evidence showing that " Eight Miles High " was already decelerating on the national charts before the end of April 1966 . He concludes that the groundbreaking song lacked strong commercial appeal by virtue of its complexity , unique sound , and excessive length ( commercial radio stations were reluctant to play songs that were over two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes long during the mid @-@ 1960s ) , and that it suffered from uncoordinated and inefficient promotion by Columbia Records . 
 = = = Influence and reception = = = 
 The song 's use of Indian and free @-@ form jazz influences , along with its impressionistic lyrics , were immediately influential on the emerging genre of psychedelic rock . Accordingly , some authors and music historians , including Eric V. D. Luft , Domenic Priore , and Dwight Rounds , have described " Eight Miles High " as being the first bona fide psychedelic rock song . In his book Riot On Sunset Strip : Rock ' n ' Roll 's Last Stand in Hollywood , Priore cites " Eight Miles High " as being the record that kicked off the psychedelic craze , explaining " prior to ' Eight Miles High , ' there were no pop records with incessant , hypnotic basslines juxtaposed by droning , trance @-@ induced improvisational guitar . " 
 The song was responsible for the naming of the musical subgenre raga rock , when journalist Sally Kempton , in her review of the single for The Village Voice , used the term to describe the record 's experimental fusion of eastern and western music . However , although Kempton was the first person to use the term raga rock in print , she had actually borrowed the phrase from the promotional material that the Byrds ' press office had supplied to accompany the " Eight Miles High " single release . In a 1968 interview for the Pop Chronicles radio documentary , McGuinn denied that the song was in fact an example of raga rock , while Crosby , speaking in 1998 , dismissed the term entirely , stating " they kept trying to label us ; every time we turned around , they came up with a new one ... it 's a bunch of bullshit . " Nonetheless , the experimental nature of the song placed the Byrds firmly at the forefront of the burgeoning psychedelic movement , along with the Yardbirds , the Beatles , Donovan and the Rolling Stones , who were all exploring similar musical territory concurrently . 
 Contemporary reviews for the single were mostly positive , with Billboard magazine describing the song as a " Big beat rhythm rocker with soft lyric ballad vocal and off @-@ beat instrumental backing . " Record World magazine also praised the song , commenting " It 's an eerie tune with lyrics bound to hypnotize . Will climb heights . " In the UK , Music Echo described the song as " wild and oriental but still <unk> " . The publication also suggested that with the release of " Eight Miles High " the Byrds had jumped ahead of the Beatles in terms of creativity , stating " [ By ] getting their single out now they 've beaten the Beatles to the punch , for Paul [ McCartney ] admitted recently that the Liverpool foursome are working on a similar sound for their new album and single . " In recent years , Richie Unterberger , writing for the Allmusic website , has described " Eight Miles High " as " one of the greatest singles of the ' 60s . " 
 In 1999 , the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , an honor reserved for " recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance that are at least 25 years old . " In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked " Eight Miles High " at number 151 on their list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time and in March 2005 , Q magazine placed the song at number 50 on their list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks . 
 = = Post @-@ release = = 
 During the same month that " Eight Miles High " was released as a single , the Byrds ' main songwriter , Gene Clark , left the band . His fear of flying was stated as the official reason for his departure , but other factors , including his tendency toward anxiety and paranoia , as well as his increasing isolation within the group , were also at work . Following the release of " Eight Miles High " and Clark 's departure , the Byrds never again managed to place a single in the Billboard Top 20 . 
 The Byrds performed " Eight Miles High " on a number of television programs during the 1960s and 1970s , including <unk> , Drop In , Midweek , and Beat @-@ Club . The song would go on to become a staple of the band 's live concert repertoire , until their final disbandment in 1973 . A sixteen @-@ minute live version of " Eight Miles High " was included on the Byrds ' ( Untitled ) album in 1970 , and another live version was released as part of the 2008 album , Live at Royal Albert Hall 1971 . The song was performed live by a reformed lineup of the Byrds featuring Roger McGuinn , David Crosby , and Chris Hillman in January 1989 . 
 The song would remain a favorite of Clark 's during his post @-@ Byrds solo career and would often be performed live at his concert appearances until his death , in 1991 . McGuinn also continues to perform an intricate acoustic guitar rendition of the song in his live concerts . Crosby has revisited " Eight Miles High " infrequently during his post @-@ Byrds career , but it was performed during Crosby , Stills , Nash & Young 's reunion tour of 2000 , with Neil Young handling McGuinn 's guitar solo , while the other three members sang the song 's three @-@ part harmonies . Additionally , the Byrds ' bass player , Chris Hillman , recorded an acoustic version of " Eight Miles High " as part of his 2005 album , The Other Side . 
 In addition to its appearance on the Fifth Dimension album , " Eight Miles High " also appears on several Byrds ' compilations , including The Byrds ' Greatest Hits , History of The Byrds , The Original Singles : 1965 – 1967 , Volume 1 , The Byrds , The Very Best of The Byrds , The Essential Byrds and There Is a Season . 
 = = Cover versions and media references = = 
 " Eight Miles High " has been covered by many different bands and artists , including , the Ventures , <unk> Minds , Lighthouse , Leo <unk> , Roxy Music , Ride , Stewart / Gaskin , Robyn Hitchcock , <unk> , Les Fradkin , The Kennedys , and the <unk> . In addition , Hüsker Dü released the song as a single prior to the release of their Zen Arcade LP in 1984 . The song was also covered in 1969 by Golden Earring , who put a nineteen @-@ minute version on their Eight Miles High album . The Emerson , Lake & Palmer spinoff group 3 recorded the song with revised lyrics on their 1988 album , To the Power of Three . Crowded House have also covered the song with ex @-@ Byrd Roger McGuinn , on their I Feel Possessed EP . 
 Don McLean 's song " American Pie " makes reference to " Eight Miles High " with the lines " The Birds [ sic ] flew off with a fall @-@ out shelter / Eight miles high and falling fast . " The First Edition 's 1968 hit , " Just Dropped In ( To See What Condition My Condition Was In ) " , contains a reference to the song with the line " I tripped on a cloud and fell a @-@ eight miles high . " The independent rock band <unk> River references " Eight Miles High " in its song " Plus Ones " , on the 2007 album The Stage Names . Bruce Springsteen 's song " Life Itself " , from his 2009 album Working on a Dream , features guitar playing and production techniques reminiscent of " Eight Miles High " by the Byrds . 
 The Byrds ' version of " Eight Miles High " was featured in the 1983 film Purple Haze . It also appears in both the " Le Voyage dans la Lune " and " The Original Wives Club " episodes of the television miniseries From the Earth to the Moon . 
 = Demonstration ( Tinie Tempah album ) = 
 Demonstration is the second studio album by British rapper Tinie Tempah . The album was released on 4 November 2013 as the follow @-@ up to his commercially successful debut album , Disc @-@ Overy ( 2010 ) . In December 2010 , Tempah announced he was writing for his second album , saying there would be a more electronic and live feel to it . It was originally intended for a late 2011 release , however it had since suffered from continuous delays . The first two singles from the album , " Trampoline " and " Children of the Sun " , were released in the run @-@ up to the album and both managed to enter the top ten of the UK Singles Chart . The album features collaborations with producers and guest artists such as Labrinth and Diplo and sees Tempah experimenting with new musical genres . 
 Demonstration received generally positive reviews , with music critics praising the choice of producers and Tempah 's evolution as a musician . The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number three , making it less successful than Disc @-@ Overy . It was beaten to a top two chart position by The Marshall Mathers LP 2 and James Arthur . The album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry on 21 February 2014 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 During an interview , Tempah commented on his second album : " I always like to work with different people on each project I do , just so you get a different sound and angle . I will be working with some of the same people I did for the first album , you know what they say ‘ if it ain 't broke then don ’ t try and fix it ’ . " Tempah hoped to collaborate with other artists : " I really want to collaborate with Toronto 's very own Drake . I think he 's amazing at what he does . I 'd also like to collaborate with Adele , Sleigh Bells , Lykke Li , The Script , Dev , James Blake ― those are the few that I 'd really like to work with . " Tempah asked a number of artists to appear on the album , including Gary Barlow , Chris Martin , Dizzee Rascal , and The Script . At the 2012 BRIT Awards , Tempah announced his second album would be called Demonstration . On 24 June 2012 , Tempah performed on the main stage at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend , performing two of his newest songs : " Mosh Pit " and " Drinking from the Bottle " , the latter of which he features on with Calvin Harris as the lead artist , and features on Harris ' 2012 album 18 Months . In interviews , other artists announced that they were working on his album such as Labrinth , Dizzee Rascal , Big Sean and Emeli Sandé . Previous collaborators Naughty Boy and Labrinth have produced multiple tracks for the album , following their appearances on Disc @-@ Overy . Chase & Status were on additional production duties for " Mosh Pit " . They had previously worked with Tinie on their album No More Idols for the single " Hitz " . Tempah 's vocals from the song are also sampled on the hidden track " 5 Minutes " . 
 Originally the album was slated for a 2011 release but was pushed back until November 2013 due to " a few key finishing touches " to the album that needed to be made before releasing it . The album artwork was premiered on 4 September 2013 . On 7 September , <unk> " iSHi " Mughal confirmed the completion of the album. iSHi produced the album 's second single " Children of the Sun " ( which was released a week prior to the album ) as well as the album track " Someday ( Place in the Sun ) " . The album was released in different regions worldwide throughout November , starting on 1 November 2013 . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 = = = Influences and themes = = = 
 In an interview with <unk> , Tempah cites Dizzee Rascal and So Solid Crew as influences for the album , who 've influenced him since his childhood . He also told Capital that Daft Punk influenced the album . Speaking about the album title Demonstration , Tinie said that it was about him compromising to make an album that was both true to where he came from and follows the trappings of mainstream hip hop : " Anyone who wants to take inspiration from it can have a sort of example based on my experiences of how to do this . So basically , do something that still nods to where you 've come from , still feels very London , still feels very British , but kind of meets the criteria of what a mainstream record needs . " He also commented oh how things change when signing with a record label and how the process of making albums : " The first time around , you don 't really know . All you do is you get this record deal and you 're like whoa ! Like , I 'm signed ! This is amazing ! And you 're just recording and before you know it the album 's done . This time around , I had to think about so much more things , you know : edits , production things that I didn 't like , going back and forth on mixing . ... I was very hands @-@ on this time . " 
 = = = Music and lyrical content = = = 
 " Someday ( Place in the Sun ) " is about how Tinie started in the cold , harsh streets of London and had to face many obstacles to get to where he is today ( his ' place in the sun ' ) . " Don 't Sell Out " incorporates elements of Tamil Cinema that meld into the hip hop and trap genres throughout the song . Tinie wrote it after hearing " Kalasala Kalasala " by Vaali and S. S. Thaman and thinking the words sounded like ' don 't sell out ' . <unk> sampled the song and sent the track to Tinie , who used this as a basis for the song . He decided to create a song poking fun at the term " selling out " , due to how frequently and foolishly it is used . " Looking Down the Barrel " follows on from where Disc @-@ Overy track " Obsession " left off : it 's the second track where Tempah 's spoken his random thoughts on fame , life , relationships and success . He decided to fill the track with ' random retorts and different tangents he was going off on ' . The song was produced by Tom Rowlands of The Chemical Brothers , and the song 's sample was selected by Rowlands . 
 " Witch Doctor " is based on a true story where Tinie met a girl at a show who he took with him on the tour bus and showed what it 's like to live his life . " It 's OK " and " Lover Not a Fighter " are two songs that feature vocals and production from Labrinth . " It 's OK " is a contrast from the " intro and fun , random bouncy things " according to <unk> . He added " it 's very unorthodox in the sense that people wouldn 't have heard or even expect us to make a song like this because it 's very slow and ballad @-@ y . It 's very reminiscent to me of the Fugees or something because it just sounds different and very soulful as well . " He wrote the song in Jamaica and wanted it to feel rustic and urban . Tinie wanted to " push the envelope " with what you 're used to hearing from him and Labrinth . " Lover Not a Fighter " is a feel @-@ good , radio @-@ friendly song that incorporates hip hop and electronic music , along with rap rock , and is about good vibes and " doing your thing " . " I 'm a lover , not a fighter . I 've just come to do my thing and enjoy myself so don 't try and get on to me about it or try and make me feel bad about everything that 's going on in my life " , said Tinie to <unk> 
 " Tears Run Dry " was originally an instrumental by <unk> and later on strings were added . The song is a ' venting ' record , where Tinie shares personal thoughts and then turns into a heavier finale . According to Tinie it was amended about 37 times due to constant adjustments and improvements . " Lost Ones " is about a couple splitting up but trying to maintain their pride , and then realising that in reality they do regret it . Paloma Faith recorded an " eerie " vocal for the chorus . Apparently Tinie wanted a part of the album to be motivational , and conveys this with the songs " Children of the Sun " , " A Heart Can Save the World " and " Heroes " . Emeli Sandé features on " A Heart Can Save the World " , and also wrote Laura Mvula 's chorus for " Heroes " . Sandé also appeared on the Disc @-@ Overy track " Let Go " . All three tracks are produced by Naughty Boy , a frequent collaborator with Sandé . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The lead single from Demonstration , " Trampoline " was premiered on <unk> 's BBC Radio 1Xtra show on 2 July 2013 . The lyric video was premiered shortly afterwards . It features 2 Chainz and is produced by Diplo . The song was released on 4 August 2013 in the United Kingdom , and peaked at number three in the UK Singles Chart making it his fourth most successful single to date . On 16 September , to promote his UK arena tour , the album track " Don 't Sell Out " live at the O2 Arena was uploaded to O2 's YouTube channel , before being made available to purchase via iTunes when you pre @-@ ordered the album . The promotional video was shot in collaboration with Dockers and Complex and premiered on 8 October 2013 at a total length of 3 minutes and 11 seconds . The song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 70 . The second single from the album , " Children of the Sun " , featuring John Martin , premiered on Zane Lowe 's BBC Radio 1 show on 12 September . It was released on 28 October 2013 in the United Kingdom . The track was produced by iSHi and reached number six on the UK Singles Chart . Upon the album 's release , " Someday ( Place in the Sun ) " charted at number 87 and " It 's OK " charted at number 180 . 
 The album 's third single , " Lover Not a Fighter " , features Labrinth and was released on 2 February . The music video for the song was shot from 20 – 21 November 2013 and released on 12 December 2013 . Due to the video release and airplay , the song rose up the UK Singles Chart to number 18 prior to independent release , later peaking at number 16 . On 24 April 2014 , the music video for a promotional single , " 5 Minutes " , premiered on YouTube . The album 's fourth single , " Tears Run Dry " , was released on 22 July 2014 following the premiere of its music video the previous day . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 A series of short trailers for " Trampoline " , getting gradually longer in length , teased different sections of the instrumental and music video . Each teaser features the Demonstration insignia , which is a horizontal red stripe going through the centre of the artwork . The first teaser was five seconds long and simply a synth and sub drop . The second is seventeen seconds long and shows a hanging microphone , accompanied by slightly more of the track . The third shows a hooded Tinie , accompanied by a different section of the track . At the end Tinie says " yeah " . The fourth and final trailer was released a day prior to the premiere of the track , and includes part of the chorus . It shows Tinie walking up to the camera and grinning . The album artwork and artwork for each of the singles feature the red stripe , and even the colour two @-@ tone vinyl has a red stripe going across it . The stripe also features on the physical disc . Tinie teamed up with Warner Music Group to develop the Tinie Tempah : Rap Demonstration app for the iTunes Store , released on 5 February 2014 . The app uses recordings of Tempah 's mouth rapping the album in its entirety , and the idea is that you can rap along to it . 
 Tinie has made several appearances on award ceremonies and TV shows to help promote the album . He performed a medley of " Lover Not a Fighter " and " Children of the Sun " at the 2014 BRIT Awards launch party , " Children of the Sun " at BBC Radio 1 's Teen Awards , " Lover Not a Fighter " alongside Labrinth on The Graham Norton Show and solo on BBC 's Live Lounge , as well as performing " Heroes " with Laura Mvula on The Jonathan Ross Show and the 2014 BAFTAs . The latter sparked reaction from the media because Tinie high <unk> Prince William mid @-@ performance . At the ceremony the duo also presented the Best Original Music award . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 On 8 October , Tinie Tempah announced he was going on a UK and Ireland arena tour in support of Demonstration . He played eleven dates , beginning with Wolverhampton Civic Hall and finishing at The O2 Dublin . The tour was originally due to last from 2 to 18 December 2013 , however it was rescheduled from 25 March to 9 April 2014 due to lack of preparation . Tour dates in Aberdeen , Glasgow , Leeds and Newcastle upon Tyne were cancelled altogether . He was supported by Big Sean , <unk> and Konan and G <unk> . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon its release , Demonstration was met with generally favorable reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 69 , based on ten reviews . David Jeffries of AllMusic gave the album four out of five stars , commenting that " guest shots from Paloma Faith , Emeli Sandé , Dizzee Rascal , and others make this one crowded album , but figuring out what to drop is nearly impossible as everyone hits the mark . " Gigwise 's Nick Scott gave the album eight out of ten stars , saying that " It would be wrong to compare Disc @-@ Overy to Demonstration ; this is the Tinie Tempah of now . It is a statement of his evolution as an artist and how his maturity and experience have now made him better than ever . " The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan gave the album four stars , describing the production as " stark electronics that recall his teen years as a grime MC " and describing some lyrics as " observant " and " sheer British genius " . She questioned the commercial success of the album , claiming that " rather than creating radio @-@ loving hooks , Tinie has expended his energies on honing lyrics and flow " . 
 Chris Cottingham of NME gave the album six out of ten , saying that " Tinie is most definitely a star , second only to Dizzee Rascal on the UK scene , perhaps even above him following Dizzee 's dismal ‘ The Fifth ’ album . So perhaps it 's no surprise Tinie 's brimming with confidence on record number two . " However , Cottingham dismissed the quality of some lyrics as " all great fun for him , no doubt , but in the past he didn ’ t trade in this lowest common denominator stuff . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the album three out of five stars , describing the album as " inoffensive grime @-@ pop for the masses that makes all the right moves , but lacks any serious bite . " Larry Day of musicOMH gave the album two and half out of five stars , commenting " this is a massive collaborative project . That 's probably the reason it 's such a chaotic , unwieldy mess . " On the other hand , he praised the promotional single " Don 't Sell Out " , saying " crunchy handclaps and jerky hooks work a kiss of life on the record , and Tempah 's lyrics are fascinating to listen to – he compares himself to Othello and nods to everything from the Queen to Celebrity Juice – if utterly misogynistic . " Day concluded the review with " Tempah has gone from rapping with a knowing wink or a glint in his eye to unloading a lewd spiel sans wit . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Demonstration debuted at number three on the UK Albums Chart , behind The Marshall Mathers LP 2 by Eminem and the self @-@ titled debut studio album by James Arthur . The record was eventually certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry , recognizing shipments of 100 @,@ 000 shipments in the country . It additionally charted within the top 40 of several additional territories , surpassing the chart positions Disc @-@ Overy held in several of them . The record debuted at number 13 in Ireland , eleven positions higher than its predecessor , and spent seven weeks on that chart . It reached number 22 in Australia ( whereas Disc @-@ Overy had peaked at number 96 ) , and number 29 in Switzerland ( whereas his previous album charted at number 73 ) . However , it charted eight spots lower than Disc @-@ Overy in New Zealand , having entered at number 40 in the country . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The album is available in four different editions : CD , digital download , 180 g vinyl LP and a 180 g two @-@ tone vinyl LP limited to 500 copies worldwide . 
 Notes 
 Track listing and credits from album booklet . 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 " Don 't Sell Out " features uncredited vocals from Candice Pillay . 
 " 5 Minutes " features uncredited vocals from J. Warner . 
 Sample credits 
 " Don 't Sell Out " contains samples of " Kalasala Kalasala " , written and performed by Vaali and S. S. Thaman and featuring vocals by L. R. <unk> , T. <unk> and Solar Sai Silambarasan . 
 " Looking Down the Barrel " contains samples of " Betty Jean 's Mama " , written and performed by Gator Creek . 
 " 5 Minutes " contains samples of " Mama Said Knock You Out " , written by Marley Marl and Bobby " Bobcat " Ervin and performed by LL Cool J and samples of " Hitz " written and performed by Chase & Status and Tinie Tempah . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Audio mastering by Stuart Hawkes at Metropolis Mastering Studios in London , UK . 
 Audio mastering for tracks 3 and 7 by Tom Coyne at Sterling Sound in New York , USA . 
 = = = Management and creative = = = 
 = = = Vocals = = = 
 = = = Songwriters = = = 
 = = = Musicians and technicians = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 1930 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1930 Atlantic hurricane season was the second least active Atlantic hurricane season on record – behind only 1914 – with only three systems reaching tropical storm intensity . Of those three , two reached hurricane status , both of which also became major hurricanes , Category 3 or higher storms on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The first system developed in the central Atlantic Ocean on August 21 . Later that month , a second storm , the Dominican Republic hurricane , formed on August 29 . It peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) . The third and final storm dissipated on October 21 . 
 Due to the lack of systems that developed , only one tropical cyclone , the second hurricane , managed to make landfall during the season . It severely impacted areas of the Greater Antilles , particularly the Dominican Republic , before making subsequent landfalls on Cuba and the U.S. states of Florida and North Carolina , with less severe effects . The estimated 2 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 deaths caused by the storm in the Dominican Republic alone ranked it as one of the deadliest Atlantic hurricanes in recorded history . No other storms affected any landmasses during the year , although the first storm damaged a cruise ship in open waters . 
 The season 's inactivity was reflected in its low accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 50 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 The first hurricane of the season was first noted in the central Atlantic Ocean on August 21 . Slowly intensifying , the system initially moved towards the west . On August 22 , a steamship in the vicinity was sustained some structural damage . After attaining hurricane strength on August 24 , the system turned northwestward , and reached Category 3 intensity on August 25 with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) as it grazed Bermuda . Recurving to the northeast , a French cruise liner encountered the hurricane while it was a Category 2 hurricane . A large wave struck the ship , shattering glass on the vessel and injuring 40 passengers . Although still a Category 2 hurricane , the system became extratropical shortly after on August 28 . The extratropical storm was tracked due east towards the Azores for a few days while gradually weakening before abruptly turning to the north and dissipating . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A tropical depression developed well east of the Lesser Antilles on August 29 . Initially drifting westward , the storm gradually intensified and became a tropical storm early the next day . By August 31 , the system strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane . The next day , the hurricane entered the Caribbean Sea , passing the island of Dominica as a Category 2 hurricane . Continuing to intensify , the storm further intensified into a Category 3 hurricane on September 2 and then to a Category 4 the following day . Around 18 : 00 UTC on September 3 , the hurricane peaked with winds of 155 mph ( 250 km / h ) , observed by a ship . Simultaneously , the storm made landfall near Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic . 
 The mountainous terrain of Hispaniola rapidly weakened the system to a tropical storm early on September 4 . Moving westward over the Caribbean Sea , the storm failed to re @-@ strengthen before making landfall in western Cuba with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) around midday on September 6 . Thereafter , the system entered the Gulf of Mexico and curved northeastward . At 09 : 00 UTC on September 9 , the storm again made landfall near Bradenton , Florida with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Later that day , the storm weakened to a tropical depression while crossing Florida . Upon emerging into the Atlantic Ocean on the next day , the system re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm . While located offshore South Carolina , the storm re @-@ attained hurricane status early on September 12 . The hurricane then brushed the Outer Banks of North Carolina before heading out to sea . The storm further strengthened to Category 2 intensity , heading eastward , but weakened to a tropical storm early on September 16 . The following day , the storm deteriorated further to a tropical depression , and late on September 17 , the depression dissipated southwest of the Azores . 
 While crossing the Lesser Antilles , the hurricane brought powerful winds and heavy rainfall to the islands . On Dominica , crops suffered severe damage . All vessels at the harbor sank , killing two people . Winds on Puerto Rico left mostly minor damage to plantations , and rainfall was generally " beneficial " . In the Dominican Republic , three districts of Santo Domingo were destroyed , with half of the city leveled by the hurricane . Damages in the city were an estimated $ 50 million ( 1930 USD ) . The Red Cross estimated 2 @,@ 000 people perished in the city , with an additional 8 @,@ 000 injured . However , the actual death toll may never be known , and historians estimate the hurricane left between 2 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 fatalities . Haiti experienced crop damage due to the storm . In Florida , " damaging " rainfall was observed over southeastern Hillsborough County , with 8 to 9 in ( 200 to 230 mm ) measured . Press reports indicated damage to highways and bridges , and crops were inundated . Damage reached approximately $ 75 @,@ 000 . After passing the Outer Banks of North Carolina as re @-@ intensifying hurricane , power outages occurred across the region . Buildings at Cape Lookout were severely damaged . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 The final storm of the season developed in the Bay of Campeche on October 18 at the tail end of a frontal boundary . Although cool @-@ air advection was occurring off the United States coast , warm air around the system allowed the tropical storm to intensify . Moving to the northeast , the system reached peak intensity as a high @-@ end tropical storm with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Ultimately , the cool @-@ air advection eventually took a toll on the storm , causing it to quickly weaken . By 06 : 00 UTC on October 21 , the storm dissipated . 
 = FairTax = 
 The FairTax is a proposal to reform the federal tax code of the United States . It would replace all federal income taxes ( including the alternative minimum tax , corporate income taxes , and capital gains taxes ) , payroll taxes ( including Social Security and Medicare taxes ) , gift taxes , and estate taxes with a single broad national consumption tax on retail sales . The Fair Tax Act ( H.R. 25 / S. 155 ) would apply a tax , once , at the point of purchase on all new goods and services for personal consumption . The proposal also calls for a monthly payment to all family households of lawful U.S. residents as an advance rebate , or " <unk> " , of tax on purchases up to the poverty level . First introduced into the United States Congress in 1999 , a number of congressional committees have heard testimony on the bill ; however , it has not moved from committee and has yet to have any effect on the tax system . In recent years , a tax reform movement has formed behind the FairTax proposal . Attention increased after talk radio personality Neal Boortz and Georgia Congressman John Linder published The FairTax Book in 2005 and additional visibility was gained in the 2008 presidential campaign . 
 As defined in the proposed legislation , the tax rate is 23 % for the first year . This percentage is based on the total amount paid including the tax ( $ 23 out of every $ 100 spent in total ) . This would be equivalent to a 30 % traditional U.S. sales tax ( $ 23 on top of every $ 77 spent — $ 100 total ) . The rate would automatically adjust annually based on federal receipts in the previous fiscal year . With the rebate taken into consideration , the FairTax would be progressive on consumption , but would also be regressive on income at higher income levels ( as consumption falls as a percentage of income ) . Opponents argue this would accordingly decrease the tax burden on high @-@ income earners and increase it on the middle class . Supporters contend that the plan would effectively tax wealth , increase purchasing power and decrease tax burdens by broadening the tax base . 
 The plan 's supporters state that a consumption tax would increase savings and investment , ease tax compliance and increase economic growth , increase incentives for international business to locate in the US and increase US competitiveness in international trade . The plan is intended to increase cost transparency for funding the federal government . Supporters believe it would increase civil liberties , benefit the environment and effectively tax illegal activity and undocumented immigrants . Opponents contend that a consumption tax of this size would be extremely difficult to collect , and would lead to pervasive tax evasion . They also argue that the proposed sales tax rate would raise less revenue than the current tax system , leading to an increased budget deficit . Other concerns include the proposed repeal of the Sixteenth Amendment , removal of tax deduction incentives , transition effects on after @-@ tax savings , incentives on credit use and the loss of tax advantages to state and local bonds . 
 = = Legislative overview and history = = 
 The legislation would remove the Internal Revenue Service ( after three years ) , and establish Excise Tax and Sales Tax bureaus in the Department of the Treasury . The states are granted the primary authority for the collection of sales tax revenues and the remittance of such revenues to the Treasury . The plan was created by Americans For Fair Taxation , an advocacy group formed to change the tax system . The group states that , together with economists , it developed the plan and the name " Fair Tax " , based on interviews , polls , and focus groups of the general public . The FairTax legislation has been introduced in the House by Georgia Republicans John Linder ( 1999 – 2010 ) and Rob Woodall ( 2011 – 2014 ) , while being introduced in the Senate by Georgia Republican Saxby Chambliss ( 2003 – 2014 ) . 
 Linder first introduced the Fair Tax Act ( H.R. 2525 ) on July 14 , 1999 , to the 106th United States Congress and a substantially similar bill has been reintroduced in each subsequent session of Congress . The bill attracted a total of 56 House and Senate cosponsors in the 108th Congress , 61 in the 109th , 76 in the 110th , 70 in the 111th , 78 in the 112th , 83 in the 113th ( H.R. 25 / S. 122 ) , and 81 in the 114th ( H.R. 25 / S. 155 ) . Former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert ( Republican ) had cosponsored the bill in the 109th – 110th Congress , but it has not received support from the Democratic leadership . Democratic Representative Collin Peterson of Minnesota and Democratic Senator Zell Miller of Georgia cosponsored and introduced the bill in the 108th Congress , but Peterson is no longer <unk> the bill and Miller has left the Senate . In the 109th – 111th Congress , Representative Dan Boren has been the only Democrat to cosponsor the bill . A number of congressional committees have heard testimony on the FairTax , but it has not moved from committee since its introduction in 1999 . The legislation was also discussed with President George W. Bush and his Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Paulson . 
 To become law , the bill will need to be included in a final version of tax legislation from the U.S. House Committee on Ways and Means , pass both the House and the Senate , and finally be signed by the President . In 2005 , President Bush established an advisory panel on tax reform that examined several national sales tax variants including aspects of the FairTax and noted several concerns . These included uncertainties as to the revenue that would be generated , and difficulties of enforcement and administration , which made this type of tax undesirable to recommend in their final report . The panel did not examine the FairTax as proposed in the legislation . The FairTax received visibility in the 2008 presidential election on the issue of taxes and the IRS , with several candidates supporting the bill . A poll in 2009 by Rasmussen Reports found that 43 % of Americans would support a national sales tax replacement , with 38 % opposed to the idea ; the sales tax was viewed as fairer by 52 % of Republicans , 44 % of Democrats , and 49 % of <unk> . President Barack Obama does not support the bill , arguing for more progressive changes to the income and payroll tax systems . 
 = = Tax rate = = 
 The sales tax rate , as defined in the legislation for the first year , is 23 % of the total payment including the tax ( $ 23 of every $ 100 spent in total — calculated similar to income taxes ) . This would be equivalent to a 30 % traditional U.S. sales tax ( $ 23 on top of every $ 77 spent — $ 100 total , or $ 30 on top of every $ 100 spent — $ 130 total ) . After the first year of implementation , this rate is automatically adjusted annually using a predefined formula reflecting actual federal receipts in the previous fiscal year . 
 The effective tax rate for any household would be variable due to the fixed monthly tax rebate that are used to rebate taxes paid on purchases up to the poverty level . The tax would be levied on all U.S. retail sales for personal consumption on new goods and services . Critics argue that the sales tax rate defined in the legislation would not be revenue neutral ( that is , it would collect less for the government than the current tax system ) , and thus would increase the budget deficit , unless government spending were equally reduced . 
 = = = Sales tax rate = = = 
 During the first year of implementation , the FairTax legislation would apply a 23 % federal retail sales tax on the total transaction value of a purchase ; in other words , consumers pay to the government 23 cents of every dollar spent in total ( sometimes called tax @-@ inclusive , and presented this way to provide a direct comparison with individual income and employment taxes which reduce a person 's available money before they can make purchases ) . The equivalent assessed tax rate is 30 % if the FairTax is applied to the pre @-@ tax price of a good like traditional U.S. state sales taxes ( sometimes called tax @-@ exclusive ; this rate is not directly comparable with existing income and employment taxes ) . After the first year of implementation , this tax rate would be automatically adjusted annually using a formula specified in the legislation that reflects actual federal receipts in the previous fiscal year . 
 = = = Effective tax rate = = = 
 A household 's effective tax rate on consumption would vary with the annual expenditures on taxable items and the fixed monthly tax rebate . The rebate would have the greatest effect at low spending levels , where they could lower a household 's effective rate to zero or below . The lowest effective tax rate under the FairTax could be negative due to the rebate for households with annual spending amounts below poverty level spending for a specified household size . At higher spending levels , the rebate has less impact , and a household 's effective tax rate would approach 23 % of total spending . A person spending at the poverty level would have an effective tax rate of 0 % , whereas someone spending at four times the poverty level would have an effective tax rate of 17 @.@ 2 % . Buying or otherwise receiving items and services not subject to federal taxation ( such as a used home or car ) can contribute towards a lower effective tax rate . The total amount of spending and the proportion of spending allocated to taxable items would determine a household 's effective tax rate on consumption . If a rate is calculated on income , instead of the tax base , the percentage could exceed the statutory tax rate in a given year . 
 = = = Monthly tax rebate = = = 
 Under the FairTax , family households of lawful U.S. residents would be eligible to receive a " Family Consumption Allowance " ( FCA ) based on family size ( regardless of income ) that is equal to the estimated total FairTax paid on poverty level spending according to the poverty guidelines published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services . The FCA is a tax rebate ( known as a " <unk> " as it would be an advance ) paid in twelve monthly installments , adjusted for inflation . The rebate is meant to eliminate the taxation of household necessities and make the plan progressive . Households would register once a year with their sales tax administering authority , providing the names and social security numbers of each household member . The Social Security Administration would disburse the monthly rebate payments in the form of a paper check via U.S. Mail , an electronic funds transfer to a bank account , or a " smartcard " that can be used like a debit card . 
 Opponents of the plan criticize this tax rebate due to its costs . Economists at the Beacon Hill Institute estimated the overall rebate cost to be $ 489 billion ( assuming 100 % participation ) . In addition , economist Bruce Bartlett has argued that the rebate would create a large opportunity for fraud , treats children disparately , and would constitute a welfare payment regardless of need . 
 The President 's Advisory Panel for Federal Tax Reform cited the rebate as one of their chief concerns when analyzing their national sales tax , stating that it would be the largest entitlement program in American history , and contending that it would " make most American families dependent on monthly checks from the federal government " . Estimated by the advisory panel at approximately $ 600 billion , " the <unk> program would cost more than all budgeted spending in 2006 on the Departments of Agriculture , Commerce , Defense , Education , Energy , Homeland Security , Housing and Urban Development , and Interior combined . " Proponents point out that income tax deductions , tax preferences , loopholes , credits , etc. under the current system was estimated at $ 945 billion by the Joint Committee on Taxation . They argue this is $ 456 billion more than the FairTax " entitlement " ( tax refund ) would spend to cover each person 's tax expenses up to the poverty level . In addition , it was estimated for 2005 that the Internal Revenue Service was already sending out $ 270 billion in refund checks . 
 = = = Presentation of tax rate = = = 
