 " Bop Gun " marked the first episode in its new time slot on Thursdays at 10 p.m. , occupying a period previously filled by L.A. Law . The show previously aired 9 p.m. on Wednesdays , where it was regularly defeated in the ratings by the ABC comedy Home Improvement . " Bop Gun " was written by David Mills and David Simon based on a story by Fontana . It was directed by Stephen Gyllenhaal , a feature director then @-@ best known for such films as Waterland ( 1992 ) and A Dangerous Woman ( 1993 ) . It was the first television script written by Mills , who previously worked as a reporter and became friends with Simon while studying journalism at the University of Maryland , College Park . Mills said of " Bop Gun " , " That script inspired me to quit journalism . It was a golden opportunity , even though I didn 't know what I was doing . I developed bad habits as a newspaper feature writer . I would always stretch a project to fill the available time . " " Bop Gun " served as a departure from previous Homicide : Life on the Street episodes by focusing more strongly on a murder victim , rather than on the detectives . Simon felt the script 's dialogue , particularly the detectives ' use of dark humor as a coping mechanism for dealing with the horrors of the homicide unit , were faithful to reality . He particularly cited the scene in which Felton angers Ellison by talking excitedly about how much overtime he expected to get . Simon said , " That 's a conversation that would happen . It would happen in any homicide unit in America , and when I saw it actually being acted out I got a real kick in the pants because I thought , ' Wherever there are homicide detectives watching this , they 're cracking up because they know how true it is . ' " 
 " Bop Gun " was originally meant to serve as the second season finale , but NBC decided to make it the season premiere with the hopes of getting increased ratings from a guest appearance by Robin Williams . Williams portrayed Robert Ellison , the husband of a slain woman tourist . Several news sources indicated Williams took on the role as a favor to Homicide executive producer Barry Levinson , who directed Williams in the films Good Morning , Vietnam ( 1987 ) and Toys ( 1992 ) . But Fontana said Williams agreed to take the part based on the actor 's positive impression of both the show in general and the " Bop Gun " script in particular . Fontana said of Williams , " He read the script , responded instantly and said , ' When do you want me there ? ' . He could not have been more prepared or more of a gentleman to everyone , and he worked his tail off . That whole experience was a joy . " Williams himself said of the show , " Visually , it was just so different from anything else on television . " Although Williams was primarily known for his comedic work , the Homicide producers and Williams himself consciously decided to remain true to the original script , rejecting the idea of adding humor or jokes to the episode . Williams ' scenes were filmed over three days , and the actors found the part emotionally draining . Fontana said , " [ Williams ] worked like a dog . It was quite a special event for all of us . It 's very intense . " 
 A 13 @-@ year @-@ old Jake Gyllenhaal , son of the episode 's director Stephen , made one of his earliest acting performances in " Bop Gun " as Matt , the young son of Robert Ellison . Williams and Homicide regular Richard Belzer were acquainted from a HBO comedy special they both appeared in , although the two had never acted together before . The two often joked between filming takes , except for during Williams ' most dramatic scenes . The episode also featured Vincent Miller , an actor who worked primarily in the Washington , D.C. area , as Tweety . 
 = = Music = = 
 " Bop Gun " was the first episode to feature Chris Tergesen as music coordinator , and thus more music is featured in it than any previous episodes . During the opening scene , the song " Killer " by Seal and Adamski plays over a brief montage of images of Vaughn Perkins , just as Tweety and Marvin preparing to rob the Ellison family . When he is arrested , Marvin is wearing headphones , listening to the Public Enemy song " <unk> off My Back " . The Eric B. & Rakim song " Chinese Arithmetic " plays during the scene in which police simultaneously interview Tweety and Marvin . " Feels Like Rain " , by the blues guitarist and singer Buddy Guy , plays as Howard arrives to talk to Vaughn , and when she leaves after talking to him , in the episode 's final scene . The song " Don 't Start Me to Talkin ' " , by blues harmonica player Sonny Boy Williamson II , was also featured in the episode . 
 Tergesen was a fan of the funk band Parliament @-@ Funkadelic , and the episode has several references to the group as a result . The episode 's title derives from the band 's song " Bop Gun ( Endangered Species ) " , and during one scene a criminal claims he shot someone over the destruction of a rare record by Eddie Hazel , a member of Funkadelic . Additionally , one of the street thug characters is named Kid Funkadelic . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 6 , 1994 , " Bop Gun " was seen by 16 @.@ 3 million viewers , a higher @-@ than @-@ usual Homicide : Life on the Street rating in large part to interest in Williams ' appearance . It received a 17 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating and a 28 share , the highest rating for a 10 p.m. drama series since January 1992 . The rating placed Homicide among the top ten network television Nielsen ratings for the week , and outperformed the ratings of L.A. Law , which normally filled the 10 p.m. Thursday timeslot . NBC Entertainment president Warren Littlefield said the ratings " far exceeded expectations " , and said he expected the series to return for a third season if the viewership remained strong . Littlefield said of the Homicide ratings : 
 " These are outstanding numbers for a dramatic television series . If we can keep a reasonable level of audience , we believe in the work , we believe in the creative team we think we have , perhaps the most outstanding ensemble cast in all of television . We just would like to see continued signs of life . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Bop Gun " received generally positive reviews , and was identified by The Baltimore Sun as one of the ten best episodes of the series . Sun writer David Zurawik said Gyllenhaal 's direction was as good as anything he had done in film , and called the script " one of the most ambitious scripts you 'll see on TV this year " . Lon Grahnke of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the episode his highest rating of four stars , and called Williams portrayal " a piercing dramatic performance " . Grahnke also said , " In one hour , ' Bop Gun ' says more about firearms , urban tragedies , crime victims and racial politics than any <unk> congressman trying to blame television for our violent society . " Entertainment Weekly critic Ken Tucker complimented the episode , noting , " Don 't let Williams distract you from the real stuff here : the brilliantly jagged murder @-@ investigation scenes and the exceptional performances from homicide @-@ detective costars Daniel Baldwin and Melissa Leo . " Tribune Company television critic Kate O 'Hare praised " Bop Gun " for focusing on characterization and dialogue rather than action , and said of the episode , " With a mix of intense emotion , dogged police work and humorous banter among the detectives , " Bop Gun " typifies the philosophy of Homicide . " David P. Kalat , author of Homicide : Life on the Street - The Unofficial Companion , called it a " grueling " episode , and that Williams performed " probably his finest <unk> performance ever " . The Philadelphia Inquirer television critic Jonathan Storm lauded the cast , the " visual art of the camera " and the " realistic , yet nearly literary dialogue " of " Bop Gun " . 
 The Times @-@ Picayune writer Benjamin Morrison praised the " unexpectedly understated " performance of Williams and praised the episode for not being simple or formulaic . He suggested viewers who were crime victims themselves would be particularly moved by the script . Hal Boedeker , television critic with The Miami Herald , called the episode an " uncompromising hour " and " the highest order for network TV " . He said Williams " astonishes in every scene " , and praised the script for not racing over topics as many television shows do , but rather taking " full measure of the weight of grief " . Elaine Liner , television critic with the Corpus Christi Caller @-@ Times , described Williams ' performance as " heartbreaking " , but particularly praised the writers for " taking the show to a higher level " by making the perpetrator sympathetic and three @-@ dimensional , not only the victim . Liner said , " Fontana succeeds in fleshing out the characters on both sides of this tragedy . " Bob Langford of The News & Observer called the episode " brilliant " and praised it for focusing not on the crime but on the effects of it , as well as the realistic portrayals regarding race , such as concerns the crime would keep away white tourists . Langford said it was occasionally preachy , but said " Sometimes , a good sermon is what we need . Amazing that one this powerful can come from a TV show . " 
 Adam Sandler of Daily Variety praised the cast , the hysteria and confusion conveyed in Gyllenhaal 's direction , and the " themes of police insensitivity , victims rights and dysfunctional families " in the script . The Washington Post writer Harriet Winslow called Williams ' performance poignant and riveting , and called the fact that it did not overshadow the other actors a " tribute to the quality of this cast " . John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times called the episode " extraordinary " and said " The senselessness of the incident is heartbreakingly captured " . St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch writer Gail Pennington praised Williams ' " controlled performance " as well as several " terrific scenes " . Among them , she said , were Gee 's explanation of how police use humor as a buffer from the horrors of their jobs , and the scene where detectives simultaneously interrogate two suspects in different rooms , which she said was " choreographed as tightly as the Bolshoi Ballet " . 
 Not all reviews were so positive . The Dallas Morning News writer Ed Bark called Williams ' a " sometimes overly transparent effort to underscore the grief of the victims ' survivors " , and said the episode " works overtime " to make the world seem like a " bleak and scary place " . Bark also said the show made itself a " target for charges of racism " by making the three murderers black , but also credited the script with making one of the perpetrators so sympathetic . Tom Shales of The Washington Post said the writers " try a little too hard " to create sympathy for the three murder suspects , and the episode suffers due to the absence of actor Andre Braugher , who plays Detective Frank Pembleton . But Shales also praised Williams ' performance and said the episode was particularly powerful because the actual violence is off @-@ screen . Buzz McCain , columnist with The Washington Times , called the episode " irritating " and " as pointless as the killing " . He particularly criticized the script , which he said was clichéd and overly " misty @-@ eyed " , particularly the extended moments of Williams talking about the shooting . In a later article , McCain said , " Nothing I 've written in this column generated as much visceral response as my nine paragraphs about ( " Bop Gun " ) . " In addition to responses from angry fans , McCain received a call from David Mills , who McCain said " simply wanted some insight as to what specifically I didn 't like about his show and how the writers might improve on the next one . " 
 Robin Williams ' performance in " Bop Gun " was among a list of the ten best guest star moments in television history , compiled by the Star Tribune in April 2001 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " Bop Gun " won a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay of an Episodic Drama . It defeated competing episodes of Northern Exposure and NYPD Blue , as well as another second season Homicide episode , " A Many Splendored Thing " . Robin Williams also received an Emmy Award nomination for Guest Actor in a Drama Series . It was the only Emmy nomination Homicide : Life on the Street received in the 46th Primetime Emmy Awards ; the series received four nominations the previous year . Williams lost the award to Richard Kiley for his performance in CBS drama series Picket Fences ; the other nominees were Dan Hedaya , James Earl Jones and Tim Curry . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Bop Gun " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 for $ 69 @.@ 95 . 
 = Brett Favre = 
 Brett Lorenzo Favre ( / <unk> / ; born October 10 , 1969 ) is a former American football quarterback who spent the majority of his career with the Green Bay Packers of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was a 20 @-@ year veteran of the NFL , having played quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons ( 1991 ) , Green Bay Packers ( 1992 – 2007 ) , New York Jets ( 2008 ) , and Minnesota Vikings ( 2009 – 2010 ) . Favre was the first quarterback in NFL history to pass for 500 touchdowns , throw for over 70 @,@ 000 yards , over 6 @,@ 000 completions , and over 10 @,@ 000 pass attempts . 
 Favre started at the quarterback position for the University of Southern Mississippi for four years before being selected in the second round of the 1991 NFL Draft by Atlanta ( 33rd overall ) . He was traded to Green Bay on February 10 , 1992 , for the 19th pick in the 1992 NFL Draft . 
 Favre became the Packers ' starting quarterback in the fourth game of the 1992 season , stepping in for injured quarterback Don Majkowski , and started every game through the 2007 season . He was traded to the New York Jets and started at quarterback for the 2008 season before signing with the Vikings on August 18 , 2009 as their starting quarterback . He made an NFL record 297 consecutive starts ( 321 including playoffs ) . 
 He is the only player to win the AP Most Valuable Player Award three consecutive times ( 1995 – 97 ) , and is one of only six quarterbacks to have won the award as well as the Super Bowl in the same season . He has led teams to eight division championships ( 1995 , 1996 , 1997 , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2007 , 2009 ) , five NFC Championship Games ( 1995 , 1996 , 1997 , 2007 , 2009 ) , and two Super Bowl appearances ( Super Bowl XXXI , Super Bowl XXXII ) , winning one ( Super Bowl XXXI ) . 
 He holds many NFL records , including most career pass completions , most career pass attempts , most career interceptions thrown , most consecutive starts by a player , most sacked , and most fumbles . At the time of his retirement , he was the NFL 's all @-@ time leader in passing yards and passing touchdowns , although both records have since been broken by Peyton Manning . 
 He is also referred to by his nickname " The Gunslinger " . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Favre was born in Gulfport , Mississippi , the son of Bonita Ann ( née French ) and Irvin Ernest Favre , and raised in the small town of Kiln . Both his parents were schoolteachers in the Hancock County School District . He is of part French ancestry . One of his ancestors is Simon Favre , an influential figure in Spanish West Florida in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries ; Brett descends from Simon 's Choctaw Native American mistress , Pistikiokonay , and thus his grandfather was affiliated with the Choctaw . 
 He was the second of four children and attended Hancock North Central High School where he played baseball and football . Favre started for the Hancock North Central baseball team as an eighth @-@ grader and earned five varsity letters . He played quarterback , lineman , strong safety , placekicker and punter in a primarily option , run @-@ oriented offense coached by his father , Irvin Favre , who was the head coach of the team . 
 Irvin Favre said he knew his son had a great arm but also knew that the school was blessed with good running backs . As a result , in the three years Brett was on the team , his father ran the wishbone , a run @-@ oriented offense . Favre rarely threw more than five passes in a game . 
 = = College career = = 
 After high school , Southern Mississippi offered Favre a scholarship ( the only one he received ) . Southern Miss wanted him to play defensive back , but Favre wanted to play quarterback instead . Favre began his freshman year as the seventh @-@ string quarterback and took over the starting position in the second half of the third game of the year against Tulane on September 19 , 1987 . Favre , despite suffering a hangover from the night before and vomiting during warm @-@ ups , led the Golden Eagles to a come @-@ from @-@ behind victory with two touchdown passes . Favre started ten games during his freshman year and won six of them . 
 In his junior season , Favre led the Golden Eagles to an upset of Florida State ( then ranked sixth in the nation ) on September 2 , 1989 . Favre capped a six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute drive with the game @-@ winning touchdown pass with 23 seconds remaining . 
 On July 14 , 1990 , before the start of Favre 's senior year at Southern Miss , he was involved in a near @-@ fatal car accident . When going around a bend a few tenths of a mile from his parents ' house , Favre lost control of his car , which flipped three times and came to rest against a tree . It was only after one of his brothers smashed a car window with a golf club that Favre could be evacuated and rushed to the hospital . In the ambulance , his mother was sitting with him . " All I kept asking [ her ] was ' Will I be able to play football again ? ' " Favre recalled later . Doctors would later remove 30 inches ( 76 cm ) of Favre 's small intestine . Six weeks after this incident , on September 8 , Favre led Southern Miss to a comeback victory over Alabama . Alabama coach Gene Stallings said , " You can call it a miracle or a legend or whatever you want to . I just know that on that day , Brett Favre was larger than life . " 
 Favre formerly held several Southern Miss football records until most were surpassed by Austin Davis by the end of the 2011 season . Favre had 15 games over his career where he compiled more than 200 passing yards , making him the fourth all – time school leader in that category . Of those 15 games , five were 300 @-@ yard games , the most compiled by any of the school 's quarterbacks . Additionally , he was the seasonal leader in total passing and total offense in all four of his seasons at Southern Miss . 
 1987 : 79 / 194 for 1 @,@ 264 yards with 15 TD vs 13 INT . 
 1988 : 178 / 319 for 2 @,@ 271 yards with 16 TD vs 5 INT . 
 1989 : 206 / 381 for 2 @,@ 588 yards with 14 TD vs 10 INT . 
 1990 : 150 / 275 for 1 @,@ 572 yards with 7 TD vs 6 INT . 
 Favre earned a teaching degree with an emphasis in special education from the University of Southern Mississippi . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Atlanta Falcons ( 1991 ) = = = 
 Favre was drafted by the Atlanta Falcons in the second round , 33rd overall in the 1991 NFL Draft . On July 19 , 1991 , Favre agreed to a three @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 4 million contract with a reported signing bonus of $ 350 @,@ 000 . Atlanta coach Jerry Glanville did not approve of the drafting of Favre , saying it would take a plane crash for him to put Favre into the game . Favre 's first pass in an NFL regular season game resulted in an interception returned for a touchdown . He only attempted four passes in his career at Atlanta , was intercepted twice , and completed none of them . Favre took one other snap , which resulted in a sack for an eleven @-@ yard loss . 
 = = = Green Bay Packers ( 1992 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Green Bay Packers general manager Ron Wolf traded a first @-@ round pick ( 19th overall , which would be used for Tony Smith ) for Favre after the 1991 season . Wolf , while an assistant to the general manager of the New York Jets , had intended to take Favre in the 1991 NFL draft , but Favre was taken by the Falcons on the previous pick . 
 According to the Milwaukee Journal @-@ Sentinel and other sources , during the physical after the trade , Favre was diagnosed with avascular necrosis of the hip , the same degenerative condition that ended Bo Jackson 's football career , and doctors recommended his physical be failed , which would nullify the trade . Wolf overruled them . 
 Favre played 16 seasons in Green Bay . During his time in Green Bay , Favre was the first and only NFL player to win three consecutive AP MVP awards . He helped the Packers appear in two Super Bowls , winning Super Bowl XXXI . Favre also started every Green Bay Packers game from September 20 , 1992 to January 20 , 2008 . 
 = = = = Beginnings ( 1992 – 94 ) = = = = 
 In the second game of the 1992 season , the Packers played the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . The Buccaneers were leading 17 – 0 at halftime when head coach Mike Holmgren benched starting quarterback Don Majkowski and Favre played the second half . On his first regular season play as a Packer , Favre threw a pass that was deflected and caught by himself . Favre was tackled and the completion went for − 7 yards . The Packers lost the game 31 – 3 , chalking up only 106 yards passing . 
 In the third game of the 1992 season , Majkowski injured a ligament in his ankle against the Cincinnati Bengals , an injury severe enough that he would be out for four weeks . Favre replaced Majkowski for the remainder of the contest . Favre fumbled four times during the course of the game , a performance poor enough that the crowd chanted for Favre to be removed in favor of another Packers backup quarterback at the time , Ty Detmer . However , down 23 – 17 with 1 : 07 left in the game , the Packers started an offensive series on their own 8 @-@ yard line . Favre then completed a 42 yard pass to Sterling Sharpe . Three plays later , Favre threw the game – winning touchdown pass to <unk> Taylor with 13 seconds remaining . 
 The next week 's game against the Pittsburgh Steelers began the longest consecutive starts streak for a quarterback in NFL history . The game ended in a 17 – 3 victory and his passer rating was 144 @.@ 6 . During the season , Favre helped put together a six @-@ game winning streak for the Packers , the longest winning streak for the club since 1965 . They ended 9 – 7 that season , missing the playoffs on their last game . Favre finished his first season as a Packer with 3 @,@ 227 yards and a quarterback rating of 85 @.@ 3 , helping him to his first Pro Bowl . 
 The following season Favre helped the Packers to their first playoff berth since 1982 and was named to his second Pro Bowl . Favre had his first career 400 yard passing game and led the NFC in pass attempts , pass completions , and pass interceptions . Favre also had four game winning drives giving him seven for his career up to that point . After the season Favre became a free agent . General manager Ron Wolf negotiated Favre into a five @-@ year , $ 19 million contract . 
 The Packers finished the 1994 season 9 – 7 , advancing to the playoffs in back to back years , a feat they had not accomplished since the Vince Lombardi era . For the first time in his career , he was not eligible for the Pro Bowl . 
 = = = = MVP ( x3 ) and Super Bowl seasons ( 1995 – 97 ) = = = = 
 In 1995 , Favre won the first of his three AP MVP awards . Favre led the Packers to an 11 – 5 record , Green Bay 's best record in nearly thirty years . Favre passed for a career high of 4 @,@ 413 yards , 38 touchdowns , and recorded a quarterback rating of 99 @.@ 5 , which was the highest of his career until he recorded a rating of 107 @.@ 2 during the 2009 season . Favre also tied an NFL record by passing for at least two touchdowns in twelve consecutive games , a feat he accomplished over the 1994 – 1995 seasons . The Packers advanced to the NFC Championship Game after upsetting the San Francisco 49ers in the NFC Divisional Game . The Packers lost the NFC Championship game to the Dallas Cowboys , marking the third year in a row the Packers season was ended by the Cowboys in the playoffs . Favre helped the Packers advance farther in the playoffs than any other Packer team since 1967 , the season the Packers won Super Bowl II . 
 While being treated for various injuries , Brett Favre developed an addiction to Vicodin , which became publicly known when he suffered a seizure during a hospital visit . Amid an NFL investigation , he went public to avoid any rumors about his condition . In May 1996 , he went into treatment and remained in rehabilitation for 46 days . Had he chosen not to go , the NFL would have imposed a $ 900 @,@ 000 fine . Favre led the Packers to their best season in 30 years in the 1996 season , winning his second consecutive MVP award in the process . The Packers led the NFL in points scored ( 456 ) as well as fewest points allowed ( 210 ) , joining only the 1972 Dolphins as the only two teams to ever accomplish this . The defense also set a then NFL record for least amount of touchdowns allowed in a 16 @-@ game season with 19 . Favre threw for 3 @,@ 899 yards , a career high 39 touchdown passes ( third highest ever at the time ) , only 13 interceptions , and passer rating of 95 @.@ 8 ( the third highest of his career ) . Green Bay tied the Denver Broncos for the NFL 's best regular season record , 13 – 3 , defeated the San Francisco 49ers ( 35 @-@ 14 ) and Carolina Panthers ( 30 @-@ 13 ) at Lambeau Field in the playoffs . The Packers advanced to Super Bowl XXXI at the Louisiana Superdome , a short drive from Favre 's hometown . 
 In Super Bowl XXXI , Favre completed 14 of 27 passes for 246 yards and 2 touchdown passes . On the second play of the game , Favre called an audible and threw a 54 @-@ yard touchdown pass to receiver Andre Rison . Favre also completed an 81 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Antonio Freeman in the second quarter ( then a Super Bowl record for longest touchdown catch ) . Favre rushed for 12 yards and another touchdown , as the Packers won Super Bowl XXXI over the New England Patriots , 35 – 21 . In their 19 games of the season , the Packers had a turnover ratio of plus 24 , and outscored their opponents 100 – 48 in the playoffs . Favre became the first and only QB to score 3 touchdowns in the Super Bowl and fail to win MVP honors . 
 Favre and the Packers continued their dominance of the NFC during the next season . Favre was named AP co @-@ MVP of the league along with Detroit Lions ' running back Barry Sanders , his third straight award . He finished the season with 3 @,@ 867 passing yards , 35 touchdown passes , 16 interceptions , and a passer rating of 92 @.@ 6 . The Packers finished with a 13 @-@ 3 record and became the only team to ever beat six teams that would go on to make the playoffs . Also , Green Bay advanced through the playoffs to the Super Bowl for the second year in a row . After being heavily favored by 13 points , the Packers lost to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXII by the score of 31 – 24 at Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego , ending the NFC 's 13 @-@ year Super Bowl winning streak . It was one of the biggest upsets in NFL history . Favre completed 25 of 42 passes for 256 yards and 3 touchdowns , with 1 interception and 1 fumble in the losing effort . 
 = = = = Mid @-@ career ( 1998 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 The Packers lost to the San Francisco 49ers in a wild card playoff game in 1998 . Favre had rallied the team with a touchdown pass to Antonio Freeman with 1 : 56 remaining in the game to put the Packers up 27 – 23 . However , Steve Young responded with a touchdown of his own to Terrell Owens with three seconds remaining to end the Packers season . Favre and the Packers failed for the first time since 1994 to at least reach the NFC championship game . 
 In the regular season finale of 2001 , Favre was the target of minor controversy when , in a game against the New York Giants at Giants Stadium , he was sacked by the Giants defensive end Michael Strahan . It was Strahan 's lone sack of the game and gave him the NFL 's single – season sack record of 22 @.@ 5 , which topped Mark Gastineau 's record of 22 set in 1984 . The controversy has followed Strahan continuously since he set the record . Jim Fassel , Strahan 's coach in 2001 , said that when a respected athlete like Strahan gets close to an all @-@ time record , sometimes opponents want him to break it . 
 On March 1 , 2001 , Favre signed a " lifetime " contract extension , which technically was a 10 @-@ year contract extension worth around $ 100 million . 
 Favre and the Packers continued posting positive results through the next few seasons . Through the 2004 season , the Packers had the longest streak of non @-@ losing seasons ( 13 ) in the NFL , despite an 8 – 8 record under coach Ray Rhodes , a 9 – 7 season under coach Mike Sherman , and no playoff berths in either 1999 or 2000 . The streak ended in 2005 , with the Packers finishing 4 – 12 overall . 
 = = = = Later career and personal tragedies ( 2003 – 06 ) = = = = 
 One day after his father died of a heart attack or stroke , Favre decided to play in a December 22 , 2003 , Monday Night Football game against the Oakland Raiders . The Packers traveled to Oakland where Favre passed for four touchdowns in the first half and 399 total yards in a 41 – 7 victory over the Raiders on international television ( even receiving applause from " Raider Nation " ) . He completed 73 @.@ 3 % of his passes and finished the game with a passer rating of 154 @.@ 9 with having recorded a perfect 158 @.@ 3 rating with four touchdowns and over 250 yards passing by halftime ( a feat accomplished by only four other passers in NFL history ) . Afterwards , Favre said , " I knew that my dad would have wanted me to play . I love him so much and I love this game . It 's meant a great deal to me , to my dad , to my family , and I didn 't expect this kind of performance . But I know he was watching tonight . " He then went to his father 's funeral in Pass Christian , Mississippi . Favre won an ESPY Award for his Monday Night Football performance . 
 A notable game in the 2004 season in which Favre and the Packers finished 10 – 6 was against the New York Giants . During the game , Favre suffered a concussion . He did not receive medical clearance to re @-@ enter the game . Despite the concussion , Favre threw a 28 @-@ yard touchdown to Javon Walker on a fourth down play . Afterwards it was reported that Favre did not remember throwing the touchdown pass . Favre also had two significant touchdown streaks of note during the season . He had completed at least one touchdown pass in 36 consecutive games over the 2002 – 2004 seasons which at the time was the second longest streak in NFL history . Also , during the 2004 post @-@ season , he broke Dan Marino 's record for consecutive games with at least one touchdown pass in the post season . Favre went on to throw a touchdown pass in twenty consecutive playoff games which is still an NFL record . 
 After the death of his father , a series of events related to Favre 's family were reported in the media . In October 2004 , ten months after the death of Favre 's father , his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Casey Tynes , was killed in an all @-@ terrain vehicle accident on Favre 's Mississippi property . 
 Soon after in 2004 , Favre 's wife , Deanna Favre , was diagnosed with breast cancer . Following aggressive treatment through 2004 , she recovered . She created The Deanna Favre Hope Foundation which supports breast cancer education and women 's breast imaging and diagnosis services for all women , including those who are medically underserved . 
 In late August 2005 , Favre 's family suffered another setback : Hurricane Katrina blew through Mississippi , destroying his family 's home there ; however , none of his family members were injured . Brett and Deanna 's property in Hattiesburg , Mississippi was also extensively damaged by the storm . Favre elected to continue to play in the 2005 season . 
 For the 2005 season , the Packers , despite throwing for over 3 @,@ 000 yards for a record 14th consecutive time , Favre had a below average season with only 20 touchdown passes and a league @-@ leading 29 interceptions . The loss of guards Marco Rivera and Mike <unk> to free agency along with key injuries to Javon Walker , Ahman Green , Bubba Franks , among others , hampered Favre and the team . His passer rating was 70 @.@ 9 , 31st in the NFL and the worst single season rating of his career . After the disappointing season , many speculated that Favre would retire . However , on April 26 , 2006 , Favre announced that he would remain with the team for the 2006 season . Despite earlier comments that the 2006 season would be his last , Favre announced in a press conference on May 6 , 2006 , that he had not ruled out the possibility of returning beyond the 2006 season . 
 In the 2006 season , Favre suffered his first career shutout against the Chicago Bears . Later in the season , the New England Patriots shut out the Packers in a game where he was injured before halftime and could not complete the game . On September 24 , 2006 , he became just the second quarterback in NFL history to record 400 touchdown passes ( Dan Marino being the first ) . He connected with rookie wide receiver Greg Jennings on a 5 @-@ yard pass that Jennings turned into a 75 @-@ yard touchdown play during a win against the Detroit Lions . He also became the first player ever to complete 5 @,@ 000 passes in his career . On December 31 , 2006 , the Packers played their last game of the season , winning 26 – 7 against the Chicago Bears . It was his 22nd career win versus the Bears , moving him to an all @-@ time record of 22 – 8 . 
 = = = = Milestone season ( 2007 ) = = = = 
 On February 26 , 2007 , Brett Favre underwent minor arthroscopic ankle surgery in Green Bay , Wisconsin to remove a buildup of bone spurs in his left ankle . 
 Favre began the 2007 season trailing in a number of career NFL passing records . On September 16 , 2007 , Favre and the Packers defeated the New York Giants to give Favre his record setting 149th win , passing John Elway . On September 30 , Favre threw a 16 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Greg Jennings in a game against the Vikings . This was his 421st NFL touchdown pass , and set a new all @-@ time record , surpassing Dan Marino 's 420 . 
 On November 4 , 2007 , after the Packers defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 33 – 22 , Favre became only the 3rd quarterback to have defeated all thirty @-@ one other current NFL teams . He joined Peyton Manning and Tom Brady as the only quarterbacks in NFL history to do this , just the week after the two of them achieved the accomplishment . On Thanksgiving 2007 , Favre led the Packers to a 37 – 26 win over the Lions , and brought the Packers to a 10 – 1 record . He won the Galloping <unk> award , given by the broadcasters at Fox to the game MVP . Favre threw three touchdown passes for his 63rd career game with at least three touchdowns , surpassing Marino 's former record of 62 . 
 Favre led the Packers to a 13 – 3 regular season record , the NFC North championship , and the second seed in the NFC playoffs . Prior to the Packers ' playoff game against the Seattle Seahawks , Favre stated his desire to continue playing football for another season . In the Divisional Playoffs , Favre threw three touchdowns as the Packers cruised to a 42 – 20 victory over the Seahawks at a snowy Lambeau Field . The Packers ' season ended the following week when they suffered a 23 – 20 overtime loss in the NFC Championship Game to the eventual Super Bowl Champion New York Giants . Negotiating sub @-@ zero temperatures , Favre amassed 236 passing yards and two touchdowns , but also threw an interception in overtime that set up the Giants ' game @-@ winning field goal . Favre 's 90 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Donald Driver in the second quarter was the longest pass in Packers playoff history , and it extended Favre 's NFL record for consecutive postseason games with a touchdown pass to 18 . Favre stated after the game that he would make a decision more quickly than he has in the past regarding whether he would return for another season . 
 Favre 's milestone 2007 season culminated with his selection to the 2008 Pro Bowl as the starting quarterback for the NFC , but an ankle injury forced him to withdraw . 
 = = = = <unk> and returns ( 2008 ) = = = = 
 Beginning near the end of the 2006 season , word began to surface that Favre was considering retirement . In fact , playing in Soldier Field against the arch @-@ rival Bears in the season finale , Favre was given a standing ovation in the closing seconds of the Packer victory as a show of respect from Chicago fans to their longtime nemesis . Moments later at the postgame interview , he gave a tearful interview with an NBC Sports correspondent , where he admitted his future was still questionable . However , after much debate , he returned for 2007 , during which his future was once again in doubt and an oft @-@ discussed topic , with many in the media speculating that if the Packers made the Super Bowl , Favre would indeed retire and hand the reins to the unproven but talented Aaron Rodgers , who was drafted two years earlier as Favre 's heir @-@ apparent . Ultimately , the Packers fell in the NFC Championship to the New York Giants ( who in turn upset the heavily favored New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLII ) . 
 On March 4 , 2008 , Favre formally announced his retirement . Although Favre stated that he had been willing to play another year , he felt that another season would only be successful if he led his team to another Super Bowl victory . He added the chances for a Super Bowl win were small , and that he was not up for the challenge . At his press conference , Favre openly wept about leaving the NFL . He stated that his decision , regardless of what was being said in the media , had nothing to do with what the Packers did or didn 't do . <unk> to contradict statements made by his agent , Bus Cook , Favre said that his decision to retire was based on the fact that he did not want to play anymore . He said during the conference , " I know I can play , but I don 't think I want to . And that 's really what it comes down to . " 
 On July 2 , 2008 , it was reported that Favre was in contact with the Packers about a possible return to the team . On July 11 , 2008 , Favre sent a letter to the Packers asking for his unconditional release to allow him to play for another NFL team . Packers general manager Ted Thompson announced he would not grant Favre an unconditional release and reaffirmed the organization 's commitment to Aaron Rodgers as its new quarterback . Complicating matters was Favre 's unique contract giving him the leverage to void any potential trade by not reporting to the camp of the team he might be traded to if the Packers elect to go that route . 
 Favre spoke publicly for the first time about his potential comeback in a July 14 , 2008 , interview with Greta Van Susteren on the Fox News Channel 's On the Record with Greta Van Susteren . In the interview , Favre said he was " guilty of retiring early " , that he was " never fully committed " to retirement , and that he was pressured by the Packers to make a decision before the NFL Draft and the start of the free agent signing period . Favre disputed the notion that he does not want to play for Green Bay and said that while he understands the organization has decided to move on , they should now allow him to do the same . He made clear that he would not return to the Packers as a backup and reiterated his desire to be released rather than traded , which would allow him the freedom to play for a competitive team . Favre also accused the Packers of being dishonest , wishing the team would have been straightforward with him and the public . 
 In the second part of the interview , which aired on July 15 , Favre expressed his frustration with Packer management , spoke of his sympathy for successor Aaron Rodgers ' predicament , and affirmed he is 100 percent committed to playing football in 2008 . 
 <unk> 's Jay Glazer reported on July 16 , 2008 , that the Packers filed tampering charges against the Minnesota Vikings with the league office , alleging improper communication between Vikings offensive coordinator Darrell <unk> and Favre , although one source suggested that Favre may have been in contact with Vikings head coach Brad Childress . After an investigation , Commissioner Roger Goodell ruled there had been no violation of tampering rules . 
 Favre formally filed for reinstatement with the NFL on July 29 , 2008 , and his petition was granted by Commissioner Goodell , effective August 4 , 2008 . Favre then flew to Green Bay to report to Packers training camp . After a lengthy meeting with head coach Mike McCarthy and general manager Ted Thompson , however , both sides agreed it was time for Favre and the organization to part ways . McCarthy sensed Favre was not in " the right mind @-@ set " to resume playing for the Packers , while Favre felt that his relationship with Packer management had deteriorated to the point that a return to the team would be untenable . 
 The Packers had announced plans to retire Favre 's No. 4 jersey in the 2008 season opener . Those plans were dropped when he announced plans to return to the NFL . In March 2009 , the Packers indicated that the team still intends to retire Favre 's number , but due to the circumstances surrounding his departure from the team , no timeline had been set . 
 = = = New York Jets ( 2008 ) = = = 
 After negotiations with both the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and New York Jets , the Packers traded Favre to the Jets on August 7 , 2008 , in exchange for a conditional fourth @-@ round pick in the 2009 draft with performance escalation . Favre 's season with the Jets started well ; in week four of the 2008 season , he threw six touchdowns against the Arizona Cardinals , a personal best and one fewer than the NFL record . This performance led to him being selected as the FedEx Air Player of the Week . By Week 12 , the Jets had compiled an 8 – 3 record , including a win over the previously undefeated Tennessee Titans . However , the Jets lost four of the last five games of the season , including the final game against the Miami Dolphins , who had acquired Chad Pennington after he was released from the Jets to make room for Favre . In those five games , Favre threw eight interceptions and only two touchdown passes , bringing his season total to twenty @-@ two of each . Favre had complained of shoulder pain and had an MRI performed on December 29 , 2008 , which revealed a torn biceps tendon in his right shoulder . After the 2008 season had ended , in mid January 2009 , Favre told Jets General Manager Mike Tannenbaum , " it may be time to look in a different direction " regarding the quarterback position . On February 11 , 2009 , Favre informed the Jets that he was retiring after 18 seasons . He remained property of the New York Jets organization , until April 28 , 2009 , when the Jets released Favre from his contract , thus allowing him to sign anywhere he wanted . By May 2009 , he was officially cut from the Jets Reserve / Retired list . In September 2009 , Favre again made Jets news , as the NFL learned that the Jets were aware that Favre injured his arm in the eleventh game of the 2008 season , and fined the Jets $ 125 @,@ 000 for not reporting the injury in any of the Jets ' five final games . 
 = = = Minnesota Vikings ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Favre officially signed with the Minnesota Vikings on August 18 , 2009 . He would go on to have a landmark season in which he surpassed former Vikings defensive end Jim Marshall for consecutive starts at one position , with 291 , became the first quarterback in NFL history to defeat every one of the league 's 32 franchises since the NFL first expanded to 32 franchises in 2002 , surpassed Dan Marino 's previous record for four @-@ touchdown games , and was named to his 11th Pro Bowl . The Vikings finished 12 @-@ 4 and advanced to the NFC Championship game , ultimately losing in overtime to the eventual Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints . Despite the loss , Favre set playoff records for pass completions and passing yards previously held by Joe Montana . 
 On August 3 , 2010 , NBC Sports reported the confirmation of Brett Favre returning to the Minnesota Vikings but saying that that the 2010 season would be his final season . An announcement was given on August 17 , 2010 confirming his return to the team . That season , Brett Favre achieved two milestones . He threw for his 500th touchdown and <unk> yard against the New York Jets . On November 7 , 2010 , in a game against the Arizona Cardinals , Favre threw for a career high 446 yards while rallying the Vikings from a 14 @-@ point 4th quarter deficit to win in overtime . On December 5 , 2010 , in a game against the Buffalo Bills , Favre was hit by Bills linebacker Arthur Moats while making a throw , causing him to sustain a sprain of the AC joint in his right shoulder . Favre missed the rest of the game and was replaced by <unk> Jackson who led the Vikings to victory despite throwing three interceptions . 
 On December 13 , 2010 , due to his sprained shoulder , Brett Favre was marked inactive for the game against the New York Giants ending his consecutive regular season start streak at 297 . Favre started a total of 321 games including post @-@ season appearances . On December 20 , 2010 while playing the Chicago Bears outside at TCF Bank Stadium due to the collapse of the roof of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome , Favre sustained a concussion after being sacked by Bears defensive end Corey Wootton . This would be his final appearance in an NFL game . 
 On January 2 , 2011 , Favre was unable to play against the Detroit Lions in the final game of the regular NFL season due to his inability to pass NFL @-@ mandated post @-@ concussion tests . In a press conference immediately following the game , Favre announced his intention to retire from professional football . On January 17 , 2011 , Favre officially filed his retirement papers with the NFL . 
 = = = Post @-@ NFL health issues = = = 
 In 2013 , Favre was asked to consider returning to the NFL to play for the injury @-@ plagued St. Louis Rams . He turned down the offer , telling <unk> radio in Washington , D.C. that he has suffered memory loss and that he feared it was related to the multiple concussions he suffered throughout his career . He was previously asked in a 2009 interview with NBC how many times he had played with a concussion that with the new standards would have resulted in him sitting out . ' A lot . ' , he replied . 
 = = = Post @-@ NFL career analyst work = = = 
 Favre was the analyst for his alma mater , Southern Miss , when they played the Rice Owls on October 1 , 2011 . He later joined NFL Network for pregame coverage of Super Bowl XLVII . It has also been reported that Favre has turned down repeated offers from NFL Network to become an on @-@ air analyst . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 = = = Honors and awards = = = 
 Favre has received several awards including : 
 3 × Associated Press Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) ( 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 ; the last shared with Barry Sanders ) . 
 11 × Pro Bowl selection . 
 6 × First- or Second @-@ team All @-@ Pro selection . 
 Named to the NFL 1990s All @-@ Decade Team . 
 Favre was inducted by the Green Bay Packers into the team Hall of Fame in July 2015 . On February 6 , 2016 , Favre was elected into the Pro Football Hall of Fame as a member of the class of 2016 . 
 He has also been honored by several organizations including Men 's Health Magazine , Sports Illustrated , Make a Wish Foundation , and United States Sports Academy . 
 = = = Records and milestones = = = 
 Favre owns several NFL records including : 
 Most pass completions ( 6 @,@ 300 ) 
 Most pass attempts ( 10 @,@ 169 ) 
 Most pass interceptions ( 336 ) 
 Most starts ( 298 ) 
 Most wins ( 186 ) ( tied with Peyton Manning ) 
 He owns a number of team records , including having printed his name into almost every passing category in the annals of Green Bay Packers history . 
 He is the holder of several firsts in NFL history , including the only quarterback to win three consecutive NFL most valuable player awards and the only quarterback to win a playoff game over age 40 . 
 He also set a number of college records with Southern Mississippi . 
 = = = Consecutive starts streak = = = 
 Since first being named the starter of the Green Bay Packers before playing the Pittsburgh Steelers on September 27 , 1992 , Brett Favre had never missed a game spanning over 18 1 ⁄ 2 consecutive seasons . He holds the record for the most consecutive starts by any player in the NFL with 297 ( 321 including playoffs ) , and is one of eight quarterbacks to have started 100 consecutive games in NFL history . Favre has stated that of all the records he set , he is most proud of the consecutive starts accomplishment . 
 Favre failed to finish a game due to injury on only eight occasions since taking control of the Packers as quarterback . Significant injuries suffered by Favre during the streak includes a first @-@ degree shoulder separation , deep thigh bruise , severely bruised left hip , severely sprained left ankle , wind knocked out coupled with coughing up blood , sprained right thumb , right elbow tendinitis , left mid @-@ foot sprain , sprained lateral collateral ligament of the left knee , broken left thumb , softball @-@ sized bruise of the left hamstring , mild concussion , sprained right hand , injured ulnar nerve of the right elbow , bone spurs on the left ankle , torn right biceps , pulled groin , stress fracture of the left ankle coupled with an avulsion fracture of calcaneus , and a sprained <unk> joint of the right shoulder . 
 During Favre 's consecutive starts streak , 238 other quarterbacks have started in the NFL , 17 of them being back @-@ ups to Favre at one point . 
 The Pro Football Hall of Fame has as an exhibit displaying the jersey Favre wore during his record breaking 117th consecutive start as a quarterback , and a section of their website devoted to what the Hall of Fame calls an " Iron man " . 
 In 2009 , Favre surpassed Jim Marshall for starts at any position with his record @-@ breaking 271st start as a quarterback as the Vikings played the Lions . His streak ended at 297 , with the last start in the streak coming on December 5 , 2010 . Favre was unable to start the Vikings ' December 13 game against the New York Giants due to a shoulder injury , despite the game being delayed for a day because of the collapse of the Metrodome roof . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 Favre 's professional statistics : 
 = = Retirement speculation = = 
 2002 : In September , Peter King conducted an interview with Favre during spring training . Favre told him that he missed home and was thinking more and more about retirement . When then head @-@ coach Mike Sherman told the players they could have off on Saturday and Sunday , Favre replied " I wish I could be on my lawn mower back home . " 
 2003 : Favre was constantly asked about retirement throughout the early part of the year . Favre jokingly responded by saying " I can 't even remember how the whole retirement thing started , but whoever started it needs to be shot . " 
 2005 : After the Packers got off to a slow start , rumors that Favre might retire started to escalate . Favre responded by saying " At 0 @-@ 3 , I think most people would say ' Oh , he 's gone after this year , or they won 't even want him back . ' ... I don 't even think about when that time might come . " 
 2006 : In an interview with ESPN in January , after the Packers had finished 4 @-@ 12 , Favre admitted that if he had to make a decision right away he would not come back . He went on to say " There 's other days , I go , ' What if it 's crunch time , two minutes left , do you want the ball ? ' I don 't know if I do . " In March , Favre hears Phil Simms say on Sirius Radio that as long as Favre can physically play the game , he should . Shortly thereafter , Favre confirms he would return to play . After the Packers defeated the Chicago Bears the last game of the season 26 @-@ 7 , Favre choked up during an interview with Andrea Kremer by saying " If today 's my last game , I want to remember it . It 's tough . It 's tough . I 'll miss these guys . I 'll miss this game . I just want every one to know that ... I didn 't plan on doing this . Way to put me on the spot . " Asked if he was indeed going to retire , Favre responded " We 'll see . We 'll see . I don 't want to say anything right now . " After the game , a Packers teammate said that Favre was just as emotional in a speech after the Seattle Seahawks game in 2005 at Lambeau Field when he was all but certain he was going to retire . 
 2007 : In February , Favre tells the Biloxi Sun Herald that he plans to come back for another season with the Packers . 
 2008 : In early March , Favre announces that he is retiring from the Green Bay Packers . At a news conference he said " I know I can play , but I don 't think I want to . It 's been a great career for me , but it 's over . As they say , all good things must come to an end . I look forward to whatever the future may hold for me . " Later in the month Favre has second thoughts and wants to return . According to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel , Favre backed out of a meeting with Packers management two days before re @-@ entry talks were to begin . In April , Sam Farmer from the Los Angeles Times reported that Favre 's agent Bus Cook was making inquiries to other teams about Favre . Favre responded by saying " I have no idea where that came from , but it certainly didn 't come from me . I 'm happy about my decision and I haven 't once said ' I wonder if I made the wrong decision . ' I know it 's the right one . It 's kind of funny . Even when I 'm retired , they won 't let me stay retired . " Also in April , the Packers placed Favre on the Reserve @-@ Retired list and planned to have Favre 's number retired during the season opener against the Minnesota Vikings . In June , Favre said he told head coach Mike McCarthy he wanted to come back to the team . He said " When he picked up the phone again after he dropped it , he said , ' Oh , God , Brett . You 're putting us in a tight spot . He said , ' Brett , playing here is not an option . ' Those were his exact , exact words . " In July , Favre sent a letter requesting his release from the Packers . A couple months earlier Favre contacted Mike McCarthy about coming out of retirement and was " rebuffed " according to a Milwaukee Journal Sentinel report . Then a report came in from ESPN that said that Favre had wanted to come out of retirement but the Packers were reluctant to take him back . The Packers refused to give Favre an unconditional release . A few days later , Favre had an interview with Greta Van Susteren of Fox News where he accused general manager Ted Thompson of forcing him to make a decision on his return to the team too quickly . Two days after the interview , the Packers filed tampering charges with the NFL front office charging that the Minnesota Vikings had inappropriate contact with Favre . The Packers then offered Favre a retirement package of $ 25 million marketing agreement to remain retired . This offer was rejected and Favre was subsequently traded to the New York Jets . 
 2009 : In February , Favre said he retired although his agent Bus Cook asked for his release from the New York Jets . After the Jets released him in April , Bus Cook e @-@ mailed Jarrett Bell of USA Today that " He 's retired , working on his farm in Mississippi . " In May , Minnesota Vikings head coach Brad Childress set up a meeting with Favre to discuss him possibly playing with the team . In July , Childress said Favre would not be coming out of retirement . However , in August Favre announced he would come back and play for the Vikings . 
 2010 : On February 7 , Favre appeared in a second quarter Super Bowl XLIV ad for Hyundai parodying his retirement indecisiveness . In the ad , set after the 2020 NFL season , a <unk> 50 year old <unk> accepts the season MVP award and ponders retirement , but can 't commit one way or the other . In April , Favre indicated that if it were not for his Vikings teammates and fans , it would be easy to retire . In early August , Favre 's ankle ( which was injured during the 2009 playoffs ) had not responded after surgery and rehabilitation . As a result , he informed the team that he would not be coming back for another season . However , two weeks later he told teammates Jared Allen , Steve Hutchinson and Ryan <unk> he was coming back for another season . 
 2011 : In January , Favre filed retirement papers with the NFL . In December , a report from ESPN @-@ Chicago indicated that Favre would be open to coming back from retirement if the Chicago Bears were interested . However , head coach Lovie Smith and Favre denied the report . Favre said " In spite of reports about playing with various teams , I 'm enjoying retirement with my family and have no plans to play football . " 
 2013 : Favre 's agent Bus Cook indicated early in the season that Favre could still play in the NFL . When asked about what his agent said , Favre responded " I am ( in shape ) , but I am no way considering playing ... The stress level was much , much more ( when I played ) .... The demands are , don 't get me wrong , I want to win , but it 's not a job . " A few weeks later , in late October , the St. Louis Rams called Favre after their starting quarterback Sam Bradford was lost for the season , but Favre declined their offer to bring him out of retirement . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Favre married Deanna Tynes on July 14 , 1996 . Together , they have two daughters , Brittany ( born 1989 ) and <unk> ( born 1999 ) . Brittany has given birth to two grandsons named Parker Brett ( was born to Brittany on April 2 , 2010 ) and A.J. The NFL stated that at the time it did not know of any other active players with grandchildren . 
 Favre 's mother , Bonita , helps manage his holdings in agriculture and real estate , handle his endorsements and appearances and oversee his charity work . Brett and Bonita Favre released a book in 2004 titled Favre ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 036 @-@ 4 ) which discusses their personal family and Green Bay Packers family , including the Monday Night Football game that followed the death of Brett 's father Irvin Favre . 
 Brett 's nephew Dylan Favre plays quarterback for Cedar Rapids of the Indoor Football League , having joined the Titans in 2016 after playing in college at Mississippi State , Pearl River Community College and the University of Tennessee @-@ Martin . 
 = = = High school coaching = = = 
 In 2012 , Favre became the offensive coordinator for Oak Grove High School . Favre won his first game as a coach by a score of 64 – 6 . In December 2013 , with Favre still serving as the offensive coordinator , Oak Grove High School won the Class 6A Mississippi high school state championship . In May 2014 , it was announced that Favre would continue to help out at Oak Grove , but would no longer be offensive coordinator . 
 = = = Charitable work = = = 
 Favre established the Brett Favre <unk> Foundation in 1996 . In conjunction with his annual golf tournament , celebrity softball game and fundraising dinners , the foundation has donated more than $ 2 million to charities in his home state of Mississippi as well as to those in his adopted state of Wisconsin . 
 Favre is involved with youth that are ill . Favre was awarded the Chris Greicius Celebrity Award from the Make a Wish Foundation . He is also known to respond to requests made to his foundation regarding youth with serious illnesses such as cancer . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 In 1999 , Favre worked with NASCAR driver Dale Jarrett to operate Jarrett / Favre Motorsports in the Busch Series , which lasted two seasons . 
 The Favre family owns and operates the Brett Favre 's Steakhouse , located in Green Bay , Wisconsin . 
 In 2013 , Favre joined the Board of Directors of <unk> , a sport social media platform . Favre 's role includes product ambassador , sports insights and advising <unk> on business interests with teams , leagues and sports conferences . 
 = = = Entertainment = = = 
 Favre made a cameo appearance in the 1998 romantic comedy film There 's Something About Mary as Cameron Diaz 's character 's former love interest . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Favre has been a spokesperson for multiple companies , including Nike , Snapper , Remington , Sears , <unk> , <unk> , MasterCard , Wrangler , Bergstrom Automotive , and Hyundai . 
 Prior to the Mississippi runoff election on June 24 , 2014 , Favre endorsed the incumbent Republican U.S. Senator Thad Cochran in his race against State Senator Chris McDaniel , a " tea party " favorite . 
 = = = NFL personal conduct issues = = = 
 In 1996 , Favre was temporarily banned by the NFL from drinking alcohol after he admitted he was addicted to Vicodin and spent 46 days at a drug rehab clinic before the start of the season . His condition was serious enough that he suffered a potentially deadly seizure . 
 In 2010 , the NFL investigated Favre for allegedly sexting and leaving inappropriate voice messages for Jets " Gameday host " Jenn <unk> during the 2008 season . According to the NFL , forensic analysis failed to prove Favre sent the objectionable photographs to <unk> . Favre was found not to be in violation of the NFL 's personal conduct policy , but was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 for failing to cooperate with the investigation . 
 = Decline in amphibian populations = 
 Although scientists observed reduction in populations of several European amphibian species since the 1950s , awareness of the decline of amphibian populations and its classification as a modern @-@ day global mass extinction only dates from the 1980s . By 1993 , more than 500 species of frogs and salamanders present on all five continents were in decline . Today , the phenomenon of declining amphibian populations affects thousands of species in all types of ecosystems and is thus recognized as one of the most severe examples of the Holocene extinction , with severe implications for global biodiversity . 
 Since the 1980s , decreases in amphibian populations , including population crashes and mass localized extinctions , have been spotted from locations all over the world . These declines are known as one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity , and several causes are believed to be involved , including disease , habitat destruction and modification , exploitation , pollution , pesticide use , introduced species , and ultraviolet @-@ B radiation ( UV @-@ B ) . However , many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly understood , and the topic is currently a subject of much ongoing research . Calculations based on extinction rates suggest that the current extinction rate of amphibians could be 211 times greater than the background extinction rate and the estimate goes up to 25 @,@ 000 – 45 @,@ 000 times if endangered species are also included in the computation . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the past three decades , declines in populations of amphibians ( the class of organisms that includes frogs , toads , salamanders , newts , and caecilians ) have occurred worldwide . In 2004 , the results were published of the first worldwide assessment of amphibian populations , the Global Amphibian Assessment . This found that 32 % of species were globally threatened , at least 43 % were experiencing some form of population decrease , and that between 9 and 122 species have become extinct since 1980 . As of 2010 , the IUCN Red List , which incorporates the Global Amphibian Assessment and subsequent updates , lists 486 amphibian species as " Critically Endangered " . Despite the high risk this group faces , recent evidence suggests the public is growing largely indifferent to this and other environmental problems , posing serious problems for conservationists and environmental workers alike . 
 Habitat loss , disease and climate change are thought to be responsible for the drastic decline in populations in recent years . Declines have been particularly intense in the western United States , Central America , South America , eastern Australia and Fiji ( although cases of amphibian extinctions have appeared worldwide ) . While human activities are causing a loss of much of the world ’ s biodiversity , amphibians appear to be suffering much greater effects than other classes of organism . Because amphibians generally have a two @-@ staged life cycle consisting of both aquatic ( larvae ) and terrestrial ( adult ) phases , they are sensitive to both terrestrial and aquatic environmental effects . Because their skins are highly permeable , they may be more susceptible to toxins in the environment than other organisms such as birds or mammals . Many scientists believe that amphibians serve as " canaries in a coal mine , " and that declines in amphibian populations and species indicate that other groups of animals and plants will soon be at risk . 
 Declines in amphibian populations were first widely recognized in the late 1980s , when a large gathering of herpetologists reported noticing declines in populations in amphibians across the globe . Among these species , the Golden toad ( Bufo <unk> ) endemic to Monteverde , Costa Rica , featured prominently . It was the subject of scientific research until populations suddenly crashed in 1987 and it had disappeared completely by 1989 . Other species at Monteverde , including the Monteverde Harlequin Frog ( Atelopus varius ) , also disappeared at the same time . Because these species were located in the pristine Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve , and these extinctions could not be related to local human activities , they raised particular concern among biologists . 
 = = Initial scepticism = = 
 When amphibian declines were first presented as a conservation issue in the late 1980s , some scientists remained unconvinced of the reality and gravity of the conservation issue . Some biologists argued that populations of most organisms , amphibians included , naturally vary through time . They argued that the lack of long @-@ term data on amphibian populations made it difficult to determine whether the anecdotal declines reported by biologists were worth the ( often limited ) time and money of conservation efforts . 
 However , since this initial scepticism , biologists have come to a consensus that declines in amphibian populations are a real and severe threat to biodiversity . This consensus emerged with an increase in the number of studies that monitored amphibian populations , direct observation of mass mortality in pristine sites that lacked apparent cause , and an awareness that declines in amphibian populations are truly global in nature . 
 = = Potential causes = = 
 Numerous potential explanations for amphibian declines have been proposed . Most or all of these causes have been associated with some population declines , so each cause is likely to affect in certain circumstances but not others . Many of the causes of amphibian declines are well @-@ understood , and appear to affect other groups of organisms as well as amphibians . These causes include habitat modification and fragmentation , introduced predators or competitors , introduced species , pollution , pesticide use , or over @-@ harvesting . However , many amphibian declines or extinctions have occurred in pristine habitats where the above effects are not likely to occur . The causes of these declines are complex , but many can be attributed to emerging diseases , climate change , increased ultraviolet @-@ B radiation , or long @-@ distance transmission of chemical contaminants by wind . 
 Artificial lighting has been suggested as another potential cause . Insects are attracted to lights making them scarcer within the amphibian habitats . 
 = = = Habitat modification = = = 
 Habitat modification or destruction is one of the most dramatic issues affecting amphibian species worldwide . As amphibians generally need aquatic and terrestrial habitats to survive , threats to either habitat can affect populations . Hence , amphibians may be more vulnerable to habitat modification than organisms that only require one habitat type . Large scale climate changes may further be modifying aquatic habitats , preventing amphibians from spawning altogether . 
 = = = Habitat fragmentation = = = 
 Habitat fragmentation occurs when habitats are isolated by habitat modification , such as when a small area of forest is completely surrounded by agricultural fields . Small populations that survive within such fragments are often susceptible to inbreeding , genetic drift , or extinction due to small fluctuations in the environment . 
 = = = Pollution and chemical contaminants = = = 
 There is evidence of chemical pollutants causing frog developmental deformities ( extra limbs , or malformed eyes ) . Pollutants have varying effects on frogs . Some alter the central nervous system ; others like <unk> cause a disruption in the production and secretion of hormones . Experimental studies have also shown that exposure to commonly used herbicides such as glyphosate ( <unk> Roundup ) or insecticides such as malathion or <unk> greatly increase mortality of tadpoles . Additional studies have indicated that terrestrial adult stages of amphibians are also susceptible to non @-@ active ingredients in Roundup , particularly <unk> , which is a surfactant . <unk> has been shown to cause male tadpoles of African clawed frogs to become hermaphroditic with development of both male and female organs . Such feminization has been reported in many parts of the world . In a study conducted in a laboratory at Uppsala University in Sweden , more than 50 % of frogs exposed to levels of estrogen @-@ like pollutants existing in natural bodies of water in Europe and the United States became females . Tadpoles exposed even to the weakest concentration of estrogen were twice as likely to become females while almost all of the control group given the heaviest dose became female . 
 While most pesticide effects are likely to be local and restricted to areas near agriculture , there is evidence from the Sierra Nevada mountains of the western United States that pesticides are traveling long distances into pristine areas , including Yosemite National Park in California . 
 Some recent evidence points to ozone as a possible contributing factor to the worldwide decline of amphibians . 
 = = = Ozone depletion , ultraviolet radiation and cloud cover = = = 
 Like many other organisms , increasing ultraviolet @-@ B ( UVB ) radiation due to stratospheric ozone depletion and other factors may harm the DNA of amphibians , particularly their eggs . The amount of damage depends upon the life stage , the species type and other environmental parameters . Salamanders and frogs that produce less <unk> , an enzyme that counteracts DNA damage from UVB , are more susceptible to the effects of loss of the ozone layer . Exposure to ultraviolet radiation may not kill a particular species or life stage but may cause sublethal damage . 
 More than three dozen species of amphibians have been studied , with severe effects reported in more than 40 publications in peer @-@ reviewed journals representing authors from North America , Europe and Australia . Experimental enclosure approaches to determine UVB effects on egg stages have been criticized ; for example , egg masses were placed at water depths much shallower than is typical for natural oviposition sites . While UVB radiation is an important stressor for amphibians , its effect on the egg stage may have been overstated . 
 Anthropogenic climate change has likely exerted a major effect on amphibian declines . For example , in the Monteverde Cloud Forest , a series of unusually warm years led to the mass disappearances of the Monteverde Harlequin frog and the Golden Toad . An increased level of cloud cover , a result of geoengineering and global warming , which has warmed the nights and cooled daytime temperatures , has been blamed for facilitating the growth and proliferation of the fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis ( the causative agent of the fungal infection chytridiomycosis ) . 
 Although the immediate cause of the die offs was the chytrid , climate change played a pivotal role in the extinctions . Researchers included this subtle connection in their inclusive climate @-@ linked epidemic hypothesis , which acknowledged climatic change as a key factor in amphibian extinctions both in Costa Rica and elsewhere . 
 New evidence has shown global warming to also be capable of directly degrading toads ' body condition and survivorship . Additionally , the phenomenon often <unk> with landscape alteration , pollution , and species invasions to effect amphibian extinctions . 
 = = = Disease = = = 
 A number of diseases have been related to mass die @-@ offs or declines in populations of amphibians , including " red @-@ leg " disease ( Aeromonas <unk> ) , <unk> ( family <unk> ) , <unk> , and chytridiomycosis . It is not entirely clear why these diseases have suddenly begun to affect amphibian populations , but some evidence suggests that these diseases may have been spread by humans , or may be more virulent when combined with other environmental factors . 
 = = = = Trematodes = = = = 
 There is considerable evidence that parasitic trematode platyhelminths ( a type of fluke ) have contributed to developmental abnormalities and population declines of amphibians in some regions . These trematodes of the genus Ribeiroia have a complex life cycle with three host species . The first host includes a number of species of aquatic snails . The early larval stages of the trematodes then are transmitted into aquatic tadpoles , where the <unk> ( larvae ) <unk> in developing limb buds . These encysted life stages produce developmental abnormalities in post @-@ metamorphic frogs , including additional or missing limbs . These abnormalities increase frog predation by aquatic birds , the final host of the trematode . 
 A study showed that high levels of nutrients used in farming and ranching activities fuel parasite infections that have caused frog deformities in ponds and lakes across North America . The study showed increased levels of nitrogen and phosphorus cause sharp hikes in the abundance of trematodes , and that the parasites subsequently form cysts in the developing limbs of tadpoles causing missing limbs , extra limbs and other severe malformations including five or six extra or even no limbs . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In 1998 , following large @-@ scale frog deaths in Australia and Central America , research teams in both areas came up with identical results : a previously undescribed species of pathogenic fungus , Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis . It is now clear that many recent extinctions of amphibians in Australia and the Americas are linked to this fungus . This fungus belongs to a family of <unk> known as chytrids that are not generally pathogenic . 
 The disease caused by Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is called chytridiomycosis . Frogs infected by this disease generally show skin lesions and hyperkeratosis , and it is believed that death occurs because of interference with skin functions including maintenance of fluid balance , electrolyte homeostasis , respiration and role as a barrier to infections . The time from infection to death has been found to be 1 – 2 weeks in experimental tests , but infected animals can carry the fungus as long as 220 days . There are several hypotheses on the transmission and vectors of the fungus . 
 Subsequent research has established that the fungus has been present in Australia since at least 1978 , and present in North America since at least the 1970s . The first known record of chytrid infection in frogs is in the African Clawed Frog , Xenopus laevis . Because Xenopus are sold in pet shops and used in laboratories around the world , it is possible that the chytrid fungus may have been exported from Africa . 
 = = = Introduced predators = = = 
 Non @-@ native predators and competitors have also been found to affect the viability of frogs in their habitats . The mountain yellow @-@ legged frog which typically inhabits the Sierra Nevada lakes have seen a decline in numbers due to stocking of non @-@ native fish ( trout ) for recreational fishing . The developing tadpoles and <unk> fall prey to the fish in large numbers . This interference in the frog 's three @-@ year metamorphosis is causing a decline that is manifest throughout their ecosystem . 
 = = = Increased noise levels = = = 
 Frogs and toads are highly vocal , and their reproductive behaviour often involves the use of vocalizations . There have been suggestions that increased noise levels caused by human activities may be contributing to their declines . In a study in Thailand , increased ambient noise levels were shown to decrease calling in some species and to cause an increase in others . This has , however , not been shown to be a cause for the widespread decline . 
 = = Symptoms of stressed populations = = 
 Amphibian populations in the beginning stages of decline often exude a number of signs , which may potentially be used to identify at @-@ risk segments in conservation efforts . One such sign is developmental instability , which has been proven as evidence of environmental stress . This environmental stress can potentially raise susceptibility to diseases such as chytridiomycosis , and thus lead to amphibian declines . In a study conducted in Queensland , Australia , for example , populations of two amphibian species , Litoria <unk> and Litoria <unk> , were found to exhibit far greater levels of limb asymmetry in pre @-@ decline years than in control years , the latter of which preceded die offs by an average of 16 years . Learning to identify such signals in the critical period before population declines occur might greatly improve conservation efforts . 
 = = Conservation measures = = 
 On 16 February 2007 , scientists worldwide met in Atlanta , U.S. , to form a group called the Amphibian Ark to help save more than 6 @,@ 000 species of amphibians from disappearing by starting captive breeding programmes . Conservation efforts have been created by several organizations such as Amphibian Conservation Alliance ( ACA ) and the World Wildlife Fund to help further studies on frog extinction and educate people on the issue at hand . 
 Areas with noticed frog extinctions , like Australia , have few policies that have been created to prevent the extinction of these species . However , local initiatives have been placed where conscious efforts to decrease global warming will also turn into a conscious effort towards saving the frogs . In South America , where there is also an increased decline of amphibian populations , there is no set policy to try to save frogs . Some suggestions would include getting entire governments to place a set of rules and institutions as a source of guidelines that local governments have to abide by . 
 A critical issue is how to design protected areas for amphibians which will provide suitable conditions for their survival . Conservation efforts through the use of protected areas have shown to generally be a temporary solution to population decline and extinction because the amphibians become inbred . It is crucial for most amphibians to maintain a high level of genetic variation through large and more diverse environments . 
 Education of local people to protect amphibians is crucial , along with legislation for local protection and limiting the use of toxic chemicals , including some fertilizers and pesticides in sensitive amphibian areas . 
 = Thomas R. Marshall = 
 Thomas Riley Marshall ( March 14 , 1854 – June 1 , 1925 ) was an American Democratic politician who served as the 28th Vice President of the United States ( 1913 – 21 ) under Woodrow Wilson . A prominent lawyer in Indiana , he became an active and well known member of the Indiana Democratic Party by stumping across the state for other candidates and organizing party rallies that later helped him win election as the 27th Governor of Indiana . In office , he proposed a controversial and progressive state constitution and pressed for other progressive era reforms . The Republican minority used the state courts to block the attempt to change the constitution . 
 His popularity as governor , and Indiana 's status as a critical swing state , helped him secure the Democratic vice presidential nomination on a ticket with Wilson in 1912 and win the subsequent general election . An ideological rift developed between the two men during their first term , leading Wilson to limit Marshall 's influence in the administration , and his brand of humor caused Wilson to move Marshall 's office away from the White House . During Marshall 's second term he delivered morale @-@ boosting speeches across the nation during World War I and became the first vice president to hold cabinet meetings , which he did while Wilson was in Europe . While he was president in the United States Senate , a small number of anti @-@ war senators kept it deadlocked by refusing to end debate . To enable critical wartime legislation to be passed , Marshall had the body adopt its first procedural rule allowing filibusters to be ended by a two @-@ thirds majority vote — a variation of this rule remains in effect . 
 Marshall 's vice presidency is most remembered for a leadership crisis following a stroke that incapacitated Wilson in October 1919 . Because of their personal dislike for him , Wilson 's advisers and wife sought to keep Marshall uninformed about the president 's condition to prevent him from easily assuming the presidency . Many people , including cabinet officials and Congressional leaders , urged Marshall to become acting president , but he refused to forcibly assume the presidency for fear of setting a precedent . Without strong leadership in the executive branch , the administration 's opponents defeated the ratification of the League of Nations treaty and effectively returned the United States to an isolationist foreign policy . Vice President Marshall is also the only known Vice President of the United States to have been the target of an assassination attempt . 
 Well known for his wit and sense of humor , one of Marshall 's most enduring jokes came during a Senate debate in which , in response to Senator Joseph Bristow 's catalog of the nation 's needs , Marshall quipped the often @-@ repeated phrase , " What this country needs is a really good five @-@ cent cigar " , provoking laughter . After his terms as vice president , he opened an Indianapolis law practice , where he authored several legal books and his memoir , Recollections . He continued to travel and speak publicly . Marshall died while on a trip after suffering a heart attack in 1925 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Thomas Marshall 's paternal grandfather , Riley Marshall , immigrated to Indiana in 1817 and settled on a farm in what is now Whitley County . He became wealthy when a moderate deposit of oil and natural gas was discovered on his farm ; when he sold the farm in 1827 it earned $ 25 @,@ 000 , $ 474 @,@ 044 in 2009 chained dollars . The money allowed him to purchase a modest estate and spend the rest of his life as an active member of the Indiana Democratic Party , serving as an Indiana State Senator , party chairman , and financial contributor . He was also able to send his only child , Daniel , to medical school . 
 Marshall 's mother , Martha Patterson , was orphaned at age 13 while living in Ohio and came to live with her sister on a farm near the Marshalls ' Indiana home . She was known for her wit and humor , as her son later would be . Martha and Daniel met and married in 1848 . 
 Thomas Marshall was born in North Manchester , Indiana on March 14 , 1854 . Two years later , a sister was born , but she died in infancy . Martha had contracted tuberculosis , which Daniel believed to be the cause of their infant daughter 's poor health . While Marshall was still a young boy , his family moved several times in search of a good climate for Daniel to attempt different " outdoor cures " on Martha . They moved first to Quincy , Illinois in 1857 . Daniel Marshall was a supporter of the American Union and a staunch Democrat , and took his son to the Lincoln and Douglas debate in Freeport in 1858 . There the four @-@ year @-@ old Marshall met Stephen Douglas and Abraham Lincoln and sat on the lap of whichever candidate was not speaking . He later referred to this as one of his earliest and most cherished memories . 
 The family moved to <unk> , Kansas in 1859 but the violence on the frontier led them to move to Missouri in 1860 ; eventually Daniel succeeded in curing Martha 's disease . As the American Civil War neared , violence spread into Missouri during the Bleeding Kansas incidents . In October several men led by Duff Green demanded that Daniel Marshall provide medical assistance to the pro @-@ slavery faction . He refused , and they left . After their departure , the Marshalls ' neighbors warned them that Green was planning to return and murder them . They helped the Marshalls quickly pack their belongings and escape to Illinois by steamboat . The Marshalls remained there only a brief time before continuing to Indiana , even farther from the volatile border region . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 On settling in <unk> , Indiana , Marshall began to attend public school . His father and grandfather became embroiled in a dispute with their Methodist minister when they refused to vote Republican in the 1862 election . The minister threatened to expel them from the church , to which Marshall 's grandfather replied that he would " take his risk on hell , but not the Republican Party " . The dispute prompted the family to move again , to Fort Wayne , and convert to the Presbyterian church . In Fort Wayne , Marshall attended high school , graduating in 1869 . At age fifteen his parents sent him to Wabash College , in Crawfordsville , where he received a classical education . His father advised him to study medicine or become a minister , but neither interested him ; he entered the school without knowing which profession he would take upon graduation . 
 Marshall joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity , participated in literary and debating societies , and founded a Democratic Club . He secured a position on the staff of the college newspaper , the Geyser , and began writing political columns defending Democratic policies . In 1872 he wrote an unfavorable column about a female lecturer at the school , accusing her of " seeking liberties " with the young boys in their boarding house . She hired lawyer Lew Wallace , the author of Ben @-@ Hur , and filed a suit demanding that Marshall pay her $ 20 @,@ 000 for libel . Marshall traveled to Indianapolis in search of a defense lawyer and employed future United States President Benjamin Harrison , then a prominent lawyer in the area . Harrison had the suit dropped by showing that the charges made by Marshall were probably true . In Marshall 's memoir , he wrote that when he approached Harrison to pay his bill , his lawyer informed him that he would not charge him for the service , but instead gave him a lecture on ethics . 
 Marshall was elected to Phi Beta Kappa during his final year at college . He graduated in June 1873 , receiving the top grade in fourteen of his thirty @-@ six courses in a class of twenty @-@ one students . As a result of his libel case , he had become increasingly interested in law and began seeking someone to teach him . At that time , the only way to become a lawyer in Indiana was to apprentice under a member of the Indiana bar association . His great @-@ uncle Woodson Marshall began to help him , but soon moved away . Marshall went to live with his parents , who had moved to Columbia City . There he read law in the office of Walter Olds , a future member of the Indiana Supreme Court . He studied in the office for over a year and was admitted to the Indiana bar on April 26 , 1875 . 
 = = = Law practice = = = 
 Marshall opened a law practice in Columbia City in 1876 , taking on many minor cases . After gaining prominence , he accepted William F. <unk> as a partner in 1879 and began taking many criminal defense cases . The two men functioned well as partners . <unk> was better educated in law and worked out their legal arguments . Marshall , the superior orator , argued the cases before the judge and jury . Their firm became well known in the region after they handled a number of high @-@ profile cases . In 1880 Marshall ran for public office for the first time as the Democratic candidate for his district 's prosecuting attorney . The district was a Republican stronghold , and he was defeated . About the same time , he met and began to court Kate Hooper , and the two became engaged to marry . Kate died of an illness in 1882 , one day before they were to be wed . Her death was a major emotional blow to Marshall , leading him to become an alcoholic . 
 Marshall lived with his parents into his thirties . His father died in the late 1880s and his mother died in 1894 , leaving him with the family estate and business . In 1895 , while working on a case , Marshall met Lois Kimsey who was working as a clerk in her father 's law firm . Despite their nineteen @-@ year age difference , the couple fell in love and married on October 2 . The Marshalls had a close marriage and were nearly inseparable , and spent only two nights apart during their nearly thirty @-@ year marriage . 
 Marshall 's alcoholism had begun to interfere with his busy life prior to his marriage . He arrived at court hung @-@ over on several occasions and was unable to keep his addiction secret in his small hometown . His wife helped him to overcome his drinking problem and give up liquor after she locked him in their home for two weeks to undergo a treatment regimen . Thereafter , he became active in temperance organizations and delivered several speeches about the dangers of liquor . Although he had stopped drinking , his past alcoholism was later raised by opponents during his gubernatorial election campaign . 
 Marshall remained active in the Democratic party after his 1880 defeat and began stumping on behalf of other candidates and helping to organize party rallies across the state . His speeches were noted for their partisanship , but his rhetoric gradually shifted away from a conservative viewpoint in the 1890s as he began to identify himself with the growing progressive movement . He became a member of the state Democratic Central Committee in 1904 , a position that raised his popularity and influence in the party . 
 Marshall and his wife were involved in several private organizations . He was active in the Presbyterian Church , taught Sunday school , and served on the county fair board . As he grew wealthy from his law firm he became involved in local charities . An active Mason and member of the Grand Lodge of Indiana , by 1898 he was a Master Mason and had risen to the thirty @-@ third degree in the Scottish Rite , the highest level of the order , and had become a member of its Supreme Council . He remained an active mason until his death and served on several masonic charitable boards . 
 = = Governorship = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 In 1906 , Marshall declined his party 's nomination to run for Congress . He did hint to state party leaders that he would be interested in running for governor in the 1908 election . He soon gained the support of several key labor unions , and was endorsed by a reporter in the Indianapolis Star . Despite this support , at the state convention he was a dark horse candidate . Party boss Thomas Taggart did not support him because of Marshall 's support of prohibition . Taggart wanted the party to nominate anti @-@ prohibitionist Samuel Ralston , but the prohibitionist and anti @-@ Taggart factions united with Marshall 's supporters , giving him the votes needed to win . 
 Marshall 's opponent in the general election was Republican Congressman James E. Watson , and the campaign focused on temperance and prohibition . Just as it began , the Republican @-@ controlled state government passed a local @-@ option law that allowed counties to ban the sale of liquor . The law became the central point of debate between the parties and their gubernatorial candidates . The Democrats proposed that the local @-@ option law be changed so that the decision to ban liquor sales could be made at the city and township level . This drew support from anti @-@ prohibitionists , who saw it as an opportunity to roll back prohibition in some areas , and as the only alternative available to the total prohibition which the Republican Party advocated . The Democratic position also helped to retain prohibitionists ' support by allowing prohibition to remain enacted in communities where a majority supported it . The Republican Party was in the midst of a period of instability , splitting along progressive and conservative lines . Their internal problems proved to be the deciding factor in the election , giving Marshall a narrow victory : he received 48 @.@ 1 % of the vote to Watson 's 48 % . He was the first Democratic governor in two decades . Democrats also came to power in the Indiana House of Representatives by a small margin , though Republicans retained control of the Indiana Senate . 
 = = = Progressive agenda = = = 
 Marshall was inaugurated as Governor of Indiana on January 11 , 1909 . Since his party had been out of power for many years , its initial objective was to appoint as many Democrats as possible to patronage positions . Marshall tried to avoid becoming directly involved in the patronage system . He allowed the party 's different factions to have positions and appointed very few of his own choices . He allowed Taggart to manage the process and pick the candidates , but signed off himself on the official appointments . Although his position on patronage kept peace in his party , it prevented him from building a strong political base . 
 During his term , Marshall focused primarily on advancing the progressive agenda . He successfully advocated the passage of a child labor law and anti @-@ corruption legislation . He supported popular election of United States Senators , and the constitutional amendment to allow it was ratified by the Indiana General Assembly during his term . He also overhauled the state auditing agencies and claimed to have saved the government millions of dollars . He was unsuccessful in passing the rest of the progressive platform agenda items or persuading the legislature to call a convention to rewrite the state constitution to expand the government 's regulatory powers . 
 Marshall was a strong opponent of Indiana 's recently passed eugenics and sterilization laws , and ordered state institutions not to follow them . He was an early , high @-@ profile opponent of eugenics laws , and he carried his opposition into the vice @-@ presidency . His governorship was the first in which no state executions took place , due to his opposition to capital punishment and his practice of pardoning and commuting the sentences of people condemned to execution . He regularly attacked corporations and used recently created anti @-@ trust laws to attempt to break several large businesses . He participated in a number of ceremonial events , including personally laying the final golden brick to complete the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in 1909 . 
 = = = Marshall 's constitution = = = 
 <unk> the state constitution became Marshall 's central focus as governor , and after the General Assembly refused to call a constitutional convention he began to seek alternative means by which to have a new constitution adopted . He and Jacob Piatt Dunn , a close friend and civic leader , wrote a new constitution that increased the state 's regulatory powers considerably , set minimum wages , and gave constitutional protections to unions . Many of these reforms were also in the Socialist Party platform under its leader , Terre Haute native Eugene V. Debs . Republicans believed Marshall 's constitution was an attempt to win over Debs ' supporters , who had a strong presence in Indiana . The constitution also allowed direct @-@ democracy initiatives and referendums to be held . The Democratic controlled assembly agreed to the request and put the measure on the ballot . His opponents attacked the direct @-@ democracy provisions , claiming they were a violation of the United States Constitution , which required states to operate republican forms of government . The 1910 mid @-@ term elections gave the Democrats control of the Indiana Senate , increasing the constitution 's chances of being adopted . Marshall presented it to the General Assembly in 1911 and recommended that they submit it to voters in the 1912 election . 
 Republicans opposed the ratification process , and were infuriated that the Democrats were attempting to revise the entire constitution without calling a constitutional convention , as had been called for the state 's two previous constitutions . Marshall argued that no convention was needed because the existing constitution did not call for one . Republicans took the issue to court and the Marion County Circuit Court granted an injunction removing the constitution from the 1912 ballot . Marshall appealed , but the Indiana Supreme Court upheld the decision in a judgment which stated that the Constitution of Indiana could not be replaced in total without a constitutional convention , based on the precedent set by Indiana 's first two constitutions . Marshall was angry with the decision and delivered a speech attacking the court and accusing it of overstepping its authority . He launched a final appeal to the United States Supreme Court but left office in January 1913 while the case was still pending . Later that year , the court declined the appeal , finding that the issue was within the sole jurisdiction of the state courts . Marshall was disappointed with the outcome . Subsequent historians , like Professor Linda Gugin , have called the process and the document itself " hopelessly flawed " , and legal expert James St. Claire has written that if the constitution had been adopted , large parts would probably have been ruled unconstitutional by the federal courts . 
 = = Vice presidency = = 
 = = = Election = = = 
 The Indiana constitution prevented Marshall from serving a consecutive term as governor . He made plans to run for a United States Senate seat after his term ended , but another opportunity presented itself during his last months as governor . Although he did not attend the 1912 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore , his name was put forward as Indiana 's choice for president . He was suggested as a compromise nominee , but William Jennings Bryan and his delegates endorsed Woodrow Wilson over Champ Clark , securing the nomination for Wilson . Indiana 's delegates lobbied to have Marshall named the vice presidential candidate in exchange for supporting Wilson . Indiana was an important swing state , and Wilson hoped that Marshall 's popularity would help him carry it in the general election . He had his delegates support Marshall , giving him the vice presidential nomination . Marshall privately turned down the nomination , assuming the job would be boring given its limited role . He changed his mind after Wilson assured him that he would be given plenty of responsibilities . During the campaign , Marshall traveled across the United States delivering speeches . The Wilson – Marshall ticket easily won the 1912 election because of the division between the Republican Party and the Progressive Party . 
 Marshall was not fond of Wilson , as he disagreed with him on a number of issues . Although Wilson invited Marshall to cabinet meetings , Marshall 's ideas were rarely considered for implementation , and Marshall eventually stopped attending them regularly . In 1913 Wilson took the then unheard @-@ of step of meeting personally with members of the Senate to discuss policy . Before this , presidents used the vice president ( who serves as president of the senate ) as a go @-@ between ; Wilson used the opportunity to show that he did not trust Marshall with delicate business . In his memoir , Marshall 's only negative comment towards Wilson was , " I have sometimes thought that great men are the bane of civilization , they are the real cause of all the bitterness and contention which amounts to anything in the world " . Their relationship was described as one of " functioning animosity " . 
 = = = Senate developments = = = 
 Marshall was not offended by Wilson 's lack of interest in his ideas , and considered his primary constitutional duty to be in the Senate . He viewed the vice presidential office as being in the legislative branch , not the executive . While he presided in the Senate , emotions sometimes ran high , including during a debate on the Mexican border crisis in 1916 . During that debate Marshall threatened to expel certain senators from the chamber for their raucous behavior , but did not carry through on the threat . On several occasions , he ordered the Senate gallery cleared . He voted eight times to break tie votes . 
 In the debates leading up to World War I , a number of isolationist senators filibustered bills that Wilson considered important . The filibusters lasted for weeks and twice lasted for over three months . Wilson and the bills ' supporters requested that Marshall put a gag @-@ order in place to cut off debate , but he refused on ethical grounds , allowing a number of bills to be defeated in hopes that opposition would eventually end their filibuster . Among the defeated bills was one allowing merchant ships to arm themselves , and another allowing the US government to make direct arms sales to the allies . Despite their victories , the small group of senators continued to lock up the senate to prevent any pro @-@ war legislation from passing . In response , Marshall led the Senate to adopt a new rule on March 8 , 1917 , allowing filibusters to be broken by two @-@ thirds of voting Senators . This replaced the previous rule that allowed any senator to prolong debate as long as he desired . The rule has been modified several times , most prominently that the current rule requires three @-@ fifths of all Senators , not only the ones voting . 
 As Marshall made little news and was viewed as a somewhat comic figure in Washington because of his sense of humor , a number of Democratic party leaders wanted him removed from the 1916 reelection ticket . Wilson , after deliberating , decided keeping Marshall on would demonstrate party unity ; thus in 1916 Marshall won reelection over the still divided Republican Party and became the first vice president re @-@ elected since John C. Calhoun in 1828 , and Wilson and Marshall became the first president and vice president team to be re @-@ elected since Monroe and Tompkins in 1820 . 
 = = = Assassination attempt = = = 
 On the evening of July 2 , 1915 , Eric Muenter , a onetime German professor at Harvard and Cornell universities , who opposed American support of the allied war effort , broke into the U.S. Senate and , finding the door to the Senate chamber locked , laid dynamite outside the reception room , which happened to be next to Marshall 's office door . Though the bomb was set with a timer , it exploded prematurely just before midnight , while no one was in the office . Muenter may not have been specifically been targeting the Vice President . 
 On July 5 , Muenter ( who went under the pseudonym Frank Holt ) burst into the Glen Cove , New York home of Jack Morgan , son of financier J.P. Morgan , demanding that he stop the sale of weapons to the allies . Morgan told the man he was in no position to comply with his demand ; Muenter shot him twice and escaped . Muenter was later apprehended and confessed to attempted assassination of the Vice President . Marshall was offered a personal security detachment after the incident , but declined it . Marshall had been receiving written death threats from numerous " cranks " for several weeks . " Some of them were signed , " Marshall told the press , " but most were anonymous . I threw them all into the waste basket . " Marshall added that he was " more or less a fatalist " and did not notify the Secret Service about the letters , " but that he naturally was startled when he heard of the explosion at the Capitol . " 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During Marshall 's second term , the United States entered World War I. Marshall was a reluctant supporter of the war , believing the country to be unprepared and feared it would be necessary to enact conscription . He was pleased with Wilson 's strategy to begin a military buildup before the declaration of war , and fully supported the war effort once it had begun . Shortly after the first troops began to assemble for transport to Europe , Marshall and Wilson hosted a delegation from the United Kingdom in which Marshall became privy to the primary war strategy . However , he was largely excluded from war planning and rarely received official updates on the progress of military campaigns . In most instances he received news of the war through the newspapers . 
 Wilson sent Marshall around the nation to deliver morale @-@ boosting speeches and encourage Americans to buy Liberty Bonds in support of the war effort . Marshall was well suited for the job , as he had been earning extra money as a public speaker while vice president , and gladly accepted the responsibility . In his speeches , he cast the war as a " moral crusade to preserve the dignity of the state for the rights of individuals " . In his memoir , he recalled that the war seemed to drag on " with leaden feet " , and that he was relieved when it finally ended . As the war neared its end , Marshall became the first vice president to conduct cabinet meetings ; Wilson left him with this responsibility while traveling in Europe to sign the Versailles treaty and to work on gathering support for his League of Nations idea . Wilson became the first president to personally deliver a treaty to be ratified by the Senate , which he presented to Marshall as the presiding officer during a morning session . 
 = = = Morrison = = = 
 Marshall 's wife was heavily involved in charitable activities in Washington and spent considerable time working at the Diet Kitchen Welfare Center providing free meals to impoverished children . In 1917 she became acquainted with a mother of newborn twins , one of whom was chronically ill . The child 's parents were unable to get adequate treatment for their son 's condition . Lois Marshall formed a close bond with the baby , who was named Clarence Ignatius Morrison , and offered to take him and help him find treatment . She and Marshall had been unable to have children , and when she brought the baby home , Marshall told her that she could " keep him , provided he did not squall ... " . Marshall grew to love the boy and wrote that he " never walked the streets of Washington with as sure a certainty as he walked into my heart " , and , as the boy grew older , that he was " beautiful as an angel ; brilliant beyond his years ; lovable from every standpoint " . 
 The Marshalls never officially adopted Morrison because they believed that to go through the procedure while his parents were still living would appear unusual to the public . Wanting to keep the situation private , they instead made a special arrangement with his parents . President Wilson felt obliged to acknowledge the boy as theirs and sent the couple a note that simply said , " With congratulations to the baby . Wilson " . Morrison lived with the Marshalls for the rest of his life . In correspondence they referred to him as Morrison Marshall , but in person they called him Izzy . Lois took him to see many doctors and spent all her available time trying to nurse him back to health , but his condition worsened and he died in February 1920 , just before his fourth birthday . His death devastated Marshall , who wrote in his memoir that Izzy " was and is and ever will be so sacred to me ... " . 
 = = = Succession crisis = = = 
 President Wilson experienced a mild stroke in September 1919 . On October 2 , he was struck by a much more severe stroke that left him partially paralyzed and almost certainly incapacitated . Wilson 's closest adviser , Joseph Tumulty , did not believe Marshall would be a suitable president and took precautions to prevent him from assuming the presidency . Wilson 's wife Edith strongly disliked Marshall because of what she called his " <unk> " disposition , and also opposed his assumption of the presidency . Tumulty and the First Lady believed that an official communication from Wilson 's staff on his condition would allow Marshall to trigger the constitutional mechanism allowing him to become acting president , and made sure no such communication occurred . After Marshall demanded to know Wilson 's status so that he could prepare for the possibility of becoming president , they had a reporter from the Baltimore Sun brief Marshall and inform him that Wilson was near death . Marshall later said that " it was the first great shock of my life " , but without an official communication on Wilson 's condition , he didn 't believe he could constitutionally assume the presidency . 
 On October 5 , Secretary of State Robert Lansing was the first official to propose that Marshall forcibly assume the presidency . Other cabinet secretaries backed Lansing 's request , as did Congressional leaders , including members of both the Democratic and Republican parties who sent private communications to Marshall . Marshall was cautious in accepting their offers of support . After consulting with his wife and his long @-@ time personal adviser , Mark <unk> , he privately refused to assume Wilson 's duties and become Acting President of the United States . The process for declaring a president incapacitated was unclear at that time , and he feared the precedent that might be set if he forcibly removed Wilson from office . Marshall wanted the president to voluntarily allow his powers to devolve to the vice president , but that was impossible given his condition and unlikely given Wilson 's dislike for Marshall . Marshall informed the cabinet that the only cases in which he would assume the presidency were a joint resolution of Congress calling on him to do so , or an official communication from Wilson or his staff asserting his inability to perform his duties . 
 Wilson was kept secluded by his wife and personal physician and only his close advisers were allowed to see him ; none would divulge official information on his condition . Although Marshall sought to meet with Wilson to personally determine his condition , he was unable to do so , and relied on vague updates he received through a few bulletins published by Wilson 's physician . Believing that Wilson and his advisers would not voluntarily transfer power to the vice president , a group of Congressional leaders initiated Marshall 's requested joint resolution . The senators opposed to the League of Nations treaty , however , believed that as president Marshall would make several key concessions that would allow the treaty to win ratification . Wilson , in his present condition , was either unwilling or unable to make the concessions , and debate on the bill had resulted in a deadlock . In order to prevent the treaty 's ratification , the anti @-@ League senators blocked the joint resolution . 
 On December 4 , Lansing announced in a Senate committee hearing that no one in the cabinet had spoken with or seen Wilson in over sixty days . The senators seeking to elevate Marshall requested that a committee be sent to check on Wilson 's condition , hoping to gain evidence to support their cause . Dubbed the " smelling committee " by several newspapers , the group discovered Wilson was in very poor health , but seemed to have recovered enough of his faculties to make decisions . Their report ended the perceived need for the joint resolution . 
 At a Sunday church service in mid @-@ December , in what Marshall believed was an attempt by other officials to force him to assume the presidency , a courier brought a message informing him that Wilson had died . Marshall was shocked , and rose to announce the news to the congregation . The ministers held a prayer , the congregation began singing hymns , and many people wept . Marshall and his wife exited the building , and made a call to the White House to determine his next course of action , only to find that he had been the victim of a hoax , and that Wilson was still living . 
 Marshall performed a few ceremonial functions for the remainder of Wilson 's term , such as hosting foreign dignitaries . Among these was Albert I , King of the Belgians , the first European monarch to visit the United States . Edward , Prince of Wales , the future monarch of the United Kingdom , spent two days with Marshall and received a personal tour of Washington from him . First Lady Edith Wilson performed most routine duties of government by reviewing all of Wilson 's communications and deciding what he would be presented with and what she would delegate to others . The resulting lack of leadership allowed the administration 's opponents to prevent ratification of the League of Nations treaty . They attacked the treaty 's tenth article , which they believed would allow the United States to be bound in an alliance to European countries that could force the country return to war without an act of Congress . Marshall personally supported the treaty 's adoption , but recommended several changes , including the requirement that all parties to it acknowledge the Monroe Doctrine and the United States ' sphere of influence , and that the tenth article be made non @-@ binding . 
 Wilson began to recover by the end of 1919 , but remained secluded for the remainder of his term , steadfast in his refusal or inability to accept changes to the treaty . Marshall was prevented from meeting with him to ascertain his true condition until his final day in office . It remains unclear who was making the executive branch 's decisions during Wilson 's incapacity , but it was likely the first lady with the help of the presidential advisers . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Marshall had his name entered as a candidate for the presidential nomination at the 1920 Democratic National Convention . He made arrangements with Thomas Taggart to have a delegation sent from Indiana to support his bid , but was unable to garner support outside of the Hoosier delegation . Ultimately he endorsed the Democratic nominees , James M. Cox for president and Franklin Delano Roosevelt for vice president , but they were defeated by the Republican ticket of Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge . On their election , Marshall sent a note to Coolidge in which he offered him his " sincere condolences " for his misfortune in being elected vice president . 
 Marshall considered returning to Columbia City after leaving office , but instead bought a home and opened a law practice in Indianapolis , where he believed there would be better business opportunities . Harding nominated him to serve on the Lincoln Memorial Commission in 1921 , and then to a more lucrative position on the Federal Coal Commission in 1922 ; Marshall resigned from both commissions in 1923 . He spent over a year writing books on the law and his Recollections , a humorous memoir . The latter book was completed in May 1925 and subsequent historians have noted it as unusual , even for its time , for not disclosing any secrets or attacking any of Marshall 's enemies . Marshall remained a popular public speaker , and continued to travel to give speeches . The last he delivered was to high school students in the town of his birth . 
 While on a trip to Washington D.C. , Marshall was struck by a heart attack while reading his Bible in bed on the night of June 1 , 1925 . His wife called for medical assistance , but he died before it arrived . A service and viewing was held in Washington two days later and was attended by many dignitaries . Marshall 's remains were returned to Indianapolis , where he lay in state for two days ; thousands visited his bier . His funeral service was held June 9 , and he was interred in Crown Hill Cemetery , next to the grave of his adopted son Morrison " Izzy " Marshall . Lois Marshall moved to Arizona and remained widowed the rest of her life , living on her husband 's pension and the $ 50 @,@ 000 she earned by selling his memoir to the Bobbs @-@ Merrill publishing company . She died in 1958 and was interred next to her husband . 
 = = Humor = = 
 Marshall was known for his quick wit and a good sense of humor . On hearing of his nomination as vice president , he announced that he was not surprised , as " Indiana is the mother of Vice Presidents ; home of more second @-@ class men than any other state " . One of his favorite jokes was about a woman with two sons , one of whom went to sea and one of whom was elected vice president ; neither was ever heard of again . On his election as vice president , he sent Woodrow Wilson a book , inscribed " From your only Vice " . 
 His humor caused him trouble during his time in Washington . He was known to greet citizens walking by his office on the White House tour by saying to them , " If you look on me as a wild animal , be kind enough to throw peanuts at me " . This prompted Wilson to move Marshall 's office to the Senate Office building , where he would not be disturbed by visitors . In response to a proposal to the board of the Smithsonian Institution to send a team to excavate for ruins in Guatemala , Marshall suggested that the team instead excavate around Washington . When asked why , he replied that , judging by the looks of the people walking on the street , they should be able to find buried cave @-@ men no more than six feet down . The joke was not well received , and he was shut out of board meetings for nearly a year . 
 His serious remarks could get him in trouble as well . Some of his public utterances in 1913 , in which he appeared to advocate radical ideas in regard to the inheritance of property , caused much criticism . 
 Marshall 's wit is best remembered from a phrase he introduced to the American lexicon . During a Senate debate in 1917 , as Senator Joseph L. Bristow cataloged a long list of what he felt the country needed , Marshall leaned over to one of his clerks and said , " What this country needs is more of this ; what this country needs is more of that " . He then quipped , loudly enough for most of the chamber to hear , " What this country needs is a really good five @-@ cent cigar " , which provoked laughter from a number of senators . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The situation that arose after the incapacity of President Wilson , for which Marshall 's vice @-@ presidency is most remembered , revived the national debate on the process of presidential succession . The topic was already being discussed when Wilson left for Europe , which influenced him to allow Marshall to conduct cabinet meetings in his absence . Wilson 's incapacity during 1919 and the lack of action by Marshall made it a major issue . The constitutional flaws in the process of presidential succession had been known since the death of President William Henry Harrison in 1841 , but little progress had been made passing a constitutional amendment to remedy the problem . Nearly fifty years later , the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution was passed , allowing the vice president to assume the presidential powers and duties any time the president was rendered incapable of carrying out the powers and duties of the office . 
 Historians have varied interpretations of Marshall 's vice presidency . Claire Suddath rated Marshall as one of the worst vice presidents in American history in a 2008 Time Magazine article . Samuel Eliot Morison wrote that had Marshall carried out his constitutional duties , assumed the presidency , and made the concessions necessary for the passage of the League of Nations treaty in late 1920 , the United States would have been much more involved in European affairs and could have helped prevent the rise of Adolf Hitler , which began in the following year . Morison and a number of other historians claim that Marshall 's decision was an indirect cause of the Second World War . Charles Thomas , one of Marshall 's biographers , wrote that although Marshall 's assumption of the presidency would have made World War II much less likely , modern hypothetical speculation on the subject was unfair to Marshall , who made the correct decision in not forcibly removing Wilson from office , even temporarily . 
 The Thomas R. Marshall House at Columbia City was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 United States presidential election , 1912 
 United States presidential election , 1916 
 = Grodziskie = 
 Grodziskie ( Polish pronunciation : [ <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ; other names : Grätzer , <unk> ) is a historical style of beer from Poland that is typically made from oak @-@ smoked wheat malt . It is a style that is unique to Poland , featuring a clear , light golden color , high carbonation , low alcohol content , low to moderate levels of hop bitterness , and a strong smoke flavor and aroma . The taste is light and crisp , with a strong character coming from the smoked malt , the high mineral content of the water , and the strain of yeast used to ferment the beverage . It was nicknamed " Polish Champagne " because of its high carbonation levels , and because it was valued as a high @-@ quality beer to be used for special occasions . 
 Grodziskie was brewed from wheat malt that was dried by circulating oak smoke through the grains . The smokiness of the grain and the mineral profile of the water used to brew the beverage gave the style its characteristic flavor . Breweries typically used locally produced hops in the beer and used one or two strains of brewer 's yeast in its production . Before packaging , the beer was filtered to remove suspended proteins that may cause cloudiness in the final product . The breweries allowed fermentation to finish in the casks or bottles , which resulted in its high carbonation . 
 The beer was originally produced by brewers in the town of Grodzisk Wielkopolski in the 14th or 15th century . A brewers ' guild was established to maintain high quality standards and the product developed a good reputation in the surrounding cities and neighboring countries . At the peak of its fame , it was exported to 37 countries and was regarded as an exceptionally good beer . The brewing industry in the town flourished . After the Second World War , the brewery was nationalized , and the beer entered a period of decline under the Communist government of Poland . By 1993 , the last brewery that was producing the style was shut down . After a period of years when the style was not available from any commercial brewers , several breweries began producing seasonal or year @-@ round recreations of the historic style , spurred by interest in the style from the homebrewing community around the world . 
 = = Description = = 
 Grodziskie is a highly carbonated , low @-@ alcohol beer with a clear , pale yellow to golden color , low to moderate levels of hop bitterness , and a moderate to medium @-@ high smoky aroma and flavor . The bright , clear , and highly carbonated appearance of Grodziskie leads to it being compared with Champagne , and it is sometimes referred to as " Polish Champagne " . Most beers that are made from wheat are unfiltered during production , and appear cloudy from suspended yeast and proteins from the wheat . During the production of Grodziskie , however , isinglass is added to the holding tanks before the beverage is bottled , which removes the suspended yeast and proteins , leaving a bright , clear beer . When poured into a glass , it produces a large , long @-@ lasting , tight head with small bubbles . It was traditionally served in tall , conical glasses that were designed to accommodate the beer in addition to the significant amounts of foam that would form when it was poured . 
 The taste is light and crisp , with some bite from the carbonation . Brewing and tasting notes from a 1914 publication described Grodziskie as a " rough , bitter beer ... with an intense smoke and hop flavor " , but by the late 20th century , the beverage 's profile had likely changed into a less @-@ hoppy beer . Modern recreations of this style tend to emphasize the smoky flavor resulting from the oak @-@ smoked malt , described as " somewhat acrid to semi @-@ sweet " , but literature from the 1960s states that a significant proportion of the beer 's unique flavors are produced by its malting and brewing process and special strains of brewer 's yeast that were used in its production . The flavor may also contain a mild wheat graininess noticeable in the background . 
 Historically , Grodziskie was made with alcohol levels of around 3 @.@ 1 % abv , but eventually versions were made with alcohol levels ranging from 2 @.@ 5 % to 5 % abv . 
 = = Ingredients = = 
 The grain used in Grodziskie is malted wheat . During the malting process , the wheat is dried in kilns that are heated by oak @-@ burning furnaces . Instead of using the furnaces to heat air which is then used to dry the wheat , the hot smoke from the kilns is forced directly through the grain bed . The smoke dries the grain , and imparts a light color and an intense , pleasant , smoky flavor . This process would not be possible in kilns that burn coal or coke as fuel because the soot in the smoke would cause the grain to become discolored and contribute undesirable harsh flavors . The smoke from the malting process also adds chemical components that help preserve the beverage , giving it a long shelf life despite its low alcohol content . There is a legend that in the 1950s , a box of Grodziskie was discovered buried in the sands of North Africa , left behind by German soldiers in World War II . The beer was opened and found to be as fresh as the day it was made . The exact degree of smokiness that resulted from the oak <unk> in historical times is not known . In addition to wheat , there were periods when the beer also included malted barley in various proportions , but for most of its history , it was made entirely from wheat . 
 Many of the distinctive features of Grodziskie result from the characteristics of the water that the breweries used to produce the beer . The water from one of the wells on <unk> Street in Grodzisk was tested , and showed a sulfate ion concentration of 183 parts per million ( ppm ) and a chloride ion concentration of 81 ppm . In addition , alkalinity ( as calcium bicarbonate ) was 350 ppm and the magnesium ion concentration was 34 ppm . A beer brewed with this type of water would have had a higher than expected <unk> due to the high alkalinity as well as the ratio of sulfate ions to chloride ions . It would have resulted in a higher pH during the early stages of production , which would inhibit the efficiency of the natural enzymes that convert the starch in the grain to fermentable sugars during mashing , leading to a beer with higher residual sugars and lower average alcohol content . Finally , water would have produced a beverage that tasted slightly sour or bitter , due to the high concentration of magnesium ions . 
 Two unique strains of yeast were traditionally used ; one highly flocculent strain that was responsible for most of the fermentation in the first few days , and the other , a powdery and less flocculant strain , that was slower and finished off the beer in the fermentation vats and in the bottles . Until the end of the 19th century , the breweries that produced Grodziskie used a single strain of yeast that was characterized by low attenuation and early flocculation . However , that strain was lost in the early 20th century . After World War II , yeast was imported from the <unk> Brewery in Berlin . That yeast was not well suited for producing Grodziskie and was frequently contaminated with spoilage organisms including Lactobacillus . In the 1960s , the state @-@ owned brewery was able to isolate and maintain its own varieties of yeast and yeast bank , but only the highly @-@ flocculant strain has been preserved to this day . Without access to the actual yeast used historically , most modern recreations of Grodziskie typically use ale yeasts that do not contribute a significant amount of yeast character to the beer . 
 Brewers typically used locally produced varieties of Polish hops such as <unk> , but would occasionally substitute similar noble hops . Historical sources indicate that around the end of the 19th century , breweries used 3 kilograms ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) of hops for every 100 kilograms ( 220 lb ) of wheat malt , but by the 1960s the hopping rate had decreased to 2 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 5 @.@ 3 lb ) of hops per 100 kilograms ( 220 lb ) of wheat malt . 
 = = Production = = 
 The beer was variously produced using an infusion mash or a decoction mash . <unk> records from the Grodzisk brewery documented an infusion mash that included a 30 @-@ minute acid rest at 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) , a 30 to 60 minute protease rest at 52 ° C ( 126 ° F ) , an α @-@ amylase rest for 30 minutes at 70 ° C ( 158 ° F ) , and a mash out at 75 ° C ( 167 ° F ) . The wort was boiled for 90 to 120 minutes . Approximately 80 % of the hops were added after 15 minutes and the remaining 20 % were added 30 minutes before the end of the boil . 
 After the boil , the beer was cooled and fermented in open wooden vats at 14 – 16 ° C ( 57 – 61 ° F ) . The two strains of yeast were added at the same time , and fermentation would proceed rapidly . After one day of fermentation , the thick foam that formed on the top of the fermentation vat was skimmed off and discarded . After 60 hours , up to 50 % of the available sugars would have been fermented by the yeast , and thick clumps of yeast were skimmed off of the surface and harvested for reuse . The beer was then pumped with sterile air into clarification tanks . Isinglass was added to clarify the beverage , and then it was bottled . 
 After packaging , the bottles were stored from three to five weeks at 14 – 18 ° C ( 57 – 64 ° F ) in a dark room as the yeast continued to ferment the remaining sugars in the beer . The carbon dioxide that resulted from the fermentation remained trapped in the bottles and dissolved into the liquid , resulting in high levels of carbonation . During this period , an average of four to five percent of the bottles would burst due to carbonation levels exceeding the strength of the bottles . 
 = = History = = 
 The first documented mention of the town of Grodzisk Wielkopolski was from around 1257 as part of lands owned by the Cistercian monastery in <unk> . The town grew in prominence due to its location on the road between Poznań and Gubin , a road that continued onward to Saxony . By the 16th century , the Ostroróg family in Greater Poland ( Wielkopolska ) controlled the town . The Ostroróg family was a source of support for the Protestant Reformation in the area , and the town became a center of Protestantism in the country and attracted dissidents from the Czech lands and Western Europe . Craftsmen , scholars , and writers gravitated to the area , which became a center of reformist thought in Wielkopolska . Industrial @-@ scale brewing developed when Johann <unk> , the administrator of the Ostroróg estate and father of Andreas <unk> , a famous Reformation writer , imported skilled brewers from Moravia and Bohemia . 
 A legend associated with the history of this beer relates to the Benedictine monk named Bernard of <unk> . Around 1603 , he arrived from the Benedictine monastery in <unk> to find the residents starving and the town 's wells depleted . The brewery was the primary source of income for the city and the hospital . Bernard prayed for the wells and a new source of water suddenly filled the Old Market well . Legends claimed that the newly refilled well had the ability to make whoever drank from it healthy again , and the beer that was produced from the water was far superior to any of the beer the brewers had been able to produce before . The well became a municipal treasure and was given credit for the commercial success of the breweries over the centuries to follow . For over 200 years after the event , the residents of Grodzisk would make an annual procession to Bernard 's monastery to bring a keg of the beer that they made from the well as a show of gratitude . 
 A maltsters ' and brewers ' guild existed in the town in 1601 . The guild created a monopoly on the right to produce malted grain and beer for sale , and kept it in the hands of a select few families , strictly controlled by the guilds . It also implemented rules and regulations on the production of the beer that was designed to protect the quality and reputation of the beer . A system of quality control was put in place ; each barrel of beer that was produced was subjected to a beer tasting by the mayor of the town and a council of elders who evaluated its quality and strength and approved the beer for sale or export with a distinctive stamp . Brewers who attempted to cheat the system of quality control were permanently stripped of their right to produce the beer . The guild also organized the production of beer by the major breweries , which shared the Old Market well . In 1843 and 1844 , there were two breweries in Grodzisk that shared the well . By 1866 , the city had begun taxing the breweries for their use of the municipal wells . Two private breweries built their own wells , and found that the water was just as good as the water from the Old Market . Following this discovery , all of breweries eventually built their own wells . 
 The earliest documentation of the beer being exported to other regions is from records in the nearby town of Wschowa from 1671 . Rules established by the local <unk> ' guild established that the penalty for charging less than 12 groschen for dying a hat was a barrel of Grodziskie . In 1694 , the nearby city of Poznań listed a bill for expenses that included entries for " Grodzisk beer " at the rate of 15 guilders per barrel that had been purchased as gifts for important people . At that cost , it can be seen that the product was valued as a premium beverage , since local beer produced in Poznań at the time cost only five to six guilders per barrel . Other records from Poznań in 1712 show that the two mayors of the city were receiving Grodziskie beer as a portion of their compensation for their service . By the 18th century , the beverage 's reputation had spread throughout Poland , and it became one of the most expensive beers in the country . 
 Between 1793 , when Grodzisk became part of Prussia as a result of the Second Partition of Poland , and 1918 , when it became part of a newly independent Poland , the town was renamed Grätz , and the style became known as Grätzer . Records show that annual production of the beer in Grätz was about 3 @,@ 200 barrels ( 5 @,@ 000 hectoliters , 130 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) , of which 1 @,@ 111 barrels were transported to Poznań , 1 @,@ 581 barrels to other nearby towns , including Wschowa , Kościan , <unk> , Rawicz , <unk> , Kalisz , and <unk> , and 500 barrels were sold within Grätz . In the late 19th century , the beer was being exported into neighboring provinces and other parts of Germany . German immigrants moved to Grätz and built modern breweries , breaking the monopoly that had been held by the brewer 's guild . By the 1890s , the five breweries in Grätz produced over 100 @,@ 000 hectoliters ( 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) of beer , with Grätzer produced in the largest quantities . It was exported to other parts of Europe and the world and gained fame as a highly valued beverage . Its peak of popularity occurred just prior to the second World War , when it was being exported to 37 countries . 
 Starting in 1922 , the production of Grodziskie was continued by only one company , <unk> <unk> Grodziskie ( United Grodzisk Breweries ) . Between 1929 and 1993 , this style had a regionally protected designation put in place by the cabinet of Poland . Production continued under the German occupation of Poland during World War II , and the beer was distributed to German forces fighting in the war . After the Second World War , the breweries were nationalized , and the beer began a period of decline . The communist government in Poland emphasized the large @-@ scale production of basic products like bread , milk , and sugar , and local culinary traditions were neglected . In part , this was due to restrictions on individual businesses and the inability of brewers to profit from the production of small @-@ scale , high @-@ quality foods , and their inability to advertise local goods and specialties . In the early 1980s , different variations of the style were created with different colors and alcohol strengths . After the Communist period in Poland ended in 1989 , production continued under the private ownership of Lech <unk> Wielkopolski , but ended in 1993 , when the brewery was closed due to lack of profitability , and because of the difficulty in finding workers who had experience producing the style . Commercial production of this style ceased for several years , but since 2010 , some breweries have produced seasonal or limited production runs of the style . 
 After the close of the brewery , Grodziskie continued to be brewed by some <unk> in Poland using 100 % smoked wheat . In 2011 , the Polish <unk> Association formed a commission for the revival of the Grodziskie beer . Even though the style has taken different forms over the years , the purpose of the commission was to develop guidelines that describe a mild version that former brewery workers could identify , even though some brewers and <unk> have experimented with variations that include different amounts of alcohol and bitterness . Grodziskie was defined in the Brewers Association style guidelines in 2013 , and added as a Historical Style to the Beer Judge Certification Program style guidelines in 2015 . 
 = Codex Alexandrinus = 
 The Codex Alexandrinus ( London , British Library , MS Royal 1 . D. V @-@ VIII ; Gregory @-@ Aland no . A or 02 , Soden δ 4 ) is a fifth @-@ century manuscript of the Greek Bible , containing the majority of the Septuagint and the New Testament . It is one of the four Great uncial codices . Along with the Codex Sinaiticus and the Vaticanus , it is one of the earliest and most complete manuscripts of the Bible . Brian Walton assigned Alexandrinus the capital Latin letter A in the Polyglot Bible of 1657 . This designation was maintained when the system was standardized by Wettstein in 1751 . Thus , Alexandrinus held the first position in the manuscript list . 
 It derives its name from Alexandria where it resided for a number of years before it was brought by the Eastern Orthodox Patriarch Cyril Lucaris from Alexandria to Constantinople . Then it was given to Charles I of England in the 17th century . Until the later purchase of Codex Sinaiticus , it was the best manuscript of the Greek Bible deposited in Britain . Today , it rests along with Codex Sinaiticus in one of the showcases in the Ritblat Gallery of the British Library . A full photographic reproduction of the New Testament volume ( Royal MS 1 D. viii ) is available on the British Library 's website . As the text came from several different traditions , different parts of the codex are not of equal textual value . The text has been edited several times since the 18th century . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The codex is in quarto , and now consists of 773 vellum folios ( 630 in the Old Testament and 143 in the New Testament ) , bound in four volumes ( 279 + 238 + 118 + 144 folios ) . Three volumes contain the Septuagint , Greek version of the Old Testament , with the complete loss of only ten leaves . The fourth volume contains the New Testament with 31 NT leaves lost . In the fourth volume 1 and 2 Clement are also missing leaves , perhaps 3 . 
 The codex contains a nearly complete copy of the LXX , including the deuterocanonical books 3 and 4 Maccabees , Psalm 151 and the 14 Odes . The " Epistle to Marcellinus " attributed to Saint Athanasius and the Eusebian summary of the Psalms are inserted before the Book of Psalms . It also contains all of the books of the New Testament ( although the pages that contained Matthew 1 : 1 @-@ 25 : 5 are not extant ) . In addition , the codex contains 1 Clement ( lacking 57 : 7 @-@ 63 ) and the homily known as 2 Clement ( up to 12 : 5a ) . The books of the Old Testament are thus distributed : Genesis — 2 Chronicles ( first volume ) , Hosea — 4 Maccabees ( second volume ) , Psalms — Sirach ( third volume ) . The New Testament ( fourth volume ) books follow in order : Gospels , Acts of the Apostles , General epistles , Pauline epistles ( Hebrews placed between 2 Thessalonians and 1 Timothy ) , Book of Revelation . 
 There is an appendix marked in the index , which lists the Psalms of Solomon and probably contained more apocryphal / <unk> books , but it has been torn off and the pages containing these books have also been lost . 
 Due to damage and lost folios , various passages are missing or have defects : 
 Lacking : 1 Sam 12 : 17 @-@ 14 : 9 ( 1 leaf ) ; Ps 49 : 20 @-@ 79 : 11 ( 9 leaves ) ; Matt 1 : 1 @-@ 25 : 6 ( 26 leaves ) ; John 6 : 50 @-@ 8 : 52 ( 2 leaves ) ; 2 Cor 4 : 13 @-@ 12 : 6 ( 3 leaves ) ; 1 Clement 57 : 7 @-@ 63 ( 1 leaf ) and 2 Clement 12 : 5a @-@ fin . ( 2 leaves ) ; 
 Damaged : Gen 14 : 14 @-@ 17 , 15 : 1 @-@ 5 , 15 : 16 @-@ 19 , 16 : 6 @-@ 9 ( lower portion of torn leaf lost ) ; 
 Defects due to torn leaves : Genesis 1 : 20 @-@ 25 , 1 : 29 @-@ 2 : 3 , Lev 8 : 6 @,@ 7 @,@ 16 ; Sirach 50 : <unk> , 51 : 5 ; 
 Lacunae on the edges of almost every page of the Apocalypse . 
 The ornamented colophon of the Epistle to Philemon has been cut out . 
 = = Description = = 
 The manuscript measures 12 @.@ 6 × 10 @.@ 4 inches ( 32 × 26 cm ) and most of the folios were originally gathered into quires of eight leaves each . In modern times it was rebound into sets of six leaves each . The material is thin , fine , and very beautiful vellum , often discoloured at the edges , which have been damaged by age and more so through the ignorance or carelessness of the modern binder , who has not always spared the text , especially at the upper inner margin . Scrivener noted that " The vellum has fallen into holes in many places , and since the ink peels off for very age <unk> a leaf is touched a little roughly , no one is allowed to handle the manuscript except for good reasons . " 
 The text in the codex is written in two columns in uncial script , with between 49 and 51 lines per column and 20 to 25 letters per line . The beginning lines of each book are written in red ink and sections within the book are marked by a larger letter set into the margin . Words are written continuously in a large , round and well @-@ formed uncial hand . There are no accents and breathing marks , except a few added by a later hand . The punctuation was written by the first hand . The letters are larger than those of the Codex Vaticanus . There is no division of words , but some pauses are observed in places in which should be a dot between two words . The poetical books of the Old Testament are written stichometrically . The Old Testament quotations in the text of New Testament are marked on the margin by the sign 〉 . 
 The only decorations in the manuscript are decorative tail @-@ pieces at the end of each book ( see illustration ) and it also shows a tendency to increase the size of the first letter of each sentence . The capitals at the beginning of the sections stand out in the margin as in codices Ephraemi and Basilensis . Codex Alexandrinus is the oldest manuscript to use capital letters to indicate new sections . 
 The interchange of vowels of similar sounds is very frequent in this manuscript . The letters <unk> and Μ are occasionally confused , and the cluster <unk> is substituted with <unk> . This may be an argument which points to Egypt , but it is not universally conceded . A lot of <unk> errors occur in the text ; for example , <unk> is exchanged for ε , <unk> for <unk> and η for <unk> . It has not more <unk> than other manuscripts of the same date . 
 The handwriting of the text from the beginning of Luke to 1 Corinthians 10 : 8 , differs from that of the rest parts of the manuscript . Some letters have Coptic shapes ( <unk> Α , Μ , Δ , and Π ) . The letters are more widely spaced and are a little larger than elsewhere . Delta has extended base and Pi has extended cross @-@ stroke . Numerals are not expressed by letters except in Apocalypse 7 : 4 ; 21 : 17 . In the past the codex had been judged to be carelessly written , with many errors of transcription , but not so many as in the Codex Sinaiticus , nor more than in the Codex Vaticanus . Besides the other corrections by later hands there are not a few instances in which the original scribe altered what he had first written . The corrected form of text often agrees with codices : D , N , X , Y , Γ , Θ , Π , Φ and majority of the minuscule manuscripts . 
 The majuscule letters have elegant shape , but a little less simple than those in the Sinaiticus and Vaticanus codices . These letters , at the end of a line , are often very small , and much of the writing is very pale and faint . Punctuation is more frequent , usually on a level with the top of the preceding letter , while a vacant space , proportionate to the break in the sense , follows the end of a paragraph . At the end of each book the colophon is ornamented by pretty volutes from prima manu . There are found the Ammonian Sections with references to the Eusebian Canons stand in the margin of the text of the Gospels . It contains divisions into larger sections – <unk> , the headings of these sections ( <unk> ) stand at the top of the pages . The places at which those sections commence are indicated throughout the Gospels , and in Luke and John their numbers are placed in the margin of each column . To all the Gospels ( except Matthew , because of lacunae ) is prefixed by a table of <unk> ( table of contents ) . 
 The various sections into which the Acts , Epistles , and Apocalypse were divided by Euthalian Apparatus and others , are not indicated in this manuscript . A cross appears occasionally as a separation in the Book of Acts . A larger letter in the margin throughout the New Testament marks the beginning of a paragraph . 
 The number of scribes were disputed in the past . According to Kenyon 's opinion there were five scribes , two scribes in the Old Testament ( I and II ) and three in the New ( III , IV , and V ) . Subsequently , Skeat and Milne argued there were only two or possibly three scribes . Present scholars agreed in that case ( Metzger , Aland , Hernández , Jongkind ) . 
 Many corrections have been made to the manuscript , some of them by the original scribe , but the majority of them by later hands . The corrected form of the text agrees with codices D , N , X , Y , Γ , Θ , Π , Σ , Φ and the great majority of the minuscule manuscripts . Kenyon observed that Codex Alexandrinus had been " extensively corrected , though much more in some books than in others " . In the Pentateuch , whole sentences were erased and a new text substituted . Kings was the least corrected of the books . In the Book of Revelation only 1 of its 84 singular readings was corrected . This is in stark contrast with Codex Sinaiticus , in which 120 of the Apocalypse 's 201 singular readings were corrected in the 7th century . 
 Each leaf has Arabic numeration , set in the verso of the lower margin . The first surviving leaf of Matthew has number 26 . The 25 leaves now lost must have been extant when that note was written . 
 = = Textual features = = 
 Textual critics have had a challenging task in classifying the Codex , the exact relationship to other known texts and families is still disputed . The Greek text of the codex is of mixed text @-@ types . It is a representative of the Byzantine text @-@ type in the Gospels - the oldest examples of the type - and the rest of the New Testament books are of the Alexandrian text @-@ type , with some Western readings . Kurt Aland placed it in Category III in the Gospels , and in Category I in rest of the books of the New Testament . The Byzantine text of the Gospels has a number of Alexandrian features , it has some affinities to the textual Family Π . Soden associated the text of the gospels with Family Π , though it is not a pure member of this family . According to Streeter , it is the earliest Greek manuscript which gives us approximately the text of Lucian the Martyr , but a small proportion of the readings seem to be earlier . 
 Alexandrinus follows the Alexandrian readings through the rest of the New Testament ; however , the text goes from closely resembling Codex Sinaiticus in the Pauline epistles to more closely resembling the text of a number of papyri ( <formula> 74 for Acts , <formula> 47 for the Apocalypse ) . The text of Acts frequently agrees with the biblical quotations made by St. Athanasius . The gospels are cited as a " consistently cited witness of the third order " in the critical apparatus of the Novum Testamentum Graece , while the rest of the New Testament is of the " first order . " In the Pauline Epistles it is closer to Sinaiticus than to Vaticanus . In the General Epistles it represents a different subtype than the Sinaiticus and the Vaticanus . In the Book of Revelation it agrees with Codex Ephraemi against Sinaiticus and Papyrus 47 . In the Book of Revelation and in several books of the Old Testament , it has the best text of all manuscripts . In the Old Testament its text often agrees with Codex Sinaiticus . 
 Old Testament 
 In Genesis 5 : 25 it reads <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 187 years ) , Vaticanus reads – <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 167 years ) ; 
 In Deuteronomy 31 : 15 it reads εν <unk> ( in a pillar ) for εν <unk> ( in a cloud ) ; 
 In Joshua 11 : 42 it reads <unk> ( took ) for <unk> ( struck ) ; 
 In Joshua 11 : 1 it reads <unk> for <unk> ; 
 In Judges 18 : 30 it reads υιου <unk> , Vaticanus reads – υιος <unk> ; 
 In Ezra 10 : 22 ( 9 : 22 LXX ) it reads <unk> ( Vaticanus – <unk> ) for <unk> ; 
 In Psalm 9 : 35 it reads <unk> ( work ) for <unk> ( pain ) . 
 New Testament 
 Mark 16 : 9 – 20 is preserved in its traditional form in the Codex Alexandrinus . 
 In Luke 4 : 17 Alexandrinus has textual variant ἀνοίξας ( opened ) together with the manuscripts B , L , W , Ξ , 33 , 892 , 1195 , 1241 , ℓ 547 , syrs , syrh , <unk> , copsa , copbo , against variant ἀναπτύξας ( unrolled ) supported by א , Dc , K , Δ , Θ , Π , Ψ , f1 , f13 , 28 , 565 , 700 , 1009 , 1010 and other manuscripts . 
 In John 1 : 39 , it has the unique reading ωρα <unk> <unk> <unk> ( about the sixth hour ) , instead of ωρα <unk> <unk> <unk> ( about the tenth hour ) , as found in all other manuscripts . 
 In Acts 8 : 39 instead of <unk> <unk> ( spirit of the Lord ) it has unusual textual variant <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> τὸν <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> τὸν <unk> ( the Holy Spirit fell on the eunuch , and an angel of the Lord caught up Philip ) supported by several minuscule manuscripts : 94 , 103 , 307 , 322 , 323 , 385 , 453 , 467 , 945 , 1739 , 1765 , 1891 , 2298 , 36a , <unk> , vg , syrh . 
 In Acts 11 : 20 the manuscript has textual variant <unk> ( Greeks ) together with the manuscripts <formula> 74 , corrector c of Sinaiticus , and Codex Bezae , against <unk> ( Hellenists ) supported by the rest of manuscripts except Sinaiticus ( <unk> — Evangelists ) . In Acts 15 : 18 it has variant <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> τῷ <unk> τὸ <unk> αὐτοῦ supported only by <formula> 74 . 
 In Acts 20 : 28 it reads του κυριου ( of the Lord ) – instead of του θεου ( of the God ) – along with the manuscripts <formula> 74 C * D E Ψ 33 36 453 945 1739 1891 . 
 In Romans 2 : 5 it reads <unk> ( reward ) for <unk> ( revelation ) . 
 In Romans 8 : 1 it reads Ιησου κατα <unk> <unk> , for Ιησου ( as א , B , D * , G , 1739 , 1881 , <unk> , g , copsa , bo , eth ) . The reading of the manuscript is supported by <unk> , Ψ , 81 , 629 , 2127 , vg . The Byzantine manuscripts read Ιησου μη κατα <unk> <unk> αλλα κατα <unk> . 
 In 1 Corinthians 2 : 1 it reads <unk> along with <formula> 46 , א , C , 88 , 436 , ita , r , syrp , copbo . Other manuscripts read <unk> or <unk> . 
 In 1 Corinthians 7 : 5 it reads τη προσευχη ( prayer ) along with <formula> 11 , <formula> 46 , א * , A , B , C , D , G , P , Ψ , 33 , 81 , 104 , 181 , 629 , 630 , 1739 , 1877 , 1881 , 1962 , it vg , cop , arm , eth . Other manuscripts read τη νηστεια και τη προσευχη ( fasting and prayer ) or τη προσευχη και νηστεια ( prayer and fasting ) . 
 In Ephesians 1 : 7 it reads <unk> for <unk> along with 365 copbo . 
 In Ephesians 4 : 14 it reads του <unk> for της <unk> . 
 In 1 Timothy 3 : 16 it has textual variant <unk> ἐφανερώθη ( he was manifested ) supported by Sinaiticus , Ephraemi , Boernerianus , 33 , 365 , 442 , 2127 , ℓ 599 , against θεός ἐφανερώθη ( God manifested ) ( <unk> , A ² , C ² , Dc , K , L , P , Ψ , 81 , 104 , 181 , 326 , 330 , 436 , 451 , 614 , 629 , 630 , 1241 , 1739 , 1877 , 1881 , 1962 , 1984 , 1985 , 2492 , 2495 , <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 In Hebrews 13 : 21 it reads <unk> <unk> και <unk> <unk> for <unk> <unk> . 
 In 1 John 5 : 6 it has textual variant δι ' <unk> καὶ <unk> καὶ πνεύματος ( through water and blood and spirit ) together with the manuscripts : Codex Sinaiticus , 104 , <unk> , 614 , <unk> , <unk> , 2495 , ℓ <unk> , syrh , copsa , copbo , Origen . Bart D. Ehrman identified it as Orthodox corrupt reading . 
 In Revelation 1 : 17 it has unique reading <unk> ( firstborn ) instead of <unk> ( the first ) . 
 In Revelation 5 : 9 it has <unk> τῷ <unk> ( redeemed to God ) . This textual variant is supported only by Ethiopian manuscripts , and has no other Greek manuscript with it . 
 = = = Verses the scribe did not include = = = 
 Mark 15 : 28 as in codices א , B , C , D , Ψ , <unk> , d , k , syrs , copsa , bo , <unk> ; 
 Christ 's agony at Gethsemane ( Luke 22 : 43 – 44 ) , as in codices <unk> , א * , B , T , 1071 ; 
 { John 7 : 53 @-@ 8 : 11 } ; 
 Acts 8 : 37 ; 15 : 34 ; 24 : 7 ; 28 : 29 ; 
 Romans 16 : 24 . 
 Alexandrinus is an important witness for the absence of Pericope <unk> ( John 7 : 53 @-@ 8 : 11 ) . Gregory asserted in regard to the lost two leaves ( John 6 : 50 @-@ 8 : 52 ) , " For by counting the lines we can prove that it was not in the book . There was not room for it " . ( A similar counting involving missing leaves is done with Codex Ephraemi ) . The analysis referenced by Gregory falls short of full proof of absence . Gregory did not discuss possibilities like the text being added in the margin , or the writing to be condensed , or the section being in another part of the Gospels that is not extant . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 = = = Place of origin = = = 
 The manuscript 's original provenance is unknown . Traditionally Alexandria is considered the place of its origin and it is the most probable hypothesis . Cyril Lucaris was the first who pointed to Alexandria as the place of origin of the codex . This popular view is based on an Arabic note from 13th or 14th century , on folio 1 , which reads : " Bound to the Patriarchal Cell in the Fortress of Alexandria . Whoever removes it thence shall be excommunicated and cut off . Written by Athanasius the humble . " " Athanasius the humble " is identified with Athanasius III , Patriarch of Alexandria from 1276 to 1316 . 
 F. C. Burkitt questioned this popular view . According to Burkitt , the note reads : " Bound to the Patriarchal Cell in the Fortress of Alexandria . He that lets it go out shall be cursed and ruined . The humble Athanasius wrote ( this ) . " The manuscript had been found on Mount Athos , and the manuscript might have been taken to Egypt by Cyril in 1616 , and that all the Arabic writing in the manuscript could have been inserted between that date and 1621 , when Cyril was elected Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople . On this supposition " Athanasius the humble " might have been " some person of Cyril 's staff who had charge of his library " . According to Burkitt 's view the codex was found on Athos , but it was written in Constantinople , because it represents a Constantinopolitan text ( now known as the Byzantine text ) . This hypothesis was supported by Kirsopp Lake . 
 Frederic G. Kenyon opposed to the <unk> 's view and argued that Cyril firmly believed in the Egyptian origin of the codex . A. S. Fulton , the Keeper of the Department of Oriental Printed Books and Manuscripts ( in British Museum ) , in 1938 re @-@ examined the Athanasius note , and gave it as his opinion that on palaeographical grounds it could be dated 13th to 14th century and that the 17th century was excluded . In 1945 T. D. <unk> published a catalogue of the library of the Patriarch of Alexandria , in which he printed two Greek notes , both from 10th @-@ century manuscripts of John Chrysostom , inserted by the Patriarch Athanasius III . The two notes must have been written between 1308 and 1316 . Although the note in the Codex Alexandrinus is entirely in Arabic , and therefore no identity of hand the Greek notes can be expected , the similarity of wording leaves no doubt that this also is the work of Athanasius III . 
 Burnett Hillman Streeter proposed Caesarea or Beirut for three reasons : it contains , after the New Testament , the two Epistles of Clement ; it represents an eclectic text in the New Testament , Antiochian in the Gospels and Alexandrian in the Acts and Epistles , it suggests some place where the influence of Antioch and of Alexandria met ; the text of the Old Testament appears to be a non @-@ Alexandrian text heavily revised by the Hexapla , the Old Testament quotations in New Testament more often than not agree with Alexandrinus against Vaticanus . 
 According to Skeat the note in the codex indicated that the manuscript had not previously been in the Patriarchal Library in Alexandria . The manuscript was carried from Constantinople to Alexandria between 1308 and 1316 , together with two mentioned above manuscripts of Chrysostom . It remained in Alexandria until 1621 , when Cyril removed it once to Constantinople . Whether was originally written , in Constantinople or in Alexandria , is another question . Skeat did not try to give the answer on this question ( " if any future scholar <unk> to claim a Constantinopolitan origin for the Codex Alexandrinus , it is at least open to him to do so " ) . This view was supported by McKendrick , who proposes Ephesian provenance of the codex . 
 A 17th @-@ century Latin note on a flyleaf ( from binding in a royal library ) states that the manuscript was given to a patriarchate of Alexandria in 1098 ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> anno 814 <unk> ) , although this may well be " merely an inaccurate attempt at deciphering the Arabic note by Athanasius " ( possibly the patriarch Athanasius III ) . The authority for this statement is unknown . 
 = = = Date = = = 
 According to an Arabic note on the reverse of the first volume of the manuscript , the manuscript was written by the hand of Thecla , the martyr , a notable lady of Egypt , a little later than the Council of Nice ( A.D. 325 ) . Tregelles made another suggestion , the New Testament volume has long been mutilated , and begins now in the twenty @-@ fifth chapter of Matthew , in which chapter the lesson for Thecla 's Day stands . " We cannot be sure how the story arose . It may be that the manuscript was written in a monastery dedicated to Thecla . " Tregelles thought that Thecla 's name might have on this account been written in the margin above , which has been cut off , and that therefore the Egyptians imagined that Thecla had written it . Cyril Lucaris believed in Thecla 's authorship , but the codex cannot be older than from late 4th century . 
 Codex Alexandrinus contains the Epistle of Athanasius on the Psalms to Marcellinus , it cannot be considered earlier than A.D. 373 , and it is terminus post quem . In the Acts and Epistles we cannot find such chapter divisions , whose authorship is ascribed to <unk> , Bishop of Sulci , come into vogue before the middle of the fifth century . It is terminus ad quem . The presence of Epistle of Clement , which was once read in Churches recalls to a period when the canon of Scripture was in some particulars not quite settled . It is certain that the writing of the manuscript appears to be somewhat more advanced than that of the Vaticanus or Sinaiticus , especially in the enlargement of initial letters . It is also more decorated , though its ornamentations are already found in earlier manuscripts . 
 Codex Alexandrinus was written a generation after codices Sinaiticus and Vaticanus , but it may still belong to the fourth century . It cannot be later than the beginning of the fifth . Currently it is dated by the INTF to the 5th century . 
 = = In Britain = = 
 The codex was brought to Constantinople in 1621 by Cyril Lucar ( first a patriarch of Alexandria , then later a patriarch of Constantinople ) . Lucar was involved in a complex struggle with the Turkish government , the Catholic Church , and his own subordinates . He was supported by English government and presented the codex to James I in 1624 , as a gratitude for his help . The codex was presented through the hands of Thomas Roe ( together with minuscule 49 ) , the English ambassador at the court of the Sultan . King James died before the manuscript started for England , and the offer was transferred to Charles I in 1627 . It became a part of the Royal Library , British Museum and since 1973 of the British Library . It was saved from the fire at <unk> House ( the Cotton library ) on 23 October 1731 , by the librarian , Bentley . 
 = = = <unk> and editions = = = 
 The Epistles of Clement of the codex were published in 1633 by Patrick Young , the Royal Librarian . A collation was made by Alexander Huish , Prebendary of Wells , for the London Polyglot Bible ( 1657 ) . The text of the manuscript was cited as footnotes . Richard Bentley made a collation in 1675 . 
 The Old Testament was edited by Ernst Grabe in 1707 @-@ 1720 , and New Testament in 1786 by Carl Gottfried Woide , in facsimile from wooden type , line for line , without intervals between the words , precisely almost as in original . Unfortunately Woide made some mistakes , e.g. in 1 Tim 3 : 16 he edits ΘΣ <unk> , and combats in his prolegomena the opinion of Wettstein , who maintained that <unk> <unk> was the original reading , and that the stroke , which in some lights can be seen across part of the Ο , arose from part of a letter visible through the vellum . Part of the Ε on the other side of the leaf does insert the O. Another errors of Woide were made in the Epistle to Ephesians – the substitution of <unk> for <unk> ( 4 : 1 ) and <unk> for <unk> ( 4 : 2 ) . 
 Woide 's errors were corrected in 1860 by B. H. Cowper , and E. H. Hansell , with three other manuscripts , in 1860 . The Old Testament portion was also published in 1816 @-@ 1828 by Baber , in three folio volumes . The entire manuscript was issued in photographic facsimile by the British Museum , under the supervision of E. M. Thompson in 1879 and 1880 . Frederic G. Kenyon edited a photographic facsimile of the New Testament with reduced size in 1909 . The text of the Old Testament followed four parts in 1915 . 
 = = = Textual criticism = = = 
 According to Bentley this manuscript is " the oldest and best in the world " . Bentley assumed that by supplementing this manuscript with readings from other manuscripts and from the Latin Vulgate , he could triangulate back to the single recension which he presumed existed at the time of the First Council of Nicaea . Wettstein highly esteemed the codex in 1730 , but he changed his opinion in 1751 and was no longer a great admirer of it . He came to the conviction that Athos was the place of its origin , not Alexandria . Michaelis also did not esteem it highly , either on account of its internal excellence or the value of its readings . The principal charge which has been produced against the manuscript , and which had been urged by Wettstein , is its having been altered from the Latin version . Michaelis countered that the transcriber who lived in Egypt would not have altered the Greek text from a Latin version , because Egypt belonged to the Greek diocese , and Latin was not understood there . Woide , who defended the Greek manuscripts in general , and the Codex Alexandrinus in particular , from the charge of having been corrupted from the Latin , discerned two hands in the New Testament . 
 Griesbach agreed with Woide and expanded on Michaelis ' point of view . If this manuscript has been corrupted from a version , it is more reasonable to suspect the Coptic , the version of the country in which it was written . Between this manuscript and both the Coptic and Syriac versions there is a remarkable coincidence . According to Griesbach the manuscript follows three different editions : the Byzantine in the Gospels , the Western in the Acts and General epistles , and the Alexandrian in the Pauline epistles . Griesbach designated the codex by letter A. 
 Tregelles explained the origin of the Arabic inscription , on which Cyril 's statement appears to rest , by remarking that the text of the New Testament in the manuscript begins with Matthew 25 : 6 , this lesson ( Matthew 25 : 1 @-@ 13 ) being that appointed by the Greek Church for the festival of St. Thecla . 
 = = Importance = = 
 It was the first manuscript of great importance and antiquity of which any extensive use was made by textual critics , but the value of the codex was differently appreciated by different writers in the past . Wettstein created a modern system of <unk> of the New Testament manuscripts . Codex Alexandrinus received symbol A and opened the list of the NT uncial manuscripts . Wettstein announced in his Prolegomena ad Novi Testamenti <unk> ( 1730 ) that Codex A is the oldest and the best manuscript of New Testament , and should be the basis in every reconstruction of the New Testament text . Codex Alexandrinus became a basis for criticizing the Textus Receptus ( Wettstein , Woide , Griesbach ) . 
 = = = Text of the codex = = = 
 Cowper , B. H. ( 1860 ) . Codex Alexandrinus . Η <unk> <unk> . Novum Testamentum Graece . Ex <unk> <unk> Alexandrino a C. G. Woide ( PDF ) . London . 
 Kenyon , Frederick G. ( 1909 ) . Codex Alexandrinus , Genesis @-@ Ruth . London : British Museum ( Facsimile edition ) . 
 Kenyon , Frederick G. ( 1915 ) . Codex Alexandrinus in Reduced Photographic Facsimile . London : British Museum ( Facsimile edition ) . 
 Thompson , Edward <unk> ( 1879 – 1883 ) . Facsimile of the Codex Alexandrinus ( 4 vols . ) . London . 
 Woide , Carl Gottfried ( 1779 – 1786 ) . Novum Testamentum <unk> e codice <unk> <unk> . London . 
 = = = Introductions to the Textual Criticism of NT = = = 
 Gregory , C. R. ( 1900 ) . Textkritik des Neuen Testaments ( in German ) 1 . Leipzig : J.C. Hinrichs <unk> <unk> pp. 29 – 32 . Retrieved 18 March 2010 . 
 Gregory , C. R. ( 1907 ) . Canon and Text of the New Testament 1 . Edinburgh : T. & T. <unk> pp. 340 – 343 . Retrieved 25 December 2010 . 
 Kenyon , Frederick G. ( 1939 ) . Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts ( 4th ed . ) . London : British Museum. pp. 128 – 132 . 
 Metzger , Bruce M. ; Ehrman , Bart D. ( 2005 ) . The Text of the New Testament : Its Transmission , Corruption , and Restoration ( 4th ed . ) . New York - Oxford : Oxford University Press . 
 Scrivener , Frederick Henry Ambrose ; Edward Miller ( 1894 ) . A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament 1 ( 4th ed . ) . London : George Bell & Sons. p . 342 . 
 Streeter , Burnett Hillman ( 1924 ) . The Four Gospels . A Study of Origins the Manuscripts Tradition , Sources , Authorship , & Dates . Oxford : MacMillan and Co Limited . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Burkitt , F. C. , Codex Alexandrinus , <unk> XI ( Oxford , 1909 – 1910 ) , pp. 663 – 666 . 
 Calkins , Robert G. ( 1983 ) . Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages . Ithaca , New York : Cornell University Press . 
 Goswell Greg , Early Readers of the Gospels : The <unk> and <unk> of Codex Alexandrinus , <unk> 66 ( 2009 ) , pp. 134 – 174 
 Hernández , Juan ( 2006 ) . Scribal Habits and Theological Influences in the Apocalypse : The Singular Readings of Sinaiticus , Alexandrinus , and Ephraemi . Tübingen : Mohr <unk> . 
 Mc Kendrick , S. ( 2003 ) . The Codex Alexandrinus : Or the dangers of being a named manuscript , in : The Bible as a Book : The Transmission of the Greek text . London : S. Mc Kendrick & O. A. O <unk> pp. 1 – 16 . ISBN 0 @-@ 7123 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Lake , Silva ( 1936 ) . Family Π and the Codex Alexandrinus . The Text According to Mark . London . 
 Milne , H. J. M. and T. C. Skeat ( 1963 ) [ 1951 ] . The Codex Sinaiticus and the Codex Alexandrinus . London . 
 Silberstein , Siegfried ( 1893 ) . Über den <unk> der im Codex <unk> und <unk> des <unk> <unk> der <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . Giessen : Giessen : J. Ricker . 
 Scrivener , F. h. a . ( 1875 ) . Six Lectures on the Text of the New Testament and the Ancient Manuscripts which contain it . Deighton , Bell , and Co : Cambridge ; London . 
 Skeat , T. C. The Provenance of the Codex Alexandrinus , <unk> VI ( Oxford , 1955 ) , pp. 233 – 235 . 
 <unk> , Henry Barclay ( 1902 ) . An Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek . Cambridge : Macmillan and Co. pp. 125 – 126 . 
 = = = Images = = = 
 Volume 4 ( the New Testament ) on the British Library 's <unk> Manuscripts website 
 Volume 4 ( the New Testament ) at the <unk> ( facsimile of 1880s edition ) 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Codex Alexandrinus : information , zoomable image British Library website 
 Waltz , Robert . " An Introduction to New Testament Textual Criticism – Codex Alexandrinus " . A Site Inspired By : The Encyclopedia of New Testament Textual Criticism . Retrieved 25 December 2010 . 
 = Larabanga Mosque = 
 The Larabanga Mosque is a historic mosque , built in the Sudanese architectural style in the village of Larabanga , Ghana . It is the oldest mosque in the country and one of the oldest in West Africa , and has been referred to as the " Mecca of West Africa " . It has undergone restoration several times since it was originally founded in 1421 ( 17th century according to some ) . The World Monuments Fund ( WMF ) has contributed substantially to its restoration , and lists it as one of the 100 Most Endangered Sites . The restoration works have revived the knowledge of mud @-@ plaster maintenance . 
 The mosque has an old Quran , believed by the locals to have been given as a gift from heaven in 1650 to <unk> <unk> Bramah , the Imam at the time , as a result of his prayers . The mosque , built with mud and reeds , has two tall towers in pyramidal shape , one for the mihrab which faces towards Mecca forming the facade on the east and the other as a minaret in the northeast corner . These are buttressed by twelve bulbous shaped structures , which are fitted with timber elements . 
 = = Location = = 
 The mosque is located in the Islamic town of Larabanga , close to <unk> in the West Gonja District of the Northern Region of Ghana . The town is situated about 15 kilometers north of <unk> , and 4 kilometers south of the Mole National Park entrance . 
 = = History = = 
 According to a legend , in 1421 an Islamic trader named <unk> had a dream while staying here , near a " Mystic Stone " , instructing him to build a mosque . Strangely , when he awoke , he found that the foundations were already in place and he proceeded to construct the mosque until it was completed . It is believed that <unk> 's remains are buried under a baobab tree , next to the mosque . 
 Unlike mosques situated in urban settings in West Africa , the Larabanga Mosque is comparatively small . Rural mosques , like Larabanga 's , were usually conceived by a single <unk> and loosely based on styles seen elsewhere such as in the Great Mosque of <unk> . In order to achieve a physical resemblance to the architecture used elsewhere , the Larabanga Mosque had to incorporate large buttresses in order to compensate for the poorer quality of building materials . 
 Larabanga is one of the eight ancient and highly revered mosques in Ghana and is also its oldest . It is a place of pilgrimage and is considered the Mecca of West Africa . 
 In the 1970s , a mixture of sand and cement was applied to the external faces of the mosque hoping that it would protect the mosque from getting damaged in the wind and rain . However , this treatment resulted in substantial damage to the building as moisture became trapped in the walls built of mud and started a deterioration process of the structure , with termites infesting the wooden supports under humid conditions . This resulted in part of the mosque collapsing and during the repair work it caused some distortions of the structural elements and the exterior of the mosque . 
 Owing to the effect of prevailing winds and rains on the walls , the mosque has needed several renovations and restoration work which over the years have altered some of its exterior designs . In September 2002 , a severe storm destroyed the mihrab and the minaret . As a result , the World Monuments Fund ( WMF ) placed the mosque on the 2002 World Monuments Watch , also considering the damage sustained after an inappropriate restoration from the 1970s . The Ghana Museums and Monuments Board decided to fully restore the mosque and sought advice from <unk> , an architectural firm based in Grenoble , France which has expertise in building earthen structures . The renovation work was supported by a WMF , with a grant fund of US $ 50 @,@ 000 from American Express . The local community also provided support . The conservation process involved removal of the earlier cement plaster from the surfaces of the mosque , the wooden structural components were replaced , the minaret and the mihrab were reconstructed , the portal was redone , and the interior and exterior surfaces were plastered in the traditional way . The renovation resulted in reassessing the state of conservation of the site , involving a team of local artisans and labourers . It helped to restore the monument with special emphasis on reviving the knowledge of mud @-@ plaster maintenance . 
 = = Features = = 
 Like other mosques in Northern Region of Ghana , Larabanga Mosque is built in the traditional <unk> @-@ Sahelian architectural style , using local materials and construction techniques . The mosque is built with mud and reeds , and measures about 8 metres ( 26 ft ) by 8 metres ( 26 ft ) . It has two towers in pyramidal shape , one for the mihrab which faces towards Mecca forming the facade on the east and the other as a minaret in the northeast corner . In addition , 12 buttresses of conical shape on the external walls are strengthened by horizontally @-@ aligned timber elements . The architectural style is also known as " flat @-@ footed adobe architecture " . All the structures are given a white wash . The mosque has an old Quran , believed by the locals to have been given as a gift from heaven in 1650 to Bramah , the Imam at the time , as a result of his prayers . The local community has also been supported in a handicraft and tourism project to generate funds not only for meeting the maintenance expenses of the mosque but also improve the economic conditions of the people . 
 = Michael 's Birthday = 
 " Michael 's Birthday " is the nineteenth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's twenty @-@ fifth episode overall . Written by Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg , and directed by Ken Whittingham , the episode first aired in the United States on March 30 , 2006 on NBC . The episode guest stars Nancy Walls as Carol Stills . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is disappointed when only Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) celebrates his birthday . Meanwhile , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) spends the day waiting to find out if he has skin cancer . 
 The ice skating scenes were shot in an actual rink ; Carell 's talent at hockey was the reason the writers decided to set the episode there . Fischer had also learned to skate in preparation for the movie Blades of Glory , but the writers decided that there was no reason for Pam to be a good skater , so they had Pam lean on Jim . " Michael 's Birthday " was watched by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers and received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is excited to be celebrating his birthday , and tries to get the employees excited with him . Unfortunately for Michael , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) seems to be the only one joining in ; the rest of the employees are more concerned about Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) , who is awaiting his results from his skin cancer screening . Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) sneak out to buy gifts for Kevin to cheer him up . 
 When Michael finds out about Kevin 's predicament , he gives Kevin his condolences , but subtly remains bitter that Kevin is ruining his birthday fun . Dwight and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) are less subtle than they think they are being when discussing their secret relationship within earshot of Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) . After goofing around at the store , Jim and Pam return to the office . 
 In an attempt to make Kevin feel better and celebrate his birthday , Michael takes the employees out ice skating . At the rink , he also runs into his real estate agent Carol Stills ( Nancy Walls ) and her children . He entertains them , which makes Carol smile . Kevin gets the word that his screening results are negative , to the relief of everyone except Michael , who believes that negative means he does have cancer , and who reacts for the first time with genuine concern and compassion for Kevin . The gifts are passed out to Kevin and Michael , and the episode ends with Pam recalling that she had fun with Jim and it was a " good day " . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was the second episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . Whittingham had previously directed the first season episode " Health Care " . " Michael 's Birthday " was written by Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg . The two had previously written the episodes " The Fight " and " The Secret " . 
 The ice skating scenes were shot in an actual rink . According to Jenna Fischer , Steve Carell used to play hockey , and the writers had been looking for a reason to use Carell 's ice skating skills in an episode . Fischer had also learned to skate in preparation for the movie Blades of Glory , but the writers decided that there was no reason for Pam to be a good skater , so they had Pam lean on Jim . Saturday Night Live alumna Nancy Walls , who played Carol Stills , is actually Steve Carell 's wife . At the rink , Michael tells Pam to be wary of breast cancer . This is the third joke that Stupnitsky and Eisenberg had aimed at Pam 's breasts , after one each in " The Fight " and " The Secret " . Fischer later jokingly said that " my breasts play a central role in one of tonight 's scenes . " Fischer also noted that , due to the slight emphasis her breasts were receiving , many fans on the internet were arguing that Fischer had had breast implants . Fischer denied the rumors , but stated that she was " flattered " . 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Jim describing Michael 's typical birthday , Dwight explaining his duties on Michael 's birthday , Michael being upset when Ryan does not get him a present , Michael telling several variations of his worst birthday , and Michael making Ryan research skin cancer . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The cold opening features Michael trying to get various members of the office involved in a pyramid scheme , which is a non @-@ sustainable business model that involves promising participants payment or services , primarily for enrolling other people into the scheme , rather than supplying any real investment or sale of products or services to the public . The scheme is generally considered one of various internet scams . Michael later reveals having also fallen for a Nigerian 419 scam . 
 Michael notes that he shares his birthday with Eva Longoria , and that it will be a perfect icebreaker if he ever meets Teri Hatcher . After Michael asks what Dwight is playing on the recorder , Dwight replies that it is " for the longest time " , by " William Joel " ( Billy Joel released " The Longest Time " in 1984 ) . When Kevin mentions he might have skin cancer , Kelly starts discussing a case involving cancer on the popular medical drama Grey 's Anatomy . She later says that the saddest funeral she ever saw was the one for Princess Diana . For Michael 's birthday , his mother sent him a picture of James Dean <unk> , Michael notes that " I bet Luke Perry 's friends don 't treat him like this " . While at the grocery store , Jim and Pam buy a copy of the American comedy movie American Pie 2 . Pam later impersonates Darth Vader , a character from the science fiction movie franchise Star Wars on the store 's intercom . To show his support for Kevin , Michael makes a fake Livestrong wristband out of construction paper . Dwight later gives Michael a Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins jersey with the words " From Dwight " on the back . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Michael 's Birthday " originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 30 , 2006 . " Michael 's Birthday " received 4 @.@ 0 / 10 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . This means that 4 @.@ 0 percent of all households with an 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old living in it watched the episode , and ten percent had their television tuned to the channel at any point . " Michael 's Birthday " was watched by 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 " Michael 's Birthday " received very positive reviews . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad wrote that the episode was " simply the best one yet " , and that it " was so brilliant and so right on that I can 't give it any higher praise " . Sciannamea went on to write that " the scenes at the ice rink were hysterical " and The Office " is the best sitcom on TV " . M. Giant of Television Without Pity graded the episode with an " A " . Lindsey Thomas of Rolling Stone magazine named the scene wherein Michael confuses the term " negative " to mean that Kevin has skin cancer as the seventeenth greatest moment in the series . Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict was moderately pleased with the entry and awarded it a " B + " . He called the entry a " good episode " , but noted that it was helped by " great supporting work from Dwight " , who he called " as not only the best supporting character on the show , but perhaps the best in television . " 
 = Reba McEntire = 
 Reba Nell McEntire ( born March 28 , 1955 ) , also known simply as Reba , is an American country music singer , songwriter , record producer , actress , and television producer . She began her career in the music industry as a high school student singing in the Kiowa High School band , on local radio shows with her siblings , and at rodeos . While a sophomore in college , she performed the National Anthem at the National Rodeo in Oklahoma City and caught the attention of country artist Red Steagall who brought her to Nashville , Tennessee . She signed a contract with Mercury Records a year later in 1975 . She released her first solo album in 1977 and released five additional studio albums under the label until 1983 . 
 Signing with MCA Nashville Records , McEntire took creative control over her second MCA album , My Kind of Country ( 1984 ) , which had a more traditional country sound and produced two number one singles : " How Blue " and " Somebody Should Leave " . The album brought her breakthrough success , bringing her a series of successful albums and number one singles in the 1980s and 1990s . McEntire has since released 26 studio albums , acquired 40 number one singles , 14 number one albums , and 28 albums have been certified gold , platinum or multi @-@ platinum in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America . She has sometimes been referred to as " The Queen of Country " . and she is one of the best @-@ selling artists of all time , having sold more than 85 million records worldwide . 
 In the early 1990s , McEntire branched into film starting with 1990 's Tremors . She has since starred in the Broadway revival of Annie Get Your Gun and in her television sitcom , Reba ( 2001 – 07 ) for which she was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Reba Nell McEntire was born March 28 , 1955 , in McAlester , Oklahoma , to Jacqueline ( née Smith ; born November 7 , 1926 ) and Clark Vincent McEntire ( November 30 , 1927 – October 23 , 2014 ) . She was named for her maternal grandmother Reba Estelle [ <unk> ] Smith ( October 6 , 1903 – May 12 , 1970 ) . Reba Smith was the daughter of Byron Williams " B.W. " Brasfield ( May 13 , 1874 – September 12 , 1906 ) and Susie Elizabeth [ Raper ] Brasfield ( February 2 , 1871 – April 18 , 1935 ) . Her father and grandfather , John Wesley McEntire ( February 19 , 1897 – February 13 , 1976 ) , were both champion steer <unk> and her father was a World Champion Steer Roper three times ( 1957 , 1958 , and 1961 ) . John McEntire was the son of Clark Stephen McEntire ( September 10 , 1855 – August 15 , 1935 ) and Helen Florida [ Brown ] McEntire ( May 19 , 1868 – May 16 , 1947 ) . Her mother had once wanted to be a country @-@ music artist but eventually decided to become a schoolteacher , but she did teach her children how to sing . Young Reba also taught herself how to play the guitar . On car rides home from their father 's rodeo shows , the McEntire siblings learned songs and harmonies from their mother , eventually forming a vocal group called the " Singing <unk> " with her brother , Pake , and her younger sister Susie ( her older sister Alice did not participate ) . Reba played guitar in the group and wrote all the songs . The group sang at rodeos and recorded " The Ballad of John McEntire " together . Released on the indie label Boss , the song pressed one thousand copies . In 1974 , McEntire attended Southeastern Oklahoma State University planning to be an elementary school teacher ( eventually graduating December 16 , 1976 ) . While not attending school , she also continued to sing locally . That same year she was hired to perform the national anthem at the National Rodeo in Oklahoma City . Country artist Red Steagall , who was also performing that day , was impressed by her vocal ability and agreed to help her launch a country @-@ music career in Nashville , Tennessee . After recording a demo tape , she signed a recording contract with Mercury Records in 1975 . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 1976 – 83 : Career launch at Mercury = = = 
 McEntire made her first recordings for Mercury on January 22 , 1976 , when she released her debut single . Upon its release that year , " I Don 't Want to Be a One Night Stand " failed to become a major hit on the Billboard country music chart , peaking at number 88 in May . She completed her second recording session September 16 , which included the production of her second single , " ( There 's Nothing Like The Love ) Between a Woman and Man " , which reached only number 86 in March 1977 . She recorded a third single that April , " Glad I Waited Just for You " , which reached number 88 by August . That same month , Mercury issued her self @-@ titled debut album . The album was a departure from any of McEntire 's future releases , as it resembled the material of Tanya Tucker and Tammy Wynette , according to AllMusic reviewer Greg Adams . The album itself did not chart the Billboard Top Country Albums chart upon its release . After releasing two singles with Jacky Ward ( " Three Sheets in the Wind " b / w " I 'd Really Love to See You Tonight " ; and " That Makes Two of Us " at No. 20 and No. 26 , respectively ) , Mercury issued her second studio album in 1979 , Out of a Dream . The album 's cover of Patsy Cline 's " Sweet Dreams " became McEntire 's first Top 20 hit , reaching No. 19 on the Billboard country chart in November 1979 . 
 In 1980 , " You Lift Me Up ( To Heaven ) " brought her to the Top 10 for the first time . Her third studio album , Feel the Fire was released in October and spawned two additional Top 20 hit singles that year . In September 1981 , McEntire 's fourth album , Heart to Heart was issued and became her first album to chart the Billboard Top Country Albums list , peaking at No. 2 . Its lead single , " Today All Over Again " became a top five country hit . The album received mainly negative reviews from critics . William Ruhlmann of AllMusic gave it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , stating she did not get creative control of her music . Ruhlmann called " There Ain 't No Love " " essentially a soft pop ballad " . Most of the album 's material consisted of mainly country pop @-@ styled ballads , which was not well liked by McEntire herself . Her fifth album , Unlimited was issued in June 1982 , and spawned her first Billboard number one single in early 1983 : " Can 't Even Get the Blues " and " You 're the First Time I 've Thought About Leaving " . The following year her sixth album , Behind the Scene was released and was positively received by music critics . In 1983 , McEntire announced her departure from Mercury , criticizing the label 's country pop production styles . 
 = = = 1984 – 90 : Breakthrough = = = 
 McEntire signed with MCA Nashville Records in 1984 and released her seventh studio album , Just a Little Love . Harold Shedd was originally the album 's producer ; however , McEntire rejected his suggestions towards country pop arrangements . It was instead produced by <unk> Wilson , although the album still had a distinguishable country pop sound . Dissatisfied with the album 's sound , she went to MCA president , Jimmy Bowen , who told McEntire to find material that was best @-@ suited to her liking . Instead of finding new material , she found previously recorded country hits from her own record collection , which was then recorded for the album . The album 's material included songs originally released as singles by Ray Price ( " Don 't You Believe Her " , " I Want to Hear It from You " ) , Carl Smith ( " Before I Met You " ) , Faron Young ( " He 's Only Everything " ) and Connie Smith ( " You 've Got Me [ Right Where You Want Me " ] ) . The album spawned two number @-@ one singles : " How Blue " and " Somebody Should Leave " . It was given positive reviews from critics , with Billboard praising McEntire as " the finest woman country singer since Kitty Wells " and Rolling Stone critics honoring her as one of their Top 5 favorite country artists . Upon its release , My Kind of Country became her highest @-@ peaking album on the Top Country Albums chart , reaching No. 13 . The album also included instruments such as a fiddle and pedal steel guitar , and was aimed more towards a traditional country sound . McEntire was later praised as a " new traditionalist " , along with Ricky Skaggs , George Strait , and Randy Travis . That year , she won the Country Music Association Awards ' Female Vocalist of the Year , her first major industry award . The album was certified Gold . 
 In 1985 , McEntire released her third MCA album , Have I Got a Deal for You , which followed the same traditional format as My Kind of Country . It was the first album produced by McEntire and was co @-@ produced with Jimmy Bowen . Like her previous release , the album received positive feedback , including Rolling Stone , which called it a " promising debut " . The album 's second single , " Only in My Mind " was entirely written by McEntire and reached No. 5 on the Billboard country chart . On January 17 , 1986 , McEntire became a member of the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville , Tennessee , and has been a member ever since . In February 1986 , McEntire 's ninth studio album , Whoever 's in New England was released . For this album , McEntire and co @-@ producer Jimmy Bowen incorporated her traditional music style into a mainstream sound that was entirely different from anything she had previously recorded . Country Music : The Rough Guide called the production of the title track , " bigger and sentimentalism more obvious , even manipulative " . The title track peaked at No. 1 on the Billboard Country Chart and won her a Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance the following year . In addition , the album became McEntire 's first release to certify gold in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( and was later certified Platinum ) . At the end of the year , McEntire won Entertainer of the Year from the Country Music Association , the highest honor in the awards show . 
 McEntire released a second album in 1986 ( her tenth overall ) , What Am I Gonna Do About You . Allmusic critic William Ruhlmann was not overly pleased with album 's production , saying that it lacked the features that had been set forth on Whoever 's in New England . <unk> criticized the title track for " something of the feel of ' Whoever 's in New England ' in its portrayal of a woman trying to recover from a painfully ended love affair " . The title track was the lead single from the release and became a number @-@ one single shortly after its release . This album also spawned a second number @-@ one in " One Promise Too Late " . The following year , her first MCA compilation , Greatest Hits was released and became her first album to be certified platinum in sales , eventually certifying triple @-@ platinum . A twelfth studio album , The Last One to Know , was released in 1987 . The emotions of her divorce from husband , Charlie Battles , were put into the album 's material , according to McEntire . The title track from the release was a number @-@ one single in 1987 and the second single , " Love Will Find Its Way to You " , also reached the top spot . In late 1987 , McEntire released her first Christmas collection , Merry Christmas to You , which sold two million copies in the United States , certifying double Platinum . The album included cover versions of " Away in a Manger " , " Silent Night " , and Grandpa Jones 's " The Christmas Guest " . 
 Her thirteenth album , Reba , was issued in 1988 and was not well received by critics , who claimed she was moving farther away from her " traditional country " sound . Stereo Review disliked the album 's contemporary style , stating , " After years of insisting that she 'd stick to hard @-@ core country ' because I have tried the contemporary @-@ type songs , and it 's not Reba McEntire — it 's just not honest , ' McEntire [ ... ] has gone whole @-@ hog pop . The album peaked at No. 1 on the Top Country Albums chart and remained there for six consecutive weeks . Okay , so maybe that 's not so terrible . " Although it was reviewed poorly , the album itself was certified platinum in sales and produced two number @-@ one singles : " I Know How He Feels " and " New Fool at an Old Game " . In addition , the release 's cover version of Jo Stafford 's " A Sunday Kind of Love " became a Top 5 hit on the Billboard country music chart . Also in 1988 , McEntire founded Starstruck Entertainment , which controlled her management , booking , publishing , promotion , publicity , accounting , ticket sales , and fan club administration . The company would eventually expand into managing a horse farm , jet charter service , trucking , construction , and book publishing . 
 McEntire 's fourteenth studio album , Sweet Sixteen , was released in May 1989 ; it spent sixteen weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard Top Country Albums chart , while also becoming her first album to peak in the top 100 on the Billboard 200 , reaching No. 78 . The album was given positive reviews because unlike her previous studio album , the release , " welcomes the fiddles and steel guitars back as she returns to the neo @-@ traditionalist fold " , according to Allmusic , which gave the release four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars . Reviewer William Ruhlmann found Sweet Sixteen to " double back to a formula that worked for her in the past " . The lead single was a cover of The Everly Brothers ' " Cathy 's Clown " , with McEntire 's version reaching No. 1 in July on the Billboard country music chart . Three more Top 10 hits followed from Sweet Sixteen : " Till Love Comes Again " , " Little Girl " , and " Walk On " , at No. 4 , 7 and 2 , respectively . In September she released Reba Live , her first live album , which originally certified gold but certified platinum ten years later . 
 Sixteen months after the release of Sweet Sixteen and after giving birth to her son , McEntire transitioned into 1990 with the release of Rumor Has It . The album 's " sound and production were almost entirely pop @-@ oriented " , according to Kurt Wolff of Country Music : The Rough Guide . Although Rumor Has It was an attempt to receive critical praise , many reviewers found the album to be " predictable " . Stereo Review mainly found the recording displeasing in some places , but the reviewer also believed she " still leaves most of the competition in the dust " , calling the album " glorious " . Rumor Has It eventually sold three million copies by 1999 , certifying triple @-@ platinum by that year . It was prefaced by the single " You Lie " , which became her fifteenth number @-@ one single on the country chart . In addition , the album 's cover of Bobbie Gentry 's 1969 hit " Fancy " and a new track , " Fallin ' Out of Love " , became Top 10 hits on the same Billboard country chart . 
 = = = 1991 : Aviation accident and For My Broken Heart = = = 
 While on tour for her 1990 album , McEntire lost eight members of her band ; ( Chris Austin , Kirk <unk> , Joey <unk> , Paula Kaye Evans , Jim Hammon , Terry Jackson , Anthony Saputo , and Michael Thomas ) , plus pilot Donald Holmes and co @-@ pilot Chris Hollinger , when their charter jet plane crashed near San Diego , California in the early morning of March 16 , 1991 . The accident occurred after McEntire 's private performance for IBM executives the night before . The first plane was a Hawker Siddeley DH @-@ 125 @-@ 1A / 522 charter jet , believed to have taken off around 1 : 45 AM from the Brown Field Municipal Airport , located near the border of Mexico . After reaching an altitude of about 3 @,@ 572 feet ( 1 @,@ 089 m ) above sea level , the aircraft crashed on the side of Otay Mountain , located ten miles east of the airport , while the second plane ( carrying her other band members ) did not crash . The accident was believed to have occurred due to poor visibility near the mountain , which was not considered " prohibitive " for flying . The news was reported nearly immediately to McEntire and her husband , who were sleeping at a nearby hotel . A spokeswoman for McEntire at the time stated in the Los Angeles Times that " she was very close to all of them . Some of them had been with her for years . Reba is totally devastated by this . It 's like losing part of your family . Right now she just wants to get back to Nashville . " 
 McEntire dedicated her sixteenth album , For My Broken Heart , to her deceased road band . Released in October 1991 , it contained songs of sorrow and lost love about " all measure of suffering , " according to Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly . Nash reported that McEntire " still hits her stride with the more traditional songs of emotional turmoil , above all combining a spectacular vocal performance with a terrific song on ' Buying Her Roses , ' a wife 's head @-@ spinning discovery of her husband 's other woman . " The release peaked at No. 1 on the Billboard Top Country Albums chart , while also reaching No. 13 on the Billboard 200 , and eventually sold four million copies . Its title track became McEntire 's sixteenth number @-@ one , followed by " Is There Life Out There " , which also reached No. 1 on the Billboard country music chart . The third single , " The Greatest Man I Never Knew , " peaked in the Top 5 and her cover of Vicki Lawrence 's " The Night the Lights Went Out in Georgia " reached No. 12 . " If I Had Only Known , " a cut from this album , was later included in the soundtrack to the 1994 film 8 Seconds . 
 = = = 1992 – 96 : Continued success = = = 
 In December 1992 , McEntire 's seventeenth studio album , It 's Your Call , was released . It became her first album to peak within the Billboard 200 Top 10 , reaching No. 8 . McEntire commented that the record was a " second chapter " to For My Broken Heart , while music reviewers such as Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly disagreed , writing , " In truth , it isn 't nearly as pessimistic as its predecessor — and unfortunately it isn 't anywhere as involving . " Nash called the album 's title track — which peaked at No. 5 on the Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart — " one of those moment @-@ of @-@ truth sagas at which McEntire excels . In the song , a wife answers the phone to find her husband 's girlfriend on the other end and seizes the opportunity not only to inform her mate that she knows of his affair but to give him the ultimatum of choosing between the two . She 's not the only one who 's <unk> ' on the line , she sings , handing her husband the phone . It 's your call . " Christopher John Farley of Time magazine wrote that the album ranged from being " relaxing " to " cathartic " , and " these vocals from one of the best country singers linger in the mind " . The album 's preceding singles — " The Heart Won 't Lie " ( a duet with then @-@ labelmate Vince Gill ) and " Take It Back " — were Top 10 hits on the Billboard country chart , reaching No. 1 and No. 5 respectively . Like its preceding album , It 's Your Call sold over a million copies , eventually certifying by the RIAA in sales of double @-@ platinum . 
 In October 1993 , McEntire 's third compilation album , Greatest Hits Volume Two was released , reaching No. 1 and No. 5 on the Billboard Top Country Albums and Billboard 200 charts respectively , selling 183 @,@ 000 copies during Christmas week 1993 . Out of the ten tracks were two new singles : the first , " Does He Love You " , was a duet with Linda Davis . The song later went on to reach No. 1 on the Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart and win both women a Grammy for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals . Its second single , " They Asked About You " , was also a Top 10 hit . The additional eight songs were some of McEntire 's biggest hit singles during a course of five years including " The Last One to Know " , " I Know How He Feels " , " Cathy 's Clown " , and " The Heart Won 't Lie " . After originally selling two million copies upon its initial release ( 2 × Multi @-@ Platinum ) , Greatest Hits Volume Two would later certify at 5 × Multi @-@ Platinum by the RIAA in 1998 . The album has gone to sell over 10 million copies worldwide , which makes it McEntire 's best selling album to date . 
 Her eighteenth studio release was 1994 's Read My Mind . The album spawned five major hit singles onto the Billboard Country chart , including the No. 1 single " The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter " . The further releases ( " Till You Love Me " , " Why Haven 't I Heard from You " , and " And Still " ) became Top 10 singles on the same chart , with " Till You Love Me " also reaching No. 78 on the Billboard Hot 100 , a chart that she had not previously entered . The album itself reached No. 2 on both the Billboard 200 and Top Country Albums charts . Charlotte Dillon of Allmusic gave the album four out of five stars , calling it " another wonderful offering of songs performed by the gifted country singer Reba McEntire " . Dillon also felt that the album 's material had " a little soul , a little swing , and some pop , too " . Entertainment Weekly 's Alanna Nash also gave the album positive feedback , viewing the album to have " enough boiling rhythms and brooding melodies to reflect the anger and disillusionment of the middle class in the ' 90s " , calling the track " She Thinks His Name Was John " to be the best example of that idea . The song was eventually spawned as a single and was considered controversial for its storyline , which described a woman who contracts AIDS from a one @-@ night stand . Because of its subject , the song garnered less of a response from radio and peaked at No. 15 . Read My Mind became another major seller for McEntire and her label , selling three million copies by 1995 and certifying at 3 × Multi @-@ Platinum from the RIAA . 
 After many years of releasing studio albums of newly recorded material , McEntire 's nineteenth studio album , Starting Over ( 1995 ) was collection of her favorite songs originally recorded by others from the 1950s through the early 1980s . The album was made to commemorate twenty years in the music industry , but many music critics gave it a less positive response than her previous release . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine commented that although the album was considered a " rebirth " for McEntire , he thought that some tracks were recorded for merely " nothing more than entertainment " . The album paid tribute to many of McEntire 's favorite artists and included cover versions of " Talking In Your Sleep " originally sung by Crystal Gayle , " Please Come to Boston " , " I Won 't Mention It Again " sung by Ray Price , " Starting Over Again " , cowritten by Donna Summer and originally a hit for Dolly Parton , " On My Own " , and " By the Time I Get to Phoenix " . " On My Own " featured guest vocals from Davis , as well as Martina McBride and Trisha Yearwood . Despite negative reviews , Starting Over was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America within the first two months of its release , but only one single — a cover of Lee Greenwood 's " Ring on Her Finger , Time on Her Hands " — was a Top 10 hit single . 
 = = = 1997 – 98 : What If It 's You and " If You See Him " = = = 
 McEntire made a major comeback into the music industry the following year with her twentieth studio album , What If It 's You . The album 's lead single , " The Fear of Being Alone " reached No. two on the country charts , and its further two singles ( " How Was I to Know " and " I 'd Rather Ride Around with You " ) reached No. 1 and No. 2 respectively . The release garnered higher critical acclaim than Starting Over , with Thom Owens of Allmusic calling the album " nevertheless an excellent reminder of her deep talents as a vocalist " . MCA Nashville chairman Bruce Hinton told Billboard how pleased he was with McEntire 's release , calling the album 's ten tracks " powerful " and concluding by stating , " There are so many writers and so many great songs in Nashville , and Reba has collected her disproportionate share [ ... ] She 's country music 's female artist of the 90 's . " What If It 's You peaked at No. 1 Top Country Albums and No. 15 on the Billboard 200 , while also becoming her first album in three years to certify in multi @-@ platinum sales , selling two million copies by 1999 . At the end of 1997 , McEntire also charted at No. 23 the charity single " What If " . The proceeds of sales for this single were donated to the Salvation Army . 
 In 1997 , McEntire headlined a tour with Brooks & Dunn that led to the recording of " If You See Him / If You See Her " with the duo the following year . This song was included on McEntire 's If You See Him album and Brooks & Dunn 's If You See Her album , both of which released on June 2 . Thom Owens of AllMusic reported in its review that both album titles were named nearly the same as " a way to draw attention for both parties , since they were no longer new guns — they were veterans in danger of losing ground to younger musicians " . The duet reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart in June 1998 and spawned an additional three Top 10 hits during that year : " Forever Love " , " Wrong Night " , and " One Honest Heart " . In addition , If You See Him peaked within the Top 10 on both the Billboard 200 and Top Country Albums chart , reaching No. 8 and No. 2 , respectively . 
 = = = 1999 – 2001 : So Good Together and Greatest Hits Vol . 3 : I 'm A Survivor = = = 
 In 1999 , McEntire released two albums . In September she issued her second Christmas album , The Secret of Giving : A Christmas Collection , which eventually sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In November , her twenty @-@ second studio album , So Good Together was released , spawning three singles . The first release , " What Do You Say " and the second release , " I 'll Be " both reached the Top 5 on the Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart . So Good Together also brought her into the Top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 for the first time , peaking at No. 31 . The album would eventually certify Platinum by the end of the decade . What Do You Say became her first crossover hit as well . Unlike any of her previous albums , So Good Together was produced by three people , including McEntire . Entertainment Weekly commented that most of the album 's material was " an odd set — mostly ballads , including an English / Portuguese duet with Jose e Durval on Boz Scaggs ' ' We 're All Alone ' " . 
 In 2001 , McEntire returned with her third greatest @-@ hits album : Greatest Hits Vol . 3 : I 'm a Survivor . The album helped McEntire receive her third gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America , which made her the most certified female country artist in music history . It spawned the number @-@ three hit " I 'm a Survivor " , which would be her last major hit for two years , as McEntire would go on a temporary hiatus to focus on her television sitcom , Reba . The album 's only other single , a cover of Kenny Rogers ' " Sweet Music Man " , went to No. 36 . 
 = = = 2003 – 07 : Return to the music industry = = = 
 McEntire 's seventy @-@ sixth chart single , " I 'm Gonna Take That Mountain " , released in mid @-@ 2003 , ended her two @-@ year break from recording . In November 2003 , her twenty @-@ third studio album , Room to Breathe , marked her first release of new material in four years . Writing for The Boston Globe , Steve Morse found the album 's material to have a variety of musical stylings , saying the track " Love Revival " sounded like Tanya Tucker and calling " If I Had Any Sense at All " " a mournful country ballad " . Dan MacIntosh of Country Standard Time gave Room to Breathe a less @-@ received review , reporting that " it ultimately falls short of leaving the listener breathless " . He highlighted " I 'm Gonna Take That Mountain " for sounding like a Bluegrass @-@ inspired song such as music by Ricky Skaggs or Patty Loveless . The album itself reached a peak of No. 4 on the Billboard Top Country Albums chart and No. 25 on the Billboard 200 , staying at the position for only one week . The second single , " Somebody " , also recorded by Mark Wills on his " Loving Every Minute " release , became her twenty @-@ second number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart and first since " If You See Him / If You See Her " six years previous . This became her thirty @-@ third number @-@ one single overall . It took longer than expected to become a hit , according to McEntire , who said , " Yeah , that had us concerned . The album came out in November and it took 30 weeks for " Somebody " to work its way up the charts . Usually , it 's 15 weeks . But this one had a resurgence of life , especially after the video came out . MCA is really kicking butt with it . " Its third single , " He Gets That from Me " reached No. 7 , followed by the Amy Dalley co @-@ written track " My Sister " , which reached No. 16 . 
 In 2005 , McEntire released the compilation Reba 1 's . The album comprised all thirty @-@ three number @-@ one hits in her career on all major trade charts . Two new songs were included on the album : " You 're Gonna Be " and " Love Needs a Holiday " . Both were released as singles , peaking at No. 33 and No. 60 , respectively , with the latter becoming her first single in twenty @-@ seven years to miss the country top 40 entirely . Country Standard Time called the tracks " Whoever 's in New England " and " You Lie " the album highlights . The album reached a peak of No. 3 on the Top Country Albums chart and No. 12 on the Billboard 200 upon its release , certifying 2 × Platinum by the RIAA within two years . On August 30 , 2007 , McEntire received two CMA nominations : Female Vocalist of the Year and Vocal Event of the Year . With those two nominations plus another in 2008 and two more in 2009 , McEntire became the female artist with the most nominations ( forty @-@ eight ) in the forty @-@ three year history of the CMA Awards , surpassing Dolly Parton , who has forty @-@ three . 
 In mid @-@ 2007 , McEntire announced the release of her twenty @-@ fifth studio album , Reba : Duets , on September 18 . McEntire stated that out of all the albums she had previously recorded , her newest release was particularly special : " This is an album that will go down in history as probably my favorite album to record because I got to work and sing and be with my friends . Out of everything in this whole career that I can say that I 'm the most proud of , are my friends . And here 's the proof . " In promotion for the album , McEntire made appearances at radio shows and on The Oprah Winfrey Show September 19 . The album 's lead single , " Because of You " — a duet with Kelly Clarkson , who originally recorded the song — became her fifty @-@ fifth Top 10 single on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart , tying her with Dolly Parton , who also had the same amount of Top 10 records . The album was given high critical praise from magazines such as PopMatters , which called McEntire 's vocals , " to sound sweet without being syrupy , while being extremely powerful . McEntire 's vocal strength yields a different kind of authority than the bluesy , drawling growl of Janis Joplin , the weathered rasp of Marianne Faithfull , or even the soul @-@ shrieking powerhouse of Tina Turner . Instead , Reba 's voice combines the aspects of all three singers but tempers it with a Southern sweetness and an unmistakable femininity . " The album contained ten tracks of duets with country and pop artists , including Kenny Chesney , LeAnn Rimes , Trisha Yearwood , Carole King , and Justin Timberlake . Reba : Duets peaked at No. 1 on the Top Country Albums chart , while also becoming her first album in her thirty @-@ year career to peak and debut at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 , with 300 @,@ 536 copies ( according to Nielsen Soundscan ) sold within its first week of release . On January 17 , 2008 , McEntire embarked on the 2 Worlds 2 Voices Tour with Clarkson , which began in Fairborn , Ohio and ended in November of the same year . A month after its release , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on October 19 , 2007 . The album 's only other single was " Every Other Weekend " . Recorded on the album as a duet with Chesney , it was released to radio with its co @-@ writer , Skip Ewing , as a duet partner . 
 = = = 2008 – 12 : Move to Valory = = = 
 In early 2008 , McEntire partnered again with Brooks & Dunn for a re @-@ recorded version of their single " Cowgirls Don 't Cry " . McEntire is featured in the video , but not on the version found on the album Cowboy Town . It became McEntire 's fifty @-@ sixth Top Ten country hit , breaking Dolly 's record for the most Top Ten country hits for a solo female . In November 2008 , McEntire announced that she would be departing from her label of twenty @-@ five years and signing with the Valory Music Group , an imprint of Big Machine Records ( coincidentally distributed by MCA and Mercury 's parent , Universal Music Group ) . Under MCA , she had sold a total of sixty @-@ seven million records worldwide and won two Grammys . The switch to Valory reunited McEntire with the label 's president , Scott Borchetta , who had worked as senior vice president of promotion at MCA during most of the 1990s . McEntire later commented on her label switch , stating , " I am thrilled to be joining the Valory team . Scott and I worked together on some of the biggest singles of my career , and I am excited to renew our partnership . " In November , 2008 , MCA released a 50 Greatest Hits box set compilation album , containing three CDs , from 1984 's " How Blue " to 2007 's " Because of You " . 
 On April 5 , 2009 , McEntire debuted her first single , " Strange " , on Valory at the 2009 Academy of Country Music Awards . The song debuted at No. 39 on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart , giving McEntire the highest single debut of her career , and went on to peak at No. 11 . Her twenty @-@ sixth studio album , Keep On Loving You was released August 18 , 2009 , and became McEntire 's first solo studio album in six years . The album gained fairly positive reviews from most album critics . On August 26 , Keep on Loving You became McEntire 's second album to top both the Billboard Country and 200 charts , selling almost 96 @,@ 000 copies within its first week . With the album , McEntire broke the record for the female country artist with the most Billboard number @-@ one albums , which was previously held by Loretta Lynn . 
 On August 18 the label released the album 's second single , " Consider Me Gone " , and it debuted at No. 51 on The Hot Country Single 's Chart . The single became McEntire 's thirty @-@ fourth number @-@ one on the Billboard chart in December . With a four @-@ week stay at No. 1 , this song became the longest @-@ lasting number @-@ one of her career , as well as the first multi @-@ week number @-@ one by a female country singer since Taylor Swift 's " Our Song " in 2007 . The album 's third and final single was " I Keep On Loving You " , co @-@ written by Ronnie Dunn of Brooks & Dunn , which peaked at No. 7 . 
 McEntire 's thirty @-@ fourth studio album , All the Women I Am , was released on November 9 , 2010 , under Valory Music Group / Starstruck Records . The album 's lead single called " Turn On the Radio " was released on August 3 , 2010 , and the music video premiered on August 18 , 2010 . Upon its release , All the Women I Am received generally positive reviews from most music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 4 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . On November 10 , 2010 , McEntire appeared at the Country Music Association Awards performing her version of Beyoncé 's " If I Were a Boy " . On December 20 , 2010 , McEntire scored her 35th Billboard number @-@ one single in the U.S. with " Turn On the Radio " . The second single from All the Women I Am was a cover of Beyoncé 's " If I Were a Boy " , which McEntire took to No. 22 . After it came " When Love Gets a Hold of You " at No. 40 and " Somebody 's Chelsea " at No. 44 . The latter was the only single that McEntire had co @-@ written since " Only in My Mind " in 1985 . McEntire later announced that she would be visiting 31 cities on her All the Women I Am Tour ' late that year with The Band Perry , Steel Magnolia , and Edens Edge as opening acts on different stops of the tour . Dates for the tour were announced July 6 , 2011 . 
 On March 1 , 2011 , the Country Music Association announced that McEntire would be inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame . McEntire was unable to attend the announcement after her father had slipped into a coma following a stroke . McEntire was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame on May 22 , 2011 , at a Medallion Ceremony that took place at the Country Music Hall of Fame in Nashville , Tennessee . She was inducted by one of her musical idols , Dolly Parton . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Nash Icon and Love Somebody = = = 
 On October 21 , 2014 , it was announced that McEntire would be the inaugural signing for Big Machine 's new imprint Nash Icon Music . She also disclosed that she was working on a new album , with 11 new songs . Her first single for the new label , " Going Out Like That , " was announced December 16 , 2014 and was released on January 6 , 2015 . It served as the lead @-@ off single to Love Somebody , McEntire 's twenty @-@ seventh studio album , released on April 14 , 2015 . Love Somebody debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Top Country Albums — her twelfth number @-@ one album on the chart — and No. 3 on Billboard 200 , selling 62 @,@ 469 copies in the U.S. The album has sold 171 @,@ 600 copies in the U.S. as of October 5 , 2015 . 
 = = Grand Ole Opry = = 
 When Reba McEntire made her Grand Ole Opry debut on September 17 , 1977 , she almost did not make it in the door after a guard at the Opry gate missed her name on the night 's list of performers . Her parents and older sister , Alice , drove 1 @,@ 400 miles round trip from their Oklahoma home to see what turned out to be Reba 's three @-@ minute performance that night . Her act was cut from two songs to just one — " Invitation to the Blues " — because of a surprise appearance from Dolly Parton . McEntire was inducted into the Grand Ole Opry on January 17 , 1986 . " The Grand Ole Opry is a home , " she says . " It 's a family . It 's like a family reunion , when you come back and get to see everybody . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1989 – 99 : Entrance into film and television acting = = = 
 During the late 1980s , many of McEntire 's music videos were being described as " mini movies " . In each video , she would portray a different character , which distinguished her music videos from other videos released by artists during that time . In the late 1980s , McEntire became interested in an acting career , eventually hiring an agent . In 1989 , she co @-@ hosted Good Morning America on ABC . 
 In 1990 , she obtained her first film role playing Heather Gummer in the horror comedy Tremors , along with Kevin Bacon . The film told the story of a small group of people living in Nevada who were fighting subterranean worm @-@ like creatures . After the film 's release , McEntire developed a strong interest in acting and made it her second career . The following year , she starred along with Kenny Rogers and Burt Reynolds in the made @-@ for @-@ television movie , The Gambler Returns : The Luck of the Draw . In 1994 , McEntire worked with director , Rob Reiner in the film , North , playing Ma Tex . The film obtained negative reviews , receiving only two and a half stars from Allmovie . 
 In 1994 , McEntire starred in Is There Life Out There ? , a television movie based on her song of the same name . The following year , she appeared in Buffalo Girls , which was based upon the life of western cowgirl , Calamity Jane ( played by Anjelica Huston ) . Playing Jane 's friend , Annie Oakley , Buffalo Girls was nominated for an Emmy award . In 1996 , McEntire was cast by director James Cameron as Molly Brown in his film Titanic . However , when it became apparent production for the film would extend well beyond its original length , McEntire had to turn down the part , as she had already scheduled prior concert engagements . The role was recast with Kathy Bates . In 1998 , she starred as Lizzie Brooks in Forever Love , which was based upon McEntire 's hit single of the same name . 
 = = = 2000 – 07 : Broadway and television series = = = 
 In early 2001 , McEntire expanded into theater , starring in the Broadway revival of Annie Get Your Gun . Playing Annie Oakley ( whom she had previously portrayed in Buffalo Girls ) , McEntire 's performance was critically acclaimed by several newspapers , including The New York Times , which commented , " Without qualification the best performance by an actress in a musical comedy this season . " McEntire personally called the musical , " some of the hardest work I 've ever done in my life " . 
 In 2005 , McEntire starred as Nellie Forbush in the Carnegie Hall concert production of the Broadway musical South Pacific with Alec Baldwin as Luther Billis and Brian Stokes Mitchell as Emile de Becque , directed by Walter Bobbie and with an adapted script by David Ives . The concert was broadcast as part of the Great Performances series in 2006 . 
 In October 2001 , McEntire premiered her half @-@ hour television sitcom Reba on the WB network . The show was based around divorced mother Reba Hart , who learns how to handle life situations after her husband divorces her and their teenage daughter becomes pregnant . Reba garnered critical acclaim and success , becoming the network 's highest @-@ rated television show for adults ranging from the ages of eighteen to forty nine . The show ran for six seasons and earned McEntire a nomination for a Golden Globe award . It was cancelled on February 18 , 2007 ; the series finale had 8 @.@ 7 million viewers . 
 = = = 2011 : Return to television = = = 
 In September 2011 , McEntire confirmed on her website that ABC had ordered a pilot for her second television series , Malibu Country . McEntire would play a divorced mother of two who moves to Malibu , California to restart her music career . The pilot was filmed in April 2012 and began production on its first season in August . It was announced that the pilot for Malibu Country would premiere November 2 , 2012 . The show then began showing every Friday night at 8 : 30 / 7 : <unk> on ABC . On May 11 , 2012 , McEntire tweeted that the show had been picked up . She also was the host in the 2011 NASCAR Award Show in Las Vegas . 
 Despite reports that Malibu Country was the most @-@ watched freshman comedy in its debut season ( 8 @.@ 7 million ) , the show was canceled on May 10 , 2013 , after eighteen episodes . 
 = = Musical styles and legacy = = 
 McEntire 's sound has been influenced by the country music of Bob Wills , Merle Haggard , Dolly Parton , Barbara Mandrell , and Patsy Cline . In college , McEntire would attend local dances at the Oklahoma – Texas border so she could dance to Wills 's music , commenting that , " it didn 't get any better than dancing to Bob Wills music " . She also explained Merle Haggard 's influence on her career , stating " I had every album he ever put out " , and would sing " every song he did " , along with her brother , Pake and sister , Susie . In addition , her first major hit , " Sweet Dreams " was a remake of Patsy Cline 's version of the song , according to McEntire herself . McEntire 's music has been described to not only be built upon traditional country music , but also expand into the genres of Country pop , Mainstream pop , Soul , Adult Contemporary , and R & B. At times , her music has often been criticized for moving away from traditional country music . Many music critics have often called her music to be " melodramatic " , " formulaic " , and " bombastic " , particularly after her 1988 album , Reba . Studio releases such as Sweet Sixteen , Rumor Has It , It 's Your Call , and Starting Over have often been described by these terms . 
 McEntire possesses a contralto vocal range and performs " vocal gymnastics " with her voice , a musical technique in which a singer twirls a note around , using their vibrato . McEntire has often credited Dolly Parton for influencing this trait , stating that she would always listen to Parton 's records and find her style of vocal gymnastics , " so pretty " . 
 McEntire has often been regarded as one of country music 's most influential female vocalists and most beloved entertainers . She has also been highly credited for remaining one of country 's most popular female artists for nearly four decades , maintaining her success by continually incorporating contemporary musical sounds without changing her traditional vocal style . For many new artists , she has been credited as the inspiration to their careers in country music , including Faith Hill , Martina McBride , Trisha Yearwood , and LeAnn Rimes . She has also been credited as an inspiration to other performers such as Sara Evans , Kelly Clarkson , Lee Ann Womack , Terri Clark , Taylor Swift , and Carrie Underwood , The Net Music Countdown second @-@ handedly reported , " That influence has manifested itself in many ways . As a role model , she 's shown others how to handle fame with grace and good humor while never backing down from her values or goals . Just as importantly , she 's shown others to refuse to accept limitations on what she can do or how much she can achieve . " McEntire also explained to the online website , " Whatever I 'm doing , I feel like I 'm representing country music " . " It 's always been my main career , and it 's where my loyalties lie . I feel like I 'm waving the flag of country music wherever I go , and I couldn 't be prouder to do it . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Two of her siblings have also had careers in the music industry . Her brother , Pake , dabbled in the country music industry in the late 80s but returned to Oklahoma after a brief stint . He owns and operates a 1 @,@ 000 acre ranch near Colgate , Oklahoma and continues to rodeo . Her sister , Susie McEntire , is a successful Christian music singer who travels the country with her husband speaking and performing . She also has an older sister , Alice Foran , a retired social worker , who resides in Lane , OK . Her niece , Calamity McEntire , is an assistant basketball coach at the University of Arizona . 
 In 1976 , McEntire married national steer wrestling champion and rancher Charlie Battles who was ten years older than her and had two teenage sons , Lance and Coty . Together , the couple owned a ranch in Oklahoma and Battles also managed her career . In 1987 , McEntire divorced Battles and moved to Nashville , Tennessee . She later commented to Bob Allen of Country Music about their separation , saying , " I had to pack everything in one day and leave . I was totally starting over . " McEntire later claimed that she wanted to focus more on her music career , while Battles felt she had peaked and insisted that she remain at home , helping to take care of the ranch and quit her music career . McEntire stated , " I wasn 't the little girl anymore , taking orders , and doing what he said . I knew my career had not peaked and I wasn 't going to walk away from it when I was rolling in awards , charting number one hits , and touring and selling out concerts . I had worked so hard to get my career to that level of success and I meant I wasn 't giving it up yet . A lot of people said I put my career before my marriage , and maybe I did , I don 't know . But we had grown apart so much on a personal level and wanted two different things out of life . There were personal issues other than my career coming between us and when you can 't respect somebody anymore , you can 't have a marriage , so I walked away . " Battles had a major stroke in 2006 and became totally disabled as a result . He died on April 21 , 2013 . 
 After the divorce from Battles , McEntire 's career started to gain significant and sustained momentum . In 1989 , McEntire married her manager and former steel guitar player , Narvel Blackstock . The couple wed in a private ceremony on a boat in Lake Tahoe . Together , the pair took over all aspects of McEntire 's career , forming Starstruck Entertainment , which was originally designed to help manage her career . From her second marriage , McEntire inherited three stepchildren - <unk> , Shawna , and Brandon - and then gave birth to a son , Shelby Steven McEntire Blackstock , in February 1990 . On August 3 , 2015 , it was announced in a joint statement on McEntire 's website that she and Blackstock had been separated for a few months after twenty @-@ six years of marriage . McEntire announced in December 2015 that their divorce was final on October 28 , 2015 . Despite the divorce , McEntire remains very close to her three stepchildren as well as the Blackstock family . Her step kids have six children between them whom she adores and considers them her grandchildren . In fact , McEntire 's song " Somebody 's Chelsea " was written about her granddaughter . 
 McEntire 's stepson Brandon Blackstock is married to McEntire 's friend and fellow singer Kelly Clarkson , who is also managed by McEntire 's ex @-@ husband . Speaking about their impending marriage in 2013 , McEntire stated that she was , " thrilled to death , thrilled to death . To have my buddy as my daughter @-@ in @-@ law , I mean , who could ask for more ? " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 McEntire holds the record for the most Academy of Country Music Top Female Vocalist Awards ( seven ) , and American Music Awards for Favorite Country Female Artist ( twelve ) . She also holds the distinction of being the first to win the Country Music Association 's Female Vocalist of the Year Award four times consecutively . Martina McBride won Female Vocalist four times , although not consecutively . In 2013 , Miranda Lambert tied McEntire to win Female Vocalist four years in a row . McEntire is also a rare musical artist to achieve solo number @-@ ones across four decades ( 1980s , 1990s , 2000s , 2010s ) . She holds the record for most CMA Award nominations for a female artist , with 49 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Seeing Sounds = 
 Seeing Sounds is the third studio album by American funk rock band N.E.R.D released June 10 , 2008 on Star Trak Entertainment and Interscope Records in the United States . After ending their contract with Virgin Records in 2005 , the band felt their previous album Fly or Die ( 2004 ) was too consistent . Using their own money , the band recorded the album in Florida and California . The album was produced solely by record production duo The Neptunes , consisting of Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo , with additional assistance by rock band <unk> and was mainly written by Williams . The album 's title , as well as its content , revolves around the neurological phenomenon of synesthesia , the mixing of sensory modalities . 
 The album debuted at number seven on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 80 @,@ 000 in its first week . It peaked in the top 20 in Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , while also charting in the several other countries . Upon its release , Seeing Sounds received generally mixed to positive reviews from most music critics . Some writers called the record N.E.R.D 's best album to date and praised its production , while others negatively criticized Williams ' singing and the album 's lyrical content . 
 = = Concept = = 
 While touring in promotion of their previous album , Fly or Die , N.E.R.D ended their contract with Virgin Records in 2005 . After touring , Pharrell Williams felt that the album was too consistent ; he felt the band abandoned a sense of unpredictability . The band became " hooked " on the energy from their fans and began recording their third album . Williams and fellow band member Chad Hugo later established Star Trak Entertainment , a subsidiary of Interscope Records . 
 For the album , the band wanted to create the atmosphere of hyperactivity they knew their fans wanted . They wrote a few songs , but felt the songs " weren 't strong enough " and sent them to other musicians . Shay Haley , a member of the band , explained that in their new work , the band wanted to add energy to the emotional appeal of their past albums , though the band did not conceive a clear plan for the direction of the new album . N.E.R.D described the desired outcomes of the album as " a pre @-@ cognitive effort to make music that would make sense for us on while we 're on a stage and to recapture that feeling we love so much " and additionally , " to make something that was thought provoking and for people to listen to it and enjoy it on their own time " . 
 Originally titled <unk> , the title was changed to Seeing Sounds . Williams explained that the title was based on synesthesia , a neurological phenomenon the band learned of while watching the Discovery Channel . They were inspired to create music that could be conceived as a live show . He was surprised to learn not everyone experienced while listening to music . He described synesthesia as the outcome when " one sense gets more information than what 's intended " , stimulated by sensory deprivation . Haley further elaborated , saying that it is a mixture of senses that causes a person to experience colorful hearing and auditory smell . When the band created the album , it was the music they envisioned and decided the appropriate title for the album , Seeing Sounds . Williams pointed out that the lyrics were also inspired by synesthesia . He said that his fans want to " rock out " and be taken on an " emotional roller coaster " , and the only way to do that is to give the fans some records they could blast out on their speakers . The European @-@ influenced music is layered and textured with many music modalities , differing from their past club @-@ oriented albums . Hugo called the album a " big album of LSD , sonic drug " . The band described the album of being an exercise in creative cohesion , band unity and a renewed purpose for themselves . Williams went on to add : 
 If you really analyze that , the most inspiration is probably deep inside a <unk> . So for us , ' seeing sounds ' is what we relate to the most . We figured we 'd make an album out of it . Energy and emotion was the criteria [ while recording ] , but we made the music anticipating the [ live ] show . That was the most important thing … [ The song ] ' Spaz ' is [ an ] old school , hip hop feeling with some drum and bass . It becomes a big , tall monster . It 's almost like this big gorilla looking down at you . If he smacks you , he kills you . His fingers are the size of your body . That 's kinda what we 're doing . We 're facing this big monster of , of what we know is out there , of what we see , that big monster of energy . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Spending their own money , N.E.R.D recorded the album at the South Beach Studios in Miami , Florida , and the Record Plant Studios in Los Angeles , California . Williams used a Triton Extreme , Triton Pro and Pro Tools in the production of the album , while Hugo worked in Access Virus TI , Roland JV @-@ 1080 , JV @-@ 2080 , XV @-@ 5080 , TR @-@ 808 and TR @-@ 909 as beatboxing was provided by Haley . Rock band <unk> further assisted production with guitar and drums . Production revolved around heavy rock , funk and soul music , which was first introduced in their debut album , In Search Of .... Hugo described the album as going back to the band 's roots , combining a classic rock sound with a 1970s funk swing . The typical process of recording was described as " Williams arrives at the studio , ideas in full flower , and lays down both a beat ( either programmed or played on an assortment of buckets ) and vocals . " Hugo then would add extra instrumentation . In an interview with MTV , Williams said that the band " didn 't care about genres ; we 're not doing this for the money . We 're doing this for people who pledge allegiance to our movement . " Hugo went on to say that they " just want to make people move " . On the album he said , " We had anger , quiet angst . We had something to get off our chest . And we wanted to show we could do it as a band . " Don Was , a musician and record producer , thought that the band was on a creatively fulfilling path , calling their musical style " really innovative " . 
 Williams felt music lacked energy , citing Limp Bizkit 's " Nookie " as the last energetic record . Williams suggested his engineer , Andrew Coleman , to " put the drums and bass on the right , keys in the middle , and the <unk> guitar and backgrounds on the left " . Coleman denied his request , saying , " those systems were different back then . If we do that , you 'll be in a club and all you will hear on one side of the club is drums and on the other side , just chords . " 
 The Hives ' members - Chris Dangerous ( drums / percussion ) , Nicholaus Arson ( guitar ) , Vigilante <unk> ( guitar ) , Dr. Matt Destruction ( bass ) - contributed instrumentals on " Time For Some Action " and " Windows " , with The Hives ' frontman Howlin ' Pelle <unk> providing guest vocals on " Time For Some Action " . On Seeing Sounds they are credited with their real names instead of the pseudonyms they use within the band . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In promotion of the album , N.E.R.D performed in Kanye West 's Glow in the Dark Tour as well as the Isle of Wight Festival . The band also performed at the Austin City Limits festival , where they encouraged fans to dance on stage and urged them to vote in the 2008 United States elections . The song " Spaz " was used for commercials for the Zune Pass . The band performed at Vanderbilt University 's Rites of Spring Music Festival in April . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album debuted at number seven on the U.S. Billboard 200 , selling 80 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It peaked in the top 20 in Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , while also charting in the several other regions , including Austria , Belgium , France and Italy . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , the album received generally mixed reviews from most music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 64 , based on 19 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Some writers noted and praised the heavy use of electronic , bass and funk beats , while others suggest The Neptunes were unable to blend R & B and rock . Anthony Henriques of PopMatters lauded the production , saying that " their signature drums and spaced @-@ out samples sound as good as ever here " , going on to say " [ t ] he overall balance between live and electronic instrumentation is also the best they have managed on any of the N.E.R.D. albums " . He compared the album to M.I.A. ' s Kala as " one of the best genre @-@ blurring club records " . However , Andy Kellman of Allmusic felt the songs " still have a way of seeming as easy and carefree as the moments when N.E.R.D. are simply bashing away … blowing off steam , and talking ridiculous nonsense " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian pointed out that the songs were " largely about sex " , calling it " wearisome " . Ian Cohen of Pitchfork Media called the album a " baffling , obnoxious mess " . Adrian <unk> of Okayplayer gave the album a score of 88 out of 100 and called some of the songs " a dynamic mess " , but noted it was " a good thing " . 
 Some critics argued that the album was their most consistent and strongest album to date . Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone felt that the album was " experimental and expansive " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine felt that the album lacked " freshness or spontaneity " that was found in the band 's debut album , calling only two songs on the album " very visionary " . Jim Farber of the Daily News criticized Williams , saying " Even aided by studio correction , the guy can 't sing " , calling it " bad singing at its engaging best " . Cohen of Pitchfork Media bashed the lyrics , saying that the writing was " far down the list of what N.E.R.D. is actually good at " . Hoard of Rolling Stone felt he learned nothing from the lyrics except that Williams was sexually aroused . Henriques of PopMatters noted that Williams is not a " technically gifted rapper " , he " does not have a beautiful voice " and his lyrics are " typically inconsequential in a ' saying shit just to sound cool ' sort of way " , but found strengths in his choruses , which he pointed out " typically use a catchy phrase or recognizable melody as an anchor for his nonsensical verses " . Dan Charnas of The Washington Post commended N.E.R.D for their songwriting , writing that Seeing Sounds " combines the adolescent and clever " . The Times writer Priya Elan gave the album 4 out of 5 stars and wrote that band is " pushing the boundaries of the popular song " . In his Consumer Guide , Robert Christgau gave the album a three @-@ star honorable mention ( ) and stated , " Beats of course , songs usually , singing <unk> sincere @-@ type singing " ; he also picked out two songs from the album : " Anti @-@ Matter " and " Everyone Nose ( All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom ) " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart history = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = General Philip Sheridan = 
 General Philip Sheridan is a bronze sculpture that honors Civil War general Philip Sheridan . The monument was sculpted by Gutzon Borglum , best known for his design of Mount Rushmore . Dedicated in 1908 , dignitaries in attendance at the unveiling ceremony included President Theodore Roosevelt , members of the President 's cabinet , high @-@ ranking military officers and veterans from the Civil War and Spanish – American War . The equestrian statue is located in the center of Sheridan Circle in the Sheridan @-@ Kalorama neighborhood of Washington , D.C. The bronze statue , surrounded by a plaza and park , is one of eighteen Civil War monuments in Washington , D.C. , which were collectively listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The sculpture and surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Philip Sheridan was a career United States Army officer who was instrumental in securing Union successes during the Valley Campaigns of 1864 , most notably the Battle of Cedar Creek . Many of the Union generals would eventually be memorialized in Washington , D.C. , with statues spread throughout the city . While looking at one of his comrade 's equestrian sculptures , Sheridan was not impressed with the depiction of the man and horse . He reportedly told his wife " Whatever you do after I 'm gone , don 't put me on a horse like that . " Following her husband 's death in 1888 , when an equestrian sculpture of her husband was being planned , Irene Sheridan insisted the horse be as " proud and courageous as its rider . " 
 On March 2 , 1889 , Congress authorized the erection of a memorial to Sheridan and appropriated $ 50 @,@ 000 for its construction . The original sculptor chosen to complete the project was Sheridan 's friend John Quincy Adams Ward , who had completed other works in Washington , D.C. , including Major General George Henry Thomas and the James A. Garfield Monument . Ward signed a contract with the Sheridan monument commission in 1892 which called for the equestrian statue to be completed by 1898 . He submitted a sketch of the model in 1892 , but that design was not approved . Not only did Ward not complete the work by 1898 , he had only completed a life @-@ size study of Sheridan 's head by 1903 . Ward finally completed a model of Sheridan , but when Irene and her son , Philip Sheridan Jr . , visited Ward 's studio in New York to see the model , they both hated it . He was depicted as a stout older officer atop a stilted horse . The commission eventually cancelled the contract with Ward in 1905 . His model of Sheridan was eventually cast in 1916 and stands in front of the New York State Capitol . 
 Gutzon Borglum had closely followed the events surrounding Ward 's procrastination and firing as the two men had an argumentative past . Borglum was convinced he could do a better job with the design and he also needed the money . He set out to study as much as possible about Sheridan 's life by reading his memoirs and biographies . Borglum was able to secure an invitation to a Washington , D.C. party that Irene attended . He sat next to her and invited Irene to his studio in New York . Borglum set out models of horses throughout the studio before she arrived and surprised Irene by how much he know about her husband . At the behest of Irene , on July 2 , 1907 , Borglum received a contract to sculpt the memorial . He was a Danish American artist who was greatly influenced by French sculptor Auguste Rodin . Borglum is best known for his carvings at Mount Rushmore and Stone Mountain . The Sheridan sculpture is his only equestrian monument in Washington , D.C. Borglum 's other works in Washington , D.C. include <unk> at Rock Creek Cemetery and several statues in the National Statuary Hall Collection in the United States Capitol . 
 On January 17 , 1908 , Borglum 's design received approval by the Sheridan monument commission , including then @-@ Secretary of War William Howard Taft , General Henry C. Corbin , and Brigadier General Michael V. Sheridan , Philip Sheridan 's brother . Irene also approved the design and chose the memorial site . She lived at <unk> Massachusetts Avenue NW ( currently offices for the Embassy of Greece ) , a short distance from Sheridan Circle and the sculpture . As Borglum worked on the sculpture , he would talk to Sheridan 's friends , sketch Sheridan 's artifacts , and visit Irene . Since Philip Jr. bore a very close resemblance to his father , Borglum used him as a model for the sculpture . When the artwork was completed , Irene , Philip Jr . , and Sheridan 's three daughters loved the finished result . The sculpture depicts Sheridan riding his horse , Rienzi , as he assembles his troops during the Battle of Cedar Creek on October 19 , 1864 . He had raced 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Winchester , Virginia , to reach the battle . Following the Union victory , Sheridan renamed the horse Winchester . After Winchester died in 1878 , Sheridan had him preserved and mounted . The horse is now on display at the National Museum of American History . Congress paid for the plaza , base , and preparation of the memorial site , while veterans of the Army of the Cumberland paid for the statue . Architect Henry Winslow designed the base and setting . The stonework was provided by the Mohegan Granite Company of New York while the <unk> Stone Company of Washington , D.C. set the stones in place . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The Sheridan memorial was dedicated on November 25 , 1908 . A large crowd was present with many dignitaries in attendance , including President Theodore Roosevelt , military officers , diplomats , and veterans of the Civil War and Spanish – American War . A processions of troops led by Brigadier General J. Franklin Bell paraded past the crowd and dignitaries while the United States Marine Band played music . Secretary of War Luke E. Wright presided over the dedication ceremony and Denis J. O 'Connell , rector of The Catholic University of America , delivered the invocation . Roosevelt , Brigadier General Horace Porter , and Wright gave eulogies of Sheridan . Roosevelt gave a short speech praising Sheridan 's valiant acts while Porter 's speech was an in depth review of Sheridan 's life , including his days at West Point and his campaigns during the Civil War and American Indian Wars . After Irene and Philip Jr. removed the covering of the statue , the crowd cheered loudly and many began to recite Thomas Buchanan Read 's poem , Sheridan 's Ride . 
 = = = Historic designation = = = 
 Along with seventeen other Civil War monuments , General Philip Sheridan was added to the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) on September 20 , 1978 , and the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites on March 3 , 1979 . The Sheridan monument is also designated a contributing property to the Massachusetts Avenue Historic District , listed on the NRHP in 1974 , and the Sheridan @-@ Kalorama Historic District , listed on the NRHP in 1989 . The sculpture and the surrounding park are owned and maintained by the National Park Service , a federal agency of the Interior Department . 
 = = Design and location = = 
 The bronze equestrian sculpture is at the center of Sheridan Circle , a traffic circle located at the intersection of 23rd Street , R Street and Massachusetts Avenue NW within the Embassy Row section of the Sheridan @-@ Kalorama neighborhood . It measures 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) long while the rectangular granite base measures 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high . The horse is slightly reared back while standing on a rocky surface . Sheridan is turned to his right with his right arm extended behind him . The right hand is holding his hat while his left hand holds the horse 's reins . Sheridan is wearing a military uniform with a long coat belted at the waist and is portrayed with a moustache and wavy hair . The sculpture is surrounded by a plaza measuring 37 feet ( 11 m ) long with five steps on the front and back leading to the sculpture . Curved benches run along the interior of the plaza facing the sculpture while the exterior of the plaza features two pairs of lion head fountain spouts . Water poured from the spouts into square basins , but this feature is no longer working . 
 Inscriptions on the monument include the following : 
 <unk> <unk> 1908 ( left side of the sculpture ) 
 <unk> CO FOUNDERS ( right side of the sculpture near the base ) 
 <unk> ( front side of the base ) 
 = Inside Out ( 2015 film ) = 
 Inside Out is a 2015 American 3D computer @-@ animated comedy @-@ drama adventure film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . The film was directed by Pete Docter and co @-@ directed by Ronnie del Carmen , with a screenplay by Docter , Meg LeFauve and Josh Cooley from a story by Docter and del Carmen . The film is set in the mind of a young girl named Riley Andersen ( Kaitlyn Dias ) , where five personified emotions — Joy ( Amy Poehler ) , Sadness ( Phyllis Smith ) , Anger ( Lewis Black ) , Fear ( Bill Hader ) , and Disgust ( Mindy Kaling ) — try to lead her through life as her parents ( Diane Lane and Kyle MacLachlan ) move from Minnesota to San Francisco and she has to adjust to her new surroundings . 
 Docter first began developing Inside Out in 2009 after noticing changes in his daughter 's personality as she grew older . The film 's producers consulted numerous psychologists , including Dacher Keltner from the University of California , Berkeley , who helped revise the story by emphasizing the neuropsychological findings that human emotions affect interpersonal relationships and can be significantly moderated by them . 
 After premiering at the 68th Cannes Film Festival in May , Inside Out was released in North America on June 19 , 2015 , accompanied by the short film Lava directed by James Ford Murphy . Critics praised the film 's concept , screenplay , subject matter , musical score , and the vocal performances — particularly for Poehler , Smith , and Richard Kind . The film grossed $ 90 @.@ 4 million in its first weekend — the highest opening for an original title at the time . It accumulated over $ 857 million in worldwide box office revenue . Inside Out has received several awards , including a BAFTA Award , Golden Globe Award , Critics ' Choice Award , Annie Award , Satellite Award and Academy Award for Best Animated Feature . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A girl named Riley Andersen is born in Minnesota and within her mind , five personifications of her basic emotions — Joy , Sadness , Fear , Disgust , and Anger — gradually come to life and influence her actions via a console in her mind 's Headquarters . As she grows up , her experiences become memories , stored in colored orbs , which are sent into long @-@ term memory each night . Her five most important " core memories " ( all of which are happy ones ) are housed in a hub that powers " islands " , each reflecting an aspect of her personality . In Headquarters , Joy acts as a de facto leader to maintain Riley 's cheerful childhood , but since she and the other emotions do not understand Sadness ' purpose ( not even Sadness herself ) , she frequently tries to keep Sadness away from the console . 
 At the age of eleven , Riley and her parents move to San Francisco for her father 's new business . Riley has poor first experiences : the new house is cramped and old , the moving van with all their belongings was misdirected , her father is under stress from his business , and a poor encounter at a pizza restaurant leaves her disheartened . When Sadness begins touching Riley 's happy memories , turning them sad , Joy tries to guard them by isolating her . On Riley 's first day at her new school , Sadness accidentally causes Riley to cry in front of her class , creating a sad core memory . Joy , panicking , tries to dispose of it , but accidentally knocks the other core memories loose during a struggle with Sadness , deactivating the personality islands . Joy , Sadness , and the core memories are sucked out of Headquarters , and taken to the maze @-@ like storage area of long @-@ term memory . 
 The other emotions try to maintain Riley 's happiness in Joy 's absence with disastrous results , distancing her from her parents , friends and hobbies , resulting in her personality islands gradually beginning to crumble and fall , one by one , into the " Memory Dump " , an abyss where memories are forgotten . In desperation , Anger inserts an idea into the console prompting Riley to run away , believing that her return to Minnesota will enable her to make new happy core memories . 
 Joy and Sadness encounter Bing Bong , Riley 's childhood imaginary friend , who suggests riding the train of thought back to Headquarters . The three eventually catch the train , but it is derailed when the " Honesty Island " collapses ( when Riley steals her mother 's credit card and begins to run away ) . In desperation , Joy abandons Sadness and tries to ride a " recall tube " back to Headquarters , but the last personality island collapses , breaking the tube , plunging Joy and Bing Bong into the Memory Dump . At the bottom , Joy then begins to lose hope , but discovers a sad memory of a hockey game that becomes happy when Riley 's parents and friends comfort her . Joy realizes that Sadness serves an important purpose : to create empathy in others when Riley is emotionally overwhelmed and needs help . 
 Joy and Bing Bong try to use Bing Bong 's old wagon rocket to escape the Memory Dump , but after several tries , Bing Bong realizes their combined weight is too much and jumps out , sacrificing himself to allow Joy to escape . Joy reunites with a despondent Sadness and manages to get them to Headquarters , only to discover that Anger 's idea has disabled the console , rendering Riley apathetic . To the surprise of the others , Joy hands control of the console to Sadness , who is able to successfully extract the idea , reactivating the console and prompting Riley to return home . 
 As Sadness <unk> the core memories , turning them sad , Riley arrives home to her parents and breaks down in tears , confessing that she misses her childhood in Minnesota . As her parents comfort her , Joy and Sadness work the console together , creating a new core memory that combines their emotions ; a new island forms representing Riley 's acceptance of her new life in San Francisco . A year later , Riley has adapted to her new home , made new friends , returned to her old hobbies , and adopted a few new ones ( fueled by new , more nuanced core memories from combinations of her emotions ) . Inside Headquarters , her emotions all work together on a new expanded console with room for them all , enabling Riley to lead a more emotionally complex life . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Several of the film 's creators also contributed some voice acting , including director Pete Docter as Father 's Anger and Pizza Girl 's Anger , and co @-@ director Ronnie del Carmen as one of the abstract thought mind workers . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As a child , director Pete Docter relocated with his family to Denmark when his father moved to study the music of Carl Nielsen . While his sisters had an easy time adjusting to the new surroundings , Docter felt he was judged constantly by peers . While other kids were interested in sports , Docter sat alone drawing , a hobby that eventually led him to animation . His social anxiety ended by high school . 
 In late 2009 , Docter noticed his pre @-@ teen daughter , Elie , exhibiting similar shyness . " She started getting more quiet and reserved , and that , frankly , triggered a lot of my own insecurities and fears , " he said . He imagined what happens in the human mind when emotions set in . The idea to depict it through animation excited Docter , who felt it the ideal form to portray " strong , opinionated , caricatured personalities . " He began researching information about the mind , alongside Jonas Rivera , a producer , and Ronnie del Carmen , a secondary director . They consulted Paul Ekman , a well @-@ known psychologist who studies emotions , and Dacher Keltner , a professor of psychology at the University of California , Berkeley . Ekman had early in his career identified six core emotions — anger , fear , sadness , disgust , joy , and surprise . Docter found surprise and fear to be too similar , which left him with five emotions to build characters around . Other emotions considered for inclusion during the development process were schadenfreude , ennui , pride , and hope . Keltner focused on sadness being an emotion that strengthens relationships . Both emphasized how emotions organize social lives and the structuring of interpersonal interactions . 
 The smash success of Docter 's 2009 film Up encouraged those at Pixar to allow Docter to create another film with a more sophisticated story . Inside Out is the first Pixar film without input from co @-@ founder and former Apple CEO Steve Jobs , who died in 2011 . It also lacked extensive input from John Lasseter , who was more focused on restructuring Walt Disney Animation Studios in Los Angeles at the time of its production . Executives at Disney and Pixar were positive at the proposal of making Inside Out , but acknowledged it would be difficult to market . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Docter recruited a story crew to help develop the film 's plot line . Although animation as an industry had been dominated by men , half of the story crew were women , in an attempt to have more diverse input . The choice to focus the film on a girl came from research that claimed that females age 11 to 17 are more attuned to expressions and emotions than others . The idea to have Riley play hockey came from Del Carmen , who observed that the sport is very popular in Minnesota . They tried to stray away from stereotypically feminine interests , such as the color pink or dresses . Initial ideas for the film found the main character , Riley , falling into a deep depression : Docter later felt they were inappropriate and scrapped them , although in the final film Riley does sink into a depression . 
 The film was first storyboarded over a period of two to three years , all the while undergoing screenings for Pixar 's " Brain Trust " , a small group of creative leaders at Pixar who oversee development on all films . After multiple screenings and suggestions from other filmmakers , the picture was put into production . It was again evaluated three months into that process . Kevin Nolting , editor of the film , estimated there were seven versions of Inside Out created before it even went into production . The story team attempted to create as much contrast with characters as possible . They found Joy the most complex character to write for , as she illustrates a broad range of " happy feelings " . The earliest idea present in the final film is that Joy holds onto youth too long , setting about a " social storm " for Riley . It was not until several screenings later that they came upon the concept of moving to a new place , which created an external conflict that made the story easier to write . Initially , this crisis was to be set at a Thanksgiving Day pageant , in which Riley was hoping to be cast as its lead role , the turkey . Docter later deemed this idea too " bizarre " and it was replaced . 
 Docter estimated it took four years of development for the film to achieve success in marrying the architecture of Riley 's mind and her personal troubles . The concept of " personality islands " helped develop the film 's emotional stakes , as they directly affect events inside her mind and in her life . In one draft , the characters fell into " Idea Fields " , where they would " cultivate new ideas " , much like a farmer would cultivate crop . The character of Bing Bong — a discarded old imaginary friend — came about in one draft of the film as part of a refugee camp inside Riley 's mind . It was difficult to achieve the correct tone for the film ; for example , viewers could not be distracted by Joy 's nature or feel negative about the mess she helps steer Riley into . Rivera credited the casting of Amy Poehler , in addition to the idea of moving , with helping the film find the right tone . 
 An early version of the film focused on Joy and Fear getting lost together , as it seemed to be the most humorous choice . By July 2012 , the project was set for an evaluation screening with other Pixar filmmakers . Docter gradually began to feel that the story was not working , which led to fears that he might be fired . He took a long walk at his home one Sunday , in which he began to consider himself a failure , his previous successes " flukes " , and a general sense that he should resign from the film . While pondering what he would miss about Pixar , he concluded that he would miss his coworkers and friends most of all . He soon reached a breakthrough : that emotions are meant to connect people together , and that relationships are the most important things in life . He decided to replace Fear with Sadness , which he felt is crucial to renewal . He met with Rivera and Del Carmen that night to explain his change of plans , and to his surprise , they reacted positively to it . At the screening , he informed his superiors that new plans for the film were in order . Although a " scary moment " , the film remained in production . 
 Josh Cooley and Meg LeFauve were credited as co @-@ writers of the screenplay following their contributions during the rewrite . Like Docter , Cooley and LeFauve included experiences with raising their own children into the screenplay . Cooley said " ... we treated the emotions like parents for Riley and because all of us in the writing room are parents ourselves , we just reflected on our own experiences as parents to create the characters . " 
 Screenwriter Michael Arndt worked for a year on the film 's script , calling it " both a brilliantly creative idea but also incredibly challenging , " but left the project in early 2011 , adding that " knowing the Pixar process , there may not be a single word [ I wrote ] that remains in the final script ! They 've had writers work on it since then . " Despite his departure , Arndt received an ' Additional Story Material ' credit . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The film 's voice cast of emotions , Amy Poehler , Lewis Black , Mindy Kaling , Bill Hader , and Phyllis Smith , were first announced in August 2013 . With the release of the film 's trailer in December 2014 , it was revealed that Diane Lane and Kyle MacLachlan were cast in the film as Riley 's parents . 
 Hader , who had previously cameoed in Monsters University , was cast to voice Fear , a role that he felt he " <unk> " his way into by being a " huge fan " of Pixar 's filmography . Hader toured the studio over a week , and also " helped out " in the story room . He was invited to play Fear by the end of his stay there , but was also asked to contact fellow Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) veteran Amy Poehler , whom the team viewed as perfect for the character of Joy . " They said : ' Would you mind calling Amy ? We don 't want to call her and have her think we 're some weirdo , ' " he recalled . He phoned Poehler and explained the story to her , noting that her role would be the driving force in the film . When the story was pitched to Kaling , she broke down in tears , explaining " I just think it 's really beautiful that you guys are making a story that tells kids that it 's difficult to grow up and it 's OK to be sad about it . " 
 Smith was chosen by Rivera while he was watching Bad Teacher and saw her in a lunch scene . He called Docter and said " I think we found our Sadness . " As the film contains several veterans of SNL , the film 's team spent a week at that program for research on a live television sequence . 
 Richard Kind , who had previously starred in A Bug 's Life , the Cars series , and Toy Story 3 , portrayed Bing Bong . Kind tried to convey the same " sort of innocence " of his previous Pixar roles , and wound up not taking part in pre @-@ release promotion as the producers decided to keep the character a secret . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The film 's art design is intended to reflect 1950s Broadway musicals . Docter imagined that with emotions for characters , they could " push the level of caricature both in the design and in the style of movement to degrees [ they 'd ] never done before . " To this end , they emulated animators Tex Avery and Chuck Jones . Docter informed supervising animators Shawn Krause and Victor <unk> to push the graphic caricature of each character rather than sticking to the rigid behavior of each RenderMan model . This required an artist to draw over characters in the film during dailies , using a Wacom Cintiq . One of the first scenes the team worked on was the dinnertime scene , in which viewers rapidly switch between the real world and Headquarters inside the family 's minds . 
 In envisaging how the mind 's interior would be depicted , the filmmakers concentrated on the word electrochemical ; Ralph Eggleston , the film 's production designer , explained , " It meant thinking of things as energy or energy @-@ based , excitable . " Each emotion has a glowing , " effervescent quality " to them ( particularly Joy ) , which was difficult to animate as it could be viewed as distracting . " The characters are created with this energy because we are trying to represent what emotions would look like . They are made up of particles that actually move . Instead of being skin and solid , it is a massive collection of energy , " Docter remarked . The team worked for eight months on Joy 's " sparkly " aura , but was prepared to delete it , as it would affect the film 's budget . However , Lasseter requested that it be applied for each emotion . " You could hear the core technical staff just hitting the ground , the budget falling through the roof , " recalled Eggleston . 
 The film is localized to accommodate international audiences : In the Japanese version , for example , Riley is disgusted by green bell peppers , rather than by broccoli ( the only topping offered by the local pizzeria ) , to reflect the fact that broccoli is generally less undesirable to Japanese children . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Michael Giacchino composed the film 's score ; this was his fifth collaboration with Pixar and his second collaboration with Docter after Up . The producers first met with Giacchino to explain the film 's concept and screen it for him . In response , he composed an eight @-@ minute suite of music , unconnected to the film , based on his emotions viewing it . Rivera noted that while both Giacchino and Docter were musicians , they discussed the film in terms of story and character . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on June 16 , 2015 . 
 Track listing 
 All music composed by Michael Giacchino . 
 = = Release = = 
 Inside Out was first announced in August 2011 at the D23 Expo . In December 2012 , Bleeding Cool reported the title of the film would be The Inside Out , while ComingSoon.net reported it would be Inside Out the following February . In April 2013 , Disney officially announced the title on Twitter as Inside Out , during CinemaCon . Prior to its release , the film underwent a test screening for children , due to concerns from executives that it would be too complex for younger audiences — a fear quelled when the audience reacted positively to the picture . 
 The film premiered on May 18 , 2015 , at the 68th Cannes Film Festival , in an out @-@ of @-@ competition screening . In the United States , it premiered on June 8 , 2015 , at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , and received a wide theatrical release starting on June 19 , 2015 , in 2D , 3D , and select IMAX 3D theatres . It was the first animated movie to be released in Dolby Vision format in Dolby Cinema and the second for Disney following Tomorrowland . Also notable was the fact that it was one of two feature films ( the other being The Good Dinosaur ) released by Pixar in the same calendar year , a first for the company . 
 A short animated film , titled Lava , accompanied Inside Out during its theatrical release . This musical love story was directed by James Ford Murphy and produced by Andrea Warren . The story was inspired by the isolated beauty of tropical islands and the explosive allure of ocean volcanoes , and takes place over millions of years . 
 On June 18 , 2015 , Skype added faces of the five " emotions " of the film as emoticons available for use in its IM service for the next three months . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Inside Out was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray ( 2D and 3D ) and DVD on November 3 , 2015 , while a digital release was released on October 13 , 2015 . The Pixar 's theatrical short , Lava , was included . A short film set in the world of Inside Out , titled Riley 's First Date ? , and directed by Josh Cooley , the head of story on the film , was included exclusively in the Blu @-@ ray and the digital release . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 An Inside Out play set featuring all five emotions as playable characters was made available for Disney Infinity 3 @.@ 0 . 
 A mobile game , Inside Out : Thought Bubbles , was released on June 18 , 2015 by Disney Mobile Games on Apple App Store , Google Play , Amazon Appstore , Windows Store and Windows Phone Store . Playing as Riley 's emotions , players have to match and sort memory bubbles through 485 levels ( as of May 2016 ) inspired by the film 's locations . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Inside Out grossed $ 356 @.@ 5 million in North America and $ 501 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 857 @.@ 4 million , against a budget of $ 175 million . It is the second highest @-@ grossing 2015 animated film , the seventh highest @-@ grossing film of 2015 , the third highest @-@ grossing Pixar film , the 11th highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time , and the 49th highest @-@ grossing film overall ( with the latter four rankings not adjusted for inflation ) . Deadline.com calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 279 @.@ 51 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Inside Out opened across 3 @,@ 946 theaters in the United States and Canada , of which 3 @,@ 100 showed the film in 3D . It grossed $ 3 @.@ 7 million during its Thursday @-@ night showings . This was a record among Pixar films that had Thursday @-@ night showings , but behind Toy Story 3 's $ 4 million midnight showing . The film then earned $ 34 @.@ 2 million on its opening day , which is the second @-@ largest opening day for a Pixar film behind Toy Story 3 ( $ 41 @.@ 1 million ) . It ended its opening weekend in second place with $ 90 @.@ 4 million , behind the second @-@ weekend gross of dinosaur thriller Jurassic World ( $ 106 @.@ 6 million ) . Although it was Pixar 's first film not to debut at No. 1 , its opening weekend gross was still the biggest for a Pixar original film ( breaking The Incredibles ' record ) , the studio 's second @-@ biggest of all time ( behind Toy Story 3 ) , the biggest weekend debut for a film that did not debut at No. 1 ( breaking The Day After Tomorrow 's record ) , and the top opening for any original film , live @-@ action or otherwise , not based on sourced material , eclipsing the $ 77 million debut of Avatar ( overtaken by The Secret Life of Pets ) . The film 's successful opening has been attributed to its Cannes premiere , CinemaCon press screening , its 98 % Rotten Tomatoes score , good word @-@ of @-@ mouth , Father 's Day weekend and a successful Tuesday night Fathom screening . In its second weekend , the film fell by 42 % to $ 52 @.@ 3 million and still held the second spot behind Jurassic World . The rest of the week saw it slightly ahead of the latter . Inside Out reached the No. 1 spot at the box office on its third weekend with $ 29 @.@ 8 million . Overall , IMAX contributed 10 % or $ 36 million ( as of September 4 , 2015 ) of its total North American revenue . It ended up grossing a total of $ 356 @.@ 5 million and became the second highest @-@ grossing Pixar film ( behind Toy Story 3 ) , the fourth highest @-@ grossing film of 2015 , the seventh highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time , the highest of 2015 , and the 32nd highest @-@ grossing film in Canada and the United States ( not adjusted for inflation ) . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Outside North America , the film earned an estimated $ 40 @.@ 3 million on its opening weekend from 37 countries , which is 42 % of the entire international market . Its largest openings were recorded in China ( $ 11 @.@ 7 million ) ; the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 11 @.@ 4 million ) ; Mexico ( $ 8 @.@ 6 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 7 @.@ 6 million ) , Italy ( $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) , Germany ( $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) , and South Korea ( $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) . In total earnings , its largest markets outside the U.S. and Canada are the United Kingdom ( $ 58 @.@ 1 million ) , South Korea ( $ 31 @.@ 7 million ) , and Mexico ( $ 31 million ) . It became the highest @-@ grossing Disney or Pixar animated film of all time in Mexico ( ahead of Frozen ) , the Philippines ( ahead of Big Hero 6 ) , India , and Ukraine and in Russia , it is the second highest @-@ grossing Disney or Pixar film and the first Pixar film to exceed one billion rubles . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Inside Out received widespread critical acclaim . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 98 % , based on 317 reviews , with a rating average of 8 @.@ 9 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Inventive , gorgeously animated , and powerfully moving , Inside Out is another outstanding addition to the Pixar library of modern animated classics . " The film also topped the site 's Top 100 Animation Movies list and occupies the highest position of a film released in the 21st century on the Top 100 Movies of All Time list at number 8 . On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating , the film has a score of 94 out of 100 , based on 48 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " . In CinemaScore polls , cinema audiences gave Inside Out an average score of " A " on an A + to F scale . 
 Prior to its release , there was concern among the general public that Pixar films were declining in quality , with an over @-@ reliance on sequels . Likewise , DreamWorks Animation was beginning to flounder in the early 2010s as several films performed below expectations at the box office , leading to speculation that the " genre " of computer animation was " in a funk " . Inside Out has been hailed as a return to form for Pixar by numerous film critics . 
 Following an advance screening at CinemaCon on April 22 , 2015 , the film was well received by audiences . Praise was aimed for its smart storyline , although some wondered whether the concept was too complicated for young audiences and to attract family crowds . After premiering at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival , the film attracted praise from film critics . Peter Debruge of Variety was effusive , calling it the studio 's " greatest idea " and " a stunningly original concept that [ ... ] promises to forever change the way people think about the way people think . " The Chicago Tribune 's Michael Phillips called it the studio 's best since Up ( also directed by Docter ) , a " consistently inventive and a heartening corrective to recent , stockholder @-@ driven <unk> . " Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter deemed it an " audacious concept " that stands among the most " conceptually trippy films " for family audiences . " With its quite literally cerebral bent , I think Inside Out might have some trouble fully connecting with younger kids , but grown @-@ ups are likely to shed more than a few tears , " remarked Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair . The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw felt it " buoyant and sweet @-@ natured " , though slightly inferior to Pixar 's best . Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club , while overall positive on the film , said it " trades the wordless gracefulness and sense of discovery of the animation studio 's best work for explanatory voice @-@ over and nonstop exposition , " also arguing that the Pixar animators could have been more visually adventurous to match the conceptual ambition . 
 As the film went into wide release , it continued to attract acclaim . Aside from naming it the best film of 2015 , Kristopher Tapley of HitFix called it as " one of the best films of the 21st century . " A. O. Scott of The New York Times deemed the film " an absolute delight " , reserving particular praise for its " defense of sorrow , an argument for the necessity of melancholy dressed in the bright colors of entertainment . " The Washington Post 's Ann Hornaday considered it " that rare movie that transcends its role as pure entertainment to become something genuinely cathartic , even therapeutic , giving children a symbolic language with which to manage their <unk> emotions . " Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times found it " bold , gorgeous , sweet , funny , [ and ] sometimes heartbreakingly sad , " deeming it one of the best films of the year . Entertainment Weekly 's Chris <unk> extolled it as " transcendent and touching [ ... ] so smart and psychologically clever . " Time 's Mary Pols felt it a " nearly hallucinogenic , entirely beautiful " work that " defies the conventions of family movies . " Christopher Orr of The Atlantic urged readers to view the picture , calling it " Pixar once again at the top of its game , telling the kind of thoughtful , moving meta @-@ story it 's hard to imagine being produced anywhere else . " Wai Chee Dimock in the Los Angeles Review of Books compared the film to the work of neuroscientists Antonio Damasio , Dacher Keltner , and Oliver Sacks . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Inside Out received 15 Best Picture , 21 Best Original Screenplay and 40 Best Animated Feature nominations from over 50 different organizations and associations . It won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay at the 88th Academy Awards held in 2016 . It received ten out of fourteen Annie Awards at the 43rd Annie Awards , including Outstanding Achievement in Directing in an Animated Feature Production for Docter , Outstanding Achievement in Voice Acting in an Animated Feature Production for Smith and Best Animated Feature . The American Film Institute selected Inside Out as one of the Top Ten Films of the year . 
 The film received the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film at the 73rd Golden Globe Awards . It received three Critics ' Choice Movie Award nominations including the win for Best Animated Feature . The New York Film Critics Circle awarded Inside Out Best Animated Film and it was named Film of the Year by National Board of Review with also winning Best Animated Film . The film was runner @-@ up for Best Animated Film at Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards and at San Diego Film Critics Society Awards . It received four nominations from Satellite Awards including Best Screenplay - Original , Best Animated or Mixed Media Feature and Best Original Score . It took the Satellite Award for Best Animated or Mixed Media Feature . The film won the award for Best Animated Film at the 69th British Academy Film Awards in London , England , and was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay ( losing to Spotlight ) . The film also received a Robert Award for Best American Film nomination and a David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film nomination , the Danish and Italian equivalent of the Academy Awards respectively . 
 Inside Out was named one of the best films of 2015 by over 100 critics and publications and was ranked second on Rotten Tomatoes and fourth on Metacritic 's best scored films of 2015 . According to Critics Top10 , the film appeared in 340 critics ' lists , with 27 of them giving the film the number one spot . It is among the most acclaimed films of 2015 alongside Mad Max : Fury Road , Carol , Spotlight , Room , and Brooklyn . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 On June 24 , 2015 , when asked about if there are plans for a possible sequel , Pete Docter explained that he had no current plans to create a sequel , stating , " There 's no sequel idea from me at this point , " but he also said , " Never say never . " On January 14 , 2016 , in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Docter stated that a sequel is possible , and that he and Pixar will explore ideas for a sequel , saying : " We 'll see if anything turns up . To me it 's not as simple as : ' We liked it , so let 's make another one . ' What happens is you design these characters not so much looks @-@ wise but as they are as character and people for a story . So we 'll explore it and see what happens . " However , in a July 2016 interview , Pixar 's president Jim Morris stated that while demand for a sequel is high , the company currently has committed their resources to several original movie concepts from 2019 onward , and that a sequel to Inside Out or other films will not happen any time soon . 
 = Wat Tyler Cluverius , Jr . = 
 Wat Tyler Cluverius , Jr . ( 12 December 1874 – 28 October 1952 ) was an admiral in the United States Navy and president of Worcester Polytechnic Institute . When he died , he was the last surviving officer of the sinking of the USS Maine . 
 An 1896 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , Cluverius joined the crew of the USS Maine in 1897 and was on board when the ship suffered an explosion in Havana Harbor in 1898 . The sinking of the Maine helped precipitate the Spanish – American War , a war in which Cluverius participated on a number of ships including USS Scorpion . During the Philippine – American War he served on the USS Solace . In 1914 , he took part in the United States occupation of Veracruz , commanding a battalion of bluejackets from the battleship USS North Dakota . During World War I he commanded the minelayer USS Shawmut , laying the anti @-@ submarine mine barrage across the North Sea , for which he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 Cluverius was Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy from 1919 to 1921 , and attended the Naval War College from 1921 to 1922 . He was aide to the Secretary of the Navy , Curtis D. Wilbur . Promoted to flag rank in 1928 , he was Commandant of the Norfolk Navy Yard from 1928 to 1930 , commanded Battleship Division Two the Scouting Fleet from June to November 1930 , and was Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief United States Fleet . He was commandant of the Ninth Naval District and the Fourth Naval District before retiring from the Navy on 1 January 1939 . In retirement , Cluverius became president of Worcester Polytechnic Institute , but returned to active duty during World War II as secretary of the Naval office of Public Information and as a member of the Navy Board of Production Awards . In this capacity he was involved in the conferring of Army @-@ Navy " E " Awards . 
 = = Naval career = = 
 Wat Tyler Cluverius , Jr. was born in New Orleans , Louisiana on 12 December 1874 , the son of Wat Tyler Cluverius , Sr. , and his wife Martha Lewis née Manning . He attended Tulane University before being appointed to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland , which he entered on 20 May 1892 . 
 In those days , naval cadets — the rank of midshipman would not exist for a few more years — by law had to serve for two years before they were eligible to take the examinations for the rank of ensign . Therefore , after graduation from the Naval Academy in June 1896 , Cluverius was posted to the cruiser USS Columbia . In 1897 joined the crew of the USS Maine . He was on board on 15 February 1898 when the ship suffered an explosion in Havana Harbor . Cluverius made his way out , splashing through water up to waist deep in the darkness , his path obstructed by wreckage . He joined other survivors on deck , and was rescued by the SS City of Washington . He was one of only 89 survivors , of whom 18 were officers . 
 The loss of the Maine helped precipitate the Spanish – American War . Cluverius saw action during the conflict on a number of ships including USS Scorpion , on which he participated in the Second Battle of Manzanillo and the bombardments of Santiago and <unk> . Commissioned as an ensign , he served in the Philippine – American War on the USS Solace in 1900 . He then served on the gunboat USS Newport . 
 In 1899 , he became engaged to Hannah Walker Sampson , the daughter of Rear Admiral William T. Sampson . The families knew each other well , and Cluverius was an usher at the wedding of Hannah 's sister Olive . On 5 April 1900 , they were married in a ceremony at the Boston Navy Yard . Their marriage produced two daughters , Elizabeth ( Betty ) and Martha , and a son , Wat Tyler Cluverius III . Not only did their son become a naval officer , but both daughters married naval officers , John S. Crenshaw and William S. Parsons respectively . Both sons in law later became admirals . 
 Cluverius served at the Naval Academy on court martial duty and as commander of the torpedo boat USS Talbot . He became commander of the gunboat USS Alvarado in June 1901 and then the USS Sandoval in October . He joined the torpedo boat USS Stockton in 1902 . The next year he was promoted to lieutenant and was posted to the battleship USS Maine , the namesake of the ship whose sinking he had survived in 1898 , as an engineering officer . He was involved with the 1904 sea trials of the cruisers USS Colorado and USS West Virginia before becoming senior engineer of the monitor USS Arkansas . In 1908 he became senior engineer of the newly commissioned USS Mississippi . 
 Shore duty followed in 1909 as a member of the Naval Examining Board of the Special Service Squadron . For a short time in 1910 , Cluverius was navigator of the USS Massachusetts , an old battleship now used as a training ship for midshipmen , before becoming Judge Advocate at the Court of Inquiry at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . He attended a conference of officers at the Naval War College in Newport , Rhode Island from May until August 1911 , and then became Inspection Officer at the New York Navy Yard . 
 Cluverius , now a lieutenant commander , was posted to the battleship USS North Dakota in March 1914 . From July to October 1914 , he took part in the United States occupation of Veracruz , commanding a battalion of bluejackets that was landed from the North Dakota . After returning to the ship he became its executive officer until July 1915 , when he became commander of the USS Dubuque . He was then posted back to the Naval Academy as an engineering instructor . 
 In November 1917 , Cluverius became responsible for the conversion of the steamer SS Massachusetts to a minelayer . The ship was commissioned on 7 December 1917 , and renamed USS Shawmut on 7 January 1918 . She steamed to Britain in June 1918 and spent the rest of World War I laying the anti @-@ submarine mine barrage across the North Sea . Shawmut laid 2 @,@ 970 anchored mines before returning to the United States In December 1918 , . He was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal " , for exceptionally meritorious service in a duty of great responsibility as Commanding Officer of the USS Shawmut , engaged in laying mines in the North Sea " . He also became an Officer of the French Legion of Honor , and Officer of the Belgian Order of Leopold and a Commander of the Norwegian Order of St. Olav . 
 Cluverius commanded the cruiser USS Baltimore from February until June 1919 , when he became Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy , a post he held until 1921 , when he left to attend the Naval War College . After graduating in 1922 , he became Chief of Staff of Commander Base Force , Pacific Fleet . He commanded the cruiser USS Seattle from June to December 1923 , when , following the usual pattern of sea duty alternating with shore duty , he was posted to the office of the Chief of Naval Operations . He became aide to the Secretary of the Navy , Curtis D. Wilbur . 
 Sea duty followed in 1926 as captain of the cruiser USS West Virginia . In 1928 , he was promoted to rear admiral . He was one of only five captains promoted that year , the others being Arthur <unk> Hepburn , Harry E. Yarnell , Albert Ware Marshall and Thomas <unk> Craven . He was Commandant of the Norfolk Navy Yard from 1928 to 1930 , and commanded Battleship Division Two ( <unk> ) of the Scouting Fleet from June to November 1930 . He then became Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief United States Fleet , Admiral Jehu V. Chase , who flew his flag from the battleship USS Texas , the ship on which his son in law Deak Parsons was also serving . 
 Cluverius was Commandant of the Ninth Naval District from 1932 to 1935 . As such , he was the US Navy representative at the Century of Progress World 's Fair in Chicago from 1933 to 1934 . His last sea command was the Base Force , United States Fleet , from 1935 to 1937 . In June 1937 he became Commandant Fourth Naval District and Philadelphia Navy Yard , a post he held until his retirement on 1 January 1939 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In retirement , Cluverius became president of Worcester Polytechnic Institute , in succession to Rear Admiral Ralph Earle , a Naval Academy classmate who died in February 1939 . Cluverius announced that his priority would be to complete the building program envisaged by his predecessor . He began with a footbridge which was named in Earle 's memory . 
 Cluverius returned to active duty during World War II as secretary of the Naval office of Public Information and as a member of the Navy Board of Production Awards . In this capacity he was involved in the conferring of Army @-@ Navy " E " Awards . In 1943 , Worcester was chosen as one of the colleges in the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program . He returned to Worcester in 1945 after the war ended . In 1951 , he oversaw the establishment of an ROTC unit on the campus . 
 On 28 October 1952 , Cluverius was returning by train from a Navy reunion in Philadelphia when he became so seriously ill that when the train stopped in New Haven he was taken to hospital , where he died . The last surviving officer of the USS Maine , he was buried in Arlington National Cemetery , with his wife Hannah , who died in 1938 . He was survived by his two daughters and his son . 
 = St. Clair Streett = 
 St. Clair Streett ( October 6 , 1893 – September 28 , 1970 ) , known as " Bill " , was a United States Air Force ( USAF ) major general and writer who first organized and led the Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) . Streett served as aide to air power advocate General Billy Mitchell , and was viewed by General of the Air Force Henry H. Arnold as his own personal " troubleshooter " . 
 Earlier in his career , Streett served in France during the last stages of World War I. In 1920 , he was awarded the Mackay Trophy and the Distinguished Flying Cross for leading a squadron of U.S. airmen on a pioneering air voyage from New York City to Nome , Alaska and back . Streett wrote of his squadron 's difficulties in an article for National Geographic . Streett assisted Mitchell during the famous bombing demonstration against battleships . After participating in several air races , he made an exploratory flight to extreme altitude during which he experienced frozen flight controls , and then wrote a story about the adventure for Popular Science . 
 During World War II , Streett commanded various training units in Hawaii , Florida and Colorado , solving logistical , training , and personnel problems . In Washington , D.C. , he led the Theater Group of the Operations Division in the Office of the Chief of Staff where he expressed grave misgivings about the role of General Douglas MacArthur in the Pacific War — some two years later Streett was sent to the South West Pacific Area to work under MacArthur commanding the Thirteenth Air Force during its first offensive drive . 
 With victory certain , Streett returned to the United States to organize for Arnold the Continental Air Forces ( CAF ) , and then to expand its operation across the country . Streett retained command when the CAF turned into the SAC , and continued to experience friction with MacArthur . After retiring from the United States Air Force in 1952 , Streett was named to the Sarnoff Commission , a presidential formation tasked with trimming unnecessary military spending . 
 = = Early career = = 
 St. Clair Streett was born in Washington , D.C. , the first child of Shadrach Watkins Streett and his wife , the former Lydia Ann Coggins . Streett was named for his grandfather , Dr. St. Clair Streett of Maryland . St. Clair is a family name originating from the mid @-@ 18th century when a Martha St. Clair married a John Streett in Maryland . 
