 = = = Conception and preproduction = = = 
 In the early 1990s , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old Motoki and his friend travelled to India ; just before going , at the friend 's recommendation he read Shin 'ya Fujiwara 's Memento Mori ( Latin for " remember that you will die " ) . While in India , he visited Varanasi , where he saw a ceremony in which the dead were cremated and their ashes floated down the Ganges . Witnessing this ceremony of death against a backdrop of bustling crowds going about their lives deeply affected Motoki . When he returned to Japan , he read numerous books on the subject of death , and in 1993 wrote a book on the relationship between life and death : Tenkuu <unk> — Hill Heaven . Among the books he read was Shinmon Aoki 's autobiographical Coffinman : The Journal of a Buddhist <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> Nikki ) , which exposed Motoki to the world of the nōkanshi for the first time . Motoki said he found a sense of mystery and near @-@ eroticism to the profession that he felt had an affinity with the film world . 
 Getting funding for the project was difficult because of the taboos against death , and the crew had to approach several companies before Departures was approved by Toshiaki Nakazawa and Yasuhiro Mase . According to the film 's director , Yōjirō Takita , a consideration in taking on the film was the age of the crew : " we got to a certain point in our lives when death was creeping up to become a factor around us " . Kundō Koyama was enlisted to provide the script , his first for a feature film ; his previous experience had been in scripting for television and stage . Takita , who had begun his career in the pink film genre before entering mainstream filmmaking in 1986 with Comic Magazine , took on the director 's role in 2006 , after producer Toshiaki Nakazawa presented him with the first draft of the script . In a later interview he stated " I wanted to make a film from the perspective of a person who deals with something so universal and yet is looked down upon , and even discriminated against " . Although he knew of the encoffining ceremony , he had never seen one performed . 
 Production of Departures took ten years , and the work was ultimately only loosely adapted from Coffinman ; later revisions of the script were worked on collaboratively by the cast and crew . Although the religious aspects of funerals were important in the source work , the film did not include them . This , together with the fact that filming was completed in Yamagata and not Aoki 's home prefecture of Toyama , led to tensions between the production staff and the author . Aoki expressed concern that the film was unable to address " the ultimate fate of the dead " . The first edition of the book was broken into three parts ; the third , " Light and Life " , was an essay @-@ like Buddhist musing on life and death , regarding the " light " seen when one perceived the integration of life and death , that is absent from the film . Aoki believed the film 's humanistic approach did away with the religious aspects that were central to the book — the emphasis on maintaining connections between the living and the dead that he felt only religion could provide — and refused to allow his name and that of his book to be used . For the new title , Koyama coined the term <unk> as a euphemism for nōkanshi , derived from the words <unk> ( " to send off " ) and hito ( " person " ) . 
 While the book and film share the same premise , the details differ considerably ; Aoki attributed these changes to the studio making the story more commercial . Both feature a protagonist who endures uneasiness and prejudice because of his job as a nōkanshi , undergoes personal growth as a result of his experiences , and finds new meaning in life when confronted with death . In both , the main character deals with societal prejudices and misunderstandings over his profession . In Coffinman , the protagonist was the owner of a pub @-@ café that had gone out of business ; during a domestic squabble his wife threw a newspaper at him , in which he found an ad for the nōkanshi position . He finds pride in his work for the first time when dealing with the body of a former girlfriend . Koyama changed the protagonist from a bar owner to cellist as he wanted cello orchestration for the film score . Other differences included moving the setting from <unk> to Yamagata for filming convenience , making the " letter @-@ stone " a greater part of the plot , and an avoidance of heavier scenes , such as religious ones and one in which Aoki talks of seeing " light " in a swarm of maggots . Koyama also added the subplot in which Daigo is able to forgive his late father ; taken from a novel he was writing , it was intended to close the story with " some sense of happiness " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Motoki , by then in his early 40s and having built a reputation as a realist , was cast as Daigo . Veteran actor Tsutomu Yamazaki was selected for the role of Sasaki ; Takita had worked with Yamazaki on We Are Not Alone ( 1993 ) . Although the character of Mika was initially planned as being the same age as Daigo , the role went to pop singer Ryōko Hirosue , who had previously acted in Takita 's Himitsu ( Secret ) in 1999 . Takita explained that a younger actress would better represent the lead couple 's growth out of naivety . In a 2009 interview , Takita stated that he had cast " everyone who was on my wish list " . 
 Motoki studied the art of encoffinment first @-@ hand from a mortician , and assisted in an encoffining ceremony ; he later stated that the experience imbued him with " a sense of mission ... to try to use as much human warmth as I could to restore [ the deceased ] to a lifelike presence for presentation to her family " . Motoki then drilled himself by practising on his talent manager until he felt he had mastered the procedure , one whose intricate , delicate movements he compared to those of the Japanese tea ceremony . Takita attended funeral ceremonies to understand the feelings of bereaved families , while Yamazaki never participated in the encoffinment training . Motoki also learned how to play a cello for the earlier parts of the film . 
 To provide realistic bodies while preventing the corpses from moving , after a lengthy casting process the crew chose extras who could lie as still as possible . For the bath house owner <unk> Yamashita , this was not possible owing to the need to see her alive first , and a search for a body double was unfruitful . Ultimately , the crew used digital effects to transplant a still image of the actor during the character 's funeral scene , allowing for a realistic effect . 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 The non @-@ profit organization Sakata Location Box was established in December 2007 to handle on @-@ location matters such as finding extras and negotiating locations . After deciding to shoot in Sakata , Location Box staff had two months to prepare for the eighty members of the film crew . Negotiations were slow , as many local property owners lost interest after learning that the filming would involve funeral scenes ; those who agreed insisted that shooting take place outside of business hours . 
 Toyama was both the setting of Coffinman and Takita 's home prefecture , but filming was done in Yamagata ; this was largely because the national <unk> Association , headquartered in Hokkaido , had a branch office in Sakata . Some preliminary scenes of snowy landscapes were shot in 2007 , and primary filming began in April 2008 , lasting 40 days . Locations included Kaminoyama , Sakata , Tsuruoka , <unk> , and <unk> . The NK Agent office was filmed in a three @-@ storey , Western @-@ style building in Sakata built between the mid @-@ Meiji and Taishō periods ( 1880s – 1920s ) . Originally a restaurant named <unk> Obata , it went out of business in 1998 . The <unk> ' café , called Concerto in the film , was located in Kaminoyama in a former beauty salon . From a hundred candidates , Takita chose it for its atmosphere as an aged building with a clear view of the nearby river and surrounding mountain range . The scene of the shooting of the training DVD took place in the Sakata Minato @-@ za , Yamagata 's first movie theatre , which had been closed since 2002 . 
 The soundtrack to Departures was by Joe Hisaishi , a composer who had gained international recognition for his work with Hayao Miyazaki and Studio Ghibli . Before shooting began , Takita asked him to prepare a soundtrack which would represent the separation between Daigo and his father , as well as the mortician 's love for his wife . Owing to the importance of cellos and cello music in the narrative , Hisaishi emphasized the instrument in his soundtrack ; he described the challenge of centring a score around the cello as one of the most difficult things he had ever done . This score was played during shooting , which according to Takita " allowed [ the crew ] to visualize many of the emotions in the film " and thus contributed to the quality of the finished work . 
 Upon completion , Takita declared Departures " perfect " , and praised the crew for their self @-@ reliance in developing the content and the humble , " hand @-@ made " quality of the film . That the film 's initial success depended largely on word @-@ of @-@ mouth was also a source of pride for the director . Coffinman author Shinmon Aoki praised Motoki 's performance and the film 's ability to show the importance of family and interpersonal connections , despite his disappointment at the dropping of the story 's religious aspect . 
 = = Style = = 
 As they are the movie 's " central dramatic piece " , the encoffining ceremonies in Departures have received extensive commentary . Mike Scott , for instance , wrote in The Times @-@ Picayune that these scenes were beautiful and heartbreaking , and Nicholas Barber of The Independent described them as " elegant and dignified " . James Adams of The Globe and Mail wrote that they were a " dignified ritual of calming , hypnotic grace , with sleights of hand bordering on the <unk> " . As the film continues , Paul Byrnes of The Sydney Morning Herald opined , the audience gains an improved knowledge of the ceremony and its importance . Viewers see that the ceremonies are not simply about preparing the body , but also about " bring [ ing ] dignity to death , respect to the deceased and solace to those who grieve " , through which the encoffiners are able to help repair broken family ties and heal damage done to those left behind . 
 There is an idealization of the nōkanshi as presented in the film . In all but one case , the dead are either young or already made @-@ up , such that " the viewer can easily tolerate these images on the screen " . The one corpse that had not been found for several days is never shown on screen . No bodies show the gaunt figure of one who has died after a long illness , or the cuts and bruises of an accident victim . Japanologist Mark R. Mullins writes that the gratitude shown in Departures would probably not have occurred in real life ; according to Coffinman , there " is nothing lower on the social scale than the mortician , and the truth of the matter is that [ the Japanese people ] fear the <unk> and the cremator just as much as death and the corpse " . 
 In a montage , scenes of Daigo playing his childhood cello while sitting outdoors are interspersed with scenes of encoffining ceremonies . Byrnes believes that this scene was meant to increase the emotional charge of the film , and Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times considered it a " beautiful fantasy scene " through which the camera is " granted sudden freedom " from the generally standard shots . Yoshiko Okuyama of the University of Hawaii at Hilo found that Daigo 's deft movements while playing the cello mirrored the high level of professionalism which he had reached . Several reviewers , such as Leigh Paatsch of the Herald Sun , questioned the need for the shot . Throughout the film 's soundtrack , cello music remains dominant . Takita drew parallels between the instrument and the encoffining ceremony , stating that 
 ... ironically , there is something similar between the process of encoffinment and the act of playing the cello . When you play the cello , the instrument has a human , curvaceous form . The cellist embraces that form when playing the instrument , very loving , affectionate . That 's very similar , physically , to the actions of the <unk> , cradling the body , being tender and gentle with it . 
 Byrnes found that Departures used the symbol of the cherry blossom , a flower which blooms after the winter only to wither soon afterwards , to represent the transience of life ; through this understanding , he wrote , Japanese people attempt to define their own existence . Natural symbols are further presented through the changing seasons , which " suggest delicate emotional changes " in the characters , as well as the letter @-@ stones , which represent " love , communication , [ and ] the baton being passed from generation to generation " . The film 's settings are used to convey various sensations , including the solitude of the countryside and the intimacy of the public bath house . The colour white , manifested through snow , chrysanthemums , and other objects , is prominent in the film ; Okuyama suggests that this , together with the classical music and ritualized hand gestures , represents the sacredness and purity of the death ceremonies . 
 Departures incorporates aspects of humour , an " unexpected " complement to the theme of death which Ebert suggested may be used to mask the audience 's fears . Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times opines that , through this use of humour , the film avoids becoming too dark and instead acts as a " warmhearted blend " of whimsy and irony . This humour manifests in a variety of manners , such as a scene in which " a mortified Daigo , naked except for a pair of adult diapers , is the reluctant model " for an educational video regarding the encoffining process , as well as a scene in which Daigo discovers that the person he is preparing is a trans woman . Takita stated that the addition of humour was deliberate , as " humans are comical by nature " , and that the humour did not conflict with the film 's darker themes . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Several critics discussed the theme of death found in Departures . Scott highlighted the contrast between the taboo of death and the value of jobs related to it . He also noted the role of the <unk> in showing " one last act of compassion " by presenting the dead in a way which preserved proud memories of their life . Initially , Daigo and his family are unable to overcome the taboos and their squeamishness when faced with death . Daigo is alienated from his wife and friends owing to traditional values . Ultimately it is through his work with the dead that Daigo finds fulfilment , and , as Peter Howell of the Toronto Star concluded , viewers realize that " death may be the termination of a life , but it 's not the end of humanity " . Okuyama writes that , in the end , the film ( and the book on which it was based ) serves as a " quiet yet persistent protest " against the discrimination which people who deal with death continue to face in modern Japan : death is a normal part of life , not something repulsive . 
 Along with this theme of death , Takita believed Departures was about life , about finding a lost sense of feeling human ; Daigo gains a greater perspective on life and comes to know the diversity of people 's lives only after encountering them in death . This life includes family bonds : Daigo 's coming to terms with his father is a major motif , encoffinment scenes focus on the living family members rather than the dead , and even in the NK Agent office , conversation often revolves around family issues . Mika 's pregnancy is the catalyst for her reconciliation with Daigo . 
 Ebert writes that , as with other Japanese films such as Tokyo Story ( Yasujirō Ozu ; 1953 ) and The Funeral ( <unk> Itami ; 1984 ) , Departures focuses on the effect of death on the survivors ; the afterlife is not given much discussion . He considered this indicative of a " deep and <unk> acceptance of death " in Japanese culture , one which is to be met not with extreme sorrow , but with contemplation . Takita stated that he intended to focus on the " dialogue between people who have passed away and the families that survive them " . The film touches on the question of the afterlife : the cremator likens death to " a gateway " , and Okuyama writes that in this sense the cremator is a gatekeeper and the encoffiners are guides . 
 Byrnes found that Departures leads one to question the extent of modernity 's effect on Japanese culture , noting the undercurrent of " traditional attitudes and values " which permeated the film . Although the encoffining ceremony was traditionally completed by the dead person 's family , a decreased interest in it opened a " niche market " for professional encoffiners . Okuyama wrote that , through this film , Takita was filling a " spiritual loss " caused by the departure from tradition in modern Japan . Tadao Sato connected this theme of modernity to that of death , explaining that the film 's unusually non @-@ bitter treatment of death demonstrated an evolution in Japanese feelings about life and death . He considered the film 's treatment of nōkan as an artistic rather than religious ceremony to reflect the agnostic attitudes of modern Japan . 
 = = Release = = 
 The taboo subject of Departures made prospective distributors wary of taking on the film . Surveys conducted at pre @-@ release screenings placed it at the bottom of the list of films audiences wanted to see . Ultimately , the film 's debut at the Montreal World Film Festival in August 2008 , which was rewarded with the festival 's grand prize , provided the necessary incentive for distributors to select Departures ; it finally received its domestic Japanese release on 13 September 2008 . Even then , owing to the strong taboo against death , Takita was worried about the film 's reception and did not anticipate commercial success , and others expressed concern that the film lacked a clear target audience . 
 This fear was misplaced ; Departures debuted in Japan at fifth place , and during the fifth week of its run hit its peak position at third place . It sold 2 @.@ 6 million tickets in Japan and generated 3 @.@ 2 billion yen ( $ 32 million ) in box office revenue in the five months after its debut . The film was still showing in 31 theatres when its success at the Academy Awards in February 2009 renewed interest ; the number of screens on which it was showing was increased to 188 and the film earned another ¥ 2 @.@ 8 billion ( $ 28 million ) , making a total of ¥ 6 billion ( $ 60 million ) . This made Departures the highest @-@ grossing domestic film and 15th top @-@ grossing film overall for 2008 . Executive producer Yasuhiro Mase credited this success to the effects of the Great Recession on Japan : viewers who were seeking employment after recently being downsized empathized with Daigo . 
 From the beginning an international release of the film was intended ; as English is considered a key language in international film festivals , English subtitles were prepared . The translation was handled by Ian MacDougall . He believed that the workings of the mortician 's world were as far from the experience of most Japanese as from that of a non @-@ Japanese audience . As such he felt a faithful translation was best , without going far to accommodate foreign audiences to unfamiliar cross @-@ cultural elements . 
 In September 2008 , <unk> acquired the international rights to Departures , which by that time had been licensed for screening in countries such as Greece , Australia , and Malaysia ; the film was ultimately screened in 36 countries . North American distribution was handled by Regent Releasing , and Departures received a limited release in nine theatres beginning on 29 May 2009 . Overall , the film earned almost $ 1 @.@ 5 million during its North American run before closing on 24 June 2010 . In the United Kingdom , Departures premiered on 4 December 2009 and was distributed by Arrow Film Distributors . The film attained a worldwide gross of nearly $ 70 million . 
 = = = Adaptations and other media = = = 
 Before Departures premiered , a manga adaptation by Akira Sasō was serialized in twelve instalments in the bi @-@ weekly Big Comic Superior , from February to August 2008 . Sasō agreed to take on the adaptation as he was impressed by the script . He had the opportunity to view the film before beginning the adaptation , and came to feel that a too @-@ literal adaptation would not be appropriate . He made changes to the settings and physical appearances of the characters , and increased the focus on the role of music in the story . Later in 2008 the serial was compiled in a 280 @-@ page volume released by Shogakukan . 
 On 10 September 2008 , three days before the Japanese premiere of Departures , a soundtrack album for the film — containing nineteen tracks from the film and featuring an orchestral performance by members of the Tokyo Metropolitan and NHK Symphony Orchestras — was released by Universal Music Japan . Pop singer Ai provided lyrics to music by Hisaishi for the image song " Okuribito / So Special " ; performed by Ai with an arrangement for cellos and orchestra , the single was released by Universal Sigma on 10 September 2008 along with a promotional video . Sheet music for the film 's soundtrack was published by KMP in 2008 ( for cello and piano ) and <unk> in 2009 ( for cello , violin , and piano ) . 
 Shinobu Momose , a writer specializing in novelizations , adapted Departures as a novel . It was published by Shogakukan in 2008 . That year the company also released <unk> ( Letter @-@ Stone ) , an illustrated book on the themes of the film told from the point of view of a talking stone ; this book was written by Koyama and illustrated by <unk> <unk> . The following year Shogakukan published an edition of Koyama 's first draft of the screenplay . A stage version of the film , also titled Departures , was written by Koyama and directed by Takita . It debuted at the Akasaka ACT Theater on 29 May 2010 , featuring kabuki actor Nakamura <unk> as Daigo and Rena Tanaka as Mika . The story , set seven years after the close of the film , concerns the insecurities of the couple 's son over Daigo 's profession . 
 = = = Home releases = = = 
 A dual @-@ layer DVD release , with special features including trailers , making @-@ of documentaries , and a recorded encoffining ceremony , was released in Japan on 18 March 2009 . A North American DVD edition of Departures , including an interview with the director , was released by Koch Vision on 12 January 2010 ; the film was not dubbed , but rather presented with Japanese audio and English subtitles . A Blu @-@ ray edition followed in May . This home release received mixed reviews . Franck <unk> of DVD Verdict was highly complimentary toward the film and the digital transfer , considering its visuals clean and sharp and the audio ( particularly the music ) " a pleasure to listen to " . Thomas <unk> , writing for DVD Talk , rated the release as " Highly Recommended " , focusing on the " unexpected powerhouse " of the film 's quality . Another writer for the website , Jeremy Mathews , advised readers to " Skip It " , finding the DVD an apt presentation of the source material — which he considered to " reduce itself to clumsy , mug @-@ filled attempts at broad comedy and awkward , repetitive tear @-@ jerker scenes " . Both DVD Talk reviews agreed that the audio and visual quality were less than perfect , and that the DVD 's extra contents were poor ; Mathews described the interview as the director answering " dull questions in a dull manner " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Departures received generally positive reviews from critics . The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes sampled 103 reviewers and judged 81 % of them to be positive , with an average score of 7 @.@ 0 out of 10 . The aggregator Metacritic gives the film 68 out of 100 , based on 27 reviews . 
 = = = = Domestic reviews = = = = 
 Initial reviews in Japan were positive . In Kinema Junpo , <unk> Shioda called Departures a turning point in Takita 's career , a human drama capturing both laughter and tears , while in the same publication Masaaki Nomura described the film as a work of supple depth that perhaps indicated a move into Takita 's mature period , praising the director for capturing a human feeling from Motoki 's earnest encoffining performance . Writing in the Yomiuri Shimbun , <unk> Fukunaga complimented Takita for using a moving , emotive story laden with humour to reverse prejudice against a taboo subject . He commended the performances of Motoki and Yamazaki , particularly their playing the serious Daigo against the befuddled Sasaki . 
 In the Asahi Shimbun , Sadao Yamane found the film admirably constructed and extolled the actors ' performances . Yamane was especially impressed by the delicate hand movements Motoki displayed when he performed the encoffinment ceremony . Tomomi <unk> in the Mainichi Shimbun found Departures a meaningful story that made the viewer think about the different lives people live , and the significance of someone dying . Writing in the same newspaper , Takashi Suzuki thought the film memorable but predictable , and Yūji Takahashi opined that the film 's ability to find nobility in a prejudiced subject was an excellent accomplishment . <unk> Watanabe gave Departures four out of five stars in The Nikkei newspaper , praising the actors ' unforced performances . 
 Following the success of Departures at the Academy Awards , critic Saburō Kawamoto found the film to show a Japan that the Japanese could relate to , in that , in a nation whose customs put great weight on visits to ancestral graves , a death was always a family affair . He believed the film had a samurai beauty to it , with its many scenes of families sitting seiza . Critic Yūichi Maeda gave the film a 90 % rating , and credited the performances of the two leads for much of the film 's success . He praised its emotional impact and its balance of seriousness and humour , but was more critical of the father – son relationship , which he considered overdone . Maeda attributed the film 's international success , despite its heavily Japanese content , to its clear depiction of Japanese views on life and death . He found the film 's conceptual scale to have an affinity to that of Hollywood ( something he considered lacking in most Japanese films ) . 
 Reviewer <unk> Yamaguchi gave the film an 85 % rating , and found the treatment of its subject charming . He praised its quiet emotional impact and humour , the interweaving of northern Japan scenery with Hisaishi 's cello score , and the film 's Japanese spirit . Media critic Sadao Yamane found a moving beauty in the dextrous hand movements Sasaki teaches Daigo for preparing bodies , and believed that a prior reading of the original script would deepen the viewer 's understanding of the action . Mark Schilling of The Japan Times gave the film four stars out of five , praising the acting though criticizing the apparent idealization of the encoffiners . He concluded that the film " makes a good case for the Japanese way of death . " 
 = = = = International reviews = = = = 
 Internationally , Departures has received mixed — mostly positive — reviews . Ebert gave the film a perfect four stars , describing it as " rock @-@ solid in its fundamentals " and highlighting its cinematography , music , and the casting of Yamazaki as Sasaki . He found that the end result " functions flawlessly " and is " excellent at achieving the universal ends of narrative " . Derek Armstrong of AllMovie gave the film four stars out of five , describing it as " a film of lyrical beauty " which is " bursting with tiny pleasures " . In a four @-@ star review , Byrnes described the film as a " moving meditation on the transience of life " which showed " great humanity " , concluding " it 's a beautiful film but take two <unk> . " Howell gave the film three stars out of four , praising its acting and cinematography . He wrote that Departures " quietly subverts aesthetic and emotional expectations " without ever losing its " high @-@ minded intent " . In a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star review , Claudia Puig of USA Today described Departures as a " beautifully composed " film which , although predictable , was " emotional , poignant " and " profoundly affecting " . 
 Philip French of The Observer considered Departures to be a " moving , gently amusing " film , which the director had " fastidiously composed " . Sharkey found it an " emotionally wrenching trip with a quiet man " , one which was well cast with " actors who move lightly , gracefully " in the various settings . In Entertainment Weekly , Owen Gleiberman gave the film a B − , considering it " tender and , at times , rather squishy " , though certain to affect anyone who had lost a parent . Barber found Departures to be " heartfelt , unpretentious , [ and ] slyly funny " , worth watching ( though ultimately predictable ) . Mike Scott gave the film three and a half stars out of four , finding that it was " a surprisingly uplifting examination of life and loss " , with humour which perfectly complemented the " moving and meaningful story " , but lent itself to characters " mug [ ging ] for the camera " . 
 Meanwhile , Kevin Maher of The Times described Departures as a " <unk> comedy " with wearisome " push @-@ button crying " , though he considered it saved by the quality of the acting , " stately " directing , and " dreamy " soundtrack . Another mixed review was published in The Daily Telegraph , which described the film as a " safe and emotionally generous crowd @-@ pleaser " that was not worthy of its Academy Award . Philip Kennicott wrote in The Washington Post that the film was " as polished as it is heavy @-@ handed " , predictable yet ready to break taboos , immersed in death yet incapable of escaping " the maddening Japanese taste for sentimentality " . In Variety , Eddie Cockrell wrote that the film offered " fascinating glimpses " of the encoffining ceremony but should have had a much shorter run time . Paatsch gave Departures three stars out of five , describing it as a " quaintly mournful flick " that " unfolds with a delicacy and precision that slowly captivates the viewer " but considering some scenes , such as the montage , " needlessly showy flourishes " . Edward Porter of The Sunday Times wrote that the film 's success at the Academy Awards could be blamed on " a case of the Academy favouring bland sentimentality " . 
 The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave Departures a C − , writing that though it featured " handsome shots of provincial life " and encoffining scenes with a " poetic quality " , ultimately the film " drips from one overstated emotion to the next " . A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times that the film was " perfectly mediocre " , predictable , and banal in its combination of humour and melodrama . Despite its sometimes touching moments , he considered Departures " interesting mainly as an index of the Academy ’ s hopelessly timid and conventional tastes " . Tony Rayns of Film Comment gave a scathing review in which he denounced the script as " embarrassingly clunky and obvious " , the acting as merely " adequate " , and the film as but a " paean to the good @-@ looking corpse " . Adams gave Departures two out of four stars , praising the emotionally and visually arresting scenes of <unk> and " loving attention to the textures , tastes and behaviours of semi @-@ rural Japan " but condemning the predictability of the plot ; he wrote that " Forty @-@ five minutes in , [ viewers have ] prepared a mental checklist of every turn that Daigo Kobayashi will face , then negotiate – and be <unk> if Takita doesn 't deliver on every one " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At the 32nd Japan Academy Prize ceremony held in February 2009 , Departures dominated the competition . It received a total of thirteen nominations , winning ten , including Picture of the Year , Screenplay of the Year ( Koyama ) , Director of the Year ( Takita ) , and Outstanding Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role ( Motoki ) . In the Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role category , Hirosue lost to Tae Kimura of All Around Us , while in the Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction category Departures 's Tomio Ogawa lost to Paco and the Magical Book 's <unk> Kuwashima . Hisaishi , nominated for two Outstanding Achievement in Music awards , won for his scoring of Studio Ghibli 's animated film Ponyo . In response to the wins , Motoki said " It feels as if everything miraculously came together in balance this time with Okuribito " . 
 Departures was submitted to the 81st Academy Awards as Japan 's submission for the Best Foreign Language Film award . Although eleven previous Japanese films had won Academy Awards in other categories , such as Best Animated Feature or Best Costume Design , the as @-@ yet unattained Best Foreign Language Film award was highly coveted in the Japanese film industry . Departures was not expected to win , owing to strong competition from the Israeli and French submissions ( Ari <unk> 's Waltz with Bashir and Laurent <unk> 's The Class , respectively ) , but was ultimately the victor at the February 2009 ceremony . This was considered a surprise by several film critics , and The New York Times 's David Itzkoff termed Departures " The Film That Lost Your Oscars Pool for You " . Motoki , who was expecting the " wonderful " Israeli submission to win , was also surprised ; he described himself as a " hanger @-@ on who just observes the ceremony " , and regretted " not walk [ ing ] with more confidence " upon his arrival . 
 Departures received recognition at a variety of film festivals , including the Audience Choice Award at the 28th Hawaii International Film Festival , the Grand Prix des <unk> at the 32nd Montreal World Film Festival , and Best Narrative Film the at the 20th Palm Springs International Film Festival . Motoki was selected as best actor at several ceremonies , including at the Asian Film Awards , the Asia Pacific Screen Awards , Blue Ribbon Awards ; he was also viewers ' choice for best actor at the Golden Rooster Awards . At the 29th Hong Kong Film Awards , Departures was selected as Best Asian Film , beating three Chinese films and Ponyo . Following the 21st Nikkan Sports Film Award ceremony , in which Departures won Best Film and Best Director , Takita expressed surprise at the film 's awards , saying " I did not know how well my work would be accepted . " By December 2009 the film had won 98 awards . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The international success of Departures received considerable attention from the press in Japan , particularly its win at the Academy Awards . The win led to a theatrical re @-@ release in Japan and to Aoki 's book selling out in stores — more than 230 @,@ 000 copies were purchased . 
 After the film 's success , Sakata Location Box set up a hospitality service called <unk> — a pun on the film 's Japanese title indicating " one who greets or picks up " another , rather than " one who sends off " . The service maintains shooting locations and provides maps of these locations for tourists . In 2009 , Location Box opened the building that served as the NK Agent office to the public . For a fee , visitors could enter and view props from the film . Under a job creation program , between 2009 and 2013 the organization received ¥ 30 million from Yamagata Prefecture and ¥ 8 million from Sakata City for the building 's maintenance and administration . The site attracted nearly 120 @,@ 000 visitors in 2009 , though numbers quickly fell ; in 2013 there were fewer than 9 @,@ 000 visitors . Safety fears due to the building 's age led to the Sakata municipal government ending the organization 's lease , and the building was closed again at the end of March 2014 . At the time , the City Tourism division was considering options , such as limiting visits to the first two floors . The building used as the Concerto café has been open to the public since 2009 as the Kaminoyama Concerto Museum , and the Sakata Minato @-@ za cinema has also been opened to tourists . Takita 's hometown of <unk> , Toyama , maintains a Film Resources Museum ; staff have reported that at times over a hundred Takita fans visit per day . 
 The film 's success generated greater interest in encoffining and the nōkanshi . Even the model of hearse driven in the film was merchandised : the <unk> Limousine Type 2 @-@ 04 , a smaller , less expensive version of the film 's vehicle , was put on the market on 24 February 2009 . The manufacturer , <unk> Motors , is located in Takita 's home prefecture of Toyama . In 2013 , Mitsuki Kimura , from a family of nōkanshi , founded the Okuribito Academy together with nurse and entrepreneur Kei <unk> . It offers training in encoffining , embalming , and related practices . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Amaranthus brownii = 
 Amaranthus brownii is an annual herb in the <unk> family . The plant is found only on the small island of Nihoa in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands , growing on rocky outcrops at altitudes of 120 – 215 m ( 394 – 705 ft ) . It is one of nine species of Amaranthus in the Hawaiian Islands , but the only endemic Hawaiian species of the genus . It was first discovered during the Tanager Expedition in 1923 by botanist Edward Leonard Caum . A. brownii differs from other Hawaiian species of Amaranthus with its spineless leaf axils , linear leaves , and <unk> fruits . 
 It is one of 26 vascular plants on Nihoa , 17 of which are indigenous , six alien , and three endemic only to Nihoa , including A. brownii , the Nihoa fan palm or <unk> , and the Nihoa carnation . A. brownii is considered the rarest plant on Nihoa and has not been directly observed on the island since 1983 . Past expeditions collected plant samples and seeds , but no specimens have managed to survive ex @-@ situ conservation efforts outside of its native habitat . There are no known plants or seeds from A. brownii in any botanical gardens . 
 Conservation and recovery plans for A. brownii have been proposed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) which administers the island of Nihoa as part of the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge in the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument . In 1996 , the plant was listed by the FWS as an endangered species . In 2003 , the FWS designated the island of Nihoa as a critical habitat for the plant and it was classified as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List . The plant is one of 51 endangered or threatened plants in the Hawaiian Islands listed under the Endangered Species Act . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first collected during a ten @-@ day visit to the island of Nihoa by the Tanager Expedition . Botanist Edward Leonard Caum collected the first specimen on June 17 , 1923 , and a second was collected by cartographer Charles S. Judd on June 20 , 1923 . Forest B. H. Brown , botanist of the Bayard Dominick Expedition to the Marquesas Islands ( 1921 – 1922 ) , helped provide descriptions and comments for some of the species described by Erling Christophersen and Caum . They named A. brownii after Brown in 1931 with the publication of their paper " Vascular plants of the Leeward Islands , Hawaii " . In the paper they originally described A. brownii as one of 20 vascular plant species on the island of Nihoa . The FWS does not recognize a common name . 
 = = Description = = 
 A. brownii is the only endemic species of Hawaiian Amaranthus in the Hawaiian Islands . It is an herbaceous annual plant that grows to a height of 30 – 90 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 – 2 @.@ 95 ft ) and has narrow , linear leaves , small green flowers , and fruit that holds a single , dark red seed . A. brownii is monoecious ; that is , the male and female flowers are found together on the same plant . It differs from other Hawaiian species of Amaranthus with its spineless leaf axils , linear leaves , and <unk> fruits ( fruit which does not open to release seeds when ripe ) . The fruits are ovoid and between 0 @.@ 8 – 1 mm long and 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 mm wide . The plant is thought to be <unk> ( pollinated by wind ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A. brownii has a very limited range ; it is found only on the 0 @.@ 65 km2 ( 0 @.@ 25 sq mi ) island of Nihoa , located 275 km ( 171 mi ) northwest of Kauai . It is thought that this endemic plant has probably always been rare and restricted to Nihoa . Its habitat is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and protected as part of the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge in the Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument . A. brownii is one of three endemic and endangered species only found on Nihoa , along with the Nihoa fan palm ( Pritchardia <unk> ) and the Nihoa carnation ( <unk> verticillata ) . At least nine other native plant species can be found in its habitat , including Hawaiian goosefoot ( Chenopodium <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> <unk> ( Ipomoea indica ) , goat 's foot ( Ipomoea pes @-@ <unk> ssp. brasiliensis ) , Panicum <unk> , <unk> ( Scaevola sericea ) , <unk> <unk> , <unk> ( Sida fallax ) , and Nelson 's <unk> ( Solanum <unk> ) . 
 The plant grows during the moist , winter season from December through July in Nihoa 's coastal dry shrubland habitat in shallow soil on rocky outcrops in exposed areas between 120 – 215 m ( 394 – 705 ft ) . At the time of its discovery in 1923 , botanists first observed the plant growing in great quantity on the ridges towards Miller Peak and on eastern ridges of the island . Expeditions in the early and mid @-@ 1960s failed to identify any specimens , but in 1969 , ethnobotanist Douglas E. Yen of the Bishop Museum collected specimens near Miller Peak . <unk> R. Herbst and Wayne Takeuchi of the FWS collected the last known specimen on July 27 , 1980 . Carl C. Christensen also visited Nihoa in 1980 to reevaluate endemic species last observed on the Tanager Expedition . Sheila Conant and Mark S. Collins visited Nihoa in 1980 as well ; Conant returned twice in 1981 , first with Mark J. <unk> and later with Audrey L. Newman . In 1983 , Conant visited the island with Wayne C. Gagné . Conant found A. brownii growing on the island in 1981 and 1983 , by which time only two populations of 35 plants were thought to exist : 23 plants were found near Miller Peak and 12 plants in Middle Valley . The two plant populations are separated by a distance of approximately 0 @.@ 4 km ( 0 @.@ 25 mi ) . 
 Prehistoric Polynesian habitation on Nihoa may have initially led to a decrease in the plant population of A. brownii . Major threats to the plant include invasive species , fire , and hybridization with other Amaranthus species . Inbreeding is a serious threat , as the small plant population must reproduce within its own circle resulting in genetic defects . A. brownii is also forced to compete with the non @-@ native weed ( <unk> oleracea ) , the plant 's main alien species threat . In 2002 and 2004 , the invasive gray bird grasshopper ( Schistocerca nitens ) presented an even larger threat to A. brownii . First recorded on the island in 1977 , the increasing population density of gray bird grasshoppers led to massive defoliation on the island , leaving A. brownii at greater risk of predation . In 2004 alone , an estimated 400 @,@ 000 gray bird grasshoppers destroyed almost 90 % of the vegetation on Nihoa . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 According to zoologist and conservationist Sheila Conant , A. brownii is important due to its uniqueness in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands as " the only Hawaiian endemic in this large genus which contains many economically and nutritionally important species . " However , in more than a decade of field surveys on Nihoa , no living plants have been identified . Wildlife refuge staff have visited the island during the dry season at least 21 times between 1983 and 1996 . The absence of the plant in recent field surveys might be explained by the time of visit . Because winter surveys of Nihoa tend to be difficult and dangerous due to poor landing conditions , surveys have not been conducted during the moist , winter growing season from December through March when the plant is easiest to find . Most of the surveys have been completed during the summer months , when it is easiest to visit Nihoa , but during this time , the stems of A. brownii dry up and cannot be distinguished from other herbaceous plants . A seven @-@ day visit to the island in April 2006 still did not find any specimens but botanists are optimistic that the species has survived . Additional winter surveys are required to accurately assess the conservation status of the plant . 
 Ex @-@ situ conservation efforts to propagate A. brownii by seed in botanical gardens have been unsuccessful . During the 1981 expedition , A. <unk> seeds were collected by Sheila Conant and presented to the Waimea Arboretum on the Hawaiian island of Oahu and the Kew Gardens in London , England . Although the seeds at the Waimea Arboretum germinated and grew for a while , no plants survived beyond the stage of seedling development . Information about the outcome of the seeds sent to Kew Gardens is unavailable . 
 A proposal for listing A. brownii under the U.S. Endangered Species Act was originally submitted on June 16 , 1976 , but was withdrawn on December 10 , 1979 as out of date and incomplete . It was proposed again on March 24 , 1993 , and was federally listed as an endangered species on August 21 , 1996 . On May 22 , 2003 , the FWS designated 171 acres ( 69 ha ) on the island of Nihoa as a critical habitat for A. brownii , as well as Pritchardia <unk> , <unk> verticillata , and two other species also found on Nihoa and other Hawaiian islands , <unk> ( <unk> tomentosa ) and <unk> <unk> . In the same year , A. brownii was internationally classified as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List . As of 2010 , A. brownii was one of 51 Hawaiian plant species listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act . 
 = The Cat in the Hat = 
 The Cat in the Hat is a children 's book written and illustrated by Theodor Geisel under the pen name Dr. Seuss and first published in 1957 . The story centers on a tall anthropomorphic cat , who wears a red and white @-@ striped hat and a red bow tie . The Cat shows up at the house of Sally and her unnamed brother one rainy day when their mother is away . Ignoring repeated objections from the children 's fish , the Cat shows the children a few of his tricks in an attempt to entertain them . In the process he and his companions , Thing One and Thing Two , wreck the house . The children and the fish become more and more alarmed until the Cat produces a machine that he uses to clean everything up . He then says his goodbyes and disappears just before the children 's mother walks in . 
 Geisel created the book in response to a debate in the United States about literacy in early childhood and the ineffectiveness of traditional primers such as those featuring Dick and Jane . Geisel was asked to write a more entertaining primer by William Spaulding , whom he had met during World War II and who was then director of the education division at Houghton Mifflin . However , because Geisel was already under contract with Random House , the two publishers agreed to a deal : Houghton Mifflin published the education edition , which was sold to schools , and Random House published the trade edition , which was sold in bookstores . 
 Geisel gave varying accounts of how he created The Cat in the Hat , but in the version he told most often he was so frustrated with the word list from which he could choose words to write his story that he decided to scan the list and create a story based on the first two words he found that rhymed . The words he found were cat and hat . The book met with immediate critical acclaim and financial success . Reviewers praised it as an exciting alternative to traditional primers . Three years after its debut , the book had already sold over a million copies , and in 2001 Publishers Weekly listed the book at number nine on its list of best @-@ selling children 's books of all time . The book 's success led to the creation of Beginner Books , a publishing house centered on producing similar books for young children learning to read . In 1983 , Geisel said , " It is the book I 'm proudest of because it had something to do with the death of the Dick and Jane primers . " The book was adapted into a 1971 animated television special and a 2003 live @-@ action film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins as a girl named Sally and her unnamed brother , who serves as the narrator of the book , sit alone in their house on a cold , rainy day , staring wistfully out the window . Then they hear a loud bump which is quickly followed by the arrival of the Cat in the Hat , a tall anthropomorphic cat in a red and white striped hat and a red bow tie . The Cat proposes to entertain the children with some tricks that he knows . The children 's pet fish refuses , insisting that the Cat leave . The Cat responds by balancing the fish on the tip of his umbrella . The game quickly becomes more complicated , as the Cat balances himself on a ball and tries to balance lots of household items on his limbs until he falls on his head , dropping everything he was holding . The fish admonishes him again , but the Cat in the Hat just proposes another game . 
 The Cat brings in a big red box from outside , from which he releases two identical creatures with blue hair and red suits called Thing One and Thing Two . The Things cause more trouble , such as flying kites in the house , knocking pictures off the wall and picking up the children 's mother 's new polka @-@ dotted gown . All this comes to an end when the fish spots the children 's mother out the window . In response , Sally 's brother catches the Things in a net , and the Cat , apparently ashamed , stores them back in the big red box . He takes it out the front door as the fish and the children survey the mess he has made . But the Cat soon returns , riding a machine that picks everything up and cleans the house , delighting the fish and the children . The Cat leaves just before their mother arrives , and the fish and the children are back where they started at the beginning of the story . As she steps in , the mother asks the children what they did while she was out , but the children are hesitant and do not answer . The story ends with the question , " What would you do if your mother asked you ? " 
 = = Background = = 
 Theodor Geisel , writing as Dr. Seuss , created The Cat in the Hat partly in response to the May 24 , 1954 , Life magazine article by John Hersey titled " Why Do Students Bog Down on First R ? A Local Committee Sheds Light on a National Problem : Reading " . In the article , Hersey was critical of school primers like those featuring Dick and Jane : 
 In the classroom boys and girls are confronted with books that have insipid illustrations depicting the slicked @-@ up lives of other children ... All feature abnormally courteous , unnaturally clean boys and girls .... In bookstores anyone can buy brighter , livelier books featuring strange and wonderful animals and children who behave naturally , i.e. , sometimes misbehave ... Given incentive from school boards , publishers could do as well with primers . 
 After detailing many issues contributing to the dilemma connected with student reading levels , Hersey asked toward the end of the article : 
 Why should [ school primers ] not have pictures that widen rather than narrow the associative richness the children give to the words they illustrate — drawings like those of the wonderfully imaginative geniuses among children 's illustrators , Tenniel , Howard Pyle , " Dr. Seuss " , Walt Disney ? 
 This article caught the attention of William Spaulding , who had met Geisel during the war and who was then the director of Houghton Mifflin 's education division . Spaulding had also read the best @-@ selling 1955 book Why Johnny Can 't Read by Rudolf Flesch . Flesch , like Hersey , criticized primers as boring but also criticized them for teaching reading through word recognition rather than phonics . In 1955 , Spaulding invited Geisel to dinner in Boston where he proposed that Geisel create a book " for six- and seven @-@ year olds who had already mastered the basic mechanics of reading " . He reportedly challenged , " Write me a story that first @-@ graders can 't put down ! " 
 At the back of Why Johnny Can 't Read , Flesch had included 72 lists of words that young children should be able to read , and Spaulding provided Geisel with a similar list . Geisel later told biographers Judith and Neil Morgan that Spaulding had supplied him with a list of 348 words that every six @-@ year @-@ old should know and insisted that the book 's vocabulary be limited to 225 words . However , according to Philip Nel , Geisel gave varying numbers in interviews from 1964 to 1969 . He variously claimed that he could use between 200 and 250 words from a list of between 300 and 400 ; the finished book contains 236 different words . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The Cat in the Hat 
 Thing One 
 Thing Two 
 Sally 
 Sally 's brother 
 Fish 
 Mother 
 = = Creation = = 
 Geisel gave varying accounts of how he conceived of The Cat in the Hat . According to the story Geisel told most often , he was so frustrated with the word list that William Spaulding had given him that he finally decided to scan the list and create a story out of the first two words he found that rhymed . The words he found were cat and hat . Near the end of his life , Geisel told his biographers , Judith and Neil Morgan , that he conceived the beginnings of the story while he was with Spaulding , in an elevator in the <unk> Mifflin offices in Boston . It was an old , shuddering elevator and was operated by a " small , stooped woman wearing ' a leather half @-@ glove and a secret smile ' " . Anita Silvey , recounting a similar story , described the woman as " a very elegant , very petite African @-@ American woman named Annie Williams " . Geisel told Silvey that , when he sketched the Cat in the Hat , he thought of Williams and gave the character Williams ' white gloves and " sly , even foxy smile " . 
 Geisel gave two conflicting , partly fictionalized accounts of the book 's creation in two articles , " How Orlo Got His Book " in The New York Times Book Review and " My Hassle with the First Grade Language " in the Chicago Tribune , both published on November 17 , 1957 . In " My Hassle with the First Grade Language " , he wrote about his proposal to a " distinguished schoolbook publisher " to write a book for young children about " scaling the peaks of Everest at 60 degrees below " . The publisher was intrigued but informed him that , because of the word list , " you can 't use the word scaling . You can 't use the word peaks . You can 't use Everest . You can 't use 60 . You can 't use degrees . You can 't ... " Geisel gave a similar account to Robert Cahn for an article in the July 6 , 1957 , edition of The Saturday Evening Post . In " My Hassle With the First Grade Language " , he also told a story of the " three excruciatingly painful weeks " in which he worked on a story about a King Cat and a Queen Cat . However , " queen " was not on the word list , nor did his first grade nephew , Norval , recognize it . So Geisel returned to the work but could then think only of words that started with the letter " q " , which did not appear in any word on the list . He then had a similar fascination with the letter " z " , which also did not appear in any word on the list . When he did finally finish the book and showed it to his nephew , Norval had already graduated from the first grade and was learning calculus . Philip Nel notes , in his dissection of the article , that Norval was Geisel 's invention . Geisel 's niece , Peggy Owens , did have a son , but he was only a one @-@ year @-@ old when the article was published . 
 In " How Orlo Got His Book " , he described Orlo , a fictional , archetypal young child who was turned off of reading by the poor selection of simple reading material . To save Orlo the frustration , Geisel decided to write a book for children like Orlo but found the task " not dissimilar to ... being lost with a witch in a tunnel of love " . He tried to write a story called " The Queen Zebra " but found that both words did not appear on the list . In fact , like Geisel wrote in " My Hassle with the First Grade Language " , the letters " q " and " z " did not appear on the list at all . He then tried to write a story about a bird , without using the word bird as it did not appear on the list . He decided to call it a " wing thing " instead but struggled as he discovered that it " couldn 't have legs or a beak or a tail . Neither a left foot or a right foot . " On his approach to writing The Cat in the Hat he wrote , " The method I used is the same method you use when you sit down to make apple <unk> [ sic ] without <unk> . " 
 Geisel variously stated that the book took between nine and 18 months to create . Donald Pease notes that he worked on it primarily alone , unlike with previous books , which had been more collaborative efforts between Geisel and his wife , Helen . This marked a general trend in his work and life . As Robert L. Bernstein later said of that period , " The more I saw of him , the more he liked being in that room and creating all by himself . " Pease points to Helen 's recovery from Guillain – Barré syndrome , which she was diagnosed with in 1954 , as the marker for this change . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Geisel agreed to write The Cat in the Hat at the request of William Spaulding of Houghton Mifflin ; however , because Geisel was under contract with Random House , the head of Random House , Bennett Cerf , made a deal with Houghton Mifflin . Random House retained the rights to trade sales , which encompassed copies of the book sold at book stores , while Houghton Mifflin retained the education rights , which encompassed copies sold to schools . 
 The Houghton Mifflin edition was released in January or February 1957 , and the Random House edition was released on March 1 . The two editions featured different covers but were otherwise identical . The first edition can be identified by the " 200 / 200 " mark in the top right corner of the front dust jacket flap , signifying the $ 2 @.@ 00 selling price . The price was reduced to $ 1 @.@ 95 on later editions . 
 According to Judith and Neil Morgan , the book sold well immediately . The trade edition initially sold an average of 12 @,@ 000 copies a month , a figure which rose rapidly . Bullock 's department store in Los Angeles , California , sold out of its first , 100 @-@ copy order of the book in a day and quickly reordered 250 more . The Morgans attribute these sales numbers to " playground word @-@ of @-@ mouth " , asserting that children heard about the book from their friends and nagged their parents to buy it for them . However , Houghton Mifflin 's school edition did not sell as well . As Geisel noted in Jonathan Cott 's 1983 profile of him , " Houghton Mifflin ... had trouble selling it to the schools ; there were a lot of Dick and Jane devotees , and my book was considered too fresh and irreverent . But Bennett Cerf at Random House had asked for trade rights , and it just took off in the bookstores . " Geisel told the Morgans , " Parents understood better than school people the necessity for this kind of reader . " 
 After three years in print , The Cat in the Hat had sold nearly one million copies . By then , the book had been translated into French , Chinese , Swedish , and Braille . In 2001 , Publishers Weekly placed it at number nine on its list of the best @-@ selling children 's books of all time . As of 2007 , more than 10 million copies of The Cat in the Hat have been printed , and it has been translated into more than 12 different languages , including Latin , under the title <unk> <unk> . In 2007 , on the occasion of the book 's fiftieth anniversary , Random House released The Annotated Cat : Under the Hats of Seuss and His Cats , which includes both The Cat in the Hat and its sequel , with annotations and an introduction by Philip Nel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book was published to immediate critical acclaim . Some reviewers praised the book as an exciting way to learn to read , particularly compared to the primers that it supplanted . Ellen Lewis Buell , in her review for The New York Times Book Review , noted the book 's heavy use of one @-@ syllable words and lively illustrations . She wrote , " Beginning readers and parents who have been helping them through the dreary activities of Dick and Jane and other primer characters are due for a happy surprise . " Helen Adams Masten of the Saturday Review called the book Geisel 's tour de force and wrote , " Parents and teachers will bless Mr. Geisel for this amusing reader with its ridiculous and lively drawings , for their children are going to have the exciting experience of learning that they can read after all . Polly Goodwin of the Chicago Sunday Tribune predicted that The Cat in the Hat would cause seven- and eight @-@ year @-@ olds to " look with distinct distaste on the drab adventures of standard primer characters " . 
 Both Helen E. Walker of Library Journal and Emily Maxwell of The New Yorker felt that the book would appeal to older children as well as to its target audience of first- and second @-@ graders . The reviewer for The <unk> concurred , writing , " Recommended enthusiastically as a picture book as well as a reader " . In contrast , Heloise P. <unk> wrote in The Horn Book Magazine , " This is a fine book for remedial purposes , but self @-@ conscious children often refuse material if its seems meant for younger children . " She felt that the book 's limited vocabulary kept it from reaching " the absurd excellence of early Seuss books " . 
 Based on a 2007 online poll , the National Education Association named The Cat in the Hat one of its " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " . In 2012 it was ranked number 36 among the " Top 100 Picture Books " in a survey published by School Library Journal – the third of five Dr. Seuss books on the list . 
 It was awarded the Early Readers <unk> Award in 2004 and 2012 . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Philip Nel places the book 's title character in the tradition of con artists in American art , including the title characters from Meredith Willson 's The Music Man and L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . Nel also contends that Geisel identified with the Cat , pointing to a self portrait of Geisel in which he appears as the Cat , which was published alongside a profile about him in The Saturday Evening Post on July 6 , 1957 . Michael K. Frith , who worked as Geisel 's editor , concurs , arguing that " The Cat in the Hat and Ted Geisel were inseparable and the same . I think there 's no question about it . This is someone who delighted in the chaos of life , who delighted in the seeming insanity of the world around him . " Ruth MacDonald asserts that the Cat 's primary goal in the book is to create fun for the children . The Cat calls it " fun that is funny " , which MacDonald distinguishes from the ordinary , serious fun that parents subject their children to . 
 Geisel once called the fish " my version of Cotton Mather " , the Puritan moralist who advised the prosecutors during the Salem witch trials . Betty Mensch and Alan Freeman support this view , writing , " Drawing on old Christian symbolism ( the fish was an ancient sign of Christianity ) Dr. Seuss portrays the fish as a kind of ever @-@ nagging superego , the embodiment of utterly conventionalized morality . " Philip Nel notes that other critics have also compared the fish to the superego . Anna Quindlen called the Cat " pure id " and marked the children , as mediators between the Cat and the fish , as the ego . Mensch and Freeman , however , argue that the Cat shows elements of both id and ego . 
 In her analysis of the fish , MacDonald asserts that it represents the voice of the children 's absent mother . Its conflict with the Cat , not only over the Cat 's uninvited presence but also their inherent predator @-@ prey relationship , provides the tension of the story . She points out that on the last page , while the children are hesitant to tell their mother about what happened in her absence , the fish gives a knowing look to the readers to assure them " that something did go on but that silence is the better part of valor in this case " . Alison Lurie agrees , writing , " there is a strong suggestion that they might not tell her . " She argues that , in the Cat 's destruction of the house , " the kids — and not only those in the story , but those who read it — have vicariously given full rein to their destructive impulses without guilt or consequences . " For a 1983 article , Geisel told Jonathan Cott , " The Cat in the Hat is a revolt against authority , but it 's ameliorated by the fact that the Cat cleans up everything at the end . It 's revolutionary in that it goes as far as Kerensky and then stops . It doesn 't go quite as far as Lenin . " 
 Donald Pease notes that The Cat in the Hat shares some structural similarities with other Dr. Seuss books . Like earlier books , The Cat in the Hat starts with " a child 's feeling of discontent with his mundane circumstances " which is soon enhanced by make believe . The book starts in a factual , realistic world , which crosses over into the world of make believe with the loud bump that heralds the arrival of the Cat . However , this is the first Dr. Seuss book in which the fantasy characters , i.e. the Cat and his companions , are not products of the children 's imagination . It also differs from previous books in that Sally and her brother actively participate in the fantasy world ; they also have a changed opinion of the Cat and his world by the story 's end . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ruth MacDonald asserts , " The Cat in the Hat is the book that made Dr. Seuss famous . Without The Cat , Seuss would have remained a minor light in the history of children 's literature . " Donald Pease concurs , writing , " The Cat in the Hat is the classic in the archive of Dr. Seuss stories for which it serves as a cornerstone and a linchpin . Before writing it Geisel was better known for the ' Quick , Henry , the <unk> ! ' ad campaign than for his nine children 's books . " The publication and popularity of the book thrust Geisel into the center of the United States literacy debate , what Pease called " the most important academic controversy " of the Cold War era . Academic Louis Menand contends that " The Cat in the Hat transformed the nature of primary education and the nature of children 's books . It not only stood for the idea that reading ought to be taught by phonics ; it also stood for the idea that language skills — and many other subjects — ought to be taught through illustrated storybooks , rather than primers and textbooks . " In 1983 , Geisel told Jonathan Cott , " It is the book I 'm proudest of because it had something to do with the death of the Dick and Jane primers . " 
 The book led directly to the creation of Beginner Books , a publishing house centered on producing books like The Cat in the Hat for beginning readers . According to Judith and Neil Morgan , when the book caught the attention of Phyllis Cerf , the wife of Geisel 's publisher , Bennett Cerf , she arranged for a meeting with Geisel , where the two agreed to create Beginner Books . Geisel became the president and editor , and the Cat in the Hat served as their mascot . Geisel 's wife , Helen , was made third partner . Random House served as distributor , until 1960 , when Random House purchased Beginner Books . Geisel wrote multiple books for the series , including The Cat in the Hat Comes Back ( 1958 ) , Green Eggs and Ham ( 1960 ) , Hop on Pop ( 1963 ) , and Fox in Socks ( 1965 ) . He initially used word lists of limited vocabularies to create these books , as he had with The Cat in the Hat , but moved away from the lists as he came to believe " that a child could learn any amount of words if fed them slowly and if the books were amply illustrated " . Other authors also contributed notable books to the series , including A Fly Went By ( 1958 ) , Sam and the Firefly ( 1958 ) , Go , Dog . Go ! ( 1961 ) , and The Big Honey Hunt ( 1962 ) . 
 The book , or elements of it , has been mentioned multiple times in United States politics . The image of the Cat balancing many objects on his body while in turn balancing himself on a ball has been included in political cartoons and articles . Political <unk> have portrayed both Bill Clinton and George W. Bush in this way . In 2004 , MAD magazine published " The Strange Similarities Between the Bush Administration and the World of Dr. Seuss " , an article which matched quotes from White House officials to excerpts taken from Dr. Seuss books , and in which George W. Bush 's State of the Union promises were contrasted with the Cat vowing ( in part ) , " I can hold up the cup and the milk and the cake ! I can hold up these books ! And the fish on a rake ! " In 2007 , during the 110th Congress , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid compared the impasse over a bill to reform immigration with the mess created by the Cat . He read lines of the book from the Senate floor . He then carried forward his analogy hoping the impasse would be straightened out for " If you go back and read Dr. Seuss , the cat manages to clean up the mess . " In 1999 , the United States Postal Service issued a stamp featuring the Cat in the Hat . 
 The Cat in the Hat 's popularity also led to increased popularity and exposure for Geisel 's previous children 's books . For example , 1940 's Horton Hatches the Egg had sold 5 @,@ 801 copies in its opening year and 1 @,@ 645 the following year . In 1958 , the year after the publication of The Cat in the Hat , 27 @,@ 643 copies of Horton were sold , and by 1960 the book had sold a total of over 200 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Cat in the Hat has been adapted for various media , including theater , television , film , and educational software . The animated musical TV special premiered in 1971 and starred Allan Sherman as the Cat . In 2003 , a live @-@ action film adaptation was released , starring Mike Myers as the Cat , Spencer Breslin as Conrad , and Dakota Fanning as Sally . <unk> reports that the film grossed $ 133 @,@ 960 @,@ 541 worldwide on an estimated $ 165 million budget . In 2012 , following the financial success of The Lorax , the animated film adaptation of the Dr. Seuss book of the same name , Universal Pictures and Illumination Entertainment announced plans to produce a CGI adaptation of the book . Rob Lieber will write the script , Chris Meledandri will produce , and Audrey Geisel will be the executive producer . 
 In 2009 , the Royal National Theatre created a stage version of the book , adapted and directed by Katie Mitchell . Seussical , a musical adaptation that incorporates aspects of many Dr. Seuss works , features the Cat in the Hat as narrator . The musical received weak reviews when it opened , in November 2001 , but eventually became a staple in regional and school theaters . The Cat also stars in the 1982 television film The Grinch <unk> the Cat in the Hat and the 2010 animated television series The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That ! A ride at Universal Studios ' Islands of Adventure park in Orlando , Florida , is based around The Cat in the Hat . 
 = Jæren Commuter Rail = 
 The Jæren Commuter Rail ( Norwegian : NSB Lokaltog Jæren , previously <unk> ) is a commuter train service operated along the westernmost part of the Sørland Line in Jæren , Norway . It is operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) with nine Class 72 electric multiple units . The service acts as a commuter rail connecting Stavanger to its suburbs , including Sandnes , and to towns further south , in Klepp , Time , <unk> and <unk> . Although passenger services have operated along the lines since 1878 , the commuter train service was inaugurated in 1992 with a significant increase of service , using existing rolling stock . The system has an annual ridership of 2 @.@ 5 million passengers to date . 
 The service runs from Stavanger Station to Egersund Station , a distance of 75 kilometers ( 47 mi ) . It has four hourly services from Stavanger to Sandnes Station , of which two continue to Nærbø Station and one to Egersund . The section from Stavanger to Sandnes is double track , while the rest is single track . The infrastructure is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration and the line is also used by intercity and freight trains . Several proposed upgrades to the system have been made system , such as a branch along the Ålgård Line , a branch to Stavanger Airport , Sola and reestablishing double track from Sandnes to Egersund . 
 = = Route = = 
 The commuter rail service runs along the full length of the Jæren Line , the old name of the section of the Sørland Line from Stavanger to Egersund . The line is standard gauge , electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC and owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . The line starts as double track at Stavanger Station , which is located in the central business district of Stavanger and is the terminal station of the Sørland Line . The station is manned , serves intercity trains and is 10 minutes from the city 's ferry terminal . Paradis Station is 1 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from Stavanger and serves the residential areas of <unk> and <unk> . Around the station there will be established new office real estate . The station is within walking distance of Stavanger University Hospital and <unk> Upper Secondary School , and is adjacent to the offices of the County Governor . 
 <unk> Station is 4 @.@ 1 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stavanger and serves a mixed residential and commercial area , including Hetland Upper Secondary School . Jåttåvågen Station serves a new neighborhood and is within a minutes walk of Viking Stadion , the home ground of Tippeligaen side Viking FK , <unk> Upper Secondary School and the future offices of Aker Solutions . Gausel Station is located from 9 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) from Stavanger and serves a mixed commercial and residential area . In addition to being next to the offices of <unk> , the station is the main interchange with buses towards Forus , which contains the offices of companies such as Statoil , Telenor and BP , and Stavanger Airport , Sola . 
 Sandnes Sentrum Station ( " Sandnes Center " ) is the first station located within Sandnes , and is located on a viaduct above the city center . Located 14 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 2 mi ) from Stavanger , it is also served by intercity trains and staffed . The station is the southern end of the double track . Sandnes Station is 15 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 6 mi ) from Stavanger and is located slightly south of city center of Sandnes . Some of the commuter trains terminate at Sandnes . Ganddal Station is 18 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 11 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stavanger and serves the mixed residential and industrial area of Ganddal . The Ålgård Line branches off at the station . 
 <unk> Station is the first in Klepp and is located 22 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 13 @.@ 9 mi ) from Stavanger . Klepp Station is located 24 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 15 @.@ 4 mi ) from Stavanger and serves the municipal center of Klepp . Bryne Station is the only station in Time and located at Bryne , 29 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 18 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stavanger . The station is staffed and also serves intercity trains . 
 Nærbø Station is the first station in <unk> and serves the municipal center of Nærbø . Some commuter trains terminate at Nærbø . <unk> Station is located 43 @.@ 1 kilometers ( 26 @.@ 8 mi ) from Stavanger , while <unk> Station is located 40 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 25 @.@ 0 mi ) from Stavanger . <unk> Station serves the residential area of <unk> and is located 54 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 33 @.@ 7 mi ) from Stavanger . Ogna Station serves the residential area of Ogna and is located 58 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 36 @.@ 3 mi ) from Stavanger . <unk> Station is located 60 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 37 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stavanger and serves the fishing village of <unk> . 
 <unk> Station is the first station in <unk> and located 66 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 41 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stavanger . Egersund Station is the terminal station of the line , and all remaining commuter trains stop there . The station is staffed and also served by intercity trains , and has correspondence with buses . The station located 74 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 46 @.@ 4 mi ) from Stavanger is about 10 minutes north of the city center of Egersund . 
 = = Service = = 
 The operating deficits are covered through subsidies by the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications . The trackage and other infrastructure is owned by the government agency Norwegian National Rail Administration , while the rolling stock is owned and operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . The service between Stavanger and Sandnes operate with a fixed schedule every 15 minutes . Of the trains to Sandnes , half continue onwards to Nærbø , giving a 30 @-@ minute headway . One train per hour operate all the way to Egersund . On weekends and late evenings , there is a reduced service . Travel time from Stavanger to Sandnes is 19 minutes , from Stavanger to Nærbø is 37 minutes , and from Stavanger to Egersund is 1 hour and 7 minutes . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 Class 72 is a series of 36 four @-@ car electric multiple units built by AnsaldoBreda . The units are permanently coupled together using Jacobs bogies . Each unit has a power output of 2 @,@ 550 kilowatts ( 3 @,@ 420 hp ) , allowing a top speed of 160 kilometers per hour ( 99 mph ) . The trains are 85 @.@ 57 meters ( 280 @.@ 7 ft ) long and weigh 156 tonnes ( 154 long tons ; 172 short tons ) , and have seating for 310 passengers and one toilet . The trains have better accessibility than the older units and unlike their predecessors are equipped with an electronic public information system . Nine of the units are used on the Jæren Commuter Rail , while the remaining 25 units are used on the Oslo Commuter Rail . 
 = = = Retired = = = 
 Class 69 is a series of 88 two and three @-@ car electric multiple units built by Strømmens Værksted between 1970 and 1993 . A motor car has a power output of 1 @,@ 188 kilowatts ( 1 @,@ 593 hp ) , allowing a speed of 130 kilometers per hour ( 81 mph ) . Each car is 24 @.@ 85 meters ( 81 @.@ 5 ft ) long , with motor cars weighing 64 @.@ 0 to 53 @.@ 9 tonnes ( 63 @.@ 0 to 53 @.@ 0 long tons ; 70 @.@ 5 to 59 @.@ 4 short tons ) and end cars weighing down to 28 @.@ 8 tonnes ( 28 @.@ 3 long tons ; 31 @.@ 7 short tons ) . Typical seating capacity is 96 passengers in the motor cars and 112 passengers in the end cars . The class was delivered in four versions , named A through D. After the initial delivery of fifteen <unk> in 1970 and 1971 , twenty <unk> were delivered in 1974 and 1975 . These were designed to operate on longer sections and were equipped with only one door per car . This turned out to extend stopping time too much , and the C and D versions were delivered with two doors per car . From 1975 to 1977 , NSB took delivery of fourteen <unk> and from 1983 to 1993 thirty @-@ nine <unk> . The latter is distinguishable because of its different front . NSB operates both two- and three @-@ car sets , and up to three units can be run in multiple , allowing NSB to operate any train length from two to nine cars . Eighty @-@ two units remain in service ; although they have been retired from the Jæren Commuter Rail , NSB still uses them on the Oslo Commuter Rail , the Bergen Commuter Rail and the Arendal Line . 
 = = History = = 
 The Jæren Line opened as a narrow gauge railway between Stavanger and Egersund on 1 March 1878 . The railway was extended from Egersund to Flekkefjord on 1 November 1904 as the Flekkefjord Line . On 21 December 1924 , the Jæren Line 's only branch opened , the Ålgård Line from Ganddal to Ålgård . On 1 March 1944 , the Jæren Line became part of the Sørland Line , when the line opened between Sira and Kristiansand and the Jæren Line was converted to standard gauge . The Sørland Line from Egersund to Stavanger was opened as electric on 3 June 1956 . This resulted in Class 65 and Class 67 electric multiple units being used on local trains on the line . In 1960 , the services were replaced by Class 68 units . The section from Stavanger to Sandnes became the first part of the Norwegian railway network , after the Ofoten Line , to centrally controlled . The centralized traffic control opened from Stavanger to Sandnes on 20 March 1964 , and from Sandnes to Egersund on 7 July . The whole line received partial automatic train control on 31 December 1986 . 
 The commuter rail system was introduced from 1 January 1992 , after an agreement between NSB , Rogaland County Municipality and the six municipalities along the line . NSB introduced new Class 69 multiple units , while the county municipality introduced a fare coordination with the corresponding bus services . The increase in service involved 15 departures per direction per day , and the travel time from Stavanger to Egersund was reduced from 80 to 55 minutes . In addition , NSB started with a half @-@ hour headway between Stavanger and Sandnes . A new station , Sandnes Sentrum , was opened in the city center of Sandnes at the time the new service started . NSB stated that the goal was to increase the daily ridership from 2 @,@ 900 to 5 @,@ 000 passengers by 1994 . The stations were also upgraded , including new sheds . The <unk> train radio system was installed between 1993 and 1996 . 
 The service was a success , and NSB received a 112 % increase in ridership the first year . This resulted in the company introducing a similar service between Trondheim and Innherred , the Trøndelag Commuter Rail , in 1993 . In 1993 , NSB won Statens <unk> , among other things for the new sheds on the Jæren Line . By 1995 , ridership was up 150 % from before the service started . In 1997 , NSB announced that they would order 36 new electric multiple units , which would among other things replace the aging trains on the Jæren Commuter Rail . The new Class 72 trains were put into service on 8 August 2002 , several years behind schedule . In April 2004 , the rail administration opened <unk> Station , which was located close to Viking Stadion , the new home ground of Tippeligaen side Viking FK . 
 By 2005 , ridership had increased to 2 @.@ 5 million per year , up 278 % from 1991 , giving a 7 % market share in the corridor . To further increase capacity and regularity , the Norwegian National Rail Administration decided to rebuild the section from Stavanger to Sandnes to double track . At the same time , a new freight terminal was to be built at Ganddal , meaning that the section would only have to be shared with intercity trains . The upgrade involved closing <unk> Station , and building three new stations : Paradis , Jåttåvågen and Gausel . Construction was started in 2006 and was estimated to be completed by 2009 . It was estimated to cost 2 @.@ 2 billion Norwegian krone . From April to November 2009 , the section from Ganddal to Stavanger was closed while the last part of the upgrade was completed . The new line was opened on 16 November 2009 and from 14 December , the 15 @-@ minute headway was introduced between Stavanger and Sandnes . 
 = = Future = = 
 The National Rail Administration has developed a plan for possible expansion of the commuter rail . The main possibilities have been discussed : rebuilding the section from Sandnes to Egersund to double track , taking back into use the Ålgård Line , which branches off at Ganddal , and building a new branch from south of Gausel to Stavanger Airport , Sola . An alternative to several of the options is a light rail , which may or may not be built as a tram @-@ train , which would use parts of the existing double track between Stavanger and Sandnes . 
 The Ålgård Line is a 12 @.@ 24 @-@ kilometer ( 7 @.@ 61 mi ) long railway which branches from the Sørland Line at Ganddal . It runs via Foss @-@ Eikeland and Figgjo to Ålgård , and was opened on 20 December 1924 . Passenger services were terminated on 1 November 1955 , making it the line with the most frequent passenger traffic in Norway to be closed . Freight trains operated until 1988 . The first 3 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) are used for freight trains to access a cement factory . The line has officially been closed , but has not been abandoned . The National Rail Administration retains ownership and can in the future renovate the line for operation . The annual traffic potential for the Ålgård Line is 600 @,@ 000 passengers . Plans call for stations at Vagle , Figgjo , <unk> and Ålgård . It is possible to operate the trains that currently terminate at Sandnes to Ålgård without new infrastructure investments to the Sørland Line . However , the line would need a full upgrade , including new tracks , electric system and signaling . Ålgård is also a good location for a park and ride for European Route E39 . 
 A branch to Sola has been considered to allow the trains to operate to Sola and the airport . The line would branch from the Sørland Line south of Gausel , and be built so trains from the branch could run both northwards and southwards . Proposed stations include the airport , <unk> , Forus West , Statoil 's head office and possibly the shopping center <unk> . This would give a travel time of 17 minutes from the airport to the city center , and 10 minutes from the airport to Sandnes . This route has , however , also been proposed as part of the light rail system . It would give about 2 @.@ 5 million annual passengers . 
 Plans have been made that would either double or triple the frequency on all the services on the existing commuter rail network . However , increased frequency south of Sandnes will require double track . Should the frequency be doubled , double track would have to be built to where the current service to Nærbø terminates . Plans call for these trains to possibly be extended to either <unk> or <unk> . Should the frequency be tripled , double track would be needed all the way to Egersund . Parts of the Jæren Line is straight enough to permit speeds between 200 and 250 kilometers per hour ( 120 and 160 mph ) . However , several shorter parts need to be rebuilt to allow this , particularly between Egersund and Ogna , and from Bryne to Ganddal . In particular , the section from Ogna to Egersund would probably have to follow an all @-@ new route , should it be rebuilt to double track . The effect of higher maximum speeds is greatest for intercity trains , as the commuter trains have so frequent stops they have little to gain from the increased speeds . 
 When the Jæren Line was built , the station in Egersund was located in the city center . With the opening of the Sørland Line , the station was moved 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) north of the city center . Egersund Station has been proposed moved back to its old location for the commuter rail , giving Egersund two stations : one for commuter trains and one for regional trains . The right @-@ of @-@ way still exists for this route , making construction easy . A new Sørland Line has also been proposed , which would run south instead of north from Egersund . This would mean that a city center location for Egersund Station would be better for intercity trains as well . 
 Rogaland County Municipality is in the planning process of building a light rail in Greater Stavanger . The initial plans call for a Y @-@ shaped service which could be operational by 2018 , with possibilities for further expansion . As of 2010 , the plans call for a 16 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 1 mi ) line from Stavanger to Sandnes , and a 7 @.@ 7 or 8 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 8 or 5 @.@ 5 mi ) branch to the airport . The travel time from Sandnes to Stavanger would be 29 minutes , and is therefore a supplement to the commuter rail . The light rail would have interchange with the light rail at Stavanger , Paradis , Jåttåvågen , Gausel and Sandnes Sentrum . Several new branches of the light rail have been proposed for later construction . 
 = Tengu = 
 Tengu ( <unk> , " heavenly dog " ) are a type of legendary creature found in Japanese folk religion and are also considered a type of Shinto god ( kami ) or yōkai ( supernatural beings ) . Although they take their name from a dog @-@ like Chinese demon ( <unk> ) , the tengu were originally thought to take the forms of birds of prey , and they are traditionally depicted with both human and avian characteristics . The earliest tengu were pictured with beaks , but this feature has often been humanized as an unnaturally long nose , which today is widely considered the tengu 's defining characteristic in the popular imagination . 
 Buddhism long held that the tengu were disruptive demons and harbingers of war . Their image gradually softened , however , into one of protective , if still dangerous , spirits of the mountains and forests . Tengu are associated with the ascetic practice known as <unk> , and they are usually depicted in the distinctive garb of its followers , the yamabushi . 
 = = Image = = 
 The tengu in art appears in a large number of shapes , but it usually falls somewhere between a large , monstrous bird and a wholly anthropomorphized being , often with a red face or an unusually large or long nose . Early depictions of tengu show them as kite @-@ like beings who can take a human @-@ like form , often retaining avian wings , head or beak . The tengu 's long nose seems to have been conceived in the 14th century , likely as a humanization of the original bird 's bill . The tengu 's long noses ally them with the Shinto deity Sarutahiko , who is described in the Japanese historical text , the Nihon Shoki , with a similar proboscis measuring seven hand @-@ spans in length . In village festivals the two figures are often portrayed with identical red , phallic @-@ nosed mask designs . 
 Some of the earliest representations of tengu appear in Japanese picture scrolls , such as the <unk> Emaki ( <unk> ) , painted c . 1296 , which parodies high @-@ ranking priests by endowing them the hawk @-@ like beaks of tengu demons . Tengu are often pictured as taking the shape of some sort of priest . Beginning in the 13th century , tengu came to be associated in particular with the yamabushi , the mountain ascetics who practice <unk> . The association soon found its way into Japanese art , where tengu are most frequently depicted in the yamabushi 's distinctive costume , which includes a small black cap ( <unk> , <unk> ) and a pom @-@ <unk> sash ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Due to their priestly aesthetic , they are often shown wielding the <unk> , a distinct staff used by Buddhist monks . 
 Tengu are commonly depicted holding magical ha @-@ uchiwa ( <unk> , " feather fan " ) , fans made of feathers . In folk tales , these fans sometimes have the ability to grow or shrink a person 's nose , but usually they are attributed the power to stir up great winds . Various other strange accessories may be associated with tengu , such as a type of tall , one @-@ toothed <unk> sandal often called tengu @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The term tengu and the characters used to write it are borrowed from the name of a fierce demon from Chinese folklore called tiāngoǔ . Chinese literature assigns this creature a variety of descriptions , but most often it is a fierce and <unk> canine monster that resembles a shooting star or comet . It makes a noise like thunder and brings war wherever it falls . One account from the <unk> Yì <unk> ( <unk> , " A Collection of Bizarre Stories " ) , written in 1791 , describes a dog @-@ like tiāngoǔ with a sharp beak and an upright posture , but usually tiāngoǔ bear little resemblance to their Japanese counterparts . 
 The 23rd chapter of the Nihon Shoki , written in 720 , is generally held to contain the first recorded mention of tengu in Japan . In this account a large shooting star appears and is identified by a Buddhist priest as a " heavenly dog " , and much like the tiāngoǔ of China , the star precedes a military uprising . Although the Chinese characters for tengu are used in the text , accompanying phonetic furigana characters give the reading as <unk> ( heavenly fox ) . M.W. de Visser speculated that the early Japanese tengu may represent a conglomeration of two Chinese spirits : the tiāngoǔ and the fox spirits called <unk> jing . 
 How the tengu was transformed from a dog @-@ meteor into a bird @-@ man is not clear . Some Japanese scholars have supported the theory that the tengu 's image derives from that of the Hindu eagle deity Garuda , who was pluralized in Buddhist scripture as one of the major races of non @-@ human beings . Like the tengu , the garuda are often portrayed in a human @-@ like form with wings and a bird 's beak . The name tengu seems to be written in place of that of the garuda in a Japanese sutra called the <unk> <unk> @-@ kyō ( <unk> ) , but this was likely written in the Edo period , long after the tengu 's image was established . At least one early story in the Konjaku Monogatari describes a tengu carrying off a dragon , which is reminiscent of the garuda 's feud with the nāga serpents . In other respects , however , the tengu 's original behavior differs markedly from that of the garuda , which is generally friendly towards Buddhism . De Visser has speculated that the tengu may be descended from an ancient Shinto bird @-@ demon which was syncretized with both the garuda and the tiāngoǔ when Buddhism arrived in Japan . However , he found little evidence to support this idea . 
 A later version of the <unk> , an ancient Japanese historical text , writes the name of <unk> , a monstrous female deity born from the god Susanoo 's spat @-@ out ferocity , with characters meaning tengu deity ( <unk> ) . The book describes <unk> as a raging creature capable of flight , with the body of a human , the head of a beast , a long nose , long ears , and long teeth that can chew through swords . An 18th @-@ century book called the Tengu <unk> ( <unk> ) suggests that this goddess may be the true predecessor of the tengu , but the date and authenticity of the <unk> , and of that edition in particular , remain disputed . 
 = = Evil spirits and angry ghosts = = 
 The Konjaku Monogatari , a collection of stories published in the late Heian Period , contains some of the earliest tales of tengu , already characterized as they would be for centuries to come . These tengu are the troublesome opponents of Buddhism , who mislead the pious with false images of the Buddha , carry off monks and drop them in remote places , possess women in an attempt to seduce holy men , rob temples , and endow those who worship them with unholy power . They often disguise themselves as priests or nuns , but their true form seems to be that of a kite . 
 Throughout the 12th and 13th centuries , accounts continued of tengu attempting to cause trouble in the world . They were now established as the ghosts of angry , vain , or heretical priests who had fallen on the " tengu @-@ realm " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . They began to possess people , especially women and girls , and speak through their mouths ( kitsunetsuki ) . Still the enemies of Buddhism , the demons also turned their attention to the royal family . The <unk> tells of an Empress who was possessed , and the <unk> reports that Emperor Sanjō was made blind by a tengu , the ghost of a priest who resented the throne . 
 One notorious tengu from the 12th century was himself the ghost of an emperor . The Hōgen Monogatari tells the story of Emperor <unk> , who was forced by his father to abandon the throne . When he later raised the Hōgen Rebellion to take back the country from Emperor Go @-@ Shirakawa , he was defeated and exiled to <unk> Province on Shikoku . According to legend he died in torment , having sworn to haunt the nation of Japan as a great demon , and thus became a fearsome tengu with long nails and eyes like a kite 's . 
 In stories from the 13th century , tengu began to abduct young boys as well as the priests they had always targeted . The boys were often returned , while the priests would be found tied to the tops of trees or other high places . All of the tengu 's victims , however , would come back in a state of near death or madness , sometimes after having been tricked into eating animal dung . 
 The tengu of this period were often conceived of as the ghosts of the arrogant , and as a result the creatures have become strongly associated with vanity and pride . Today the Japanese expression tengu ni naru , literally , " becoming a tengu " , is still used to describe a conceited person . 
 = = Great and small demons = = 
 In the Genpei <unk> , written in the late Kamakura period , a god appears to Go @-@ Shirakawa and gives a detailed account of tengu ghosts . He says that they fall onto the tengu road because , as Buddhists , they cannot go to Hell , yet as people with bad principles , they also cannot go to Heaven . He describes the appearance of different types of tengu : the ghosts of priests , nuns , ordinary men , and ordinary women , all of whom in life possessed excessive pride . The god introduces the notion that not all tengu are equal ; knowledgeable men become daitengu ( <unk> , greater tengu ) , but ignorant ones become <unk> ( <unk> , small tengu ) . 
 The philosopher Hayashi <unk> lists the greatest of these daitengu as Sōjōbō of Kurama , <unk> of Atago , and <unk> of Hira . The demons of Kurama and Atago are among the most famous tengu . 
 A section of the Tengu <unk> , later quoted by Inoue Enryō , lists the daitengu in this order : 
 Sōjōbō ( <unk> ) of Mount Kurama 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Atago 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of the Hira Mountains 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Akiba 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount <unk> 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Hiko 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of <unk> ( mountain ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Ueno ( Ueno Park ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Itsukushima 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount <unk> 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Katsuragi 
 Tsukuba @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) of Hitachi Province 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Fuji 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of Mount Takao 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) of <unk> 
 Saburō ( <unk> ) of Mount <unk> 
 Ajari ( <unk> ) of Higo Province 
 <unk> are often pictured in a more human @-@ like form than their underlings , and due to their long noses , they may also called <unk> ( <unk> , tall @-@ nosed tengu ) . <unk> may conversely be depicted as more bird @-@ like . They are sometimes called Karasu @-@ Tengu ( <unk> , crow tengu ) , or <unk> or konoha @-@ tengu ( <unk> , <unk> tengu ) . Inoue Enryō described two kinds of tengu in his <unk> : the great daitengu , and the small , bird @-@ like konoha @-@ tengu who live in Cryptomeria trees . The konoha @-@ tengu are noted in a book from 1746 called the <unk> <unk> Dan ( <unk> ) , as bird @-@ like creatures with wings two meters across which were seen catching fish in the Ōi River , but this name rarely appears in literature otherwise . 
 Creatures that do not fit the classic bird or yamabushi image are sometimes called tengu . For example , tengu in the guise of wood @-@ spirits may be called <unk> ( occasionally written <unk> ) ( <unk> , dog guests ) , but this word can also refer to tengu with canine mouths or other features . The people of Kōchi Prefecture on Shikoku believe in a creature called <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , lawn tengu ) , but this is a small childlike being who loves <unk> wrestling and sometimes dwells in the water , and is generally considered one of the many kinds of kappa . Another water @-@ dwelling tengu is the <unk> ( <unk> , river tengu ) of the Greater Tokyo Area . This creature is rarely seen , but it is believed to create strange fireballs and be a nuisance to fishermen . 
 = = Protective spirits and deities = = 
 The <unk> , a book of Buddhist parables from the Kamakura period , makes a point of distinguishing between good and bad tengu . The book explains that the former are in command of the latter and are the protectors , not opponents , of Buddhism - although the flaw of pride or ambition has caused them to fall onto the demon road , they remain the same basically good , dharma @-@ abiding persons they were in life . 
 The tengu 's unpleasant image continued to erode in the 17th century . Some stories now presented them as much less malicious , protecting and blessing Buddhist institutions rather than menacing them or setting them on fire . According to a legend in the 18th @-@ century <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , a tengu took the form of a yamabushi and faithfully served the abbot of a Zen monastery until the man guessed his attendant 's true form . The tengu 's wings and huge nose then reappeared . The tengu requested a piece of wisdom from his master and left , but he continued , unseen , to provide the monastery with miraculous aid . 
 In the 18th and 19th centuries , tengu came to be feared as the vigilant protectors of certain forests . In the 1764 collection of strange stories <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , a tale tells of a man who wanders into a deep valley while gathering leaves , only to be faced with a sudden and ferocious hailstorm . A group of peasants later tell him that he was in the valley where the <unk> live , and anyone who takes a single leaf from that place will surely die . In the <unk> Chomon Kishū ( <unk> ) , written in 1849 , the author describes the customs of the wood @-@ cutters of Mino Province , who used a sort of rice cake called <unk> @-@ mochi to placate the tengu , who would otherwise perpetrate all sorts of mischief . In other provinces a special kind of fish called <unk> was offered to the tengu by woodsmen and hunters , in exchange for a successful day 's work . The people of Ishikawa Prefecture have until recently believed that the tengu loathe mackerel , and have used this fish as a charm against kidnappings and hauntings by the mischievous spirits . 
 Tengu are worshipped as beneficial kami ( gods or revered spirits ) in various Japanese religious cults . For example , the tengu Saburō of Izuna is worshipped on that mountain and various others as Izuna Gongen ( <unk> , incarnation of Izuna ) , one of the primary deities in the Izuna <unk> cult , which also has ties to fox sorcery and the Dakini of Tantric Buddhism . Izuna Gongen is depicted as a beaked , winged figure with snakes wrapped around his limbs , surrounded by a halo of flame , riding on the back of a fox and brandishing a sword . Worshippers of tengu on other sacred mountains have adopted similar images for their deities , such as <unk> ( <unk> ) or Akiba Gongen ( <unk> ) of Akiba and <unk> Gongen ( <unk> ) of Saijō @-@ ji Temple in Odawara . 
 = = In popular folk tales = = 
 Tengu appear frequently in the orally @-@ transmitted tales collected by Japanese folklorists . As these stories are often humorous , they tend to portray tengu as ridiculous creatures who are easily tricked or confused by humans . Some common folk tales in which tengu appear include : 
 " The Tengu 's Magic Cloak " ( <unk> , Tengu no <unk> ) : A boy looks through an ordinary piece of bamboo and pretends he can see distant places . A tengu , overwhelmed by curiosity , offers to trade it for a magic straw cloak that renders the wearer invisible . Having duped the tengu , the boy continues his mischief while wearing the cloak . Another version of this story tells of an ugly old man who tricks a tengu into giving him his magical cloak and causes mayhem for his fellow villagers . The story ends with the tengu regaining the coat through a game of riddle exchange and punishes the man by turning him into a wolf . 
 " The Old Man 's Lump Removed " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ tori <unk> ) : An old man has a lump or tumor on his face . In the mountains he encounters a band of tengu making merry and joins their dancing . He pleases them so much that they want him to join them the next night , and offer a gift for him . In addition , they take the lump off his face , thinking that he will want it back and therefore have to join them the next night . An unpleasant neighbor , who also has a lump , hears of the old man 's good fortune and attempts to repeat it , and steal the gift . The tengu , however , simply give him the first lump in addition to his own , because they are disgusted by his bad dancing , and because he tried to steal the gift . 
 " The Tengu 's Fan " ( <unk> , Tengu no <unk> ) A scoundrel obtains a tengu 's magic fan , which can shrink or grow noses . He secretly uses this item to grotesquely extend the nose of a rich man 's daughter , and then shrinks it again in exchange for her hand in marriage . Later he accidentally fans himself while he dozes , and his nose grows so long it reaches heaven , resulting in painful misfortune for him . 
 " The Tengu 's <unk> " ( <unk> , " Tengu no <unk> " ) : A gambler meets a tengu , who asks him what he is most frightened of . The gambler lies , claiming that he is terrified of gold or mochi . The tengu answers truthfully that he is frightened of a kind of plant or some other mundane item . The tengu , thinking he is playing a cruel trick , then causes money or rice cakes to rain down on the gambler . The gambler is of course delighted and proceeds to scare the tengu away with the thing he fears most . The gambler then obtains the tengu 's magic gourd ( or another treasured item ) that was left behind . 
 " The Tengu , and the <unk> " : A tengu bothers a woodcutter , showing off his supernatural abilities by guessing everything the man is thinking . The woodcutter swings his axe , and a splinter of wood hits the tengu on the nose . The tengu flees in terror , exclaiming that humans are dangerous creatures who can do things without thinking about them . 
 = = Martial arts = = 
 During the 14th century , the tengu began to trouble the world outside of the Buddhist clergy , and like their ominous ancestors the tiāngoǔ , the tengu became creatures associated with war . Legends eventually ascribed to them great knowledge in the art of skilled combat . 
 This reputation seems to have its origins in a legend surrounding the famous warrior Minamoto no Yoshitsune . When Yoshitsune was a young boy going by the name of Ushiwaka @-@ <unk> , his father , <unk> , was assassinated by the Taira clan . Taira no Kiyomori , head of the Taira , allowed the child to survive on the grounds that he be exiled to the temple on Mount Kurama and become a monk . But one day in the <unk> @-@ ga @-@ dani Valley , Ushiwaka encountered the mountain 's tengu , Sōjōbō . This spirit taught the boy the art of swordsmanship so that he might bring vengeance on the Taira . 
 Originally the actions of this tengu were portrayed as another attempt by demons to throw the world into chaos and war , but as Yoshitsune 's renown as a legendary warrior increased , his monstrous teacher came to be depicted in a much more sympathetic and honorable light . In one of the most famous renditions of the story , the Noh play Kurama Tengu , Ushiwaka is the only person from his temple who does not give up an outing in disgust at the sight of a strange yamabushi . Sōjōbō thus befriends the boy and teaches him out of sympathy for his plight . 
 Two stories from the 19th century continue this theme : In the <unk> Chomon Kishū , a boy is carried off by a tengu and spends three years with the creature . He comes home with a magic gun that never misses a shot . A story from Inaba Province , related by Inoue Enryō , tells of a girl with poor manual dexterity who is suddenly possessed by a tengu . The spirit wishes to rekindle the declining art of swordsmanship in the world . Soon a young samurai appears to whom the tengu has appeared in a dream , and the possessed girl instructs him as an expert swordsman . Some rumors surrounding the ninja indicate that they were also instructed by the tengu . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Profoundly entrenched in the Japanese imagination for centuries , tengu continue to be popular subjects in modern fiction , both in Japan and increasingly in other countries . They often appear among the many characters and creatures featured in Japanese cinema , animation , comics , <unk> , and video games . 
 = = = Supplementary sources = = = 
 de Visser , M. W. ( 1908 ) . " The Fox and the Badger in Japanese Folklore " . Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan ( Z. P. <unk> & Co . ) 36 ( 3 ) : 107 – 116 . 
 Mizuki , Shigeru ( 2003 ) . Mujara 1 : Kantō , Hokkaidō , Okinawa @-@ hen . Japan : Soft Garage . ISBN 4 @-@ 86133 @-@ 004 @-@ 1 . 
 Mizuki , Shigeru ( 2003 ) . Mujara 2 : Chūbu @-@ hen . Japan : Soft Garage . ISBN 4 @-@ 86133 @-@ 005 @-@ X. 
 Mizuki , Shigeru ( 2004 ) . Mujara 4 : Chūgoku / Shikoku @-@ hen . Japan : Soft Garage . ISBN 4 @-@ 86133 @-@ 016 @-@ 5 . 
 Moriarty , Elizabeth ( 1972 ) . " The Communitarian Aspect of Shinto Matsuri " . Asian Folklore Studies ( Asian Folklore Studies , Nanzan University ) 31 ( 2 ) : 91 – 140 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Knutsen , Roald ( 2011 ) . Tengu - The shamanic and esoteric origins of <unk> martial arts . Kent : Global Oriental . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 22 @-@ 7 . 
 = Funerary Monument to Sir John Hawkwood = 
 The Funerary Monument ( or Equestrian Monument ) to Sir John Hawkwood is a fresco by Paolo Uccello , commemorating English condottiero John Hawkwood , commissioned in 1436 for Florence 's Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore . The fresco is an important example of art commemorating a soldier @-@ for @-@ hire who fought in the Italian peninsula and is a seminal work in the development of perspective . 
 The politics of the commissioning and recommissioning of the fresco have been analyzed and debated by historians . The fresco is often cited as a form of " Florentine propaganda " for its appropriation of a foreign soldier of fortune as a Florentine hero and for its implied promise to other condottieri of the potential rewards of serving Florence . The fresco has also been interpreted as a product of internal political competition between the Albizzi and Medici factions in Renaissance Florence , due to the latter 's modification of the work 's symbolism and iconography during its recommissioning . 
 The fresco is the oldest extant and authenticated work of Uccello , from a relatively well @-@ known aspect of his career compared to the periods before and after its creation . The fresco has been restored ( once by Lorenzo di Credi , who added the frame ) and is now detached from the wall ; it has been repositioned twice in modern times . 
 = = John Hawkwood = = 
 Hawkwood had a long military career and a complicated relationship with Florence . He fought for England during the Hundred Years War and then with the " Great Company " which had harassed the Avignon Papacy . After gaining command of the " White Company " from Albert Sterz in the 1360s , Hawkwood led the company across the Alps in 1363 in the employ of John II , Marquess of Montferrat , to take part in his war against Milan . Hawkwood and the " White Company " remained in Italy , accepting money from many city @-@ states , both to wage war and to refrain from it . Hawkwood 's reputation as one of the ablest condottieri in the peninsula developed in the ensuing decades , during which he was employed ( by both sides ) in the Pisan – Florentine War ( 1363 – 1364 ) , notably winning the Battle of Cascina ( 1364 ) for Florence , in the wars of Perugia against the Pope ( 1369 ) , and in the service of Bernabò Visconti in his war against a coalition that included Pisa and Florence , and even ( in 1372 ) the Marquis of <unk> . 
 Hawkwood then entered the service of Pope Gregory XI in his wars against Milan ( 1372 – 1375 ) and in the War of the Eight Saints ( 1375 – 1378 ) , during which Hawkwood helped put down the Florentine @-@ instigated rebellions in the Papal States . During the conflict , Hawkwood was paid 130 @,@ 000 florins — which was extracted from local clergy , bishops , abbots , monasteries , and ecclesiastical institutions — to confine his activities to suppressing the rebellions in the Papal States , rather than directly attacking Florence . Hawkwood also received a 600 florin annual salary for the next five years and a lifetime annual pension of 1 @,@ 200 florins . 
 Hawkwood married <unk> , the illegitimate daughter of Bernabò Visconti , in 1377 . In that same year he defected to Florence . Hawkwood 's 1377 massacre at Cesena during the twilight of his papal employment in the War of the Eight Saints continues to tarnish his legacy . Thus , until 1377 , Hawkwood had principally served the Visconti of Milan and their allies in Pisa , Lucca , and Siena , usually against the interests of Florence , making him an ironic candidate for a monument in the Duomo of Florence . At the bidding of Pisa , Hawkwood attacked the Brunelleschi family 's Villa <unk> in Castello , burned Florentine subject territories around <unk> after defeating Florentine condottiero Ranuccio Farnese il Vecchio , and even taunted Florence from outside the city walls . 
 However , Hawkwood was the de facto commander @-@ in @-@ chief ( Captain @-@ General ) of Florence 's military from 1377 until immediately prior to his death in 1394 . Hawkwood won many victories for Florence , including his suppression of the <unk> revolt in January 1382 , but contemporary Florentines would have regarded Hawkwood 's successful retreat from Milan late in his career , across three rivers — including the notorious Oglio — and across a barren countryside , as his " greatest military feat " . 
 Hawkwood , now in his seventies , made preparations to return to England , where he had been sending money to acquire land , and set up a chantry . Just as he was liquidating his affairs in Italy , he died , on March 17 , 1394 . 
 In 1395 , Richard II of England petitioned Florence for the return of Hawkwood 's body , as he had done for Robert de Vere , Duke of Ireland , the local magnate to the Hawkwood family in England , in whose service he had begun his military career . Florence acquiesced to Richard II 's request in a June 3 , 1395 letter : 
 Our devotion can deny nothing to the eminence of your highness . We will leave nothing undone that is possible to do , so that we may fulfill your good pleasure . So , therefore , although we consider it reflected glory on us and our people to keep the ashes and bones of the late brave and most magnificent captain John Hawkwood , who , as commander of our army , fought most gloriously for us and who at public expense was interred in the principal church of Santa <unk> ... nevertheless , according to the tenor of your request , we freely concede permission that his remains shall return to their native land . 
 However , it remains an open question whether Hawkwood 's remains were ever transferred to England , to the tomb prepared for him at St. Peter 's in Sible Hedingham , or whether his remains were reburied in 1405 under the old choir of the Duomo , of which record has been lost since it was repaved in the 16th century . In any case , the tomb monument would have run into difficulty , as a ban on tombs above floor level in the Cathedral was passed on April 5 , 1400 . 
 = = Context = = 
 In the Quattrocento , it was traditional for condottieri like Hawkwood to be buried in major public churches , even when their careers had produced mixed results for the city @-@ state in question . The genre of the equestrian statue was revived during the Quattrocento for the purpose of commemorating condottieri ; Donatello 's Equestrian Statue of <unk> ( c . 1447 – 1453 ) in Padua is the first surviving bronze equestrian statue since Ancient Rome . <unk> <unk> was interred at San Francesco in Venice ; Jacopo de ' Cavalli at SS . Giovanni e Paolo in Rome ; Paolo Savelli at Basilica dei <unk> in Venice , along with a wooden equestrian statue on a marble sarcophagus , which — along with the bronze horses on the façade of St. Mark — may have inspired Uccello 's Hawkwood ; and Konrad <unk> at a church in Pisa . When such burials were not possible , frescoes were an acceptable substitute : <unk> da <unk> was painted on horseback by Simone Martini in Palazzo <unk> in Siena in 1328 ; Pietro Farnese was depicted in a papier @-@ mâché equestrian monument atop a sarcophagus in the Florence Cathedral in 1363 . 
 Holding ever more lavish funeral ceremonies for fallen condottieri was only one way in which Italian city @-@ states competed with each other to attract the services of the most skilled mercenaries . Hawkwood 's funeral was sandwiched between the funerals in Siena of Giovanni d <unk> degli Ubaldini — who had been poisoned by the Florentines in the Visconti wars — and Giovanni " Tedesco " da Pietramala . The commissioning of Uccello to repaint the fresco came at the " climax " of a war with Lucca , which had recently begun a monument to honor Niccolò Piccinino , in contrast to Piccinino 's defaming portrait in the Palazzo della Signoria in 1428 , depicting him hanging upside @-@ down in chains , which was " <unk> [ ed ] " in April 1430 . 
 = = Commissioning = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On August 20 , 1393 — when the Signoria , at the suggestion of Coluccio Salutati , voted to erect a marble statue of Hawkwood in the Duomo , " that brave men may know that the commune of Florence <unk> true service " — Hawkwood was liquidating his Tuscan properties and preparing to return to England . It was unprecedented for the Signoria to vote to erect a monument to a living person in the cathedral . The ambiguous plans of the Signoria — which likely was aware of Hawkwood 's health status — might well have been for a tomb rather than a cenotaph ; Hawkwood died soon after , on March 17 , 1394 . The Signoria went to great lengths ( unsuccessfully ) to entice <unk> to remain in the city — voting to transfer various sums of money to her ( in exchange for Hawkwood 's Tuscan fortress ) , despite " thorny legal issues " which required multiple acts of the city council — indicating to some extent the market value of Hawkwood 's symbolic capital . 
 Hawkwood 's March 20 funeral began in the Piazza della Signoria , continued to the <unk> di San Giovanni , where his body was placed on the baptismal font for public viewing , and culminated in the Cathedral , at a cost of 410 florins , not counting the substantial expenses of the Guilds . 
 The plans for Hawkwood 's commemoration were modified on December 2 , 1395 , when it was decided to also rework the wooden monument of Pietro Farnese , the hero of the Pisan war , and to place marble tomb monuments to Farnese and Hawkwood on the north aisle , facing the high altar . Painters Agnolo Gaddi and Giuliano Arrighi were selected by a committee to sketch directly onto the Duomo wall models for the Hawkwood and Farnese tombs . Although neither tomb was realized , documentary evidence suggests that a painting of Hawkwood — with a figure of Hawkwood by Gaddi and a sarcophagus by <unk> — was completed by June 16 , 1396 . Historian Frances Stonor Saunders speculates that Uccello may have based his representation of Hawkwood on this early painting and that the earlier painting may have been based on a death mask of Hawkwood . The Hawkwood fresco is situated in the third bay of the northern wall , today flanked by paintings of Dante ( c . 1455 ) and a similar fresco monument to fellow mercenary Niccolò da Tolentino ( 1456 , by Andrea del <unk> ) ; fictive tombs in fresco of two humanist <unk> — Bishop Corsini ( c . 1422 , probably by Giovanni dal Ponte ) and Fra Luigi de ' <unk> ( c . 1439 by Bicci di Lorenzo ) , an Augustinian monk who founded a literary academy — are much smaller than those of the two condottieri . The fresco probably came to replace the tomb ( rather than serving as a place marker for it ) for reasons of expedience and frugality , although on these points there is little documentary evidence . 
 = = = Fresco = = = 
 The fresco was initially commissioned , decades after Hawkwood 's death , in May 1433 by the Albizzi government , just months before the regime 's collapse . Perhaps the project was an attempt by the Albizzi to hearken back to a time when the oligarchic elite of Florence had been more aligned with their own conservative interests . On July 13 , 1433 , design competition notices for the new monument were placed at the Duomo , the Baptistry , and <unk> . The instigators of the renewed project were the grandsons of Guido di <unk> del Pera <unk> , one of the ambassadors who ( unsuccessfully ) pleaded with Hawkwood to return to Florence 's service in 1389 , and Donato <unk> , a 14th @-@ century military and political historian . It is almost inconceivable that the commissioners of the monument would not have regarded Hawkwood as a self @-@ interested mercenary , knowing that he often acted against the interests of Florence . After the launching of the design competition , in September 1433 , Cosimo and <unk> de ' Medici were exiled from Florence , for — among other things — allegedly attempting to embroil Florence in a war with Lucca . 
 = = = Recommissioning = = = 
 After Cosimo 's triumphant return to Florence , rather than scrapping the project , in May 1436 the Medici regime hired Uccello to replace the Gaddi and <unk> fresco . Hugh Hudson suggests that it would have been too risky for the Medici to cancel the Albizzi project , so they instead shrewdly modified it to fit their interests . There is , of course , some weakness to attributing the commissioning and re @-@ commissioning of the monument to Albizzi or Medici intrigues , as only two ( maybe three ) of the eight operai on July 13 , 1433 were members of the Albizzi faction and only one was a Medici when it was resumed on May 18 , 1436 ; yet the influences of both factions doubtlessly did not require blood relation . Around this time , documents attest to multiple repairs of a nearby window , opening the possibility that the original fresco had experienced water damage , and would have needed to be restored in any case . Others have suggested that the recommissioning was part of the " refurbishing " of the cathedral associated with its rededication as Santa Maria del Fiore by Pope Eugene IV in March 1436 . Yet , <unk> concludes that " undoubtedly under pressure from the Medici " the operai discarded their plans for a straightforward restoration of the Gaddi fresco and opted for a completely new monument . 
 = = = Uccello = = = 
 The choice of Paolo Uccello ( born in Florence in 1397 ) , who had apprenticed for Lorenzo Ghiberti from June 1407 , busying himself polishing the " Gates of Paradise " , may have been an attempt to find a painter knowledgeable in bronze and statuary , which the fresco was to mimic . For centuries , art historians have regarded Uccello as a less @-@ prominent artist at the time of the Hawkwood commission : he is not mentioned in the preface of Alberti 's De Pictura , nor in Domenico Veneziano 's 1438 letter to Piero di Cosimo de ' Medici listing the major contemporary painters ; nor have art historians even attempted to speculate that he studied the frescoes at the Brancacci Chapel . One difficulty for art historians attempting to gauge Uccello 's reputation at the time of the Hawkwood 's commissioning is the 10 @-@ year blind spot in the reconstruction of Uccello 's career between 1415 — when Uccello was made a member of the Guild of Doctors and Apothecaries ( Arte dei Medici e <unk> ) — and his trip to Venice in 1425 . Similarly , all the works of Uccello 's Venetian period are either missing or else of uncertain attribution : Uccello is thought to have made a no @-@ longer @-@ existing mosaic of St. Peter on the façade of St. Mark 's Basilica , to have collaborated on the design of architectural structures for the mosaics in the <unk> Chapel of St. Mark 's by Michele <unk> , and possibly to have made some geometrical pattern decorations for the interior of St. Mark 's . 
 Uccello was known to have been in Venice in 1427 and to have returned to Florence by 1431 , allowing a second window for historiographical speculation : some say he may have gone to Rome ; others say he went directly to Florence . Uccello probably painted the Creation of the Animals and Creation of Adam ( c . 1431 ) in the upper part of one of the bays of the <unk> Verde ( the " Green Cloister " ) in Santa Maria Novella , which — like the Hawkwood , as specified in its commission — is in the " terra verde " grisaille manner . Perhaps Uccello worked on the stories from the life of the Virgin and St. Stephen in the Chapel of Our Lady of the Assumption in the Prato Cathedral around 1435 , although Pope @-@ Hennessy , <unk> , and Salmi all dispute this attribution . 
 Thus , the Florence Cathedral is the repository of all the extant works of Uccello whose attribution is firmly rooted in contemporary documents : two murals — the Hawkwood and the Clock Face with Four Heads of Prophets or Evangelists ( 1443 ) — and two stained glass windows — Resurrection ( 1443 – 1444 ) and Nativity ( 1443 – 1444 ) . The Hawkwood is Uccello 's " earliest dated and fully authenticated extant work " . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Uccello 's Hawkwood was completed , only to be ordered redone by the capo maestro of the Opera del Duomo , on June 28 , 1436 . Uccello was found not to have been at fault on July 6 , and paid for both his first and second versions , the latter of which was finished before August 31 . Incidentally , the second version — copied from the original , rather than direct observation — is the only true extant testimony to Hawkwood 's appearance . The demanded redesign — which was ordered soon after post @-@ Albizzi members secured a majority among the operai — is at the heart of any discussion about the political implications of the fresco . For centuries , art historians have argued that the rejection was rooted in questions of perspective and color , while more recent scholarship suggests it was the content of the fresco to which the capo maestro objected . The specific objections of the capo maestro are not documented — except that the fresco was " not painted as it should be " , but it is clear that only the portion containing the horse and rider was to be erased and redone . A preparatory drawing in the Uffizi with the same static scene is the primary clue to the appearance of the original fresco , in which Hawkwood was apparently more armored , taller , and — along with his horse — in a more militaristic stance . The Hawkwood thus both participated in and reinforced the Quattrocento trend that every Florentine public monument to a soldier of fortune employ a parade horse rather than a battle charger , in less than complete armor , and at a pace more suited for reviewing troops than charging into battle . A study which subjected the drawing to ultraviolet rays confirmed that Uccello had originally depicted Hawkwood as " more threatening " , with his baton raised and horse " at the ready " . 
 The fresco 's current appearance is not identical to the version redone by Uccello . The frame with candelabra @-@ pattern decorations was added by Lorenzo di Credi in 1524 , when he restored the fresco . In 1688 , it was restored again , in refurbishments celebrating the marriage of Ferdinand de ' Medici and Violante of Bavaria . The fresco was restored and transferred to canvas in 1842 by Giovanni Rizzoli and moved to the west wall of the Duomo , only to be moved back to the north wall in 1947 , after being mounted on a masonite and aluminum support . It has been argued , based on Uccello 's alleged use of Masaccio 's eye @-@ point perspective , that the painting was originally five feet higher than it stands today . The fully restored fresco was also briefly taken down in 1953 – 1954 to be shown in the " Quattro Maestri " ( " Four Masters " ) exhibition in Florence . 
 = = Style = = 
 The reworked fresco has been seen as " classicizing " the image of the condottieri , with the terra verde technique giving the conceit of an equestrian bronze statue . The horse 's proportions are based loosely upon those prescribed by Alberti in De <unk> <unk> , which in turn is based upon the anonymous <unk> del Cavallo <unk> ; however , in many ways the horse departs radically from Alberti 's ideal of a harmonious and " lithe " creature in the style of <unk> d 'Este 's monument to Niccolò III d 'Este , Arco del Cavallo in Ferrara . Furthermore , Uccello 's perspective in the Hawkwood monument openly flaunted Alberti 's conception of perspective as demarcated in De Pictura ( 1435 , translated into Italian as Della <unk> in 1436 ) : the vanishing point is at the eye @-@ level of the spectator rather than within the field of the fresco , for example . Alberti 's De re <unk> also objected to statues of soldiers and / or lay burials in churches . Although the fresco is often called " monochrome " , its background is dark red , the horse and tomb are accented in red , black , white , and orange . The Trompe @-@ l 'œil perspective from the base , the chiaroscuro relief @-@ effect of the horse and the rider , and lighting from the left are similar to Masaccio 's Holy Trinity . The connection to Masaccio is so strong ( or so often reported ) that Francesco Albertini actually attributed the work to <unk> in 1510 . However , Uccello 's fresco has two viewpoints : the horse and rider are painted as if on level with the spectator , and the cenotaph is seen as if from below . 
 A variety of explanations have been proposed for this split perspective , which has even been suggested by Frederick Hartt to have been a practical joke . <unk> in these questions of perspective is Vasari 's criticism of the horse 's raising both its right legs at the same time , which would likely topple the horse , if accomplished . However , it is clear from Uccello 's other works that he was not interested in using perspective simply for realism ; rather , Uccello " placed in an unnatural , fantastic overall atmosphere , the fruit of this painter 's complex and unique imagination " . This style has even been cited as an example of synthetic realism in line with the late Gothic movement . 
 = = = Inscription = = = 
 <unk> the classical elements of the fresco is the Latin inscription , added on December 17 , 1436 and penned by Bartolomeo Fortini de <unk> , son of Benedetto di Ser Landi Fortini , former treasurer of Florence and apprentice of <unk> Alberti , one of the chief negotiators of Florence during the War of the Eight Saints — the first such inscription on an antique sarcophagus in a Florentine painting . The inscription reads : " Ioannes <unk> eques <unk> dux aetatis <unk> <unk> et rei militaris <unk> habitus est " ( John Hawkwood , British knight , most prudent leader of his age and most expert in the art of war ) . The epitaph , likely a reference to Hawkwood 's aforementioned <unk> ( " most prudent " ) retreat across the Oglio , is borrowed from the eulogy of Roman general Fabius Maximus , who wore down Hannibal by tactical retreat and avoiding battle . The eulogy of Fabius Maximus <unk> so distinctly with Quattrocento humanism that some scholars have even dubbed it a " Renaissance fake " . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 By classicizing the condottieri , the portrait may have represented an opportunity to — as Leonardo Bruni had advocated — " revive the ancient form of tribute " by choosing a " long @-@ dead and uncontroversial subject " . Mallett has interpreted the fresco as a Medicean attempt to exalt " the <unk> of condottieri to a populace with mixed feelings " . In fact , Cosimo may have allowed the former Albizzi project to go through merely to pave the way for a similar honor for Niccolò da Tolentino ( died 1435 ) , a condottiero whom the Medici would have favored over Hawkwood . The Tolentino fresco was commissioned 20 years after the soldier of fortune 's death , and was specified in its contract to be painted in " the same manner and form as the Hawkwood " . Thus , the recommissioning of the portrait may be read as part of an ongoing debate over the appropriateness of condottieri for a Republic . Bruni raises this subject in De militia ( 1420 ) , arguing for a standing Florentine militia , especially given the close ties between Tolentino and the Medici . Intending to depict Hawkwood as an " obedient captain conducting an inspection of troops " , the conceit of Hawkwood patiently reviewing troops is " suggestive of a loyal communal servant " . 
 The Medici may have wished to emphasize that point that any condottiero , no matter how hostile or fickle , could be bought off and manipulated to Florentine interests and truly <unk> . Attempts to claim Hawkwood as Florentine were well underway even before his death ; for example , Pier Paolo <unk> the Elder wrote in 1391 that Hawkwood " no longer has any foreign blood ... and has become regenerated more strongly and more healthful in fiber and body under the moderating sky of Italy " . Such a viewpoint has even crept into modern scholarship : the 19th @-@ century Italian historian Ercole <unk> called Hawkwood " the last of the foreign condottieri or the first of the Italian ones " ; his 18th @-@ century biography Domenico Maria <unk> called him " general captain of Florentine armies " and virtually ignored two decades of Hawkwood 's service to other city @-@ states ; even in the 20th century , Friedrich <unk> attempted to characterize Hawkwood 's direct attack on Florence as a " marriage proposal " . 
 = Kacey Wong = 
 Dr. Kacey Wong ( born 1970 ) is a Hong Kong visual artist and educator – formerly Assistant Professor at the School of Design , Hong Kong Polytechnic University . Wong has received the Hong Kong Contemporary Arts Award by the Hong Kong Art Museum ( 2012 ) , Best Artist Award ( 2010 ) ; and Rising Artist Award and Outstanding Arts Education Award ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Wong Kwok @-@ <unk> was born in 1970 in Hong Kong . Due to concerns about the future of Hong Kong at the time , Wong was sent away at the age of 14 to Long Island in the United States as a secondary school pupil . His chosen name " Kacey " is derived from the initials of his Chinese name . Wong was admitted to Cornell University , from where he obtained a bachelor 's degree in Architecture . He has practiced internationally as an architect and artist . His sculptures explore philosophical ideas that engage the body of the viewer . He holds a master 's degree in Sculpture at Chelsea College of Arts . Wong also obtained his Doctorate in Fine Arts from the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in 2003 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Upon graduation from university , Wong worked as an architect for nearly six years in New York , Japan , and Hong Kong , in the fields of graphic , interior and architectural design . He set up in independent practice . Finding that the professional world as an architect did not allow for the degree of freedom he desired , he gave up a well @-@ paid professional career and left for further studies in England . After finishing the masters programme in London in 1998 , Wong returned to Hong Kong and taught sculpture and art appreciation at the Chinese University of Hong Kong for two years . Wong later became Assistant professor in the school of design at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University , until 2015 . 
 In 2003 , Wong was bestowed the Rising Artist Award by the Hong Kong Arts Council and Outstanding Arts Education Award . The Hong Kong Museum of Art awarded Wong their Hong Kong Contemporary Arts Award in 2012 . 
 = = Works = = 
 Wong stated that most people take for granted what they possess , and may be without identity or culture . Wong says his self @-@ awareness , and what Hong Kong represents to him , stem from the years he spent abroad . He says that only by living amidst a second culture can one fully come to realise what one represents and where one belongs . A thread that runs through much of his work is therefore the notion of home , homelessness and wandering . Since 2011 , his repertoire has taken on a political dimension . 
 = = = Space = = = 
 Home ( 1999 ) , Personal Skyscraper ( 2000 ) , and City Space ( 2001 ) were exhibitions where Wong was both exhibitor and curator . 
 " 10 Boxes : Everything I 've Ever Thought About , I Put Inside a Box " in 2000 was Wong 's first solo exhibition . The series of ten sculptures , housed in wall @-@ mounted boxes , each having its own name , explores a different theme or spatial relationship . For example , Office Block symbolises the power structures within companies ; Only You is based on romantic relations ; Destroy Them treats subjects like education and childhood influences . 
 In 2008 , Wong created Wandering Home , an installation consisting of a mobile home conceptualised on city living and the homeless , which was shown at the Venice Biennale of Architecture . The small tin hut on the back of a tricycle is a comment on Hong Kong society , and the plight of people who sleep on the streets and who are forced to move on periodically by government officials . Costing HK $ 5 @,@ 000 to make , the house is not exactly a practical solution to the homeless , but the concept was tried out on street sleepers in Sham Shui Po . In 2008 , Wong created Tin Man No.11 , an essay in space in the form of a metallic robot that transforms into a bed . He extended the concept by creating Famiglia Grande , a series of transformable cases . In 2009 , Wong attended the <unk> Festival in Hamburg as a skyscraper . 
 His work Paddling Home , a 4 ft × 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m × 1 @.@ 2 m ) floating house , was set to sea in January 2010 . The work , symbolising the Hong Kong 's property market where the accommodation is high @-@ density , small and pricey , was selected at the Hong Kong & Shenzhen Bi City Biennale of Urbanism Architecture exhibition that year . The design includes tiled walls , wooden floorboards , bay windows , a television , air @-@ conditioning , roof space from which to drive a few golf balls and a 5 @-@ horsepower outboard motor . It was priced at a symbolical HK $ 888 @,@ 888 ( $ 114 @,@ 000 ) . Wong said that , as the square foot price is [ an astronomical ] HK $ 55 @,@ 555 , Paddling Home is an ironic statement comparing the perils of owning a <unk> and glossily @-@ packaged high end residence to being on the high seas . When asked in 2012 , Wong said he considers Paddling Home his most challenging work to date . 
 He published a photographic book , Drift City 2000 – 2010 , as the culmination of a ten @-@ year project where he travelled the world and superposed himself as a cardboard skyscraper ( Skyscraper Man ) in different surroundings as a critique of modernism . For the project , Wong collected images from over 20 locations around the world , including one at the Egyptian pyramids made when he and his wife were on honeymoon in 2002 . That image cost him a three @-@ hour art lecture to police who demanded a substantial " photography fee " . 
 = = = Environmentalism = = = 
 Wong became interested in environmentalism through visiting a waste reprocessing centre in Hong Kong , and realising just how little was recycled . His works re @-@ use or recycle materials obtained from rubbish tips . In 2010 , Wong curated " Memory of the Forest " , a collection of animal sculptures by himself and 13 students made using discarded wood , which symbolises the animals ' lost habitats . Wong contributed a similar " Mega Musical Art Piece " to the 2012 Hong Kong Cleanup campaign in the form of an octopus . Wong participated in a campaign of the Ocean Recovery Alliance in Hong Kong in April 2013 , contributing Death by Amputation – a sculpture of a life @-@ sized finned shark – to an exhibition in Stanley harbour in the hope that it will provoke thought on the source of food and the cruelty inflicted by humans on animals . In 2014 , as part of an animal @-@ themed exhibition with other artists , he unveiled Ball Ball , an imposing sculpture of his one @-@ eyed cat again made of discarded wood . 
 = = = Protest art = = = 
 Wong cites his political awakening being in 2011 , following the arrest of mainland artist Ai Weiwei . He responded by forming a group named Art Citizens ( <unk> ) , and rallied some 2 @,@ 000 artists to march for Ai on 23 April . As curator for the group , he put together a month @-@ long exhibition that opened on 26 May named " Love the Future " ( <unk> ) – a pun on Ai 's name – with works of over 50 artists . Wong 's own showpiece , a <unk> ( alpaca ) sculpture , was one of the stars of the show . Since then , Wong has become known for his eye @-@ catching displays at public demonstrations drawing attention to Hong Kong 's political situation . 
 Fond of quoting Ai , Wong believes that art and politics are <unk> , and that no art is completely without political connotation . Wong sees art as one of the organic elements in the mix of political movements , playing an indirect and auxiliary role . He has variously participated in the annual 1 July protest marches riding in a pink armoured personnel carrier , walking around with a facsimile washing machine on his head , and guiding a 10 @-@ foot red robot he created . For the march on 1 July 2014 , Wong created the “ Warning Squad " , where he and several people dressed as police officers holding parody banners inspired by those increasingly seen used by police officers at protests . His signs included “ Love the Party ” – echoing the CPC slogan “ Love the country , love the Party ” ( <unk> ) – “ Fake Commie ” ; “ Party @-@ State ” referring to the one @-@ party state within China ; “ <unk> ” referring to the gradual infiltration of the communist ethos into Hong Kong ; “ Land Grabbing ” referring to the land acquisition for development in the Northeast New Territories . 
 Wong was highly active during the Umbrella Revolution : he held a contest for the best logo to elevate awareness and generate more concern for the demand for " real universal suffrage " for Hong Kong . Using social media as a " safe platform " for universal participation , he generated considerable awareness and received entries from all over the world . Wong held sessions where he would draw a person 's portrait in one minute without looking at the paper – the concept inspired by Nelson Mandela 's maxim " It always seems impossible until it 's done " . He also co @-@ founded Umbrella Movement Art Preservation , to make an inventory of works and their locations at protest sites , aiming to rescue key pieces before police clearances . 
 For his personal exhibition in March 2015 entitled " Resisting Against Absurdity " , Wong reunited pieces he created for previous protest marches and added new works : in particular the Black Cop Candle – a set of wax statues of policemen in riot gear and raised batons . These symbolise the seven " black " ( meaning corrupt ) cops who beat up a protester and who were caught on film so doing during the 2014 protests ; lighting the candles would melt them and transform them into light . 
 At a march protesting at the disappearances of the staff of Causeway Bay Books in 2015 , Wong symbolically constructed a red gallows carrying the Chinese characters for " abduction " ( <unk> ) , bound himself with red rope and gagged himself with red duct tape . 
 = = = Other roles = = = 
 Wong co @-@ founded Street Design Union to study and advance the role of artists and designers in the socio @-@ political sphere . Since 2001 , he has taken his " Personal Skyscraper Workshops " to primary schools to encourage children to admire the architecture . He does this by having pupils create wearable architectural clothing with foam boards and paper . 
 In 2016 , the M + in Hong Kong commissioned Wong to create the " M + Rover " – a mobile gallery for their schools outreach programme . The Rover was created out of a hollowed @-@ out container in which was installed a wooden interior using disused pallets to create the feel of a whale . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Wong is an avid fan of war @-@ games – an activity he partakes in every week which he says helps with mental agility . He also enjoys diving . Wong and his wife Margaret live with <unk> – a cat which had lost an eye in an accident . Wong chose to adopt him over other cats because he was unique . Wong said : " Imagine you were to go to a pet shop and ask for a one @-@ eyed cat ... ' Sorry we don 't do those ' would be the response " . 
 = Białystok = 
 Białystok [ [ <unk> ] ( <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ stock ; Belarusian : <unk> <unk> , Lithuanian : <unk> , Russian : <unk> Belostok , Yiddish : <unk> <unk> ) is the largest city in northeastern Poland and the capital of the Podlaskie Voivodeship . 
 Located in the Białystok Uplands ( Polish : <unk> Białostocka ) of the Podlaskie Plain ( Polish : <unk> <unk> ) on the banks of the Biała River , Białystok ranks second in terms of population density , eleventh in population , and thirteenth in area , of the cities of Poland . It has historically attracted migrants from elsewhere in Poland and beyond , particularly from Central and Eastern Europe . This is facilitated by the fact that the nearby border with Belarus is also the eastern border of the European Union , as well as the Schengen Area . The city and its adjacent municipalities constitute Metropolitan Białystok . The city has a Warm Summer Continental climate , characterized by warm summers and long frosty winters . Forests are an important part of Białystok 's character , and occupy around 1 @,@ 756 ha ( 4 @,@ 340 acres ) ( 17 @.@ 2 % of the administrative area of the city ) which places it as the fifth most forested city in Poland . 
 The first settlers arrived in the 14th century . A town grew up and received its municipal charter in 1692 . Białystok has traditionally been one of the leading centers of academic , cultural , and artistic life in Podlaskie and the most important economic center in northeastern Poland . In the nineteenth century Białystok was an important center for light industry , which was the reason for the substantial growth of the city 's population . But after the fall of communism in 1989 many of these factories faced severe problems and subsequently closed down . Through the infusion of EU investment funds , the city continues to work to reshape itself into a modern metropolis . Białystok in 2010 , was on the short @-@ list , but ultimately lost the competition to become a finalist for European Capital of Culture in 2016 . Over the centuries Białystok has produced a number of people who have provided unique contributions to the fields of science , language , politics , religion , sports , visual arts and performing arts . This environment was created in the mid @-@ eighteenth century by the patronage of Jan Klemens Branicki for the arts and sciences . These include Ryszard Kaczorowski , the last émigré President of the Republic of Poland ; L. L. Zamenhof , the creator of Esperanto ; and Albert Sabin , the co @-@ developer of the polio vaccine . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English translation of Białystok is " white slope " . Due to changing borders over the centuries , the city has been known as Belarusian : <unk> ( <unk> ? , <unk> ? [ <unk> ] ) , Yiddish : <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , Ukrainian : <unk> ( <unk> ) , Lithuanian : <unk> ( <unk> ) , and Russian : <unk> ( Belostok ) . 
 Linguist A. P. <unk> proposes that the language source for Białystok is <unk> . Names with the <unk> suffix as a second element of a <unk> are localized in the basin of the upper Narew . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological discoveries show that the first settlements in the area of present @-@ day Białystok occurred during the Stone Age . Tombs of ancient settlers can be found in the district of Dojlidy . In the early Iron Age a mix of Prussians , Yotvingians and Wielbark culture people settled in the area producing kurgans , the tombs of the chiefs in the area located in the current village of <unk> . Since then , the Białystok area has been at the crossroads of cultures . Trade routes linking the Baltic to the Black Sea favored the development of settlements with <unk> @-@ Ruthenian @-@ Polish cultural characteristics . 
 The city of Białystok has existed for five centuries and during this time the fate of the city has been affected by various political and economic forces . 
 Surviving documents attest that around 1437 a representative of the <unk> family , Jakub <unk> of the coat of arms <unk> , received from Michael <unk> son of Sigismund <unk> , Duke of Lithuania , a wilderness area along the river Biała that marked the beginning of Białystok as a settlement . 
 The first brick church and a castle were built between 1617 and 1826 . The two @-@ floor castle , designed on a rectangular plan in the Gothic @-@ Renaissance style , was the work of Job <unk> . Extension of the castle was continued by Krzysztof Wiesiołowski , starost of Tykocin , Grand Marshal of Lithuania since 1635 , and husband of Aleksandra Marianna Sobieska . In 1637 he died childless , and as a result Białystok came under the management of his widow . After her death in 1645 the Wiesiołowski estate , including Białystok , passed to the Commonwealth to cover the costs of maintaining Tykocin Castle . In the years 1645 – 1659 Białystok was managed by the governors of Tykocin and was part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . 
 In 1661 it was given to Stefan Czarniecki as a reward for his service in the victory over the Swedes during the Deluge . Four years later , it was given as a dowry of his daughter Aleksandra , who married Hetman Jan Klemens Branicki , thus passing into the hands of the Branicki family . In 1692 , Stefan Mikołaj Branicki , the son of Jan Klemens Branicki ( Marshal of the Crown Court ) , obtained city rights for Białystok from King John III Sobieski . He constructed the Branicki Palace on the foundations of the castle of the Wiesiołowski family . In the second half of the eighteenth century the ownership of the city was inherited by Field Crown Hetman Jan Klemens Branicki . It was he who transformed the palace built by his father into a magnificent residence of a great noble . 
 The end of the eighteenth century saw the division of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , in three steps , among the neighboring states . The Kingdom of Prussia acquired Białystok and the surrounding region during the third partition . The city became the capital of the New East Prussia province in 1795 . Prussia lost the territory following Napoleon Bonaparte 's victory in the War of the Fourth Coalition as the resultant 1807 Treaties of Tilsit awarded the area to the Russian Empire , which organized the region into the Belostok Oblast , with the city as the regional center . 
 At the end of the nineteenth century , the majority of the city 's population was Jewish . According to Russian census of 1897 , out of the total population of 66 @,@ 000 , Jews constituted 41 @,@ 900 ( so around 63 % percent ) . This heritage can be seen on the Jewish Heritage Trail in Białystok . The first Anarchist groups to attract a significant following of Russian workers or peasants , were the Anarcho @-@ Communist <unk> @-@ <unk> groups , founded in Białystok in 1903 . The Białystok pogrom occurred between 14 – 16 June 1906 in the city . During the pogrom between 81 and 88 people were killed , and about 80 people were wounded . 
 During World War I the Bialystok @-@ Grodno District was the administrative division of German @-@ controlled territory of Ober @-@ Ost . It comprised the city , as the capital , and the surrounding Podlaskie region , roughly corresponding to the territory of the earlier Belostok Oblast . At the end of World War I the city became part of the newly independent Second Polish Republic , as the capital of the Białystok Voivodeship ( 1919 – 1939 ) . During the 1919 – 1920 Polish @-@ Soviet War , possession of the city by the Red Army and the Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee occurred during the lead up to the Battle of Warsaw . During the resultant counteroffensive , the city returned to Polish control after the Battle of Białystok . 
 With the beginning of World War II , Poland was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union , and initially the city came under Soviet control , as a result of the Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact . It was incorporated into the Byelorussian SSR from 1939 to 1941 as the capital of the <unk> Voblast . After the Nazi attack on Soviet Union in 1941 , Białystok was occupied by the German Army on 27 June 1941 , during the Battle of Białystok – Minsk , and the city became the capital of Bezirk Białystok , a separate region in German occupied Poland , until 1944 . The Great Synagogue , Białystok was burnt down by Germans on June 27 , 1941 , with an estimated number of 2 @,@ 000 Jews inside . 
 From the very beginning , the Nazis pursued a ruthless policy of pillage and removal of the non @-@ German population . The 56 @,@ 000 Jewish residents of the town were confined in a ghetto . On August 15 , 1943 , the Białystok Ghetto Uprising began , and several hundred Polish Jews and members of the Anti @-@ Fascist Military Organisation ( Polish : <unk> Organizacja <unk> ) started an armed struggle against the German troops who were carrying out the planned liquidation of the ghetto with deportations to the Treblinka extermination camp . 
 The city was liberated by the Red Army on 27 July 1944 and on 20 September 1944 transferred to Poland . After the war , the city became capital of the initial Białystok Voivodeship ( 1945 – 1975 ) of the People 's Republic of Poland . After the 1975 administrative reorganization , the city was the capital of the smaller Białystok Voivodeship ( 1975 – 1998 ) . Since 1999 it has been the capital of the Podlaskie Voivodeship , Republic of Poland . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Białystok is situated in the Białystok Uplands ( Polish : <unk> Białostocka ) of the Podlaskie Plain ( Polish : <unk> <unk> ) , part of what is known collectively as the Green Lungs of Poland . The Biała River , a left tributary of the <unk> River , passes through the city . The landscape of the Białystok Upland is diverse , with high moraine hills and <unk> in excess of 200 m ( 660 ft ) above sea level . Vast areas of outwash , a glacial plain formed of sediments deposited by meltwater at the terminus of a glacier , are covered by forests . 
 Forests are an important part of the city character , they currently occupy approximately 1 @,@ 756 ha ( 4 @,@ 340 acres ) ( 17 @.@ 2 % of the administrative area of the city ) which places it as the fifth most " wooded " city in Poland ; behind Katowice ( 38 % ) , Bydgoszcz ( 30 % ) , Toruń ( 22 @.@ 9 % ) and Gdańsk ( 17 @.@ 6 % ) . 
 Part of <unk> Forest is preserved within the city limits by two nature reserves — a total area of 105 ha ( 260 acres ) . The <unk> Forest Nature Reserve ( Polish : <unk> <unk> Las <unk> ) , which is contained within the city limits , is a fragment , 33 @.@ 48 ha ( 82 @.@ 7 acres ) , of the riparian forest with a dominant assemblage of oak and hornbeam . The <unk> Nature Reserve ( Polish : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a 70 @.@ 07 ha ( 173 @.@ 1 acres ) park in the city that preserves the natural state of a forest fragment characteristic of the Białystok Upland , with a dominant mixed forest of hazel and spruce . 
 The 40 ha ( 99 acres ) of forests lying in the vicinity of the Dojlidy Ponds are administered by the Central Sports and Recreation Center in Białystok ( Polish : <unk> <unk> <unk> i <unk> w Białymstoku – <unk> ) . The Dojlidy Ponds recreation area includes a public beach , walking trails , birdwatching and fishing . 
 Climate 
 The city has a Mild Summer Continental or <unk> climate ( Dfb ) according to the Köppen climate classification system , characterized by warm temperatures during summer and long and frosty winters . It is substantially different from most of the other Polish lowlands . The region is one of the coldest in Poland , with the average temperature in January being − 2 @.@ 5 ° C ( 27 ° F ) . The average temperature in a year is about 7 ° C ( 45 ° F ) . The number of frost days ranges from 50 to 60 , with frost from 110 to 138 days and the duration of snow cover from 90 to 110 days . Mean annual rainfall values oscillate around 580 mm ( 22 @.@ 8 in ) , and the vegetation period lasts 200 to 210 days . 
 | source 3 = <unk> | source 4 = <unk> 
 = = Districts and Metropolitan Region = = 
 Districts of Białystok 
 The city of Białystok is divided into 28 administrative units , known in Polish as <unk> . The first 27 of these were created on October 25 , 2004 . The 28th , Dojlidy Górne , was created by on October 23 , 2006 , out of three settlements which had been incorporated into the city : Dojlidy Górne , Kolonia <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The center of the city , <unk> Centrum , surrounds Lipowa Street , the main street of the city . Lipowa Street extends from Rynek <unk> ( the corner of <unk> Street ) to Plac <unk> im . Romana <unk> ( the corner of Krakowska Street ) . Over the centuries the name of this exclusive and elegant street has taken on a number of different names ; <unk> , <unk> , Lipowa , Józef Piłsudski , Joseph Stalin , Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin , once again , to return , after the end of World War II , to its original name – Lipowa Street . 
 The city covers 10 @,@ 212 ha ( 25 @,@ 230 acres ) of which 3 @,@ 210 ha ( 7 @,@ 900 acres ) is agricultural land , 4 @,@ 889 ha ( 12 @,@ 080 acres ) is urbanized areas , 85 ha ( 210 acres ) is surface waters and 65 ha ( 160 acres ) is wasteland . The composition of the districts vary from residential near the city center , with a combination of multi @-@ story apartment buildings and individual houses on small parcels , to industrial and agricultural at the city edges . 
 Metropolitan Białystok 
 Metropolitan Białystok was designated by the Voivodeship of the Regulation No. 52 / 05 of 16 May 2005 to help develop the region economically . In 2006 , the metropolitan area population was 450 @,@ 254 inhabitants . The municipalities adjacent to Białystok are slowly losing their agricultural character , becoming residential suburban neighborhoods with single @-@ family housing and small businesses . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In June 2009 , the population of the city was 294 @,@ 399 , among cities of Poland , Białystok is second in terms of population density , eleventh in population , and thirteenth in area . 
 Historically , Białystok has been a destination for internal and foreign immigration , especially from Central and Eastern Europe . In addition to the Polish minority , there was a significant Jewish majority in Białystok . According to Russian census of 1897 , out of the total population of 66 @,@ 000 , Jews constituted 41 @,@ 900 ( around 63 % percent ) . Białystok 's pre @-@ World War II Jewish population constituted about 63 percent of the city 's total population of 107 @,@ 000 . World War II changed all of this , in 1939 , around 107 @,@ 000 people lived in Białystok , but in 1946 – only 56 @,@ 759 , and to this day there is much less ethnic diversity than in the previous 300 years of the city 's history . Currently the city 's population is 97 % Polish , 2 @.@ 5 % Belarusian and 0 @.@ 5 % of a number of minorities including Russians , Lipka Tatars , Ukrainians and Romani . Most of the modern @-@ day population growth is based on internal migration within Poland and urbanization of surrounding areas . 
 = = Governance = = 
 City government 
 Białystok , like other major cities in Poland , is a city county ( Polish : Miasto na <unk> <unk> ) . The Legislative power in the city is vested in the unicameral Białystok City Council ( Polish : Rada <unk> ) , which has 28 members . Council members are elected directly every four years , one of whom is the mayor , or President of Białystok ( Polish : <unk> ) . Like most legislative bodies , the City Council divides itself into committees which have the oversight of various functions of the city government . Bills passed by a simple majority are sent to the mayor , who may sign them into law . If the mayor vetoes a bill , the Council has 30 days to override the veto by a two @-@ thirds majority vote . The current President of Białystok , elected for his first term in 2006 , is Tadeusz <unk> won the elections as the Civic Platform 's candidate , however , he has no official connection with the party . In the first round of the elections he received 49 % of the votes ( 42 @,@ 889 votes altogether ) . In the later runoff he defeated his rival candidate Marek Kozlowski from Law and Justice ( Polish : Prawo i <unk> ) , receiving 67 % of the votes cast ( 53 @,@ 018 votes ) . 
 For the 2010 – 2011 fiscal year the city received revenue ( taxes levied + investments ) of 1 @,@ 409 @,@ 565 @,@ 525 zł , expended 1 @,@ 676 @,@ 459 @,@ 102 zł leaving a budget deficit of 266 @,@ 893 @,@ 577 zł . The deficit was covered by short @-@ term borrowing of 166 @,@ 893 @,@ 577 zł and the issuance of 100 million zł in municipal bonds . 
 Other levels of governmental representation 
 It is also the seat of government for the Podlaskie Voivodeship . The city is represented by several members of both houses of the Polish Parliament ( Sejm and Senat ) from the Białystok constituency . Białystok is represented by the Podlaskie and <unk> @-@ Masurian constituency of the European Parliament . 
 International relations 
 There are two consulates in Białystok , Belarus has a Consulate General and Romania has an Honorary Consulate . The City of Białystok is a member of several organizations such as Union of Polish <unk> ( Polish : Unia <unk> Polskich ) , Euroregion Niemen , Polish Green Lungs Foundation ( headquarters ) and <unk> . 
 Białystok is twinned with Częstochowa , Poland , Dijon , France : , Eindhoven , Netherlands , Hrodno , Belarus , Jelgava , Latvia , Kaliningrad , Russia Kaunas , Lithuania , Milwaukee County , Wisconsin , USA and Tallinn , Estonia . 
 = = Military units = = 
 The 18th Reconnaissance Regiment ( Polish : 18 <unk> <unk> ) of the Polish Land Forces is based in Białystok . The heritage of the unit was the former 18th Territorial Defense Battalion ( Polish : 18 Białostocka Brygada Obrony <unk> ) and prior to that the former 18th Mechanized Brigade . December 31 , 2001 , as a result of the restructuring of the Armed Forces , 18th Mechanized Brigade ( Polish : 18 Brygada <unk> ) was disbanded and in its place created the 18th Territorial Defense Battalion ( Polish : 18 Białostocka Brygada Obrony <unk> ) . 
 Historical military units 
 During December 1993 an order of the Chief of the General Staff of the Polish Armed Forces created the 18th Mechanized Brigade ( Polish : 18 Brygada <unk> ) at the garrison in Białystok . The unit was formed from the 3rd Mechanized Regiment ( Polish : 3 <unk> <unk> ) and was subordinated to the commander of the 1st Warsaw Mechanized Division ( Polish : 1 <unk> <unk> <unk> im . <unk> <unk> ) . On December 31 , 2001 , as a result of the restructuring of the Armed Forces , the 18th Mechanized Brigade was disbanded and in its place was created the 18th Territorial Defense Battalion . 
 The Podlaska Cavalry Brigade ( Polish : Podlaska Brygada <unk> ) was a military unit of the Polish Army , created on April 1 , 1937 . Its headquarters was located in Białystok and operated as part of Independent Operational Group Narew . It was formed from the Cavalry Brigade " Białystok " , which existed between February 1929 , and March 30 , 1937 . After the Soviet invasion of Poland , remnants of the Brigade fought both Wehrmacht and Red Army troops , capitulating on October 6 , 1939 . 
 The Cavalry Brigade " Białystok " ( BK " Białystok " ) of the Polish Army Second Republic was formed in February 1929 . April 1 , 1937 BK " Białystok " was renamed the Podlaska Cavalry Brigade . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In the nineteenth century Białystok was an important center for light industry , which was the reason for the substantial growth of the city 's population . The tradition continued with many garment factories established in the twentieth century , such as <unk> in the district of <unk> . However , after the fall of communism in 1989 many of these factories faced severe problems and subsequently closed down . 
 The unemployment rate for February 2011 in Białystok was 13 @.@ 2 % . The 2009 average household had a monthly per capita income of 1018 @.@ 77 zł and monthly per capita expenses of 823 @.@ 56 zł 
 The city has a number of nearby border crossings . The border with Belarus is only 50 km ( 31 mi ) away , the nearest border crossings are located in ; Bobrowniki ( road crossing located about 50 km ( 31 mi ) from the city limits ) , <unk> Białostocka ( road and rail crossing located 60 km ( 37 mi ) from the city limits ) , <unk> ( railway – freight traffic ) , <unk> ( road ) and <unk> ( railway ) . Since the border with Belarus is also the eastern border of the European Union , as well as the Schengen Area the city is a center for trade in mainly from the east . 
 Industry 
 The leading industries in the city 's economy are : food processing ( production of meat products , fruit and vegetable products , the production of spirits , the production of frozen food , grain processing ) , electrical engineering ( production tools and equipment for machine tools , production of electric heaters , manufacture and production mixers household appliances ) . There is also a developed machine industry ( electronics , machinery and metal ) , plastic processing ( production of household appliances ) , textiles ( textiles and upholstery , manufacture of underwear , clothing accessories , footwear and backpacks ) , Wood ( production plywood and furniture ) building materials . 
 Some notable major employers who are based in Białystok include : 
 Dojlidy Brewery in the district of Dojlidy produces the second most popular beer in Poland , <unk> . 
 <unk> Białystok , the biggest vodka manufacturer in Poland , is located in the city district of <unk> . The company produces <unk> and <unk> ( bison grass vodka ) – both major exports abroad . 
 Standard Motor Products Poland Ltd. headquartered in Białystok began manufacturing ignition coils for original equipment manufacturers 30 years ago . 
 " <unk> " Białystok is the leading Polish producer of fire fighting equipment . 
 <unk> , <unk> o.o. is a manufacturer of stationary and mobile concrete mixing equipment based in Białystok . 
 <unk> S.A. is a large manufacture of household appliances , including vacuum cleaners , coffee makers , and LED lighting located in Białystok . 
 <unk> , a major Polish producer of carpets and similar products is in Białystok , located in the district of <unk> . 
 <unk> ( Polska ) Sp. z o.o. , has provided for more than 60 years precision injection molded products for some of the world 's leading brands . 
 <unk> Huta <unk> Białystok Sp. z o.o. , established in 1929 , produces mouth blown glass lampshades and related products . <unk> belongs to elite group of Glass Works in Europe , where 100 % of the lighting glass is mouth @-@ blown . 
 <unk> Białystok S.A ( Cold Store Białystok S.A. ) , established in 1952 , is one of the largest Polish producers of frozen vegetables , fruits and ready @-@ to @-@ heat meals . 
 Podlaskie Zakłady <unk> S.A. was established on 1 July 2000 as a result of privatizing The Regional Establishment of Corn and Milling Industry ' <unk> ' in Białystok . It is one of the leading firms in Podlaskie region in the department of preservation and processing of grain with elevators in Białystok , <unk> and Suwałki . 
 = = Culture and tourism = = 
 Białystok is one of the largest cultural centers in the Podlaskie Voivodeship . The attractions include performing arts groups , art museums , historical museums , walking tours of architectural / cultural aspects and a wide variety of parks and green spaces . Białystok in 2010 was on the short @-@ list , but ultimately lost the competition , to become a finalist for European Capital of Culture in 2016 . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The city has a number of performing arts facilities including : 
 The Białystok Puppet Theater ( Polish : <unk> Teatr <unk> ) , established in 1953 , is one of the oldest Polish puppet theaters . The facility is located at <unk> 1 in Białystok . The repertoire includes performances for both children and puppet adaptations of world literature for adults . Because of the high artistic level of productions , the theater has been recognized as one of the best puppetry arts centers in Poland . 
 The Aleksandra <unk> Drama Theatre . Housed in a building designed by Jarosław <unk> , built in the years 1933 – 1938 . 
 The Podlasie Opera and Philharmonic – European Art Centre in Białystok is the largest institute of arts in Northeastern Poland , and the most modern cultural center in this region of Europe . In its amphitheatre every year in the end of June Halfway Festival takes place . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 There are a number of museums in the city including : 
 The Historical Museum in Białystok ( Polish : Muzeum <unk> w Białymstoku ) is part of the Podlaskie Museum . The facility has a rich collection of archival materials and iconography illustrating the history of Białystok and Podlasie , and a number of middle @-@ class cultural relics , especially in the field of craft utility . There are also the Numismatic Cabinet of the collection of 16 000 coins , medals and securities . The museum is in possession of the only collections in the country memorabilia connected with the Tatar settlement on the Polish – Lithuanian – Belarusian region . 
 The Army Museum in Białystok ( Polish : Muzeum <unk> w Białymstoku ) was established in September 1968 as a branch of the Podlaskie Museum to house the research and collections of many people connected with military history of north @-@ eastern Poland . 
 The Ludwik Zamenhof Centre ( Polish : Centrum im . Ludwika <unk> w Białymstoku ) offers the visitors a permanent exhibition , ' Bialystok of Young Ludwik Zamenhof ' , and various temporary exhibitions , concerts , film projections , and theatre performances . The Centre has a branch of Lukasz <unk> ’ s Podlaska Library dedicated to the Esperanto language . 
 = = = Parks and green spaces = = = 
 Around 32 % of the city is occupied by parks , squares and forest preserves which creates a unique and healthy climate . The green spaces include : 
 Branicki Palace ( Polish : Pałac <unk> ) is a historical edifice and 9 @.@ 7 ha ( 24 acres ) park in Białystok . It was developed on the site of an earlier building in the first half of the eighteenth century by Jan Klemens Branicki , a wealthy Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth hetman , into a residence suitable for a man whose ambition was to be elected king of Poland . The palace complex with gardens , <unk> , sculptures , outbuildings and other structures and the city with churches , city hall and monastery , all built almost at the same time according to French models was the reason why the city was known in the eighteenth century as Versailles of Podlaskie ( Polish : <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Planty is a 14 @.@ 94 ha ( 36 @.@ 9 acres ) park created between 1930 and 1938 , under the auspices of the then Voivode <unk> Mariana <unk> in the areas adjacent to Branicki Palace . The modernist composition of the park was designed by Stanislav Gralla . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The various historically driven changes have had a very significant influence on the architectural space of the city . Most other Polish cities have suffered similarly , but the processes in Białystok , have had a particularly intense course . Numerous historic works of architecture no longer exist , while many others have been rebuilt to their original configuration . Very few historic buildings of the city have been preserved – the sights are merely an echo of the old historical shape of Białystok . 
 Main sights include : 
 Palaces : Branicki Palace , Branicki Guest Palace , Lubomirski Palace , <unk> Palace , <unk> Palace 
 Town hall 
 Catholic Cathedral 
 St. Roch Church 
 St. Adalbert Church 
 Orthodox Cathedral 
 Daughters of Charity Monastery 
 Former Arsenal 
 Former Masonic Lodge 
 = = Sports = = 
 The city has both professional and amateur sports teams , and a number of venues where they are based . <unk> Białystok is a Polish football club , based in Białystok , in the <unk> League that plays at the Białystok City Stadium . <unk> Białystok won the Polish Cup in 2010 , Super Cup and qualified to play in the third round qualification of the UEFA Europa League . A new 22 @,@ 500 seat stadium was completed at the beginning of 2015 . 
 Hetman Białystok ( formerly known as Gwardia Białystok ) is a Polish football club based in Podlaskie Voivodeship . They play in the Division IV or the ( 4th ) League . 
 Lowlanders Białystok is a football club , based in Białystok , that plays in the Polish American Football League ( Polish : Polska Liga <unk> <unk> ) PLFA I Conference . The Lowlanders were the champions of the PLFA II Conference in 2010 with a perfect season ( 8 wins in eight meetings ) . Because of the win they were advanced to the upper conference ( PLFA I ) in 2011 . 
 = = Media = = 
 Białystok has a wide variety of media outlets serving the city and surrounding region . There are two locally published daily newspapers , Gazeta <unk> ( 36 @.@ 3 % market share ) and Kurier <unk> ( 20 @.@ 3 % market share ) . In addition two national papers have local bureaus . There are a number of national and locally produced television and radio channels available both over @-@ the @-@ air from the nearby <unk> Białystok ( <unk> ) Mast , the seventh highest structure in Poland , in addition to transmitter sites within the city . TVP Białystok is one of the locally produced , regional branches of the TVP , Poland 's public television broadcaster . There is also a cable television system available within the city . The city has two campus radio stations ; <unk> at the Medical University of Białystok and Radio <unk> at Białystok Technical University . 
 = = Religion = = 
 In the early 1900s , Białystok was reputed to have the largest concentration of Jews of all the cities in the world . In 1931 , 40 @,@ 000 Jews lived in the city , nearly half the city 's inhabitants . The city is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Białystok . Pope John Paul II on 5 June 1991 , during a visit to Białystok , announced the establishment of the Archdiocese of Białystok which ended the period of the temporary church administration of the portion of the Archdiocese of Vilnius that had , after World War II , remained within the Polish borders . The city is also the seat of the Białystok @-@ Gdansk Diocese of the Autocephalous Polish Orthodox Church . Białystok is the largest concentration of Orthodox believers in Poland . In Białystok , the following Protestant churches exist : a Lutheran parish , two Pentecostal churches , Baptist church , a congregation of the Church of God in Christ and a Seventh Day Adventist church . 
 Białystok is home to more than two thousand Muslims ( mainly Tatars ) . There is an Islamic Centre a House of Prayer , and various organisations such as <unk> Gmina <unk> , Stowarzyszenie <unk> <unk> and <unk> Stowarzyszenie <unk> <unk> . There is magazine issued – " <unk> i <unk> " ( " Memory and persistence " ) . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The city is , and has been for centuries , the main hub of transportation for the Podlaskie Voivodeship and the entire northeastern section of Poland . It is a major city on the European Union roadways ( Via Baltica ) and railways ( Rail Baltica ) to the Baltic Republics and Finland . It is also a main gateway of trade with Belarus due to its proximity to the border and its current and longstanding relationship with Hrodno , Belarus . 
 Railways 
 Passenger trains connect from <unk> , Hrodno and Lithuania to Warsaw and the rest of the European passenger network . Passenger services are provided by two rail service providers , PKP Intercity that provides intercity passengers trains ( express , intercity , <unk> , hotel and <unk> ) and <unk> <unk> that operates only regional passenger trains financed by the voivodeship . Passenger trains are mostly run using electrical multiple units ( on electrified lines ) or rail buses . 
 Buses 
 There is an extensive bus network that covers the entire city by three bus services , but no tram or subway exists . The three bus operators are partially owned by the city ( <unk> , KPK and <unk> ) and each shares approximately a third of the lines and the bus fleet . 
 Roads and highways 
 The National Roads ( Polish : Droga <unk> ) running through Białystok : 
 : Rzeszów – Lublin – Bielsk Podlaski – Białystok – <unk> ( Belarus – Polish border ) 
 : <unk> ( Russia – Polish border ) <unk> @-@ Białystok @-@ Bobrowniki ( Belarus @-@ Polish border ) 
 / 67 : <unk> ( Polish – Lithuania border ) – Białystok – Warsaw – Wrocław – <unk> Zdrój ( Czech – Polish border ) 
 Airports 
 A civil airport , Białystok @-@ <unk> Airport , lies within the city limits , but does not provide regularly scheduled service . There were plans in 2011 to build a new regional airport , Białystok @-@ <unk> Airport , that would have provided flights within Europe . 
 = = Education = = 
 Higher education in the city can be traced back to the second half of the eighteenth century , when the ownership of the city was inherited by Field Crown Hetman Jan Klemens Branicki . As a patron of the arts and sciences , Branicki encouraged numerous artists and scientists to settle in Białystok to take advantage of Branicki 's patronage . In 1745 Branicki established Poland 's first military college , the School of Civil and Military Engineering , in the city . 
 Since the fall of communism many privately funded institutions of higher educations have been founded and their number is still increasing . Currently Białystok is home to one principal public university ( University of Białystok ) and two other public specialist universities ( Białystok Technical University and Medical University of Białystok ) . Some institutions , such as Musical Academy in Białystok , are branches of their parent institutions in other cities , usually in Warsaw . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Over the centuries Białystok has produced a number of persons who have provided unique contributions to the fields of science , language , politics , religion , sports , visual arts and performing arts . This environment was created in the mid eighteenth century by the patronage of Jan Klemens Branicki for the arts and sciences . A list of recent notable persons includes , but is not limited to ; Ryszard Kaczorowski , last émigré President of the Republic of Poland , L. L. Zamenhof , the creator of Esperanto , Albert Sabin , co @-@ developer of the polio vaccine , Izabella Scorupco , actress , Max Weber , painter . Tomasz <unk> illustrator , animator and director Oscar nominee in 2002 for The Cathedral 
 = Lavanify = 
 Lavanify is a mammalian genus from the late Cretaceous ( probably Maastrichtian , about 71 to 66 million years ago ) of Madagascar . The only species , L. <unk> , is known from two isolated teeth , one of which is damaged . The teeth were collected in 1995 – 1996 and described in 1997 . The animal is classified as a member of Gondwanatheria , an enigmatic extinct group with unclear phylogenetic relationships , and within Gondwanatheria as a member of the family Sudamericidae . Lavanify is most closely related to the Indian Bharattherium ; the South American Sudamerica and Gondwanatherium are more distantly related . Gondwanatheres probably ate hard plant material . 
 Lavanify had high @-@ crowned , curved teeth . One of the two teeth is 11 @.@ 2 mm high and shows a deep furrow and , is centered laterally in the crown , a V @-@ shaped area that consists of dentine . The other , damaged , tooth is 9 @.@ 8 mm high and has at least one deep cavity ( infundibulum ) . Characters shared by the teeth of Lavanify and Bharattherium include the presence of an infundibulum and a furrow ; they both also have large , continuous bands of matrix ( unbundled hydroxyapatite crystals ) between the prisms ( bundles of hydroxyapatite crystals ) of the enamel , and perikymata — wave @-@ like ridges and grooves in the enamel surface . 
 = = Discovery and context = = 
 Two teeth of Lavanify were discovered in 1995 – 1996 during joint expeditions of the State University of New York , Stony Brook University , and the University of Antananarivo to the late Cretaceous ( mostly Maastrichtian , about 71 to 66 million years ago [ mya ] ) Maevarano Formation of northwestern Madagascar . The two teeth were found in different sites in a white sandstone unit of the Maevarano Formation near the village of Berivotra and have been deposited in the collections of the University of Antananarivo ( specimen UA 8653 ) and Field Museum of Natural History ( specimen FMNH PM 59520 ) . David Krause and colleagues described Lavanify and a sudamericid from India , which they did not name , in a 1997 paper in Nature . These were the first gondwanathere mammals to be found outside of Argentina and provided evidence that the mammal faunas of the different Gondwanan ( southern ) continents were similar to each other . The generic name , Lavanify , means " long tooth " and the specific name , <unk> , means " curved " in Malagasy ; both refer to the teeth 's shape . 
 Gondwanatheres are a small group of mammals of uncertain phylogenetic affinities known from the late Cretaceous to the Eocene ( ~ 56 – 34 mya ) of the Gondwanan continents , known only from teeth and a few lower jaws . Upon their discovery in the 1980s , gondwanatheres were initially thought to be xenarthrans — part of the same group as living sloths , armadillos , and anteaters — but later workers have favored affinities with multituberculates ( a diverse group of fossil mammals ) or left the relationships of the gondwanatheres open . The group comprises two families . The family Ferugliotheriidae , whose members had low @-@ crowned teeth , occurs in the Campanian ( ~ 84 – 71 mya ) to Maastrichtian of Argentina . All other gondwanatheres , including Lavanify , are placed in the Sudamericidae , which have high @-@ crowned ( hypsodont ) teeth . These include Gondwanatherium from the Campanian and Maastrichtian of Argentina ; Sudamerica from the Paleocene ( ~ 66 – 56 mya ) of Argentina ; Lavanify ; at least one species from the Maastrichtian of India ; an unnamed species related to Sudamerica from the Eocene of Antarctica ; and an unnamed possible gondwanathere , TNM 02067 , from the Cretaceous of Tanzania . In 2007 , teams led by G.P. Wilson and <unk> Prasad independently described this animal as Dakshina and Bharattherium respectively ; as the latter name was published first , it is the correct name for this genus according to the Principle of Priority . Gondwanatheres have been interpreted as feeding on roots , bark , and abrasive vegetation or as the earliest grass @-@ eating mammals . 
 Several other mammals have been recorded from the late Cretaceous of Madagascar , mostly on the basis of isolated teeth . A possible second gondwanathere is represented by a tooth that is larger and lower @-@ crowned than those of Lavanify , and a yet lower @-@ crowned tooth may also be of a gondwanathere . A lower molar , UA 8699 , may be of a marsupial or a placental and a molar fragment is referable to Multituberculata . Finally , an as @-@ yet @-@ undescribed mammal is known from a fairly complete skeleton . None of these mammals is related to the living mammals of the island , many of which belong to unique groups ( see List of mammals of Madagascar ) . The fauna also contains crocodyliforms , dinosaurs , and other animals . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lavanify is known from the complete cheektooth UA 8653 and the broken tooth FMNH PM 59520 . Krause and colleagues could not determine whether the teeth were from the lower or upper jaw and whether they were molars or molariform ( molar @-@ like ) premolars , but suggested that they represented two different tooth positions . However , Wilson and colleagues in 2007 tentatively identified UA 8653 as a left fourth ( last ) lower molariform ( mf4 ) ; because molars and premolars of gondwanatheres cannot be reliably distinguished , the term " molariform " is used instead . FMNH PM 59520 resembles the Gondwanatherium fossil MACN Pv @-@ RN 1027 , a broken tooth that may be an upper molariform . In both Lavanify teeth , the enamel surface features perikymata ( ridges and grooves arranged in a transverse , wave @-@ like pattern ) . 
 UA 8653 , the holotype , is hypsodont and curved . It is 11 @.@ 2 mm high , of which the crown makes up about 85 % , and the dimensions of its crown are 3 @.@ 4 x 3 @.@ 2 mm . The occlusal ( chewing ) surface is worn flat and contains a V @-@ shaped island of dentine surrounded by enamel . One side of the crown lacks enamel . Between the two arms of the V , at the lingual ( inner ) side of the tooth , is a furrow filled with cementum , which extends all the way through the tooth ; the presence of such a long furrow distinguishes it from Gondwanatherium . The enamel is made up of small , round prisms ( bundles of hydroxyapatite crystals ) that are separated by large , continuous bands of interprismatic matrix ( IPM ; the material between the enamel prisms ) . 
 FMNH PM 59520 is 9 @.@ 8 mm high . It is similar in many respects to UA 8653 , but is less curved and its occlusal surface contains a large infundibulum ( funnel @-@ shaped cavity ) , filled with cementum and surrounded by enamel that penetrates deeply into the tooth . There is also either a second infundibulum or a cementum @-@ filled furrow . The differences in degree of curvature and occlusal morphology suggest that this tooth represents a different tooth position than UA 8653 . Krause and colleagues tentatively placed this tooth in Lavanify in view of the considerable variation among other gondwanathere teeth of a single species and in the absence of evidence to the contrary . 
 = = Relationships = = 
 In their original description , Krause and colleagues suggested that Lavanify was most closely related to the then @-@ unnamed Indian sudamericid . They based this proposed relationship on the shared presence of prominent , continuous bands of IPM . The teams who named the Indian gondwanathere in 2007 both agreed with this proposed relationship . In their description of Dakshina , Wilson and colleagues added the presence of an infundibulum and of perikymata to the evidence for the relationship between the two . These three characters are synapomorphies ( shared derived traits ) for the Bharattherium @-@ Lavanify clade . They also share the presence of furrows on the lingual side of the teeth only , but whether this is a derived feature is uncertain . Wilson and colleagues list two autapomorphies ( unique derived traits ) of Lavanify : presence of a V @-@ shaped dentine island and absence of enamel on one side of the crown . Prasad and colleagues who named Bharattherium , noted the absence of enamel on part of the crown of a Bharattherium tooth and interpreted this trait as a synapomorphy of Bharattherium and Lavanify . They also mentioned the presence of a furrow and infundibulum as shared traits . 
 = Eat , Pray , Queef = 
 " Eat , Pray , Queef " is the fourth episode of the thirteenth season of the American animated television series South Park . The 185th overall episode of the series , it originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on April 1 , 2009 . In the episode , the men of South Park become infuriated when the fart @-@ joke oriented Terrance and Phillip show is replaced with the Queef Sisters , a show devoted to queef jokes . The women of South Park accuse the men of holding a sexist double standard when it comes to women queefing and men farting . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . Parker and Matt Stone originally considered doing a full @-@ length Queef Sisters episode in the style of the second season premiere " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " , but they decided against it based on the negative fan reaction to that episode . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews and , according to Nielsen Media Research , was seen by more than three million households in its original airing , making it the most @-@ watched Comedy Central production of the week . The title is a reference to the Elizabeth Gilbert book Eat , Pray , Love ; the episode also included references to Martha Stewart and the film The Road Warrior . The episode ends with the South Park men recording " Queef Free " , a charity song in the style of " We Are The World " mixed with lyrics from " I Am Woman " . " Eat , Pray , Queef " was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray along with the rest of the thirteenth season on March 16 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The boys of South Park Elementary School are anxiously awaiting the night 's episode of Terrance and Phillip , which ended in a cliffhanger last season , while the girls at the school express disgust over the show and the boys ' obsession with fart jokes . Cartman retaliates by farting in a little girl 's face , which causes all the boys to laugh . After school , the boys gather in Cartman 's house to watch the episode . To their horror , it is then revealed that , as an April Fools Day joke , the channel is airing a new show called the Queef Sisters , about Canadian sisters Katherine ( voiced by Trey Parker ) and Katie Queef ( voiced by Matt Stone ) . They are very similar to Terrance and Phillip , but instead of fart jokes , they make queef jokes . The show starts a queefing movement across the country , and men everywhere get upset and disgusted by the queefs , although the women do not understand what the problem is . Though the women of South Park argue that there is no difference between queefing and farting , the men are revolted by queefs , while still finding their own fart jokes amusing . 
 Meanwhile , Terrance and Phillip are furious their show got replaced with The Queef Sisters , sharing the American Men 's disgust of queef jokes . When the producer asks why they think fart jokes are funny , but are revolted by queef jokes , Terrance says it 's " because babies come from there . " 
 As a joke mirroring Cartman 's , one of the girls at school queefs on Butters ' face , causing him to run screaming and crying out of the school building . The other boys are shocked and their fathers , outraged , go to the Colorado General Assembly and demand a law banning queefing , much to the anger of the town 's women . Meanwhile , the Queef Sisters appear on Regis and Kelly to promote their book Eat , Pray , Queef , and Terrance and Philip 's show gets canceled due to the rising popularity of the Queef Sisters . Terrance and Philip attempt to kill the Queef Sisters , but the plan backfires when they end up becoming attracted to them after the Queef Sisters mention that Terrence and Phillip are the sisters ' idols . They pair off into couples and travel the Canadian Wine Country together . Meanwhile , after Stan 's mother Sharon queefs , she and Stan 's sister , Shelley , start laughing at the dinner table , causing Stan and his father Randy to leave . 
 Feeling sorry for Butters , the South Park boys testify in the case in the Colorado State Senate about the girl who <unk> on Butters . A debate on the senate floor culminates with a female senator queefing almost exact lines of dialogue from the The Road Warrior film . The next day , the newspapers announce that , partly due to the senator 's stunt the previous day , the queefing ban has passed . As Stan and his father Randy celebrate , Sharon and Shelley are hurt and insulted by the decision , describing it as an example of sexism that still pervades society , and finally sarcastically congratulate the men for " getting their own way ... again . " Stan and Randy finally understand the issue was not simply about queefing , but a larger point about women 's rights . The two get all the South Park men together and record an inspirational song called " Queef Free " , declaring women should have the right to queef , while photographs of women working various careers are displayed on a television screen . Terrance and Philip , despite a continued disgust with the constant queefing , attempt to marry the two Queef Sisters . The vicar leaves the ceremony in disgust as the couples repeatedly fart and queef on him , pronouncing them " <unk> and <unk> " as he leaves . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Eat , Pray , Queef " was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker . It first aired on April 1 , 2009 in the United States on Comedy Central . Although Parker and fellow co @-@ creator Matt Stone acknowledged it was a particularly juvenile episode , Parker said it was his favorite show of the season to produce . He said , " I seriously never laughed as hard doing retakes , just going shot @-@ by @-@ shot , sitting there in the editing room laughing . " During the writing process , the female producers and employees with the show found the script largely unfunny , disgusting and offensive . They reportedly claimed vaginal flatulence would not bloom into a proud women 's movement as it did in the episode , but Parker and Stone insisted that was what made the concept even funnier . 
 Originally , Parker and Stone considered making a full @-@ length episode of The Queef Sisters . The duo had pulled a similar stunt with the second season premiere . Instead of the expected follow @-@ up to " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " , in which the identity of Cartman 's father was to be revealed , Parker and Matt Stone showed the episode " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " , a Terrance and Phillip @-@ centered episode as an April Fools ' Day prank . Since " Eat , Pray , Queef " was coincidentally also set to air on April Fools ' Day , they considered a similar joke revolving around Katherine and Katie . However , since " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " infuriated South Park fans at the time , they decided not to do it and wrote a full script for " Eat , Pray , Queef " instead . The original prank is referenced in the episode , when The Canada Channel announces that it will not air a much @-@ anticipated part two episode of Terrance and Phillip , and instead will show the Queef Sisters as an April Fools ' Day prank . The angry reaction from the boys mirrors the real @-@ life fan reaction to the South Park second season premiere . 
 The episode uses the characters ' conflicting responses to the comedic value of farts and queefs to demonstrate a double standard between rights of men and women , even in the 21st century , as both genders hold unfair opinions toward the other sex , and the episode suggests men and women are , and should be , equals . Shortly after " Eat , Pray , Queef " was originally broadcast , the site also featured T @-@ shirts and hooded sweatshirts based on the episode . One featured Katherine and Katie queefing and saying , " Babies come from there ! " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The book Eat , Pray , Queef by the Queef Sisters , which is also the source of the episode 's title , is a satirical reference to the book Eat , Pray , Love written by Elizabeth Gilbert . There is a brief scene in which television host Martha Stewart provides instruction on ways to decorate queefs on The Martha Stewart Show . Television show hosts Regis Philbin and Kelly Ripa interview Katie and Katherine on their show , Live with Regis and Kelly . One of the queefs released by a woman in the episode includes exact dialogue from the 1981 action film The Road Warrior . The montage sequence where Terrance and Phillip take Katherine and Katie on a tour of Canadian wine country is a parody of a similar montage sequence in the 2004 comedy film " Sideways " . The men 's anthem " Queef Free " is a parody of " We Are The World " , the 1985 celebrities @-@ for @-@ charity song written by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie . 
 Within the episode , The Canada Channel announces that , as an April Fools ' Day prank , it will be airing the new Queef Sisters show instead of the much @-@ anticipated part two episode of Terrance and Phillip . This is a reference to the South Park second season premiere . Instead of the expected follow @-@ up to " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " , in which the identity of Cartman 's father was to be revealed , Parker and Matt Stone showed the episode " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " , a Terrance and Phillip @-@ centered episode as an April Fools ' Day prank . The move infuriated South Park fans . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A preview clip of the episode listed on South Park Studios , the official South Park website , during the week before the episode 's broadcast was viewed more than 50 @,@ 000 times . In its original American broadcast , " Eat , Pray , Queef " was watched by three million households overall , according to the Nielsen Media Research , making it the most @-@ watched Comedy Central production of the week . It had over one million more household viewers than the second most watched Comedy Central show that week , the April 1 episode of The Daily Show . 
 Niki Payne of the Philadelphia Examiner said " Eat , Pray , Queef " was " probably one of my all @-@ time favorite episodes of South Park right now " because it was so on point concerning the double standards between men and women . She particularly praised the scene in which Stan and Randy are disgusted and uncomfortable when Stan 's mom and sister started queefing at the dinner table . Carlos Delgado of If Magazine said the episode was " shocking , disgusting and obscenely funny " and demonstrated South Park 's ability to tackle any type of issue " in a uniquely South Park manner " . He particularly enjoyed the Martha Stewart segment , which he described as " just haunting " . Josh Modell of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B grade . Modell said the Katie and Katherine cartoon was particularly funny , but queefing was referred to in so many jokes that it became a bit tired by the end . 
 Some reviewers were less laudatory . Travis Fickett of IGN said the episode was " a textbook example of a disappointing South Park " . He said the jokes were predictable , lazy , boring , and that Terrance and Phillip are not funny enough to carry large portions of an episode . 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Eat , Pray , Queef " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's thirteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on March 16 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , a collection of deleted scenes , and a special mini @-@ feature Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , which discussed the process behind animating the show with Inside Xbox host Major Nelson . 
 = Ed Miliband = 
 Edward Samuel " Ed " Miliband ( born 24 December 1969 ) is a British politician who was Leader of the Labour Party as well as Leader of the Opposition between 2010 and 2015 . He has been the Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Doncaster North since 2005 and served in the Cabinet from 2007 to 2010 under Prime Minister Gordon Brown . He and his brother , David Miliband , were the first siblings to sit in the Cabinet simultaneously since Edward and Oliver Stanley in 1938 . 
 Born in London , Miliband graduated from Corpus Christi College at the University of Oxford , and the London School of Economics , becoming first a television journalist , a Labour Party researcher and a visiting scholar at Harvard University before rising to become one of Chancellor Gordon Brown 's confidants and Chairman of HM Treasury 's Council of Economic Advisers . 
 Miliband was elected to Parliament in 2005 , succeeding the retiring Labour MP Kevin Hughes in Doncaster North . Prime Minister Tony Blair made Miliband Parliamentary Secretary to the Cabinet Office in May 2006 and when Gordon Brown became Prime Minister in 2007 , he appointed Miliband Minister for the Cabinet Office and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster . Miliband was subsequently promoted to the new post of Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change , a position he held from 2008 to 2010 . 
 After Labour was defeated in the May 2010 general election , Brown resigned as leader and in September 2010 , Miliband was elected Leader of the Labour Party . Miliband 's tenure as Labour leader was characterised by a leftward shift in his party 's policies and opposition to the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition government 's cuts to the public sector . He led his party into several elections , including the 2014 European Parliament election and the 2015 general election . Following Labour 's loss to the Conservative Party at the general election , Miliband announced his resignation as leader on 8 May 2015 and instructed the party to put into motion the processes to elect a new leader . He was succeeded in the ensuing leadership election by Jeremy Corbyn . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Born in University College Hospital in Fitzrovia , London , Miliband is the younger son of immigrant parents . His mother , Marion Kozak , a human rights campaigner and early CND member , is a Polish Jew who survived the Holocaust thanks to being protected by Catholic Poles . His father , Ralph Miliband , was a Belgian @-@ born Polish Jewish Marxist academic whose father fled with him to England during World War II . The family lived on <unk> Street in Primrose Hill , London . His elder brother , David Miliband , still owns the house today . 
 Ralph Miliband left his academic post at the London School of Economics in 1972 to take up a chair at the University of Leeds as a Professor of Politics . His family moved to Leeds with him in 1973 and Miliband attended <unk> Infant School in Horsforth between 1974 and 1977 , during which time he became a fan of Leeds United . 
 Due to his father 's later employment as a roving teacher , Miliband spent two spells living in Boston , Massachusetts , one year when he was seven and one middle school term when he was twelve . Miliband remembered his time in the US as one of his happiest , during which he became a fan of American culture , watching Dallas and following the Boston Red Sox and the New England Patriots . 
 Between 1978 and 1981 , Ed Miliband attended Primrose Hill Primary School , near Primrose Hill , in Camden and then from 1981 to 1989 , Haverstock Comprehensive School in Chalk Farm . He learned to play the violin while at school , and as a teenager , he reviewed films and plays on LBC Radio 's Young London programme as one of its fortnightly " Three O 'Clock Reviewers " . After completing his O @-@ levels , he worked as an intern to family friend Tony Benn , the MP for Chesterfield . 
 In 1989 , Miliband gained four A Levels – in Mathematics ( A ) , English ( A ) , Further Mathematics ( B ) and Physics ( B ) – and then read Philosophy , Politics and Economics at Corpus Christi College , Oxford . In his first year , he was elected JCR President , leading a student campaign against a rise in rent charges . In his second year he dropped philosophy , and was awarded an upper second class Bachelor of Arts degree . He went on to graduate from the London School of Economics with a Master of Science in Economics . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 = = = Special Adviser = = = 
 In 1992 , after graduating from the University of Oxford , Miliband began his working career in the media as a researcher to co @-@ presenter Andrew Rawnsley in the Channel 4 show A Week in Politics . In 1993 , Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury Harriet Harman approached Rawnsley to recruit Miliband as her policy researcher and speechwriter . At the time , Yvette Cooper also worked for Harman as part of Labour 's Shadow Treasury team . 
 In 1994 , when Harriet Harman was moved by the newly elected Labour Leader Tony Blair to become Shadow Secretary of State for Employment , Miliband stayed on in the Shadow Treasury team and was promoted to work for Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown . In 1995 , with encouragement from Gordon Brown , Miliband took time out from his job to study at the London School of Economics , where he obtained a Masters in Economics . After Labour 's 1997 landslide victory , Miliband was appointed as a special adviser to Chancellor Gordon Brown from 1997 to 2002 . 
 = = = Harvard = = = 
 On 25 July 2002 , it was announced that Miliband would take a 12 @-@ month unpaid sabbatical from HM Treasury to be a visiting scholar at the Center for European Studies of Harvard University for two semesters . He spent his time at Harvard teaching economics , and stayed there after September 2003 for an additional semester teaching a course titled " What 's Left ? The Politics of Social Justice " . During this time , he was granted " access " to Senator John Kerry and reported to Brown on the Presidential hopeful 's progress . After Miliband returned to the UK in January 2004 Gordon Brown appointed him Chairman of HM Treasury 's Council of Economic Advisers as a replacement for Ed Balls , with specific responsibility for directing the UK 's long @-@ term economic planning . 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 In early 2005 , Miliband resigned his advisory role to HM Treasury to stand for election . Kevin Hughes , then the Labour MP for Doncaster North , announced in February of that year that he would be standing down at the next election due to being diagnosed with motor neurone disease . Miliband applied for selection to be the candidate in the safe Labour seat and won , beating off a close challenge from Michael Dugher , then a SPAD to Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon . Dugher would later become an MP in 2010 . 
 Gordon Brown visited Doncaster North during the general election campaign to support his former adviser . Miliband was elected to Parliament on 5 May 2005 , with over 50 % of the vote and a majority of 12 @,@ 656 . He made his maiden speech in the House of Commons on 23 May , responding to comments made by future Speaker John Bercow . In Tony Blair 's cabinet reshuffle in May 2006 , he was made the Parliamentary Secretary to the Cabinet Office , as Minister for the Third Sector , with responsibility for voluntary and charity organisations . 
 = = = Cabinet = = = 
 On 28 June 2007 , the day after Gordon Brown had become Prime Minister , Miliband was sworn of the Privy Council and appointed Minister for the Cabinet Office and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , being promoted to the Cabinet . This meant that he and his brother , Foreign Secretary David Miliband , became the first brothers to serve in a British Cabinet since Edward and Oliver Stanley in 1938 . He was additionally given the task of drafting Labour 's manifesto for the 2010 general election . 
 On 3 October 2008 , Miliband was promoted to become Secretary of State for the newly created Department of Energy and Climate Change in a Cabinet reshuffle . On 16 October , Miliband announced that the British government would legislate to oblige itself to cut greenhouse emissions by 80 % by 2050 , rather than the 60 % cut in carbon dioxide emissions previously announced . 
 In March 2009 , while Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change , Miliband attended the UK premiere of climate @-@ change film The Age of Stupid , where he was ambushed by actor Pete Postlethwaite , who threatened to return his OBE and vote for any party other than Labour if the Kingsnorth coal @-@ fired power station were to be given the go @-@ ahead by the government . A month later , Miliband announced to the House of Commons a change to the government 's policy on coal @-@ fired power stations , saying that any potential new coal @-@ fired power stations would be unable to receive government consent unless they could demonstrate that they would be able to effectively capture and bury 25 % of the emissions they produce immediately , with a view to seeing that rise to 100 % of emissions by 2025 . This , a government source told the Guardian , effectively represented " a complete rewrite of UK energy policy for the future " . 
 Miliband represented the UK at the 2009 Copenhagen Summit , from which emerged a global commitment to provide an additional US $ 10 billion a year to fight the effects of climate change , with an additional $ 100 billion a year provided by 2020 . The conference was not able to achieve a legally binding agreement . Miliband accused China of deliberately foiling attempts at a binding agreement ; China explicitly denied this , accusing British politicians of engaging in a " political scheme " . 
 During the 2009 parliamentary expenses scandal , Miliband was named by the Daily Telegraph as one of the " saints " of the scandal , due to his claiming one of the lowest amounts of expenses in the House of Commons and submitting no claims that later had to be paid back . 
 = = Leadership of the Labour Party = = 
 = = = Leadership election = = = 
 Following the formation of the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition Government on 11 May 2010 , Gordon Brown resigned as Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party with immediate effect . In accordance with the Labour constitution , Deputy Leader Harriet Harman took over as Acting Leader and became Leader of the Opposition . On 14 May , Miliband announced that he would stand as a candidate in the forthcoming election for the leadership of the Labour Party . He launched his campaign during a speech given at a Fabian Society conference at the School of Oriental and African Studies and was nominated by 62 fellow Labour MPs . The other candidates were left @-@ wing backbencher Diane Abbott , Shadow Education Secretary Ed Balls , Shadow Health Secretary Andy Burnham and Miliband 's elder brother , Shadow Foreign Secretary David Miliband . 
 On 23 May , former Labour Leader Neil Kinnock announced that he would endorse Ed Miliband 's campaign , saying that he had " the capacity to inspire people " and that he had " strong values and the ability to ' lift ' people " . Other senior Labour figures who backed the younger Miliband included Tony Benn and former Deputy Leaders Roy Hattersley and Margaret Beckett . By 9 June , the deadline for entry into the leadership election , Miliband had been nominated by just over 24 % of the Parliamentary Labour Party , double the amount required . By September , Miliband had received the support of six trade unions , including both Unite and UNISON , 151 of the 650 Constituency Labour Parties , three affiliated socialist societies , and half of Labour MEPs . 
 Ed Miliband subsequently won the election , the result of which was announced on 25 September 2010 , after second , third and fourth preferences votes were counted , achieving the support of 50 @.@ 654 % of the electoral college , defeating his brother by 1 @.@ 3 % . In the fourth and final stage of the redistribution of votes after three candidates had been eliminated , Ed Miliband led in the trade unions and affiliated organisations section of the electoral college ( 19 @.@ 93 % of the total to David 's 13 @.@ 40 % ) , but in both the MPs and MEPs section ( 15 @.@ 52 % to 17 @.@ 81 % ) , and Constituency Labour Party section ( 15 @.@ 20 % to 18 @.@ 14 % ) , came second . In the final round , Ed Miliband won with a total of 175 @,@ 519 votes to David 's 147 @,@ 220 votes . 
 = = = Leader of the Opposition = = = 
 On becoming Leader of the Labour Party on 25 September 2010 , Miliband also became Leader of the Opposition . At 40 , he was the youngest leader of the party ever . At his first Prime Minister 's Questions on 13 October 2010 , he raised questions about the government 's announced removal of a non @-@ means tested child benefit . During the 2011 military intervention in Libya , Miliband supported UK military action against Muammar Gaddafi . Miliband spoke at a large " March for the Alternative " rally held in London on 26 March 2011 to protest against cuts to public spending , though he was criticised by some for comparing it to the anti @-@ apartheid and American civil rights movements . 
 A June 2011 poll result from Ipsos MORI put Labour 2 percentage points ahead of the Conservatives , but Miliband 's personal rating was low , being rated as less popular than Iain Duncan Smith at a similar stage in his leadership . The same organisation 's polling did find that Miliband 's personal ratings in his first full year of leadership were better than David Cameron 's during his first full year as Conservative leader in 2006 . 
 In July 2011 , following the revelation that the News of the World had paid private investigators to hack into the phones of Milly Dowler , as well as the families of murder victims and deceased servicemen , Miliband called for News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks to resign , urged David Cameron to establish a public , judge @-@ led inquiry into the scandal , and announced that he would force a Commons vote on whether to block the News International bid for a controlling stake in BSkyB . He also called for the Press Complaints Commission to be abolished – a call later echoed by Cameron and Nick Clegg – and called into question Cameron 's judgement in hiring former News of the World editor Andy Coulson to be his Director of communications . Cameron later took the unusual step of saying that the government would back Miliband 's motion that the BSkyB bid be dropped , and an hour before Miliband 's motion was due to be debated , News International announced that it would withdraw the bid . 
 Following the riots in England in August 2011 , Miliband called for a public inquiry into the events , and insisted society had " to avoid simplistic answers " . The call for an inquiry was rejected by David Cameron , prompting Miliband to say he would set up his own . In a BBC Radio 4 interview shortly after the riots , Miliband spoke of an irresponsibility that applied not only to the people involved in the riots , but " wherever we find it in our society . We 've seen in the past few years ... MPs ' expenses , what happened in the banks " . Miliband also said Labour did not do enough to tackle moral problems during its 13 years in office . In December 2011 Miliband appointed Tim Livesey , a former adviser to the Archbishop of Canterbury , to be his full @-@ time chief of staff . 
 In his first speech of 2012 , Miliband said that if Labour won the 2015 general election the times would be difficult economically , but Labour was still the only party capable of delivering " fairness " . He also said he would tackle " vested interests " , citing energy and rail companies . Following the announcement in late January 2012 that the chief executive officer of nationalised The Royal Bank of Scotland , Stephen Hester , would receive a bonus worth £ 950 @,@ 000 , Miliband called the amount " disgraceful " , and urged David Cameron to act to prevent the bonus . Cameron refused , saying it was a matter for the RBS board , leading Miliband to announce that Labour would force a Commons vote on whether or not the government should block it . Hester announced that he would forego his bonus , and Miliband said Labour would carry on with a Commons vote regardless , focusing instead on the bonuses of other RBS executives . Following George Galloway 's unexpected win in the March by @-@ election in Bradford West , Miliband announced he would lead an inquiry into the result , saying , it " could not be dismissed as a one @-@ off " . In April 2012 , in the midst of a debate about the nature of political party funding , Miliband called on David Cameron to institute a £ 5 @,@ 000 cap on donations from individuals and organisations to political parties , after it had been suggested that the government favoured a cap of £ 50 @,@ 000 . On 14 July 2012 , Miliband became the first Leader of the Labour Party to attend and address the Durham Miners ' Gala in 23 years . In the same month , Miliband became the first British politician to be invited to France to meet the new French President , François Hollande . 
 On 23 January 2013 , Miliband stated that he was against holding a referendum on the UK 's membership of the European Union because of the economic uncertainty that it would create . On 18 March 2013 , Miliband reached a deal with both Cameron and Nick Clegg on new press regulation laws following the Leveson Inquiry , which he said " satisfied the demands of protection for victims and freedom of the press " . In August 2013 , following the recall of Parliament to discuss an alleged chemical attack in Syria , Miliband announced that Labour would oppose any military intervention on the basis that there was insufficient evidence . David Cameron had been in favour of such action but lost the ensuing vote , making it the first time that a British prime minister had been prevented from instigating military action by parliament since 1956 . 
 At the Labour conference in September 2013 , Miliband highlighted his party 's stance on the NHS and announced if elected Labour would abolish the bedroom tax . The conference included several ' signature ' policies , such as strengthening the minimum wage , freezing business rates , building 200 @,@ 000 houses a year , lowering the voting age to 16 , and the provision of childcare by primary schools between 8am and 6pm . The policy that attracted the most attention was the commitment to help tackle the ' cost @-@ of @-@ living crisis ' by freezing gas and electricity prices until 2017 to give time to ' reset the market ' in favour of consumers . In January 2014 Miliband extended the concept of reform to include the ' big five ' banks , in addition to the ' big six ' utility companies , and discussed the impact of the cost @-@ of @-@ living on the ' squeezed middle ' saying " the current cost @-@ of @-@ living crisis is not just about people on tax credits , zero @-@ hour contracts and the minimum wage . It is about the millions of middle @-@ class families who never dreamt that life would be such a struggle " . 
 Throughout 2014 , Miliband changed Labour 's policy on immigration , partly in response to UKIP 's performance in the European and local elections in May , and the close result in the Heywood and Middleton by @-@ election in October . Miliband committed to increase funding for border checks , tackle exploitation and the undercutting of wages , require employers who recruit abroad to create apprenticeships , and ensure workers in public @-@ facing roles have minimum standards of English . In November 2014 , Labour announced plans to require new EU migrants wait two years before claiming benefits . 
 Miliband campaigned in the Scottish independence referendum with the cross @-@ party Better Together campaign , supporting Scotland 's membership of the United Kingdom . Opinion polls showed solid leads for the ' no ' campaign , with a 20 point @-@ lead on 19 August . However , by the end of the month , the lead has fallen to just 6 points , with YouGov analysis showing a big shift in support among Labour supporters . Miliband made an unplanned visit to Lanarkshire to draw a contrast between a Labour and Conservative future for Scotland within the UK . A poll on 7 September showed a 2 @-@ point lead for the ' yes ' campaign , leading to a joint commitment by Miliband , Cameron and Clegg for greater devolution to Scotland through a version of home rule . The results on 19 September showed victory for the ' no ' campaign , 55 @.@ 3 % to 44 @.@ 7 % . 
 The day after the referendum , Cameron raised the issue of ' English votes for English laws ' , with Miliband criticising the move as a simplistic solution to a complex problem , eventually coming out in favour for a constitutional convention to be held after the general election . 
 The Labour party conference in Manchester on 21 – 24 September occurred days after the Scottish referendum result . Miliband 's conference speech was criticised , particularly after he missed sections on the deficit and immigration , after attempting to deliver the speech without notes . At the conference , Miliband pledged to focus on six national goals for Britain until 2025 , including boosting pay , apprenticeships and housing ; a mansion tax and levy on tobacco companies to fund £ 2 @.@ 5 billion a year ' time to care ' fund for the NHS ; a commitment to raise the minimum wage to £ 8 or more by 2020 ; and a promise to lower the voting age to 16 ready for elections in 2016 . 
 In February 2015 , Labour pledged to reverse the privatisation of the railways by getting rid of the franchising system , after previously saying that they would allow the public sector to bid for franchises . 
 = = = Shadow Cabinet = = = 
 The first election to the Shadow Cabinet that took place under Miliband 's leadership was on 7 October 2010 . Ending days of speculation , David Miliband announced that he would not seek election to the Shadow Cabinet on 29 September , the day nominations closed , saying he wanted to avoid " constant comparison " with his brother Ed . The three other defeated candidates for the Labour leadership all stood in the election , though Diane Abbott failed to win enough votes to gain a place . Following the election , Miliband unveiled his Shadow Cabinet on 8 October 2010 . Among others he appointed Alan Johnson as Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer , Yvette Cooper was chosen as Shadow Foreign Secretary , and both defeated Labour leadership candidates Ed Balls and Andy Burnham were given senior roles , becoming Shadow Home Secretary and Shadow Education Secretary respectively . Burnham was also given responsibility for overseeing Labour 's election co @-@ ordination . Sadiq Khan , who managed Miliband 's successful leadership campaign , was appointed Shadow Justice Secretary and Shadow Lord Chancellor , and continuing Deputy Leader Harriet Harman continued to shadow Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg , as well as being made Shadow International Development Secretary . Alan Johnson would later resign , stepping down for " personal reasons " on 20 January 2011 , necessitating Miliband 's first reshuffle , in which he made Balls Shadow Chancellor , Cooper Shadow Home Secretary and Douglas Alexander Shadow Foreign Secretary . 
 On 24 June 2011 , it was reported that Miliband was seeking to change the decades @-@ old rule that Labour 's Shadow Cabinet would be elected every two years , instead wanting to adopt a system where he alone had the authority to select its members . Miliband later confirmed the story , claiming that the rule represented " a legacy of Labour 's past in opposition " . On 5 July , Labour MPs voted overwhelmingly by a margin of 196 to 41 to back the rule change , paving the way for NEC and conference approval , which was secured in September 2011 . This made Miliband the first Labour leader to have the authority to pick his own Shadow Cabinet . ` On 7 October 2011 , Miliband reshuffled his Shadow Cabinet . John Denham , John Healey and Shaun Woodward announced that they were stepping down , while Meg Hillier , Ann <unk> and Baroness Scotland also left the Shadow Cabinet . Veteran MPs Tom Watson , Jon Trickett , Stephen Twigg and Vernon Coaker were promoted to the Shadow Cabinet , as were several of the 2010 intake , including Chuka Umunna , Margaret Curran and Rachel Reeves , with Liz Kendall and Michael Dugher given the right to attend Shadow Cabinet . Lord Wood and Emily Thornberry were also made Shadow Cabinet attendees . 
 On 15 May 2012 , Miliband appointed Owen Smith to replace Peter Hain – who retired from frontline politics – as Shadow Welsh Secretary , and also promoted Jon <unk> to the Shadow Cabinet , putting him in charge of overseeing Labour 's ongoing policy review with a view to draft Labour 's manifesto for the next election . On 4 July 2013 , Miliband effectively sacked Tom Watson from the Shadow Cabinet after allegations of corruption over the selection of a Parliamentary candidate for Falkirk . Watson had offered his resignation , but when Miliband was asked by a journalist specifically whether he had sacked Watson , he replied , " ... I said it was right for him to go , yes . " 
 On 7 October 2013 , Miliband reshuffled his Shadow Cabinet for the third time , saying that this would be the last reshuffle before the general election . In a move similar to his 2011 reshuffle , several MPs from the 2010 intake were promoted , while more long @-@ serving MPs were moved . Tristram Hunt and Rachel Reeves received promotions , while Liam Byrne and Stephen Twigg were among those demoted . 
 Miliband conducted a final mini @-@ reshuffle ahead of the 2015 general election in November 2014 , when Jim Murphy resigned as Shadow International Development Secretary to become Leader of the Scottish Labour Party . 
 = = = Local and European elections = = = 
 Miliband 's first electoral tests as Labour Leader came in the elections to the Scottish Parliament , Welsh Assembly and various councils across England , excluding London , on 5 May 2011 . The results for Labour were described as a " mixed bag " , with the party performing well in Wales – falling just one seat short of an overall majority and forming the next Welsh Government on its own – and making large gains from the Liberal Democrats in northern councils , including Sheffield , Leeds , Liverpool and Manchester . Results were less encouraging in the south of England , and results in Scotland were described as a " disaster " , with Labour losing nine seats to the SNP , which went on to gain the Parliament 's first ever majority . Miliband said that following the poor showings in Scotland " lessons must still be learnt " . 
 Miliband launched Labour 's campaign for the 2012 local elections with a speech in Birmingham , accusing the coalition government of " betrayal " , and claiming that it " lacked the values " that Britain needed . The Labour results were described as a success , with the party building on its performance the previous year in the north of England and Wales , consolidating its position in northern cities and winning control of places such as Cardiff and Swansea . Labour performed well in the Midlands and South of England , winning control of councils including Birmingham , Norwich , Plymouth and Southampton . Labour was less successful in Scotland than England and Wales , but retained control of Glasgow despite predictions it would not . Overall , Labour gained over 800 councillors and control of 22 councils . 
 In April 2013 , Miliband pledged ahead of the upcoming county elections that Labour would change planning laws to give local authorities greater authority to decide what shops can open in their high streets . He also said that Labour would introduce more strenuous laws relating to pay @-@ day lenders and betting shops . Labour subsequently gained nearly 300 councillors , as well as control of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire County Councils . 
 In May 2014 , Miliband led Labour through the European Parliament elections , where the party increased its number of Members of the European Parliament from 13 to 20 . Labour came second with 24 @.@ 4 % of the vote , finishing ahead of the Conservatives but behind the UK Independence Party . This was the first time since the European elections of 1984 that the largest opposition party had failed to win the most seats . On the same day , Labour polled ahead of all other parties at the local elections , winning 31 % of the vote and taking control of six additional councils . 
 = = = 2015 general election and resignation = = = 
 On 30 March 2015 , the Parliament of the United Kingdom dissolved and a general election was called for 7 May . Miliband began his campaign by launching a " manifesto for business " , stating that only by voting Labour would the UK 's position within the European Union be secure . Miliband subsequently unveiled five pledges at a rally in Birmingham which would form the focus of a future Labour government , specifically identifying policies on deficit reduction , living standards , the NHS , immigration controls and tuition fees . He included an additional pledge on housing and rent on 27 April . On 14 April , Labour launched its full manifesto , which Miliband said was fully funded and would require no additional borrowing . Also in April , he claimed he would attempt to create legislation against Islamophobia . 
 Throughout the campaign for the 7 May elections , Miliband insisted that David Cameron should debate him one on one as part of a televised election broadcast in order to highlight differences in policies between the two major parties , but this was never to happen , with the pair instead being interviewed separately by Jeremy Paxman as part of the first major televised political broadcast of the election involving multiple parties . 
 Despite opinion polls leading up to the general election predicting a tight result , Labour decisively lost the 7 May general election to the Conservatives . Although gaining 22 seats , Labour lost all but one of its MPs in Scotland and ended up with a net loss of 48 seats , failing to win a number of key marginal seats that it had expected to win comfortably . After being returned as MP for Doncaster North , Miliband stated that it had been a " difficult and disappointing " night for Labour . Following David Cameron 's success in forming a majority government , Miliband resigned as Leader of the Labour Party on 8 May , with Harriet Harman becoming acting leader while a leadership election was initiated . 
 Miliband has remained on Labour 's backbench since he stepped down as leader , declining to serve in new Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn 's shadow cabinet . 
 = = Policies and views = = 
 = = = Self @-@ described views = = = 
 Miliband described himself as a new type of Labour politician , looking to move beyond the divisiveness of <unk> and <unk> , and calling for an end to the " factionalism and <unk> " of Labour 's past . He also repeatedly spoke of the requirement for a " new politics " . 
 During the Labour leadership campaign , he described himself as a socialist , and spoke out against some of the actions of the Blair ministry , including criticising its record on civil liberties and foreign policy . Though he was not an MP at the time of the 2003 vote , Miliband was a strong critic of the Iraq War . He backed UK military action and intervention in Afghanistan and Libya respectively . 
 Miliband called for " responsible capitalism " when Google 's Eric Schmidt commented on his corporation 's non @-@ payment of tax . He also supported making the UK 's 50 % top rate of tax permanent , as well as the institution of a new financial transaction tax , <unk> Northern Rock , putting limits on top salaries , scrapping tuition fees in favour of a graduate tax , implementing a living wage policy and the scrapping of the ID cards policy , and spoke in favour of a " National Care Service " . 
 Miliband worked closely with the think tank Policy Network on the concept of <unk> as a means to tackle what he described as ' the growing crisis in living standards ' . His announcement that <unk> would become a cornerstone of the UK Labour Party 's economic policy was jokingly mocked by Prime Minister David Cameron during Prime Minister 's Questions in the House of Commons . 
 Though Labour remained officially neutral , he in a personal capacity supported the ultimately unsuccessful " Yes to AV " campaign in the Alternative Vote referendum on 5 May 2011 , saying that it would benefit Britain 's " progressive majority " . In September 2011 , Miliband stated that a future Labour Government would immediately cut the cap on tuition fees for university students from £ 9 @,@ 000 per year to £ 6 @,@ 000 , though he also stated that he remained committed to a graduate tax in the long @-@ run . Together with Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls , Miliband also promoted a " five @-@ point plan for jobs and growth " aimed at helping the UK economy , involving extending the bonus tax on banks pioneered by Alistair Darling , bringing forward planned long @-@ term investment to help reduce unemployment , cutting the rate of VAT from 20 % back to 17 @.@ 5 % , cutting VAT on home improvements to 5 % for a temporary one @-@ year period , and instigating a one @-@ year National Insurance break to encourage employers to hire more staff . Miliband also endorsed the Blue Labour trend in the Labour Party , founded by Maurice <unk> . Blue Labour talks about family and friendships at the heart of society , rather than just material wealth ; it also offers a very strong critique of the free market as well as the big state . This was seen to have influenced his 2011 conference speech , signalling " predatory and productive capitalism " . 
 Miliband is progressive in regard to issues of gender and sexuality . He publicly identifies as a feminist . March 2012 Miliband pledged his support for same sex marriage . As he signed an ' equal marriage pledge ' , he said , " I strongly agree gay and lesbian couples should have an equal right to marry and deserve the same recognition from the state and society as anyone else . " 
 In June 2014 , while speaking to the Labour Friends of Israel , Miliband stated that if he became Prime Minister he would seek " closer ties " with Israel and opposed the boycott of Israeli goods , saying that he would " resolutely oppose the isolation of Israel " and that nobody in the Labour Party should question Israel 's right to exist . He also stated that as a Jew and a friend of Israel , he must also criticise Israel when necessary , opposing the " killing of innocent Palestinian civilians " and calling Hamas a terrorist organisation . 
 = = = Comments on other politicians = = = 
 Miliband has criticised Conservative Leader and Prime Minister David Cameron for " sacrificing everything on the altar of deficit reduction " , and has accused him of being guilty of practising " old politics " , citing alleged broken promises on areas such as crime , policing , bank bonuses , and child benefit . 
 Miliband has also been particularly critical of Liberal Democrat Leader and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg following the Conservative – Liberal Democrat coalition agreement , accusing him of " betrayal " and of " selling @-@ out " his party 's voters . He has also stated that he would demand the resignation of Nick Clegg as a precursor to any future Labour @-@ Liberal Democrat coalition . In the 2011 Alternative Vote referendum , Miliband refused to share a platform with Clegg , stating that he had become " too toxic " a brand , and that he would harm the " Yes to AV " campaign . He shared platforms during the campaign with former Liberal Democrat Leaders Lord Ashdown and Charles Kennedy , as well as current Liberal Democrat Deputy Leader Simon Hughes , the Green Party Leader Caroline Lucas and Business Secretary Vince Cable , among others . Since becoming Labour leader , Miliband has made speeches aimed at winning over disaffected Liberal Democrats , identifying a difference between the " Orange Book " Lib Dems , who were closer to the Conservatives , and Lib Dems on the centre @-@ left , offering the latter a role in helping Labour 's policy review . 
 Following the death of former Prime Minister and Conservative Leader Margaret Thatcher in 2013 , Miliband spoke in a House of Commons sitting specially convened to pay tributes to her . He noted that , although he disagreed with a few of her policies , he respected " what her death means to the many , many people who admired her " . He also said that Thatcher " broke the mould " in everything she had achieved in her life , and that she had had the ability to " overcome every obstacle in her path " . He had previously praised Thatcher shortly before the Labour Party Conference in September 2012 for creating an " era of aspiration " in the 1980s . 
 Miliband has previously spoken positively of his brother David , praising his record as Foreign Secretary , and saying that " his door was always open " following David 's decision not to stand for the Shadow Cabinet in 2010 . Upon David 's announcement in 2013 that he would resign as a Labour MP and move to New York to head the International Rescue Committee , Miliband said that British politics would be " a poorer place " without him , and that he thought David " would once again make a contribution to British public life . " 
 When asked to choose the greatest British Prime Minister , Miliband answered with Labour 's post @-@ war Prime Minister and longest @-@ serving Leader , Clement Attlee . He has also spoken positively of his two immediate predecessors as Labour leader , former Prime Ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown , praising their leadership and records in government . 
 = = = Media portrayal = = = 
 Miliband was portrayed during Labour 's 2015 election campaign as being genuine in his desire to improve the lives of working people and to display progression from New Labour , but unable to defeat interpretations of him as being ineffectual , or even cartoonish in nature . Political illustrators perceived a resemblance to Wallace of the British animation Wallace and Gromit and greatly exaggerated this in caricatures ; various images also surfaced of Miliband performing tasks such as eating a sandwich , donating money to a beggar , smiling , and giving a kiss to his wife , all while displaying apparently unnatural or awkward facial expressions . In a March 2015 Newsnight election debate , he was challenged by Jeremy Paxman as to whether or not he was ' tough enough ' to be Prime Minister , famously responding , " Hell yes , I 'm tough enough , " in reference to his reluctance to support air strikes against extremist targets in Syria . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Miliband is married to a barrister , Justine Thornton . The pair met in 2002 and lived together in North London before becoming engaged in March 2010 and married in May 2011 . They have two sons , Daniel , born 2009 , and Samuel , born 2010 . 
 Miliband is of Jewish heritage — the first Jewish leader of the Labour Party — and describes himself as a Jewish atheist . After marrying Thornton in a civil ceremony on 27 May 2011 , he paid tribute to his Jewish heritage by following the tradition of breaking a glass . In 2012 , Miliband wrote , " Like many others from Holocaust families , I have a paradoxical relationship with this history . On one level I feel intimately connected with it – this happened to my parents and grandparents . On another , it feels like a totally different world . " 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Styles = = 
 Mr. Edward Samuel Miliband ( 1969 – 2005 ) 
 Mr. Edward Samuel Miliband MP ( 2005 – 2007 ) 
 The Right Honourable Edward Samuel Miliband MP ( 2007 – present ) 
 = Feeder = 
 Feeder are a Welsh rock band formed in Newport , Wales . They have released eight studio albums , three compilations , two EPs , and 34 singles . They have spent a total of 180 weeks on the singles and albums charts combined as of 2012 , and have accumulated 25 top 75 singles between 1997 and 2012 . 
 Feeder 's music has been inspired by a wide variety of artists and styles , including The Police , Nirvana , and The Smashing Pumpkins . Their early material showcased a heavy rock sound reminiscent of grunge , but the band would later introduce more acoustic aspects into their music , including elements of pianos and string orchestras . 
 The band was formed in 1992 under the name of " Reel " by vocalist and guitarist Grant Nicholas , drummer Jon Lee and bassist Simon Blight , three of the four members of Raindancer , after the departure of that band 's other member , guitarist John Canham . However , Blight left Reel later in 1992 , and the band played with many session bassists before hiring Taka Hirose in 1995 , a year after the band signed with The Echo Label . 
 Feeder garnered media attention in 2001 for their third album , Echo Park , and its lead single , " Buck Rogers " , which later become a UK Top 5 single . In January 2002 , Jon Lee committed suicide in his Miami home , after which the remaining members began to record and play with former Skunk Anansie drummer Mark Richardson . They released their fourth album , Comfort in Sound later that year , which touched on themes such as loss and coming to terms with death , while also exploring themes of positivity . Richardson was ultimately made an official member , remaining so until May 2009 when he returned to a reformed Skunk Anansie . Feeder employed Australian Damon Wilson and former <unk> drummer Tim Trotter for sessions and touring commitments for Renegades ( 2010 ) , and they have since employed drummer Karl Brazil . Although the band have not had a top 10 release since 2008 , they have still charted two more Top 20 albums , with the latest being 2012 's Generation Freakshow . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early releases ( 1991 – 96 ) = = = 
 At the age of 14 , singer and guitarist Grant Nicholas joined a band called ' Sweet Leaf ' , named after a song by Black Sabbath , who were the first band he had seen play live . At this time Japanese bassist Taka Hirose and drummer Jon Lee were playing in different covers bands , but did not know each other . While playing in different bands on the Newport gig circuit , Grant and Jon became friends . They formed an electronic duo called ' Temper Temper ' after Jon left Newport band The Darling Buds . Shortly thereafter , they formed a band called Raindancer . Both of these bands failed to win a recording contract , with the sound of the latter once being compared by Grant with that of The Waterboys . On 20 June 1991 , Raindancer were invited to appear on Stage One , a late night television show on ITV Central , showcasing up and coming bands . The gig was filmed at The Town and Country Club , London without an audience present . 
 Going back to the drawing board , Raindancer reformed as three @-@ piece band called ' Reel ' after John Canham departed . Their bass player Simon Blight later departed from the band and the music business , before changing their name to ' Real ' . During this time in 1994 they recruited Taka Hirose via an advert in Loot , which Taka placed himself . The band then changed their name to Feeder , named after Grant 's pet goldfish . They won their recording contract with Echo after sending a demo tape , and then completed the deal after an employee from the label witnessed one of the band 's gigs . A track called " Don 't Bring Me Down " , which featured on the demo appeared as a b @-@ side on the " Day In Day Out " single , albeit a different version to the demo recording . After signing with The Echo Label in 1994 , the group toured with Scarborough band <unk> who at the time , recently formed from the ashes of Little Angels . It was this tour where Feeder met Mark Richardson for the first time . 
 Feeder 's first official release was a two @-@ track EP entitled Two Colours , released in 1995 which was only available at the band 's early gigs . It was limited to 1 @,@ 500 CDs and 1 @,@ 000 7 " vinyls . In 1996 , the band released their first commercially available release , being the EP Swim and received a 4 / 5 review in Kerrang ! magazine ( KKKK ) . Swim was later re @-@ released in July 2001 with extra tracks , being a selection of b @-@ sides from their earlier singles , alongside the videos for the Polythene singles " Crash " and " Cement " . Overall unit sales for Swim stand at 40 @,@ 000 as of February 2005 . 
 Shortly before the release of Swim , a cassette tape titled Two Tracker was given away free with the magazines Kerrang ! and Edge and contained the tracks " Sweet 16 " and " Waterfall " . The latter was described on the inlay card , as one of the tracks that would be on their forthcoming debut album proper , with the working title Here in the Bubble ( whose name was soon changed to Polythene ) . The photography for the inlay of Swim was produced by Grant himself , while Chris Sheldon produced the recordings . The band released " Stereo World " as a single after appearing at the Reading festival . 
 = = = Polythene ( 1997 – 98 ) = = = 
 After building a strong fanbase with the release of Swim , the band released their first full @-@ length album in 1997 . The result Polythene , was one of the most critically acclaimed albums of 1997 with Metal Hammer and Kerrang ! , placing the album at first and sixth in their respective end of year lists . Kerrang ! later included the album in their 200 Albums For the Year 2000 list in the " Essential <unk> " category . Two tracks from Swim were used for the album , being " Descend " and " <unk> " . 
 After the recording sessions were completed , the album 's first single " Tangerine " was released and charted at # 60 in the UK singles chart . This was followed by " Cement " , charting at # 53 and then the release of the album which charted at # 65 . Two more singles were released before and after their main stage debut at the Reading festival , with " Crash " making number # 48 , while " High " charted at number # 24 . 
 The album as of February 2005 , has sold 89 @,@ 000 copies . They also re @-@ issued the album in October 1997 , with " High " included and the " Stereo World " b @-@ side " Change " replacing " Waterfall " from the original track list . Also included as an enhanced element was the video for " High " . The album caused many critics to label the band " The UK 's answer to the Smashing Pumpkins " , and also draw comparisons to The Pixies and Talk Talk . 
 In early 1998 , following the band 's final 1997 tour in support of Polythene , the band travelled to the United States as a support act for Everclear . During their U.S. tour , the band released a re @-@ worked version of " <unk> " for UK release , which charted at # 37 . After their return to the UK , they played their own headline tour with Everclear this time in the supporting position . Later that year , Feeder started to play various music festivals in the United States , alongside a headline tour with " High " being released to radio stations and charting at # 24 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart ; it was the follow @-@ up to " Cement " which had charted at # 31 , also on the same listing . During the band 's first U.S. tour , Grant broke his ankle and picked up other injuries , while finding it hard to sleep at nights . This inspired him to write " Insomnia " , which later appeared on their second album . They stayed in the U.S. for the majority of the year , with a trip back to the UK for their <unk> appearance . Feeder later included live @-@ only guitarist Dean Tidey ; Grant once said in an interview with Kerrang ! , that he was considering bringing in another guitarist for their live gigs . 
 = = = Yesterday Went Too Soon ( 1999 ) = = = 
 For 1999 's Yesterday Went Too Soon , the band decided to self @-@ produce the album , brought in Matt Sime for engineering duties and had the album mixed in New York by Andy Wallace . " Dry " was re @-@ recorded as a full band version after the original acoustic version appeared on " <unk> " as a b @-@ side . That single 's b @-@ sides featured tracks from the sessions for that album , therefore revealing what sort of direction it would take on . The working title for the album was originally A Life Through Headphones , and was originally set to be a double album . The name change was due to former Take That singer Robbie Williams releasing his solo debut album Life Thru a Lens , with the band not wanting to be compared to him . 
 When the album was released , the band 's reputation was on the rise and it entered the UK albums chart at number eight , which was at the time an unexpected chart position for the band . Before that , the band had released the album 's first single , " Day In Day Out " , in March 1999 which charted at # 31 followed by " Insomnia " at # 22 , resulting in their first appearance on Top of the Pops . A week before the album 's release , the band played the main stage of the Reading and Leeds festivals , while the title track from the album was at # 20 in the singles chart . The album was then released on 30 August 1999 . Only one single was lifted from the album after its release , in which a re @-@ recorded version of " <unk> " charted at # 41 . 
 Some of the album 's lyrical themes were derived from Grant 's personal perspective of working in a menial supermarket job on a daily basis ( " Day in Day Out " ) , his experiences after gigs on their US tour ( " Insomnia " and " You 're My Evergreen " ) , past relationships ( the title track and " Dry " ) , the music industry ( " Hole in My Head " ) and " fear of commitment in relationships " ( " <unk> " ) amongst others . Musically , the album employed an indie rock feel to it , which also featured extended appearances of an acoustic guitar on some of its tracks . 
 The album was due for release in June , but this was delayed until August to include material written after its completion which the band felt was too good to leave off . Upon its release , the UK music press immediately warmed to the album , which also received Melody Maker ' s Album of the Week accolade . The year ended with the band providing support for the Red Hot Chili Peppers at Wembley Arena and Manic Street Preachers at the Millennium Stadium . As of March 2003 , the album has been certified gold shipping 100 @,@ 000 units in the UK , with total counter sales standing at 110 @,@ 000 as of February 2005 . The album was Melody Maker 's # 24 album of 1999 , while Metal Hammer placed the album in at # 6 and Kerrang ! ranked it at # 16 . 
 = = = Echo Park and mainstream breakthrough ( 2000 – 01 ) = = = 
 Feeder spent most of 2000 at Great Linford Manor studios , writing and recording for their next album . The band also continued playing festivals around the country previewing the new material they were working on , such as <unk> and Glastonbury , but would end the year promoting " Buck Rogers " , their first single since November 1999 and then playing a mini @-@ tour at the end of the year to mainly showcase the new material . The release of the single on 8 January 2001 was coupled with a signing session at London 's now defunct Tower Records store and then a TV appearance on Top of The Pops before the single charted . The single charted at number five , becoming the band 's first top 10 entry in the singles chart before appearing on Top of the Pops again . " Buck Rogers " then spent a second week in the top 10 . 
 Grant wrote " Buck Rogers " with The Pixies as an influence , but " on a comic book level " . He had originally written the track for another band Echo Park producer Gil Norton was working with , but decided not to give it away , as he felt Feeder could have a hit with it themselves . " Buck Rogers " still receives regular airplay on alternative radio stations in the United Kingdom . Kerrang ! ' s writers have also approved of the track as one of their " 666 Songs You Must Own " , when it appeared at # 5 in their rock songs list in November 2004 . 
 After a sell @-@ out tour of two legs ending at the London Astoria , the album Echo Park entered at number five in the UK album charts , shortly after " Seven Days in the Sun " , the album 's second single charted at # 14 . Shortly before the single 's release , the band 's rise up to the mainstream was recognised by the now defunct Scottish Television live music show Boxed Set , where a half @-@ hour @-@ long live @-@ set with a studio audience was played . A third single , " Turn " reached # 27 in July before festival season . " Just a Day " , a b @-@ side from " Seven Days in the Sun " , later reached # 12 in December . The response the album received on a critical level was mixed , with Dan <unk> of Q magazine claiming that the listener will still be " feeling hungry half an hour later " , alongside suggesting that the album is " hard to love " . Ben Myers of Kerrang ! gave the album 4 / 5 ( KKKK ) which indicates " blinding " , while citing that the band " hit their stride " on the album , alongside suggesting that the album is " fat free and stripped to the bone " . 
 The album saw the band take on much more of a commercially influenced sound , and also the appearance of Moog synthesizers , while being lyrically focused on a comedic approach , as with " Seven Days in the Sun " , but also dark emotions , such as those shown on " Turn " , " Oxygen " , and " Satellite News " . It was during the campaign for Echo Park that the band played another slot on the main stage at the Reading and Leeds festival , including T in the Park . As of August 2003 , the album has shipped 300 @,@ 000 units in the UK going platinum , with counter sales standing at 293 @,@ 000 as of February 2005 . Grant said in a Melody Maker interview that if the album did not sell well enough the band would probably split up ; he said at the time that " It 's the same with any band . That 's just the way the music business is . There is only a certain amount of money a label will put into a band . I 'm just being realistic . We 've been around for seven or eight years and I am not planning on giving up , but we 're putting everything into this record and I 'm just hoping that people like it " . The album campaign helped the band in August 2001 win the " Best British Live Act " accolade at the Kerrang ! awards , before ending the year supporting the Stereophonics , and then releasing the " Just a Day " single in December . In February 2015 , " Buck Rogers " gained a silver certification for 200 @,@ 000 physical sales , digital downloads and streaming points combined . 
 = = = Jon Lee 's death and Comfort in Sound ( 2002 – 03 ) = = = 
 In January 2002 , Jon Lee committed suicide in his Miami home , resulting in the band keeping out of the public eye for most of the year . It was during this time that lead @-@ singer Grant Nicholas wrote a series of songs relating to their emotions and reactions to Jon 's death , which formed their fourth album Comfort in Sound . The band brought in former Skunk Anansie and Little Angels member Mark Richardson for drumming duties . The album focused mainly on themes such as loss , depression , grief and positivity , while dedicating " <unk> " to Jon . The album was released in October of the same year to widespread critical acclaim in the British music press , with Kerrang ! alongside the heavy rock magazine Metal Hammer giving the album their respective Album of the Week accolades . The band were invited to the Reading and Leeds festivals that year , headlining the second stage at Reading on the first day which took place on 23 August , before heading off to Leeds the next . Grant also mentioned that at the time their fourth album already had a series of backing tracks recorded , with a total of 15 when recording is completed with then 10 chosen for the final album , when the final track listing was revealed , this was increased to 12 . The album is currently Feeder 's best @-@ seller with an estimated 503 @,@ 706 units sold as of April 2012 . The album charted at # 98 in Japan and # 28 in Ireland , beating the peak position of # 57 that Echo Park managed during the previous year . In Japan , it would be the first time Feeder ever charted there . The album charted at number six in the UK . 
 Musically , the album was much more mellow , with the use of a string orchestra on " Forget About Tomorrow " , while other tracks on the album also used an accordion , trumpet , and a piano played by their manager Matt Page , with " Godzilla " being one of two tracks on the album to use loud guitars . The album was their first release to be certified platinum , ( with Echo Park going platinum later on ) . It also spawned their second top 10 single , with " Just the Way I 'm Feeling " in January 2003 . In December of the same year they took on their only arena tour , after the album 's first nationwide tour was a sell out with 50 @,@ 000 tickets sold , and visited 21 different towns and cities in the United Kingdom over 23 different dates . In reaction to this , the band were invited to the Glastonbury Festival being placed third on the last day , playing the " Pyramid Stage " . Shortly after the release of the single , the band were invited to support Coldplay on their UK and European tour , due to their frontman Chris Martin often saying how much he liked the Comfort in Sound album and their live shows . Their show at the Birmingham National Indoor Arena was reviewed by Kerrang ! , which seen Steve Beebee give the band 4 / 5 ( KKKK ) for their performance . 
 The album 's final single , being the title track , was only available to buy as a limited edition of 3 @,@ 000 CDs on their 2003 arena tour . Four singles were released commercially , with those being " Come Back Around " ( # 14 ) , " Just the Way I 'm Feeling " ( # 10 ) , " Forget About Tomorrow " ( # 12 ) , and " Find the Colour " ( # 24 ) , which was released following their <unk> appearance and Kerrang ! award win for " Best British Band " , beating competition from Muse and the Stereophonics , which Grant dedicated to Jon saying it was the award he had always wanted the band to win . The band later went on to win an Internet Music Award for their " Just The Way I 'm Feeling " video , while the album became their first to appear on the end of year top 75 album charts , appearing at # 66 . The album 's commercial reception helped Echo experience their most successful financial year . Feeder then received their only nomination to date at The BRIT Awards , in which they appeared in the " Best British Rock " category at the 2004 event , before making their only appearance in the charts that year as part of Bob Geldof 's Band Aid 20 charity ensemble . The single was the Christmas number one , and became the year 's biggest @-@ selling UK single . Alongside only making one chart appearance in 2004 , Feeder also only made one live appearance during the year as part of the Carling Live 24 event , playing their show at the Hammersmith Apollo on 1 May . 
 = = = Pushing the Senses ( 2004 – 05 ) = = = 
 Feeder returned to the studio to record their fifth album Pushing the Senses . The album was seen by Grant as more of an extension to Comfort in Sound , as it focused on the same lyrical themes and musical styles , and also said that it had more of an organic sound , with more upbeat tracks added into the mix . It also seen a number of piano driven tracks , with " Frequency " being an example . " Frequency " was produced by Coldplay producer Ken Nelson , while for the rest of the album , Gil Norton was on production duties . Grant told Kerrang ! in May 2004 , " I 've done some recording on my own in a little studio up by where I live in North London . I demo the album in its full form before the rest of the band play on it . Its difficult to know at this stage what it will turn out like , but so far its slightly more mature sounding " . Grant later added " Each album is a journey and a reflection of the past , there is some stuff that touches on what has happened , but there are songs about love , songs of loss and songs about the future . I don 't want to give too much away but there 's one track called " Bitter Glass " . Its quite dark but uplifting too . Its about pulling yourself out of a big hole " . 
 The album was Feeder 's highest charting release , at number two on the UK album chart selling 42 @,@ 951 units in its first week , while receiving a gold certification , and becoming a top 100 album in six other countries . Press response to the album was mixed . Kerrang ! were brutal towards the band for all of their review , with Ben Meyers referring to them as a " Radio Friendly Unit <unk> " , including comparisons to a " Pastel box " . Grant later said in a documentary with Kerrang ! Radio that he was " pissed off " with the review their magazine counterpart gave them , while citing " It was a very unfair review and reviewed by the wrong person " . 
 The album helped them win their only major headline slot to date , being at 2005 's Download Festival , shortly before supporting U2 for a brief period on their Vertigo Tour , which was followed by an appearance at the Live 8 concert in Edinburgh ( the second charity event the band played that year after Tsunami Relief Cardiff ) . The campaign in total spawned four UK top 40 singles , which included " Shatter " , a reworked version of the " Tumble and Fall " b @-@ side that became a double A @-@ side with " Tender " ( # 11 ) . Other singles included " Tumble and Fall " ( top five ) , " Feeling A Moment " ( # 13 ) , and " Pushing the Senses " ( # 30 ) . A fan @-@ petition had been launched to see " Shatter " released as a single in its own right . The album was after ten weeks on sales of 111 @,@ 214 units , 22 percent ahead of Comfort in Sound at that stage . However , the album did not keep up this momentum while also not going platinum . The last reported sales were that of 160 @,@ 183 in October of the same year , which fell below Echo 's expectations . It is however the band 's most successful record based on peak chart positions in each country of release , while also being their only album so far to spawn a charting single outside of the UK and Ireland when " Feeling a Moment " peaked at # 32 in Australia . Feeder already at the time charted four top 50 singles in Ireland , with " Tumble and Fall " being their first and only top 40 to date reaching a peak position of # 26 . The album itself made the Irish top 20 artist album chart at # 16 , one week before its UK release . 
 Feeder would end the year seeing their then latest album appear at # 39 on Q 's end of year list , with " Feeling a Moment " voted the 98th best song of the year by its readers . However , on 3 December 2005 , they were forced to postpone a winter tour , after Grant picked up bleeds on his vocal cords the night before during a gig in Brighton , causing the show to be abandoned and later rescheduled along with the rest of the outstanding dates . During the year , Feeder 's domestic studio album sales passed the one million units mark . 
 = = = The Singles and Silent Cry ( 2006 – 08 ) = = = 
 In late 2005 , Feeder already returned to the studio , with Stephen Street working as the band 's producer to record three new tracks to appear on their then forthcoming singles collection . " Lost and Found " ( which Grant described as " an urban love song " ) became the first single to promote the collection , and would reach # 12 in the UK singles chart in May 2006 , after completing their delayed winter tour , which ended at the LG Arena in Birmingham in front of 8 @,@ 000 fans . The Singles , released in the same month as " Lost and Found " , was the first Feeder album to have involvement from a major label , with EMI taking part in a one @-@ off collaboration with Echo as the album 's distributor . The album reached number two on the UK albums chart with first week sales of 50 @,@ 003 entering at number three , and was certified platinum in under three months , with a total of 497 @,@ 700 units sold as of April 2012 , including a gold certification in Ireland after charting at # 13 . The album also made the top ten in Europe with a debut top 40 peak in Japan at # 37 , while " Save Us " was its second and final single in the UK , charting at # 34 in late July . A version of the album included a DVD of all their videos filmed up to that point , along with extensive sleevenotes by Ben Johncock . The album became only their second to appear on the end of year top 75 this time at # 48 , while becoming their first album to spend more than one week on the top 10 . Sales of The Singles , alongside a series of changes at Echo making them into an " Incubator label " , enabled the company to report a " modest profit " for 2006 . Feeder returned to the Reading and Leeds festivals after a four @-@ year break , having a late slot on the main stage , before ending the year with a small tour of London , playing The Roundhouse , and The Coronet . These were in aid of War Child who the band are patrons of , having earlier in the year visited The Congo as part of their work for the charity . 
 In 2007 Feeder returned to the studio to record their sixth album . Most of the year was spent on the recording , and in 2006 the band announced in an interview with XFM that the album would be reminiscent of their earlier material . The resulting album Silent Cry was released on 16 June 2008 . The album overally received moderate reviews . While some like Guardian were negative towards the album. others like Rock Louder were more positive . On its release week the album charted at number eight with sales of 16 @,@ 029 . In its second week the album then fell to number 30 , with a third week drop to number 60 before leaving the top 75 albums listing . In Japan it peaked at # 53 which is currently higher than all their studio albums , but lower than the peak of The Singles . Before the release of the album , " We Are the People " charted at # 25 in the singles chart , making it their lowest chart position for a lead single since 1999 's " Day in Day Out " . " Miss You " from the album was given away by the band 's official website as a free download in April , and gained over 8 @,@ 000 downloads on its first day of release . As of December 2008 , sales of Silent Cry stand at less than 50 @,@ 000 units , less than was what hoped for by their label . Shortly after album release , the band recorded a cover of Public Image Ltd 's 1978 self @-@ titled single " Public Image " , for a compilation album to celebrate Independents Day which celebrated independently released music . The second single from Silent Cry was Feeder 's first download @-@ only single , consisting of " Tracing Lines " and the album 's title track which failed to make the charts . 
 In May 2008 , the band played a small eight date tour to promote the album to the fanbase , which sold out in six hours . This was followed by a one @-@ off gig on 12 June at the Proud Galleries in Camden , which sold out in six minutes . The band then went on to play at the iTunes festival in July , which saw a live six @-@ track EP release of their performance , before playing the 2008 Reading and Leeds festivals in August , on the main stage . In July the band played at T in the Park , with an appearance at the Isle of Wight Festival the month previous . In 2008 , the band also introduced live keyboard player Dean Deavall , of the band Casino . During the same year , on 25 October at 06 : 00 GMT after playing the Glasgow <unk> as part of their 29 date UK tour , the band 's crew bus caught fire on the M62 motorway whilst travelling between Glasgow and Lincoln , destroying it and the crew 's personal items . It was also announced by Chrysalis later on in the year , that Echo have been restructured into a copyright exploitation company , in which its main duty is maintaining the copyright on existing releases while no longer releasing any new records or signing any more artists . As a result , Feeder were until 2010 no longer on a record contract in their own country , while still being signed to their Japanese label Victor and Play it Again Sam ( PIAS ) , their European label . Their 2008 UK tour , seen their first ever gig in <unk> , and their last ever show at the London Astoria on 18 November 2008 . The venue was later torn down in early 2009 and was also their last ever show as an Echo Label artist . 
 After ending their tour at the Portsmouth Pyramids Centre , a six track EP titled Seven Sleepers was released in Japan , the same time they toured there in March . It included a collection of B @-@ sides from the Silent Cry album , plus two new songs . 
 = = = Mark 's departure and Renegades ( 2009 – 10 ) = = = 
 After starting 2009 with two warm @-@ up shows for their tour of Japan in Scarborough and Crewe , the band later on in May announced that Feeder had " ended their partnership " with drummer Mark Richardson , who returned to his original band Skunk Anansie . Mark was replaced by session drummer Karl Brazil who had just come off tour with James Blunt , and had also played drums for British band Ben 's Brother . Karl 's first live appearances with the band , after a series of university events were at the UK leg of the Sonisphere Festival , stating that this would be their only UK festival appearance of 2009 , as they would be working on their seventh studio album . It was then later announced that they would be appearing at the <unk> Music Festival in Folkestone . Here they previewed a new track titled " Sentimental " , with the announcement that they have been in a recording studio in South Wales . 
 At first , Tim Trotter then of <unk> was filling in on drum duties in the studio also as a session drummer , before Karl stepped in . With Karl playing drums for Robbie Williams , Natalie Imbruglia and Ben 's Brother , Tim once again took over drum duties in the studio . On 2 December , the band 's official webpage was changed to display the word " <unk> " and the names of each of the band members by their surname , with " <unk> " mentioned amongst these . On 17 December a sample of a new song " Sentimental " was added to their website , which was later replaced with a 20 @-@ second clip of another song called " Renegades " . Later on that month the website announced a six date tour and the release of a tour @-@ only EP which was released on " Big Teeth Music " , also their own record label . After the tour was completed , another six date tour was shortly announced with the band this time playing bigger venues . Another EP was released to coincide with the tour , which included a further four new songs with one of these being titled " Home " ; one of the new songs the band performed on their first tour under this alias . The side @-@ project was used as a method to promote the seventh Feeder studio album titled Renegades at live shows where they would mainly play the new songs , thus avoiding having to play any of their hits if they played as Feeder . The side @-@ project would cease in 2010 after playing their final gig as Renegades at that year 's Sonisphere Festival . 
 In an April 2010 interview with South Yorkshire newspaper The Star , Grant expressed his disappointment with the side @-@ project band 's sudden increase in success and awareness , in which he claimed that he wanted the band to continue playing in clubs with a slower ascendency to the bigger venues . The tour promoter however suggested that Renegades should play slightly bigger venues for the second tour than of those seen on their debut . Looking back on this version of the band , Grant Nicholas explained in an interview with Culture Deluxe , that the project was not a big marketing plan , but announced it without saying exactly what was happening . Some people thought it was a name change , Grant recording a solo album , while others got the idea from the start . He described problems with promoters printing " Feeder " on the tickets , leading to a misunderstanding that a more mainstream set was expected . 
 After completing their second and final tour as Renegades , the band then announced their new single " Call Out " under the name of Feeder before shortly revealing the name of their seventh album as Renegades . All of the new songs performed live as Renegades were listed on the album with the free download track " Fallen " being a b @-@ side on " Call Out " and was released as a download and vinyl single , with the album released on 5 July . Renegades peaked at # 16 in the UK album charts , giving them their seventh top 20 album with sales of 8 @,@ 729 , before being followed @-@ up by the single release of the title track , also only on vinyl and download . In Japan , the album charted at # 93 , making it their least successful since Comfort in Sound . Dean Deavall then departed from Casino to concentrate more on his time with Feeder , including his own band The High Hurts . The album received mostly favourable reviews , although some critics as Will Dean of BBC Online did not praise the album giving it a mixed response 
 After a tour of Japan which saw Luna Sea guitarist <unk> join them on stage at the <unk> Unit for a performance of " Breed " ( originally recorded by Nirvana ) , Feeder returned to the UK for a sell @-@ out tour in late October which started at the Leeds Metropolitan University , before ending at Southampton University . This was followed by a small tour of Europe , South Africa and Australia , before a brief return to the UK ended their year . " Down to the River / This Town " also became the final single from the album , released only as a download and vinyl on 6 December . 
 = = = Generation Freakshow and hiatus ( 2011 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In 2010 , during the Renegades sessions , a number of tracks were left off the album before then being considered for inclusion for the follow @-@ up to that album . As there were not enough to fit on the album , more were recorded during the closing stages of the year , with the band taking a break from recording on 19 December , before resuming recording on 10 January 2011 . Between 16 January and 24 January a production session began in New York City , this included overdubs , guitars and keyboards with Grant also flying over to record vocals , while some of the album was already recorded in London . On 19 January 2011 a photo of song lyrics written on a sheet of paper was posted on their official Facebook page . The first of these songs to enter public knowledge , with different working titles was " Borders " , with other working titles being " Jessie " and " White City Rock " . In an interview with Heineken Music , on 27 January 2011 Grant revealed that 19 or 20 songs are so far in the recording stages , while the album is planned to be released after their tour of the United Kingdom and Europe ends in March , and like Renegades , looks likely to be released domestically on their own Big Teeth Music imprint . 
 " Side By Side " , which was a chart @-@ eligible paid download in aid of the victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan , charted at # 91 , before it ultimately did not appear on the UK version of the album , although did appear on the Japanese release . Grant Nicholas cited on the band 's Facebook page , that the single was released purely for the Japanese Tsunami disaster with the chart position not being as important . During their 2011 touring , Feeder introduced drummer Damon Wilson as a live regular and session musician . In September 2011 , the band revealed on their Facebook page that the recording of their yet @-@ untitled eighth studio album is complete with only mixing on the final song to be finalised , before mastering then began on 30 September in New York . Feeder hosted a trailer on YouTube titled " Coming Soon " on 2 December 2011 and had a message written in Morse code as " - ... --- <unk> . - .. . <unk> . ... " , which translates to " Borders " . On 6 December 2011 another trailer was released , announcing " Borders " as the first single from the new album , including a four @-@ date tour . On 19 January 2012 the official music video for " Borders " was uploaded on YouTube . " Borders " was released on CD , cassette and 7 " on 30 January 2012 , with the parent album Generation Freakshow originally scheduled with a release date of 26 March 2012 but later delayed until 23 April 2012 . This was the first time Feeder released a cassette single since 2001 's " Just a Day " . In February 2012 after Feeder had completed a mini @-@ tour , which ended in Inverness and started in Exeter , " Borders " charted at # 52 giving the band their 25th top 75 single and their first official chart visit since 2008 's " We Are the People " . 
 Critical response , much like the previous few Feeder albums , was mixed . BBC Music praised the album , while Drowned in Sound , despite negative reviews in the past , credited Feeder for creating another strong addition to their back catalogue . The album which was released to coincide with a week @-@ long tour , however improved upon the respectable commercial response of Renegades by charting at # 13 , which increased the band 's UK album charts span to fifteen years , while selling 7 @,@ 338 units in the same week . In Japan , Generation Freakshow improved upon the relatively disappointing chart position of Renegades , when it entered at # 57 and became their most successful studio album in almost four years . The only track from the sessions of the Renegades album to end up on Generation Freakshow , was that of " Tiny Minds " . The week following the album 's release , " Children of the Sun " was released as the album 's second single and saw the band revert to the vinyl and download formats . Because of this , the single failed to chart while not attracting the same radio attention as " Borders " . The title track was due to be a single , but was later pulled despite promotional CDs already being pressed and sent to radio . " Idaho " became the third single from the album , released on 27 August 2012 . Like " Children of the Sun " , this also failed to chart . 
 The band continued their year with a main stage appearance at the Isle of Wright Festival , opening the event . This was then followed by a first appearance in four years at the Reading Festival , although in their lowest position since their 1996 debut , headlining the fourth stage . Their appearance at the T in the Park festival that year was later cancelled , due to a band illness . It was announced in July that " Idaho " will be the third single from Generation Freakshow , and will be released on 27 August . The band played at Hyde Park in August as part of a series of concerts to celebrate the 2012 Summer Olympics , which was preceded by an appearance at Lusty Glaze in Newquay , alongside performances in Wales and Ireland , with the video shoot for " Idaho " in between . 
 Later on in 2012 , Feeder took on one last tour for the year . The tour lasted for five dates starting at the O2 Academy Glasgow , before ending at the Brixton Academy in November . At the Brixton show , Grant Nicholas announced that the band would be going away for a while , before deciding what to do next . Earlier on before the tour began , Nicholas was interviewed by website Mancunian Matters in which he told them that the band would take a break next year with no shows planned , although a follow @-@ up album was mentioned alongside possible side @-@ projects . 
 Although 2013 was their first full year on hiatus , they played one show that year at Reading University as a private event , while no other shows were played . Their back catalog which was initially issued on The Echo Label , was later re @-@ issued by Sony Music Entertainment , thus allowing the distribution of this material to continue . 
 During 2013 , Hirose 's side @-@ project band Muddy Apes released their second album in Japan , which also features Tidey . Later , on 3 March 2014 , Nicholas announced a solo project via the launch of a Twitter handle and Facebook page , while an official website is to be launched . 
 On 31 May 2014 , Grant 's debut solo recording " Soul Mates " , was played on BBC Radio 2 , with the release of his album Yorktown Heights on 9 August 2014 in Japan and 11 August 2014 in the United Kingdom . Shortly after the download release of " Soul Mates " , Grant later posted a handwritten note on Facebook announcing the release date of his solo album , while also revealing " Feeder 's heart still beats strong " and has been working on new material . 
 In March 2015 Grant revealed that " there will be a new Feeder record next year " . 
 = = = Return and All Bright Electric ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 In January 2016 , the band posted photos of themselves recording in Grant 's home studio , ' The Treehouse ' . It was then announced on 29 January 2016 that Feeder would headline the Big Top stage at the Isle of Wight Festival in June , with the band stating that it would be one of their only UK festival appearances that year . On the 25th of February 2016 , the band posted on their Facebook page , a CDR bearing their name in marker pen . 
 On 23 March , they announced on their Facebook page that they will headline <unk> in Ullapool , Highlands , Scotland on Friday September 30 as well as a picture of Grant performing on guitar at the tree house as the band continue to record their ninth studio album which is expected to be released later in 2016 . 
 In June 15 , the band announced that the album would be titled All Bright Electric and it 's scheduled to be released on September 30 , 2016 . The lead single from album , " Universe of Life " was released on the same day . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 In a 2008 interview with Kerrang ! on a selection of the band 's singles , Nicholas expressed his annoyance with comparisons between Coldplay and the album Pushing the Senses ; he said that those comparisons were only made because he played a piano on many of the tracks that were on the album . In a 2011 interview with Cambridge @-@ based webzine The Tab , he elaborated on his position regarding these comparisons , saying , " Feeder have a much broader music dynamic musically , and we are a much heavier band , both live and on record . I have a lot of respect for Coldplay and we have toured with them , but we are two totally different bands , both dynamically and musically . I just think it 's lazy journalism . " 
 = = Sales and legacy = = 
 Over the course of their career , Feeder has come to domestically accumulate a total of eight gold and platinum records , with a gold record in Ireland for The Singles , bringing their British Isles ( and worldwide ) total to nine . In 2015 , " Buck Rogers " received a Silver award for 200 @,@ 000 UK sales , 14 years after release . 
 Despite having completely dropped out of mainstream radio play since 2008 , while being relegated almost solely to alternative rock stations in the United Kingdom , Silent Cry reached # 8 on the albums chart in its first week of release in 2008 with 16 @,@ 000 units sold . It has sold less than 50 @,@ 000 units to date according to Chrysalis , the owners of the now defunct Echo Label . The subsequent Silent Cry tour was Feeder 's longest playing up to 29 different dates , with many selling out . Nevertheless , Silent Cry remains their first album since 1997 's Polythene not to achieve at least gold status . The 2010 follow @-@ up Renegades , was less successful only spending two weeks in the chart after entering at # 16 , while also being their first since the aforementioned Polythene not to chart within the Top 10 . 
 However , the charting of Renegades , marked the third decade in which a Feeder album had been released and charted at least in the Top 20 . This marked their 6th studio album to appear in the Top 20 and the band 's 9th album to appear on the chart regardless of position over the course of their career . The album also debuted at # 1 on the Official UK Rock Albums chart . Still , Renegades has yet to accumulate sales that approach or eclipse any of their other studio albums before this . 2012 follow @-@ up Generation Freakshow , charted higher at # 13 although on lower debut week sales . 2002 's Comfort in Sound is the band 's best selling release , shifting over 503 @,@ 706 units in the United Kingdom alone with The Singles taking second spot with 497 @,@ 700 units . At the end of 2006 , when the campaign for The Singles was drawing to a close , Feeder ranked as one of the UK 's most successful chart acts of the past 50 years , with a total of 166 weeks across both charts without reaching the number one spot . 
 In Japan , Feeder have also gained a cult following , in which their last five studio albums have all charted in the top 100 between 2002 and 2012 . Their most successful of these is 2008 's Silent Cry charting at # 53 , although their most successful and only top 40 entry to date is their 2006 singles compilation , meaning the band have charted six albums regardless of format . In addition , much of their music has been featured in the Gran Turismo racing video game series , which is developed by the Japanese video game development studio Polyphony Digital . 
 Feeder are also one of Wales ' most popular rock bands , highlighted in October 2003 , by the display of Taka 's bass guitar from the " Seven Days in the Sun " video at the Hard Rock Cafe in Cardiff and Grant 's attendance at the branch 's opening the same year . The Cardiff branch later closed in late 2010 , one day shy of its seventh anniversary of opening . 
 Although the band 's record sales are not of major totals , Feeder have however accumulated 25 top 75 singles between 1997 @-@ 2012 , a run which started with 1997 's " Tangerine " charting at # 60 , before ending in 2012 with " Borders " at # 52 . Their top 75 singles tally , ties with artists such as Coldplay . Feeder have also headlined many of the United Kingdom 's major venues , such as Wembley Arena , Birmingham National Indoor Arena , Birmingham LG Arena , Bournemouth International Centre and the Cardiff International Arena . Alongside this , Feeder also headlined a major festival for the first ( and currently only ) time in their career , which was at the 2005 Download festival . 
 In an April 2012 interview with British rock monthly Total Guitar , the band were praised by Rob Laing citing " All the way from their very first release , the Two Colours EP in 1995 , through tragedy and triumph , he 's [ Grant ] gone the distance with Feeder while other British alternative rock bands of the 90s crashed or faded " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Polythene ( 1997 ) 
 Yesterday Went Too Soon ( 1999 ) 
 Echo Park ( 2001 ) 
 Comfort in Sound ( 2002 ) 
 Pushing the Senses ( 2005 ) 
 Silent Cry ( 2008 ) 
 Renegades ( 2010 ) 
 Generation Freakshow ( 2012 ) 
 All Bright Electric ( 2016 ) 
 = = Members = = 
 Current 
 Grant Nicholas - Lead vocals , lead guitars , piano ( 1992 – present ) 
 Taka Hirose - Bass guitars , backing vocals ( 1995 – present ) 
 Karl Brazil - Drums , percussion ( 2009 – present ) 
 Former 
 Jon Lee - drums ( 1992 – 2002 ; died 2002 ) 
 Simon Blight - bass ( 1992 ) 
 Mark Richardson - drums ( 2002 – 2009 ) 
 Live / Session 
 Dean Tidey - guitars ( 1999 – 2000 , 2002 – 2009 ) 
 Matt Sime - keyboards ( 2000 @-@ 2001 ) 
 Dean Deavall - keyboards ( 2008 – present ) 
 Tim Trotter - drums ( 2009 – present ) 
 Damon Wilson - drums ( 2011 – present ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 Major ceremonial awards 
 Gold and platinum records 
 = Herbert Greenfield = 
 Herbert W. Greenfield ( November 25 , 1869 – August 23 , 1949 ) was a Canadian politician who served as the fourth Premier of Alberta from 1921 until 1925 . Born in Winchester , Hampshire , in England , he immigrated to Canada in his late twenties , settling first in Ontario and then in Alberta , where he farmed . He soon became involved in the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) , a farmers ' lobby organization that was in the process of becoming a political party , and was elected as the organization 's vice president . Greenfield did not run in the 1921 provincial election , the first provincial general election in which the UFA fielded candidates , but when the UFA won a majority in the Legislature in that election he was chosen by the UFA caucus to serve as Premier . 
 Like most of the UFA caucus , Greenfield had no experience in government and he struggled in the position . He relied extensively on his Attorney General , John E. Brownlee , for counsel on policy and strategy . He was unable to control his caucus , which did not generally believe in party discipline , and his government almost lost several votes in the Legislature despite its majority . He was unable to effectively address the problems facing farmers ( including drought and low grain prices ) , bitter labour disputes in the coal industry , or the pronounced divisions in public opinion that had sprung up around prohibition ( which his government ended ) . Despite this , his time as Premier saw the elimination of the provincial deficit , substantial progress in negotiating the transfer of natural resource rights from the federal government , and the creation of the Alberta Wheat Pool . He also named Irene Parlby as the province 's first female cabinet minister . 
 By 1924 , many UFA Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) wanted to see Greenfield leave office , both because they were frustrated with his failings and because they thought it likely that a Greenfield @-@ led government would be defeated in the next election . Their first attempt to replace him failed when Brownlee , their intended replacement , refused to have anything to do with the plan , but a second attempt , in 1925 , was successful when Brownlee agreed to take office if Greenfield personally requested that he do so . Greenfield had not wanted the job in the first place , and agreed to resign in Brownlee 's favour . 
 After his retirement from politics , Greenfield represented Alberta in London , England for several years before returning to Canada to work in the oil and gas industry . He died in 1949 at the age of 79 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Herbert W. Greenfield was born November 25 , 1869 , in Winchester , Hampshire , England , the son of John Greenfield ( c . 1830 – 1909 ) and Mary Leake ( c . 1835 – 1904 ) . He attended Wesleyan School in Dalston , but dropped out as a result of his father 's bankruptcy . He worked aboard a cattle boat in 1892 before emigrating to Canada in 1896 . 
 In Canada , he worked in the oil fields near Sarnia , Ontario , and as a farmer in Weston , Ontario . He married Elizabeth Harris on February 28 , 1900 . The couple had two sons , Franklin Harris Greenfield and Arnold Leake Greenfield . In 1904 , the family went west for economic reasons and homesteaded near Edmonton . He found work in a lumber mill and later turned to farming . During his first year in Alberta , a fire destroyed his home , and he and his wife spent the winter in an abandoned sod hut . In 1906 , they resettled to a large home four kilometers south of Westlock . 
 In 1922 , while Greenfield was Premier , Elizabeth died suddenly as a result of routine surgery . He remarried in 1926 , to Marjorie Greenwood Cormack , who brought two children of her own into the marriage . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Greenfield entered public life on a local level soon after moving to his new farm . He was elected to the local school board , where he spent twelve years , including stints as chair , secretary , and treasurer . He also served as Vice President of the Alberta Educational Association , as President of the Westlock Agricultural Society , and as co @-@ founder and President of the Alberta Association of Municipal Districts . Greenfield also was an officer of the province @-@ wide Association of Local Improvement Districts , which advocated for reforms such as a change from a ten @-@ hour to an eight @-@ hour work day , on the grounds that many Local Improvement Districts ( <unk> ) were having trouble competing with railways for labour . John E. Brownlee later said of Greenfield 's involvement in the <unk> that it was there " that he was first initiated into the discussion of public subjects , and it became the training ground for his subsequent success . " 
 Provincially , Greenfield was originally a Liberal , but along with many other farmers , began to grow dissatisfied with the Liberal government 's treatment of farmers . He became involved with the United Farmers of Alberta , which prior to 1919 was a non @-@ partisan lobby group that eschewed direct involvement in the political process . He was elected to the organization 's executive in 1919 and chaired its mass conventions in 1920 and 1921 . He headed an extremely successful membership drive , Despite this involvement , he did not seek election to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in the 1921 election . When the UFA , which as part of its resistance to old @-@ style politics had contested the election without designating a leader , won 38 of 61 seats , it found itself needing to form a government without having decided who would head it . Greenfield meanwhile had been named interim Vice President of the organization after the death of Percival Baker . 
 The logical choice was UFA President Henry Wise Wood . However , Wood had little taste for the minutiae of government , preferring to remain at the head of what he saw as a broader political movement ( saying he would " sooner be President of the UFA than the USA " ) , and saw party lawyer Brownlee as the best choice . Brownlee , who , like Wood , had not contested the election , said he felt that the Premier must be a farmer for the aspirations of the UFA 's base to be fulfilled . George Hoadley , one of the two UFA members with previous legislative experience ( Hoadley had been a sitting Conservative MLA prior to the election ; UFA MLA Alex Moore had been elected in a by @-@ election a few months before the general election ) , was considered , but since his previous experience had been as a Conservative — one of the old line parties so disdained by the UFA — he was deemed unacceptable . There was even some speculation that incumbent Liberal Premier Charles Stewart , who had become a member of the UFA before it entered politics directly , would stay on as Premier , but he immediately announced that he would serve only until the UFA selected a leader . A meeting of the UFA caucus in Calgary selected Greenfield , and he took office as Premier on August 13 , 1921 . 
 = = Premier = = 
 Greenfield took office as Premier amid great expectations : the Lethbridge Herald called him " the only new Moses that can bridge the Red Sea " , while the Calgary Herald noted that " No government ever went into office in this country carrying better wishes for its success " . He also took office without a seat in the legislature . This latter circumstance was addressed through the voluntary resignation of Donald MacBeth Kennedy , who had won the riding of Peace River for the UFA . Greenfield won the seat by acclamation December 9 , 1921 . 
 = = = Legislature and cabinet = = = 
 Once in the legislature , however , Greenfield faltered in his leadership of his caucus . The UFA MLAs came from a determinedly independent and non @-@ partisan background and proved nearly impossible to whip . When Greenfield selected his cabinet and was about to announce it to his caucus for their vetting , he was interrupted by Lorne Proudfoot who asked whether , in addition to the rumoured inclusion of Labour members , the cabinet would include any of the fourteen Liberal MLAs . Proudfoot argued that to exclude them would be to " start out much after the matter of the old parties " . Greenfield had not intended this , and suggested that no Liberals would likely be amenable to it . Irene Parlby , the caucus 's only woman ( who Greenfield would shortly name as Alberta 's first female cabinet minister ) agreed , and suggested that the UFA 's ideal of securing representation for all economic groups in society did not apply to the Liberals , who were not an economic group and were not democratically organized in any event . Proudfoot 's proposal was defeated sixteen votes to fourteen . Greenfield went on to name the seven member cabinet he had intended , including Labour MLA Alex Ross as Minister of Public Works , Parlby as Minister Without Portfolio , and Greenfield himself as Provincial Treasurer . 
 Once the legislature convened in 1922 , the inexperience of the Premier and his caucus was further laid bare . Greenfield , devastated by the sudden death of his wife , turned in a poor performance . Faced with an aggressive attack by new Liberal leader John R. Boyle , Greenfield relied heavily on Attorney General John Brownlee , who sat next to him in the Legislature , to provide the defense . The session got off to an inauspicious start : Greenfield nominated the government 's preferred candidate for speaker , Oran McPherson , only to have one of his backbenchers , Alex Moore , nominate Independent Conservative John Smith Stewart ; Stewart spared the government embarrassment by declining the nomination . 
 Moore , along with fellow UFA backbencher John Russell Love , caused the government further trouble with a resolution aiming to limit the circumstances under which the government would have to resign . By convention of the Westminster system , a government was required to resign on the defeat of any piece of its legislation that was critical to its program . Moore and Love objected to the manner in which this provision could be expected to pressure UFA MLAs to back government legislation that they might otherwise be inclined to oppose , and introduced a resolution in the Legislature that called for a policy by which the government would resign only upon passage of an explicit motion of no confidence . The resolution caught the attention of politicians across Canada , including future Prime Minister R. B. Bennett , who warned that it was unconstitutional . Brownlee moved an amendment that reduced the resolution to a vague statement of principle , which passed and was not heard of again . 
 UFA members also objected to the concept of a caucus , in which MLAs from one party debate policy behind closed doors . They believed that the role of an MLA was to represent the views of his or her constituents directly on the floor of the Legislature . This belief too proved problematic to the government . The <unk> 's Act had been adopted by the Liberal government to provide low @-@ interest loans to dairy farmers . It was unpopular among farmers , and Greenfield 's government aimed to amend it . Many UFA backbenchers , however , wanted to see it repealed all together , but because of their objection to caucus discussions Greenfield was not aware of this by the time his amendments came to the floor of the legislature . They passed through the house with little debate , until just after third reading , when one of the backbenchers rose to ask if the time had come to speak against the bill . Brownlee suggested that , in view of the legislators ' inexperience with parliamentary procedure , the legislature consider the motion to adopt the bill on third reading as not yet having passed , that debate might ensue . This suggestion adopted , several UFA members attacked the Act . They were joined in this by the Liberals , despite the fact that it was a Liberal act that had been co @-@ authored by Boyle . In the end , the bill passed only by virtue of the support of the four Labour members . 
 More trouble with the legislature struck Greenfield in August 1922 , during a special session called for the purpose of passing enabling legislation for a provincial wheat board . The session lasted only a week , and on August 31 the only item of business that remained was the members ' pay for the session . The government was proposing $ 100 per member , but some MLAs complained that this was insufficient in light of the long travel times between Edmonton and their constituencies . Greenfield , lacking the counsel of the vacationing Brownlee and wanting to avoid trouble , proposed upping the amount to $ 200 . Independent MLA Robert Pearson proposed increasing it once again , to $ 250 , to match what their counterparts in Saskatchewan had received . This suggestion was carried . While Greenfield had hardly been the driving force behind the increases , he had facilitated them and had been blind to the appearance of paying MLAs more for six afternoons of work than some farmers were able to earn in a year . The grassroots of his own party condemned the move , all the more so when the wheat board that had been the purpose of the special session failed to come to fruition . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Greenfield became Premier at a time of agricultural depression , especially in the province 's south . The region , which was responsible for approximately 75 % of Alberta 's wheat production , was in the midst of its fifth consecutive year of drought , and the farmers who had been responsible for putting the UFA into office were now demanding action . Initially , the government offered direct financial assistance , with $ 5 million provided in seed and grain relief by the end of 1922 . However , this effort was driving the province close to bankruptcy , and in 1923 Greenfield announced an end to the handouts ( the bill authorizing the last of these was a source of chagrin for MLAs from all parties , both because it marked the end of direct assistance for farmers and because the last of the assistance was itself so expensive ) . Farmers and political representatives from the affected areas criticized the government bitterly , referencing Greenfield 's earlier pledge that " if the south country should fall , then we are prepared to fall with it " . 
 The government did not give up on addressing the problem when it ended subsidies . It had previously commissioned a number of studies on the agricultural situation and related factors , and converted some of the results of these studies into legislation . The Debt Adjustment Act of 1923 was designed to adjust farmers ' debts to a level that they could actually pay , thus allowing them to carry on while still ensuring that creditors received as much as was feasible . In the words of University of Calgary professor David C. Jones , the bill offered " solace , but no real satisfaction " . According to Jones , Greenfield 's attempts to rescue southern Alberta from agricultural calamity were probably doomed to failure . Even so , Greenfield had called the situation his top priority , and his failure to bring it to a successful resolution cost him politically . 
 Another preoccupation of the UFA and the Greenfield government was the marketing of wheat . From 1919 to 1920 there had been a federally established wheat pool to stabilize wheat prices . When it was disbanded , wheat prices tumbled by two @-@ thirds , prompting many farmers to call for its re @-@ introduction . At the call of the UFA and farmers ' organizations in other provinces , the federal government ( whose razor @-@ thin majority in the House of Commons was often widened by the support of farmer @-@ friendly Progressive members ) created a new , mandatory agency , pending the appointment by the provincial governments of Alberta and Saskatchewan of a board of directors for the agency . This they proved unable to do . Greenfield 's government ultimately admitted defeat and gave up on re @-@ establishing the pool , opting instead to guarantee loans to farmer @-@ run cooperative pools . With government assistance , the Alberta Wheat Pool came into existence in time for the 1923 harvest . 
 = = = Labour unrest = = = 
 During Greenfield 's premiership , Alberta 's major non @-@ agricultural industry was coal mining , and the industry was not prospering . Production was more than 50 % greater than demand , and fewer than half of the province 's mines were profitable . The industry as a whole was earning a profit of less than one cent per ton of coal . Miners ' wages had more than doubled ( in nominal terms ) between 1909 and 1920 but had barely held their own against the wartime inflation . In the 1920s mine owners began to roll them back . Besides the low wages , miners were unsatisfied with working conditions in an industry that saw more than 3 @,@ 300 workplace accidents per year . The results had been labour militancy and violence . A general strike in the industry in 1920 had seen strikers assault strikebreakers , throw them off their bicycles , and throw rocks through the windows of buses . Police were used to aid the strikebreakers and had been sometimes attacked as well . One constable was partially paralyzed from the beating he received . Provincial police commissioner W.C. Bryan was warned against inspecting one strike site in a note reading " You spoilt the strike , and if you go ... you will be killed . " He went anyway , and was greeted by an ambush in which three bullets were fired into his car , missing him . 
 The situation was still unsettled after Greenfield became premier in autumn 1921 . Greenfield was at a loss as to how to respond to this crisis , complaining that both employees and employers were the most difficult people in the province to deal with and that they showed " very little spirit of compromise " . He tried to be balanced in his approach to this labour @-@ employer friction but was not aided by his own Minister of Public Works , Labour MLA Alex Ross , who took the side of the miners and objected to the government 's provision of police escorts for strikebreakers . Though the problems originated before Greenfield took office , many Albertans felt that a stronger leader might have been more successful than Greenfield in achieving industrial peace . 
 = = = Prohibition = = = 
 Prohibition had been introduced in Alberta following a 1916 referendum , during which the UFA had advocated for the prohibitionist side . The Liberal version of prohibition was weak , and Greenfield came into office intending to strengthen the legislation . Even by 1920 , however , it was becoming apparent that the policy was not working ( or , as the Medicine Hat News noted , " Prohibition is now working smoothly . The only thing left is to stop the sale of liquor ! " ) . Greenfield 's own MLAs began to grumble about the policy — Archibald Matheson expressed in 1923 the view that " This government has acted as philosopher , guide , and God to the people long enough . " Public opinion , too , began to shift against the policy , more rapidly after 1922 when three police officers were killed in the line of duty by bootleggers . The last and most dramatic of these was the murder of Steve Lawson in front of the barracks where he and his family lived , by Emil " Pic " Picariello and Florence Lassandra . Public opinion ran high both for and against the pair , and their 1923 hangings only served to unite both factions against prohibition . 
 An autumn 1923 referendum saw Albertans vote decisively for the repeal of prohibition , despite the UFA 's continuing support for the policy . In response , the government resolved to repeal the Prohibition Act and replaced it with government @-@ controlled liquor sales . Greenfield attempted to make the move more palatable to prohibitionists by proposing that liquor profits be shared with impoverished municipalities . However , the scheme proved unworkable , and the re @-@ legalization went ahead without any such profit @-@ sharing . In 1924 , the government introduced legislation to replace prohibition with the regulation of liquor sales by the government , and subjected it to a free vote . While the legislation passed , the new measures were divisive , pitting community leaders who wanted their towns to remain " dry " against those who wanted to apply for liquor licences , and different would @-@ be saloon @-@ keepers against one another in competing for the government @-@ issued licences . 
 = = = Provincial finances = = = 
 At the outset of his premiership , Greenfield served as Provincial Treasurer as well as Premier . In both of these capacities , he was faced with a provincial deficit , which reached an accumulated total of $ 4 million between his taking office and the end of the 1922 fiscal year . One reason for this was the government 's involvement in railways : it had found itself the owner of four uncompleted money @-@ losing railway lines after the private syndicates set up to run them collapsed due to construction cost overruns . By 1922 , the government had lost a total of $ 6 @.@ 7 million on the endeavor , with an additional $ 5 million expected to follow that year — 37 % of the estimated 1922 provincial budget . Greenfield wanted to sell the lines to the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) , a course of action that was endorsed by Brownlee , but many farmers despised the CPR and most UFA MLAs preferred to keep the lines government @-@ operated . Moreover , Greenfield 's own Minister of Railways , Vernor Smith , was among this faction . This problem plagued Greenfield for his entire term as Premier , and it was not until Brownlee succeeded him that a resolution came in the form of a $ 25 million sale to the major lines . 
 Absent a solution to the railway problem , the government continued its deficits . Brownlee advocated deep cuts in spending to bring them under control , and , when Greenfield demurred , began to cut staff in his own department . He found an ally in Richard Gavin Reid in 1923 when Greenfield , exhausted by his responsibilities , appointed the latter to replace him as Provincial Treasurer . Reid impressed on the cabinet the need for drastic economy in all departments and , by 1925 ( the last year of Greenfield 's Premiership ) , the government at last showed a surplus , a state that would persist until the beginning of the Great Depression , with the exception of a small deficit in 1927 . 
 = = = Natural resources = = = 
 At the time that Alberta was made a province in 1905 , the federal government retained control of its natural resources ( though it provided financial compensation to the new provincial government for this ) , a fact that set it apart from the older provinces . By 1925 , negotiations to alter this state of affairs had been ongoing for more than a decade , and the two levels of government had an agreement in principle . Despite this , Alberta Liberal leader John R. Boyle sent a letter to his fellow Liberal , Canadian Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King , pleading with him to delay any agreement until after the expected 1925 election so that the UFA could not claim success . Greenfield and Brownlee attended a series of meetings with federal representatives beginning May 19 in Ottawa ; these continued until June 7 , whereupon Brownlee returned home . Greenfield offered to stay , but on June 11 King told him that the cabinet would need the summer to consider the question and that no agreement would be immediately forthcoming . This decision did not help the Alberta Liberals , who went on to lose the next election soundly , and did not prevent the transfer of resource rights , which took place in 1929 , but was enough to rob Greenfield of his glory ; he left office the next year . 
 = = = Provincial banking = = = 
 It was the longstanding view of a segment of the UFA that the Alberta government should enter the banking business directly by obtaining a bank charter from the federal government ( which has responsibility for banking under the Canadian constitution ) . In fact , UFA President William John <unk> had included the idea in a speech he gave on his goals for the organization in 1913 . At the UFA convention in 1923 , a proponent of a provincial banking , George Bevington , made a passionate speech in favour of this idea , bringing most of the membership around to his side . The convention passed a resolution in favour of the idea ( along with one calling on the provincial treasury to establish a loan department , an idea that came to fruition fifteen years later with the creation of Alberta Treasury Branches ) , against the stiff opposition of Attorney @-@ General Brownlee . Brownlee 's opposition stemmed in part from investigations that Greenfield 's government had already undertaken into the subject : information was gathered from similar experiments in New Zealand and New South Wales , leading to the conclusion that , while there would be some benefit to a provincially owned bank , Alberta " had neither the economic nor constitutional base to consider such a scheme " . This conclusion was affirmed by University of Alberta professor D. A. MacGibbon in a government @-@ commissioned study . 
 At the 1924 UFA convention , Bevington and his followers moved a resolution calling for immediate action on the previous year 's banking resolution . Against them stood Greenfield 's government , UFA president Henry Wise Wood ( whom Bevington was challenging for re @-@ election ) , and radical Labour Member of Parliament William Irvine . Thanks to Irvine 's surprising intervention on the side of the conservatives , the resolution was soundly defeated . 
 = = Departure from politics = = 
 Greenfield 's political stock fell during the course of his time as Premier . His arrival was heralded with great expectations of economic and political reform . After the 1921 federal election , Progressive Party of Canada leader Thomas Crerar was considering a merger of his party with the Liberal Party of Canada and asked Greenfield to join him as Alberta 's representative in the federal cabinet upon completion of this merger . This initially lofty stature was reduced by incident after incident : his reliance on Brownlee in the legislature and elsewhere , his failure to deliver on the promised economic relief , and his alienation of the radical wing of his own party . By 1924 , many of Greenfield 's own backbenchers had had enough and hatched a plan to force Greenfield 's resignation and replace him with Brownlee , who was perceived as more likely to lead the UFA to victory in the impending election . This group — which included George Johnston , George MacLachlan , William Shield , Donald Cameron , Oran McPherson , and Austin Claypool — contacted Brownlee to alert him to their intentions and were taken aback when the Attorney @-@ General told them that if Greenfield resigned , so would he . 
 The following year , the group approached Greenfield directly to ask for his resignation . He initially agreed , but then vacillated long enough for Brownlee to once again pledge his loyalty to the Premier . This time , Henry Wise Wood intervened to ask Brownlee to reconsider , which he agreed to do only if Greenfield himself made the request . The Premier immediately did so , saying that he had never wanted the job in the first place . On November 23 , Greenfield resigned as Premier of Alberta , tearfully telling the media that he was " through with politics " . 
 The media judged the rebellion harshly . The Calgary Herald mocked the rebels as a " group of farmer politicians who have always claimed to be purer than those of other parties " and yet " [ threw ] their leader to the wolves in the hope that they may save their own skins " . It concluded : " Greenfield was not a good political captain , but he had a poor set of officers and a mutinous crew . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1927 , Greenfield was appointed Alberta 's Agent General in London , England . The appointment was controversial and was perceived as a patronage reward even by some UFA backbenchers . Liberals also accused the government of benefiting the Hudson 's Bay Company , which owned the London office that the government leased , more than Alberta . Even so , Greenfield 's performance in the position was well regarded : his personality was better @-@ suited for his duties there , which included the promotion of Alberta 's burgeoning oil and gas industry , attracting English immigration to Alberta , and acting as a guide for Albertans visiting London . It was in this last capacity that he welcomed Brownlee to London , where the two met together with British immigration and financial officials . 
 In 1931 , the Agent General 's office closed , and Greenfield returned to Alberta , settling in Calgary . There he entered the oil and gas business , serving as a director ( and later vice president ) of <unk> Oils , president of the Oil and Gas Association , president of the Alberta Petroleum Association , and director of Home Oil . He also served as managing director of the British Dominion Land Settlement Corporation and as president of the Calgary Board of Trade . He spent the rest of his life in the city , maintaining an office in the General Trusts Building . 
 Greenfield died at 8 : 25 in the morning of August 23 , 1949 . His funeral took place at Grace Presbyterian Church and he is buried in Union Cemetery , both of which are in Calgary . In 1968 , Greenfield School , an elementary school in Edmonton , was named in his honour . 
 = 2014 Coppa Italia Final = 
 The 2014 Coppa Italia Final decided the winner of the 2013 – 14 Coppa Italia , the 66th season of Italy 's main football cup . It was played on 3 May 2014 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome , between Fiorentina and Napoli . Napoli won the game 3 @-@ 1 , with two early goals from Lorenzo Insigne and a late third by substitute Dries Mertens , although they had <unk> <unk> sent off in the second half . Juan Manuel Vargas scored Fiorentina 's goal . 
 As Napoli qualified for the UEFA Champions League by their league position , Fiorentina as runners @-@ up qualified for the Group Stage of the 2014 – 15 UEFA Europa League . This was the last season in which cup runners @-@ up could qualify for the Europa League if the winner had already qualified for the Champions League . Napoli went on to play in the 2014 Supercoppa Italiana against the 2013 – 14 Serie A champions Juventus , and won . 
 The final was marred by pre @-@ match violence , which delayed the scheduled kick @-@ off time . Three Napoli fans were shot , one of whom died following a two @-@ month coma . Club President Aurelio De Laurentiis dedicated Napoli 's victory to the wounded fans . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fiorentina played their 10th Coppa Italia final , having won six , including their last in 2001 . It was Napoli 's ninth , and they had previously won four , including their last final in 2012 . 
 During the league season , Fiorentina and Napoli had already played each other twice . The first fixture , on 30 October 2013 at the Stadio Artemio Franchi , resulted in a 2 – 1 away win for Napoli which ended Fiorentina 's unbeaten home record . All of the goals came in the first half — José Callejón opened the scoring , Giuseppe Rossi equalised with a penalty and Dries Mertens scored the winner in the 36th minute . In the closing stages of the game , Christian Maggio was sent off for the visitors , and Juan Cuadrado for the hosts . In the reverse fixture , at Napoli 's Stadio San Paolo on 23 March 2014 , Fiorentina were victorious as Joaquín scored the only goal of the game with three minutes remaining ; <unk> <unk> had been sent off for the hosts in the first half for fouling Marko Bakić when the Fiorentina midfielder had an opportunity to score . 
 Prior to the cup final , Napoli were in third place in Serie A and therefore in the last position to qualify for the Champions League , eight points ahead of Fiorentina with nine points left to play for . Fiorentina manager Vincenzo Montella said before the game that his priority was to finish fourth and win the Coppa Italia . His Napoli counterpart , Rafael Benítez , warned his players not to expect to win solely based on their league position . 
 Players and staff of both clubs were invited to Vatican City the day before the final , where they listened to a speech by Pope Francis . Managers Montella and Benítez presented souvenirs of their clubs to the Pope . 
