 = = Road to the final = = 
 = = = Fiorentina = = = 
 Fiorentina , of Serie A , entered the tournament in the Last 16 at home to Chievo , also of their league . They won 2 – 0 with first @-@ half goals from Joaquín and Ante <unk> , despite the dismissal of Massimo Ambrosini . In the quarter @-@ final on 23 January , again at home , they beat Serie B Siena 2 – 1 with Josip Iličić opening the scoring and Marvin <unk> scoring the winner . Fiorentina 's semi @-@ final against Udinese began with a 2 – 1 away defeat on 4 February , but the second leg on 12 February was a 2 – 0 home victory with goals from Manuel Pasqual and Cuadrado . 
 = = = Napoli = = = 
 Napoli , also of Serie A , entered in the Last 16 on 15 January with a 3 – 1 home win over Atalanta , in which Callejón scored twice and Lorenzo Insigne the other goal . Their quarter @-@ final on 29 January was a 1 – 0 victory at home over cup holders Lazio , with a late goal from Gonzalo Higuaín . Like Fiorentina , Napoli began their semi @-@ final with an away defeat ( 3 – 2 against Roma ) , but secured their place in the final with a 3 – 0 victory at home on 12 February , with goals from Callejón , Higuaín and <unk> . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Fiorentina were without record signing Mario Gómez , the German striker having suffered with injury all season . Their top scorer of the season , Giuseppe Rossi , had been injured since January but was included as a substitute . Montella opined that Rossi would be ready to represent Italy at the World Cup in June . Goalkeeper Neto and midfielder Borja Valero had been doubts due to recent finger and knee injuries respectively , but made the starting line @-@ up . Midfielder Cuadrado was suspended , having been given a yellow card towards the end of their semi @-@ final victory over Udinese . 
 Napoli 's top scorer of the season , Higuaín , started despite a bruise to his shin from his last match . Benítez said " Not everyone in the team is 100 per cent , but we are in good shape " . 
 = = = Pre @-@ match violence = = = 
 Three Napoli fans were shot outside the stadium before the match , two with arm injuries . Ciro Esposito , who was in a critical state after being shot in the chest , died in hospital on 25 June . 
 Police , who found the gun , have stated that they do not believe that the shootings were related to other clashes by the two sets of fans : prior to the game , there were reports of firecrackers and other projectiles being thrown between them in the Tor di Quinto area of Rome . Kick @-@ off was subsequently delayed as Napoli fans did not want the match to start without knowing the condition of the shot fans . When match organisers attempted to speak to the Napoli fans , accompanied by their midfielder Marek <unk> , they were " pelted with flares and smoke bombs " . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Napoli winger Insigne opened the scoring in the 11th minute by cutting in from the left and curling a shot past Fiorentina goalkeeper Neto . He doubled the lead six minutes later by connecting to Higuaín 's cross and forcing a deflection off Nenad <unk> . With two goals in the final , he equalled the amount of goals that he had scored in the entire Serie A season . Fiorentina responded in the 28th minute , when Josip Iličić chipped the defence and Juan Vargas volleyed the ball into the goal . In the last minute of the half , Alberto <unk> put the ball into Napoli 's goal , but it was disallowed for offside . 
 Fiorentina had chances to equalise in the second half , with a long shot from substitute Matías Fernández tipped over the crossbar by Napoli goalkeeper Pepe Reina , and Iličić missing a one @-@ on @-@ one . The team also brought on Rossi in place of Joaquín after 72 minutes , his first action since his injury in January . Despite being reduced to ten men for the last 10 minutes after a second booking for <unk> <unk> after he fouled Iličić , Napoli extended their lead in injury time when substitute Mertens scored a third after being set up by Callejón . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Napoli supporters invaded the pitch to celebrate following their team 's victory . However , they were brought under control in order to allow the trophy ceremony to take place . 
 Aurelio De Laurentiis , club president of Napoli , dedicated the cup win to the then unidentified fan who had been shot before the match and operated on . On the pre @-@ match violence , Demetrio Albertini , vice president of the Italian Football Federation , said " It certainly wasn 't a great scene , what we displayed today alongside football , for a football lover like me , it was an ugly display . " 
 As cup winners , Napoli qualified for the 2014 Supercoppa Italiana in which they would face Serie A champions Juventus . The match had traditionally taken place in August , but Napoli requested it be moved due to their Champions League play @-@ off that month . The fixture was eventually played on 22 December during the league 's winter break , at the Jassim Bin Hamad Stadium in Doha , Qatar . It finished 1 – 1 after 90 minutes , 2 – 2 after extra time , and Napoli won 6 – 5 in the penalty shootout . 
 = Temple of the Dog = 
 Temple of the Dog is an American rock band that formed in Seattle , Washington in 1990 . It was conceived by vocalist Chris Cornell of Soundgarden as a tribute to his friend , the late Andrew Wood , lead singer of the bands Malfunkshun and Mother Love Bone . The line @-@ up included Stone Gossard on rhythm guitar , Jeff Ament on bass guitar ( both ex @-@ members of Mother Love Bone ) , Mike McCready on lead guitar , and Matt Cameron on drums . Eddie Vedder provided some lead and backing vocals . 
 The band released its only album , the self @-@ titled Temple of the Dog , in April 1991 through A & M Records . The recording sessions took place in November and December 1990 at London Bridge Studios , in Seattle , Washington with producer Rick Parashar . Although earning praise from music critics at the time of its release , the album was not widely recognized until 1992 , when Vedder , Ament , Gossard , and McCready had their breakthrough with Pearl Jam . 
 The band will tour in 2016 in celebration of the 25th anniversary of their self @-@ titled album . 
 = = History = = 
 Temple of the Dog was started by Soundgarden frontman Chris Cornell , who had been a roommate of Andrew Wood , the lead singer of Malfunkshun and Mother Love Bone . Wood died on March 19 , 1990 of a heroin overdose , the day Cornell got back from a tour . As he went on to tour Europe a few days later , he started writing songs in tribute to his late friend . The result was two songs , " Reach Down " and " Say Hello 2 Heaven , " which he recorded as soon as he got back from touring . 
 The recorded material was slow and melodic , musically different from the aggressive rock music of Soundgarden . Cornell approached Wood 's former bandmates , Stone Gossard and Jeff Ament — who were still figuring out how to continue without Mother Love Bone — with the intention of releasing the songs as a single . Ament described the collaboration as " a really good thing at the time " for Gossard and him that put them into a " band situation where we could play and make music . " The band 's lineup was completed by the addition of Soundgarden ( and later Pearl Jam ) drummer Matt Cameron and future Pearl Jam lead guitarist Mike McCready . They named themselves Temple of the Dog , a reference to a line in the lyrics of the Mother Love Bone song " Man of Golden Words . " 
 The band started rehearsing " Reach Down , " " Say Hello 2 Heaven , " and other songs that Cornell had written on tour prior to Wood 's death , as well as re @-@ working some existing material from demos written by Gossard , Ament , and Cameron . One such demo became a song for two bands , recorded as " Footsteps " by Pearl Jam and " Times of Trouble " by Temple of the Dog . The idea of doing covers of Wood 's solo material also came up but was abandoned quickly , as they realized it would make people ( including Wood 's close friends and relatives ) think the band was " exploiting his material . " 
 The release of a single was soon deemed a " stupid idea " by Cornell and dropped in favor of an EP or album . The album was recorded in only 15 days , produced by the band themselves . Gossard described the recording process as a " non @-@ pressure @-@ filled " situation , as there were no expectations or pressure coming from the record company . Eddie Vedder , who had flown from San Diego , California to Seattle , Washington to audition to be the singer of Mookie Blaylock ( which eventually became Pearl Jam ) , ended up providing backing vocals . " Hunger Strike " ( sample ) became a duet between Cornell and Vedder . Cornell was having trouble with the vocals at practice , when Vedder stepped in . Cornell later said , " He sang half of that song not even knowing that I 'd wanted the part to be there and he sang it exactly the way I was thinking about doing it , just instinctively . " 
 Temple of the Dog was released on April 16 , 1991 , through A & M Records and initially sold 70 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Ament recalled that they requested a Pearl Jam sticker on the cover — as they had just picked their new name — because " it 'll be a good thing for us , " but they were refused . The album received favorable reviews but failed to chart . Critic Steve Huey of AllMusic later rated the album with four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , stating that the " record sounds like a bridge between Mother Love Bone 's theatrical ' 70s @-@ rock updates and Pearl Jam 's hard @-@ rocking seriousness . " David Fricke of Rolling Stone also wrote in retrospect that the album " deserves immortality . " The band members were pleased with the material , as it achieved its purpose ; Cornell believed that " Andy really would have liked " the songs , and Gossard also asserted that he thought Wood would be " blown away by the whole thing . " Soon after the album 's release , Soundgarden and Pearl Jam embarked on recording their next albums , and the Temple of the Dog project was brought to a close . 
 In the summer of 1992 , the album received new attention . Although it had been released more than a year earlier , A & M Records realized that they had in their catalog what was essentially a collaboration between Soundgarden and Pearl Jam , who had both risen to mainstream attention in the months since the album 's release with their respective albums , Badmotorfinger and Ten . A & M decided to reissue the album and promote " Hunger Strike " as a single with an accompanying music video . The attention allowed both the album and single to chart on Billboard and resulted in a boost in album sales . The album was among the 100 top @-@ selling albums of 1992 . Temple of the Dog ended up selling more than a million copies , achieving platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Ament , Cameron , Cornell , and McCready later reunited under the name <unk> to record a cover of Jimi Hendrix 's " Hey Baby ( Land of the New Rising Sun ) " for the 1993 tribute album Stone Free : A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix . In a 2007 interview with Ultimate Guitar Archive , Cornell stated he would be open for a Temple of the Dog reunion , or " some collaboration with any combination of those guys . " He also revealed that Temple of the Dog was the reason he joined Audioslave , as the experience made him " keep an open mind " about collaborations with musicians from other bands . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The only time Temple of the Dog played a full one @-@ hour set was while rehearsing and writing the material for the album . The band ( with the exception of Vedder ) performed in Seattle at the Off Ramp Café on November 13 , 1990 . They also opened for Alice in Chains , following the short lived Seattle group Panic , on December 20 , 1990 at the Moore Theater in Seattle . In the time since the album 's release , the band reformed for short live performances on four occasions where both Soundgarden and Pearl Jam were performing . Temple of the Dog performed " Hunger Strike " on October 3 , 1991 at the Foundations Forum in Los Angeles , California ; a three @-@ song set on October 6 , 1991 at the Hollywood Palladium in Hollywood for the RIP Magazine 5th anniversary party ( Temple of the Dog played after secret headlining act Spinal Tap ) ; and " Hunger Strike " on both August 14 , 1992 at Lake Fairfax Park in Reston , Virginia and September 13 , 1992 at Irvine Meadows Amphitheater in Irvine , California ( both shows were part of the Lollapalooza festival series in 1992 ) . The band also played " Reach Down " on the latter occasion . 
 At a Pearl Jam show at the Santa Barbara Bowl in Santa Barbara , California on October 28 , 2003 , Cornell joined the band on @-@ stage , effectively reuniting Temple of the Dog ( Cameron had been the drummer for Pearl Jam since 1998 ) for renditions of " Hunger Strike " and " Reach Down " . The version of " Reach Down " recorded that night later appeared on Pearl Jam 's 2003 fan club Christmas single . Pearl Jam has also been known to perform " Hunger Strike " live without Cornell on rare occasions . 
 Cornell 's post @-@ Soundgarden band , Audioslave , added " All Night Thing , " " Call Me a Dog , " and " Hunger Strike " to its live set in 2005 . Additionally , Cornell has added the aforementioned songs , plus " Pushin Forward Back , " " Wooden Jesus , " " Reach Down , " and " Say Hello 2 Heaven , " to his solo live set . 
 On October 6 , 2009 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage to perform " Hunger Strike " in Los Angeles , collectively reuniting Temple of the Dog once again . Following the brief 2009 reunion show , a fan group emerged on Facebook in April 2010 supporting a 20th anniversary benefit reunion tour to take place beginning April 16 , 2011 . 
 During Labor Day weekend , 2011 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage at Alpine Valley in Wisconsin for <unk> ( Pearl Jam 's twentieth anniversary celebration ) . On September 3 , he joined them for a four @-@ song set , which included the songs " <unk> Champion " ( a Mother Love Bone cover with Cornell on vocals ) , " Say Hello 2 Heaven , " " Reach Down , " and " Hunger Strike . " The September 4 appearance included a four @-@ song set with Cornell joining in on " Hunger Strike , " " Call Me a Dog , " " All Night Thing , " and " Reach Down " ( which also included Glen Hansard , Dhani Harrison of <unk> , <unk> Garza , and Liam Finn ) . 
 On both October 25 and 26 , 2014 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage to perform " Hunger Strike " at Shoreline Amphitheater in Mountain View , California during the 28th Annual Bridge School Benefit . 
 On January 30 , 2015 , Pearl Jam bandmates ( minus Vedder ) Stone Gossard , Jeff Ament , and Matt Cameron joined Chris Cornell and Mike McCready during the Mad Season Sonic Evolution Concert at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony . The group performed 2 songs , " Reach Down " , and " Call Me A Dog " . 
 The band will tour in 2016 in celebration of the 25th anniversary of their self @-@ titled album . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Music Videos = = = 
 1991 - Hunger Strike 
 = = Members = = 
 Chris Cornell – lead vocals , banjo , guitar , harmonica 
 Mike McCready – lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Stone Gossard – rhythm guitar , backing vocals 
 Jeff Ament – bass , backing vocals 
 Matt Cameron – drums , backing vocals 
 Guest 
 Eddie Vedder – backing vocals , co @-@ lead vocals , guitar 
 = George ( Blackadder ) = 
 George was a supporting character who appeared in various adaptations of the BBC sitcom Blackadder , played by Hugh Laurie . Each series saw a different incarnation of the character , because each was set in a different period of history . He was most prominently featured in the third and fourth series , shouting almost all of his lines throughout both . The character was added to the series as a replacement for the Lord Percy Percy character , who did not appear in the third instalment because Tim McInnerny , the actor playing him , feared being typecast . 
 The first incarnation of the character was a caricature of George , Prince of Wales , serving as the main antagonist of the third series . The second , Lt. The Hon. George Colthurst St <unk> , was a young officer in the British Army during World War I , a supporting protagonist in the fourth series . Both portrayals were of " dim @-@ witted upper @-@ class <unk> " , who depended greatly on Edmund Blackadder ( Rowan Atkinson ) . The character garnered positive responses from critics . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Both Prince George and Lt. George are portrayed as dim @-@ witted " upper class <unk> " . The son of King George III , Prince George is represented as a childish , spoiled , bumbling foppish fool who spends money extravagantly ( especially on impressive trousers and socks ) . Lieutenant George , stationed in the trenches of World War I , retains his enthusiastic naiveté , despite being stuck in the trenches for 3 years , revealing a lack of awareness of the seriousness of his circumstances ; Robert Bianco of USA Today stated the character " smiles through in the face of certain death " . 
 Both men are portrayed as very incompetent , in " Nob and Nobility " , it takes Prince George a week to put on a pair of trousers by himself , eventually putting them on his head . George relies heavily on Blackadder in the third ( Mr. E. Blackadder ) series , even while Blackadder despises George for his immense wealth and complete inability to rectify problems in his life . While George is considered " moronic " and " idiotic " , he is helpful , loyal , and is aware he is not very intelligent , describing himself as " thick as a whale omelette " . In a 2008 retrospective , co @-@ star Stephen Fry said George 's keenness for self @-@ improvement was one of the things he felt made the character likeable . In " Duel and Duality , " the final episode of the third series , after a sexual encounter with the Duke of Wellington 's nieces , this princely incarnation of George is struck by a point @-@ blank shot from the vengeful Wellington 's pistol and killed . George briefly awakes , believing that he may have a <unk> case on him that deflected the blow , but when he realises that he must have left the case at home , promptly falls dead again in Baldrick 's arms . 
 George 's incarnation as Lieutenant The Honourable George Colthurst St. <unk> MC , in Blackadder Goes Forth , is a frontline officer – strongly reminiscent in both manner and personality of Bertie Wooster ( as whom Laurie would later go on to appear ) – who joined the army on the first day of World War I , along with nine other students at Cambridge University . The ten men named themselves the Trinity College <unk> , or the " Trinity <unk> " . It is revealed later , in the fourth series ' finale , that George is the only surviving member of the group . Although he lacks any kind of skill , competence , or authority as an officer , his upper @-@ class status and educational background meant he went straight into the commissioned ranks upon enlisting . George is shown to have a special friendship with General Melchett ( Fry ) , an old family friend with whom he shares his public school " tally @-@ ho " attitude towards the war . Melchett even offers George a way out of the trenches for the " final push " , which he refuses , much to Blackadder 's incredulity . Although George is shown to have benefited from his background of privilege he still remains a generally kind and hopeful individual , and shortly before the big push at the end of the final episode George finally expresses some genuine fear and sadness that he may indeed die . 
 In the 1989 sketch Shakespeare Sketch Laurie portrays a very George @-@ like William Shakespeare . Lord Blackadder is his agent and manages to persuade him to condense his new play Hamlet . 
 = = Development = = 
 Tim McInnerny , who had starred in The Black Adder and Blackadder II as Lord Percy Percy , was afraid to be typecast in comedic roles and decided not to appear in the third instalment of Blackadder , though he did appear in the episode " Nob and Nobility " , as Lord Topper , a snobby aristocrat who claims to be The Scarlet Pimpernel , and returned in the fourth series playing Captain Kevin Darling . The Prince George character was created as a new " incompetent sidekick " for the title character . He was modelled after George IV of the United Kingdom , who served as Prince Regent between 1811 and 1820 . Laurie had previously guest starred in the final two episodes of Blackadder II , and the producers decided to cast him in the role of Prince George . Laurie 's physical appearance differed significantly from George IV 's appearance , who was obese during the time of his regency . Writers Ben Elton and Richard Curtis were unfazed by this , referring to George as " a fat , flatulent git " , an appropriate description for the real Prince rather than Laurie . 
 Laurie was supposed to wear a monocle as Lt. George , the character 's second incarnation , but eventually decided against it after it kept falling out of his eye . Laurie reprised the role of Prince George in the Christmas special Blackadder 's Christmas Carol , and portrayed a new character , Lord <unk> , set in the distant future . He also appeared in the millennium special Blackadder : Back & Forth , playing the Roman Consul Georgius and the modern day Major George Bufton @-@ Tufton , The Viscount Bufton @-@ Tufton . Although no new series or specials were made , the creators of the series have commented on various proposals over the years ; one possibility was a film in which the main characters return as a 1960s ' rock band , with George playing the guitar and keyboard . Curtis later said Laurie 's international success with House would make a new instalment difficult . 
 = = Reception = = 
 George , as well as Laurie , drew positive responses from critics . Tara Ariano and Sarah Bunting of Television Without Pity considered Laurie one of the best actors in the series ' cast . Richard Barber of People lauded Laurie 's performance as George as " hilarious " and " brilliant " . David Smith of the Guardian highlighted the pathos of the performance , writing that Laurie 's performance as Lt. George , as he was about to go over the top to his death , " elicited tears of both laughter and grief " . 
 = North Community High School = 
 North Community High School , or simply Minneapolis North , is a public , four @-@ year high school located in Minneapolis , Minnesota . The school has existed for over 120 years in several buildings all located on the North Side of Minneapolis . North once had a predominately Jewish student body but by 1982 , the school and the neighborhood it is located in had become mostly African @-@ American . Desegregation efforts , such as magnet school programs , have attempted to attract students from throughout Minneapolis and nearby suburbs . 
 In recent years , the school has been known for its highly successful boys ' and girls ' basketball programs . Both teams have had numerous state tournament appearances and state championship titles . North offers several college preparatory classes and operates , Minneapolis Public Schools ' radio station , <unk> @-@ FM . The school has often struggled academically in terms of graduation rate and state standardized <unk> and suggestions by a Minneapolis City Council member to burn the school down . 
 = = History = = 
 There have been four separate buildings in which North has operated . The first housed just three grades when North opened in 1888 . Three years later the first class graduated in 1891 . The building grew to be too small for the school and a new building was built , opening in 1896 at a new location . On June 18 , 1913 a fire burned down most of the building , forcing a new building to be rebuilt . A new building was built over the destroyed one and was completed in 1914 . Later additions were added in 1921 , 1923 and 1939 . In 1963 it was determined that for the building was " to be retained as a secondary educational facility over a long period of time by the Minneapolis Public School system , it needs extensive rehabilitation and modernization to meet present day health , safety and educational adequacy . " . A new building was built on a new site and funded as part of a $ 18 million bond referendum in 1964 , that funded improvements to North and several other Minneapolis public schools . The building was finished and opened in 1973 . The building is described as " resembling a giant bunker with few windows , double doors that are often locked from outside during the day to keep out unwanted visitors and painted @-@ over graffiti on outside walls . " Another description calls it a " series of brick boxes arranged around a courtyard " that " doesn 't allow it to connect well with the community " . The building used to house adult education classes , a school for teenage mothers and a separate charter school , Dunwoody Academy . All of these programs have now relocated to other buildings . 
 As the North Side neighborhood has changed , so has Minneapolis North . During the 1920s and 1930s the North Side was the center of Minneapolis ' Jewish population . In 1936 almost half of the students were Jewish . The North Side has since transitioned into a diverse working @-@ class neighborhood with the highest rate of housing foreclosures in Minneapolis . North used to be a very large school and was overcrowded with over 2800 students attending the school in 1931 . Now , residents are able to choose which schools they attend , and as a result only about half of the North Side 's students attend local schools such as North . The Minneapolis Public Schools Board of Education 's decision to close several North Side middle and elementary schools led to North 's enrollment plummeting from 1 @,@ 143 students in 2004 @-@ 05 to 265 students in 2010 . On October 11 , 2010 Minneapolis Public Schools Superintendent <unk> Johnson recommend to the Board of Education the phasing out of North High Community High School beginning the 2011 @-@ 12 school year . However , this decision resulted in backlash from the North Minneapolis community . It was decided that North Community High School would remain open , but change its curriculum standards to focus more on arts and communications . It is now called North Academy of Arts and Communications ( NAAC ) . 
 = = Student body = = 
 In the 2006 @-@ 2007 school year , 964 students attended North . North 's minority enrollment has grown in the last twenty years despite attempts to keep it low . In 1987 North 's minority enrollment was 46 % . Minority enrollment continued to grow , becoming over 60 % in 1991 . Today , only three percent of students are white , with the majority of students , 69 % , being black . Currently , 82 % of students qualify for free or reduced priced lunch , an indicator of poverty . 16 % of the students had limited English proficiency and 22 % of students qualified for special education . 
 = = Academics = = 
 During the 2012 @-@ 2013 school year and with its inaugural class of freshman , North Academy of Arts and Communication ( NAAC ) , began as a small college preparatory school that cultivates scholarly global citizens through inquiry , art , exploration and communication skills . Its highly qualified , multi @-@ talented , and caring staff is dedicated to fostering a school culture that supports students academically , socially , and emotionally through the implementation of research @-@ based teaching strategies , integrated art and communication curricula . 
 North 's framework is based on the Seven Guiding Principles of the Institute for Student Achievement ( ISA ) : 
 College Preparatory Instructional Program 
 Dedicated Team of Teachers and Counselor 
 Distributed Counseling 
 Continuous Professional Development 
 Extended School Day and School Year 
 Family Involvement 
 Continuous Organizational Improvement 
 The school has an Advanced Placement program that offers several different courses . 
 North is slated to open a second academy in the fall of 2016 : N @-@ STEM ( North Academy of Science , Technology , Engineering and Math ) which is an iteration of the school 's successful <unk> program which was closed in 2007 . 
 North 's low academic results have led to criticism . In February 2007 Minneapolis City Council member Don Samuels suggested burning North down . " My children will not darken the door of a Minneapolis public school in this city at this time under these conditions . I 've said burn North High School down ! I can 't be paying as a taxpayer for the education of my neighbors and 72 percent of them are failing — meaning black boys . Something worse than vouchers could come along . If it works , if it sacrifices the entire school system , fine ! Get rid of the damn thing ! It hasn 't worked ! " His suggestion caused uproar in the community , and his remarks were heavily criticized . Samuels later apologized for the " extreme language " but stated that he did not regret making the comments . 
 = = Radio station = = 
 North High School is home to <unk> @-@ FM , a radio station owned by the Minneapolis Public Schools . The station signed on the air in October , 1970 , and moved to North in 1983 when the Minneapolis Area Vocational Technical Institute , where the station had been located from its launch ( as Vocational High School ) , closed and the building sold . Students are responsible for much of the station 's operation , and 35 hours of airtime a week is devoted to student programming . Approximately 150 students are involved in the radio station 's operation , with the majority attending North . Students typically enroll in the program as ninth @-@ graders and are prepared for on @-@ air duties by their junior or senior year . 
 The station broadcasts traffic reports for the Minneapolis @-@ Saint Paul metro area with data provided by the Minnesota Department of Transportation . From 1989 to 2005 , the station was paid approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 by the DOT for this service . <unk> had planned to cancel the contract , but due to public demand the state continued the relationship . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 North offers a variety of musical programs . A beginning band , concert band , Jazz ensemble and drum line are offered . Choir , varsity choir , vocal ensembles and a gospel choir are available . Other extracurricular activities include a variety of academic competitions , a chess club , culture @-@ specific clubs including an award winning Asian Club , debate and mock trial teams , a school newspaper and yearbook , science club and student government . North 's Math team competes in the Minnesota State High School Mathematics League . The school has a chapter of National Honor Society . 
 = = Sports = = 
 North is a member of the Minnesota State High School League . North offers eleven boys ' and twelve girls ' varsity sports . These include football ( boys ) , wrestling ( boys ) , tennis ( boys and girls ) , basketball ( boys and girls ) , baseball ( boys ) , softball ( girls ) , golf ( boys and girls ) , soccer ( boys and girls ) , volleyball ( girls ) , swimming ( boys and girls ) , gymnastics ( girls ) , badminton ( girls ) , ice hockey ( boys and girls ) , cross country ( boys and girls ) and track and field ( boys and girls ) . North has Adapted Bowling . Both boys ' and girls ' teams are called " <unk> " . All of the sports teams participate , like all public high schools in Minneapolis , in the Minneapolis City Conference . North has won the state title in Boys ' Track and Field in 1943 and 1948 . 
 Basketball 
 The boys ' basketball team was dominant in the 1980s . Coached by Tony Queen , the team won eight of ten Minneapolis City Conference championships and went to the state tournament eight times , winning in 1980 and placing second in 1984 and 1985 . In 1988 Queen was suspended from coaching for one year following attempts to recruit basketball players , which is illegal under Minnesota State High School League rules . He lost a battle to be rehired in U.S. District court . Queen was fired in 1990 for having sex with a student in the <unk> . In the mid @-@ 1990s the boys ' team had a dominating resurgence . Led by Khalid El @-@ Amin , North tied a state record with three state championships in a row , from 1995 to 1997 . The boys ' team won another championship in 2003 . 
 The girls ' team went to the state title game every year except for one from 1997 to 2005 . They won in 1998 , 1999 , and had three straight wins in 2003 , 2004 and 2005 . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Farrell Dobbs ( 1907 @-@ 1983 ) , American Trotskyist and trade unionist 
 William Gallagher ( 1894 ) , former U.S. Representative from Minnesota 's 3rd congressional district 
 Cyril A. Stebbins ( 1898 ) , agricultural educator 
 Roy Wier ( 1906 ) ? , former U.S. Representative from Minnesota 's 3rd congressional district 
 Floyd B. Olson ( 1909 ) , 22nd Governor of Minnesota 
 Irving S. Shapiro ( 1924 ) ? , former chairman and CEO of DuPont 
 Sid Gillman ( 1930 ) , professional football coach 
 The Andrews Sisters ( 1930s ) , singing group 
 Bob Bjorklund , American football player 
 Sid Hartman ( 1939 ) , sports journalist 
 W. Harry Davis ( 1942 ) , civil rights activist , amateur boxing coach , civic leader and businessman 
 Robert Vaughn ( 1950 ) ? , actor 
 Tom Barnard ( 1969 ) , radio talk show host 
 Terry Lewis , Morris Day and other members of Flyte Tyme / The Time , musicians 
 Wayne Robinson ( 1948 ) ? NFL football player Philadelphia Eagles ( 1952 @-@ 1956 ) professional football coach ( 1957 @-@ 1976 ) 
 Rafael Rodriguez ( 1964 ) Professional welter weight boxer of Minnesota ( 1970 's ) Inducted in Minnesota 's boxing Hall Of Fame ( 2010 ) 
 <unk> Ward ( 2001 ) Olympic Figure Skating Coach and Choreographer . Former US Figure Skating Competitor and Puerto Rico 's 2004 Champion . 
 Khalid El @-@ Amin ( 1997 ) Professional NBA Player 
 = Simele massacre = 
 The Simele massacre ( Syriac : <unk> <unk> <unk> d @-@ Simele , Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was a massacre committed by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Iraq during a campaign systematically targeting the Assyrians of northern Iraq in August 1933 . The term is used to describe not only the massacre in Simele , but also the killing spree that took place among 63 Assyrian villages in the Dohuk and Mosul districts that led to the deaths of between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 Assyrians . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = The Assyrians of the mountains = = = 
 The majority of the Assyrians affected by the massacres were adherents of the Church of the East ( often dubbed Nestorian ) , who originally inhabited the mountainous Hakkari and <unk> regions covering parts of the modern provinces of the Hakkâri , Şırnak and Van in Turkey and Dohuk in Iraq , with a population ranging between 75 @,@ 000 and 150 @,@ 000 . Most of these Assyrians were massacred during the Genocide of 1915 , at the hands of the Ottoman Turks . The rest endured two winter marches to Urmia in 1915 and to Hamadan in 1918 . Many of them were relocated to refugee camps by the British in <unk> and later to Habbaniyah , and in 1921 some were enlisted in the pro @-@ British Assyrian Levies which helped quell Kurdish revolts in the British Mandate of Mesopotamia . Most Hakkari Assyrians were resettled after 1925 in a cluster of villages in northern Iraq . Some of the villages where the Assyrians settled were leased directly by the government , while others belonged to Kurdish landlords who had the right to evict them at any time . 
 The Assyrians did not share an amicable relation with their neighbours . Their historical feud with the Kurds , which culminated in 1915 , was centuries old . Bitterness between the Assyrians and the Arabs was reported by British historians as far back as 1920 . This was made worse by the British officers of the Levies who encouraged the Assyrians to think that they were first @-@ class troops , which had the effect of increasing the natural pride of the Assyrians . This , coupled with the fact that the British and Assyrian Levies succeeded in suppressing Kurdish revolts when the Iraqi Army failed created an inferiority complex among some Iraqi corps towards the British and the Assyrians . 
 The conclusion of the British mandate of Iraq caused considerable unease among the Assyrians who felt betrayed by the British . For them , any treaty with the Iraqis had to take into consideration their desire for an autonomous position similar to the Ottoman Millet system . The Iraqis , on the other hand felt that the Assyrian demands were , alongside the Kurdish disturbances in the north , a conspiracy by the British to divide Iraq by agitating its minorities . 
 = = = Iraqi independence and crisis = = = 
 With Iraqi independence , the new Assyrian spiritual @-@ temporal leader , Mar <unk> Shimun XXIII the Catholicos Patriarch of the Assyrian Church of the East , demanded the Assyrians be given autonomy within Iraq , seeking support from the United Kingdom and pressing his case before the League of Nations in 1932 . His followers planned to resign from the Assyrian Levies ( a military force under the command of the British that served British interests ) and to re @-@ group as a militia and concentrate in the north , creating a de facto Assyrian enclave . 
 In spring 1933 , Malik Yaqu , a former Levies ' officer , was engaged in a propaganda campaign on behalf of Mar Shimun trying to persuade the Assyrians not to apply for an Iraqi nationality or accept the settlement offered to them by the central government . <unk> was accompanied by 200 armed men which was seen as an act of defiance by the Iraqi authorities . His activities caused distress among the Kurds and the Iraqi government started sending its army to the Dohuk region in order to intimidate Yaqu and dissuade the Assyrians from joining his cause . 
 In June 1933 , the Mar Shimun was invited to Baghdad for negotiations with <unk> Sulayman 's government and was detained there after refusing to relinquish temporal authority . He would eventually be exiled to Cyprus . 
 = = Massacres = = 
 = = = Clashes at Dirabun = = = 
 On 21 July 1933 , more than 600 Assyrians , led by Malik Yaqu , crossed the border into Syria in hope of receiving asylum from the French Mandate of Syria . They were however disarmed and refused asylum , and were subsequently given light arms and sent back to Iraq on 4 August . They then decided to surrender themselves to the Iraqi Army . While crossing the Tigris in the Assyrian village of Dirabun , a clash erupted between the Assyrians and an Iraqi army brigade . Despite the advantage of heavy artillery , the Iraqis were driven back to their military base in Dirabun . The Assyrians , convinced that the army had targeted them deliberately , attacked the army 's barracks with little success . They were driven back to Syria upon the arrival of Iraqi aeroplanes . The Iraqi army lost 33 soldiers during the fighting while the Assyrian irregulars took fewer casualties . Historians do not agree on who started the clashes at the border . The British Administrative Inspector for Mosul Lieutenant Colonel R. R. Stafford wrote that the Assyrians had no intention of clashing with the Iraqis , while the Iraqi historian and son of the prominent Arab nationalist Sati ' al @-@ Husri , Khaldun Husry claims that it was Yaqu 's men who provoked the army at Dirabun . Husry supports propaganda rumours which circulated among Iraqi nationalist newspapers of the Assyrians mutilating the bodies of killed Iraqi soldiers , which further enraged the Iraqi public opinion against the Assyrians . 
 = = = Beginning of the massacres = = = 
 Even though all military activities ceased by 6 August , stories of atrocities committed by the Assyrians at Dirabun and rumours that Christians were planning to blow bridges up and poison drinking water in major Iraqi cities spread . According to some historians , the agitation against Assyrians was also encouraged by Rashid Ali al @-@ Gaylani 's Arab nationalist government , which saw it as a distraction to the continuous Shiite revolt in the southern part of the country . 
 The Iraqi army led by Bakr Sidqi , an experienced brigadier general of Kurdish ethnicity , moved north in order to crush the Assyrians once and for all . They started executing every Assyrian male found in the mountainous <unk> region between Zakho and Duhok starting from 8 August . Assyrian civilians were transported in military trucks from Zakho and Dohuk to uninhabited places in batches of eight or ten where they were shot with machine guns and run over by heavy armoured cars to make sure no one survived . 
 = = = Looting of villages = = = 
 While these killings were taking place , nearby Kurdish , Arab and Yazidi tribes were encouraged to loot Assyrian villages . Kurdish tribes of Gulli , Sindi and <unk> were encouraged by the mayor of Zakho to loot villages to the northeast of Simele , while Yazidis and Kurds also raided Assyrian villages in <unk> and Amadiya . Most women and children from those villages took refuge in Simele and Dohuk . 
 On 9 August , the Arab tribes of <unk> and <unk> started crossing the east bank of the Tigris and raiding Assyrian villages on the plains to the south of Dohuk . They were mostly driven by the loss of a large amount of their own livestock to drought in the previous years . 
 More than 60 Assyrian villages were looted . Even though women and children were mostly left to take refuge in neighbouring villages , men were sometimes rounded up and handed over to the army , by whom they were duly shot . Some villages were completely burned down and most of them were later inhabited by Kurds . 
 = = = The massacre of Simele = = = 
 The town of Simele became the last refuge for Assyrians fleeing from the looted villages . The mayor of Zakho arrived with a military force on 8 and 9 August to disarm the city . During that time thousands of refugees flocked around the police post in the town , where they were told by officials that they would be safe under the Iraqi flag . 10 August saw the arrival of Kurdish and Arab looters who , undeterred by the local police , took away the freshly cut wheat and barley . During the night of 10 – 11 August , the Arab inhabitants of Simele joined the looting . The Assyrian villagers could only watch as their Arab neighbours drove their flocks before them . 
 On 11 August the villagers were ordered to leave the police post and return to their homes , which they began to do with some reluctance . As they were heading back Iraqi soldiers in armoured cars arrived , and the Iraqi flag flying over the police post was pulled down . Without warning or obvious provocation , the troops began to fire indiscriminately against the defenseless Assyrians . Ismael <unk> <unk> , the commanding officer , then ordered his troops not to target women . Stafford , describes the ensuing massacre as follows : 
 A cold blooded and methodical massacre of all the men in the village then followed , a massacre which for the black treachery in which it was conceived and the callousness with which it was carried out , was as foul a crime as any in the blood stained annals of the Middle East . The Assyrians had no fight left in them , partly because of the state of mind to which the events of the past week had reduced them , largely because they were disarmed . Had they been armed it seems certain that Ismail <unk> <unk> and his bravos would have hesitated to take them on in fair fight . Having disarmed them , they proceeded with the massacre according to plan . This took some time . Not that there was any hurry , for the troops had the whole day ahead of them . Their opponents were helpless and there was no chance of any interference from any quarter whatsoever . Machine gunners set up their guns outside the windows of the houses in which the Assyrians had taken refuge , and having trained them on the terror stricken wretches in the crowded rooms , fired among them until not a man was left standing in the shambles . In some other instance the blood lust of the troops took a slightly more active form , and men were dragged out and shot or bludgeoned to death and their bodies thrown on a pile of dead . 
 In his depiction of the massacre , Mar Shimun , mentions that : 
 Girls were raped and made to march naked before Iraqi commanders . Children were run over by military cars . Pregnant women were bayonetted . Children were flung in the air and pierced on to the points of bayonets . Holy books were used for the burning of the massacred . 
 The official Iraqi account that the Assyrian casualties were sustained during a short battle with Kurdish and Arab tribes has been discredited by all historians . Khaldun Husry claims that the mass killing was not premeditated , and that the responsibility lies on the shoulder of , Ismael <unk> , a junior officer in the army . 
 On 13 August , Bakr Sidqi moved his troops to Alqosh , where he planned to inflict a further massacre on the Assyrians who found refuge there . 
 = = Targeted villages = = 
 Today , most of these villages are inhabited by Kurds . The main campaign lasted until 16 August , but violent raids on Assyrians were being reported up to the end of the month . The campaign resulted in one third of the Assyrian population of Iraq fleeing to Syria . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 18 August , Iraqi troops entered Mosul where they were given an enthusiastic reception by its Muslim inhabitants . Triumphant arches were erected and decorated with melons pierced with daggers , symbolising the heads of murdered Assyrians . The crown prince Ghazi himself came to the city to award ' victorious ' colours to those military and tribal leaders who participated in the massacres and the looting . Anti @-@ Christian feeling was at its height in Mosul , and the Christians of the city were largely confined to their homes during the whole month in fear of further action by the frenzied mob . 
 The Iraqi army later paraded in the streets of Baghdad in celebration of its victories . Bakr Sidqi was promoted ; he later led Iraq 's first military coup and became prime minister . Popular support for a compulsory conscription bill rose after the massacres . 
 Immediately after the massacre and the repression of the alleged Assyrian uprising , the Iraqi government demanded a conscription bill . Non @-@ Assyrian Iraqi tribesmen offered to serve in the Iraqi army in order to counter the Assyrians . In late August , the government of Mosul demanded that the central government ' ruthlessly ' stamp out the rebellion , eliminate all foreign influence in Iraqi affairs , and take immediate steps to enact a law for compulsory military service . The next week , 49 Kurdish tribal chieftains joined in a pro @-@ conscription telegram to the government , expressing thanks for punishing the ' Assyrian insurgents ' , stating that a " nation can be proud of itself only through its power , and since evidence of this power is the army , " they requested compulsory military service . Rashid Ali al @-@ Gaylani presented the bill to the parliament , his government fell , however , before it was legislated and Jamil al @-@ <unk> 's government enacted conscription in February 1934 . 
 From the nationalists ' point of view , the Assyrian Levies were British proxies to be used by their ' masters ' to destroy the new Iraqi state whose independence the British had consistently opposed . The British allowed their Assyrian auxiliary troops to retain their arms and granted them special duty and privileges : guarding military air installations and receiving higher pay than the Iraqi Arab recruits . Under British protection , the Assyrian Levies did not become Iraqi citizens after until 1924 . The nationalists believed the British were hoping for the Assyrians to destroy Iraq 's internal cohesion by becoming independent and by inciting others such as the Kurds to follow their example . 
 The massacres and looting had a deep psychological impact on the Assyrians . Stafford reported their low morale upon arrival in Alqosh : 
 When I visited Alqosh myself on August 21st I found the Assyrians , like the Assyrians elsewhere , utterly panic @-@ stricken . Not only were they disturbed , but their spirit was completely broken . It was difficult to recognize in their cowed demeanour the proud mountaineers whom everyone had known so well and admired so much for the past dozen years . 
 Because of the massacre , around 6 @,@ 200 Assyrians left Nineveh plains immediately for the neighbouring French Mandate of Syria , and were later joined by 15 @,@ 000 refugees the following years . They concentrated in the Jazira region and built a number of villages on the banks of the Khabur River . 
 King Faysal , who recently returned to Iraq from a medical vacation , was very stressed during the crisis . His health deteriorated even more during the hot summer days in Baghdad . The British Chargé d 'Affaires met him in his Pajamas squatting in his bed on 15 Augusts where he denied that a massacre was committed in Simele . Faysal left Iraq again on 2 September seeking a cooler climate in London where he died 5 days later . 
 Mar Shimun who was detained since June 1933 was forced into exile along with his extended family despite initial British reluctance . He was flown to by an RAF plane to Cyprus in 18 Augusts , and later to the United States in 1949 , thus later forcing the head of the Assyrian Church of the East to relocate to Chicago where it remained until 2015 , with the newly consecrated Mar <unk> 3rd returning the patriarchal seat of the Assyrian Church of the East to North Iraq . In 1948 , Mar Shimun met with the representatives of Iraq , Syria and Iran in Washington subsequently calling upon his followers to " live as loyal citizens wherever they resided in the Middle East " relinquishing his role as a temporal leader and the nationalistic role of the church . This left a power vacuum in Assyrian politics that was filled by the Assyrian Universal Alliance in 1968 . 
 = = = Responsibility for the massacres = = = 
 Official British sources estimate the total number of all Assyrians killed during August 1933 at around 600 , while Assyrian sources put the figure at 3 @,@ 000 . Historians disagree as to who holds responsibility for ordering the mass killings . Stafford blames Arab nationalists , most prominently Rashid Ali al @-@ Gaylani and Bakr Sidqi . According to him , Iraqi Army officers despised the Assyrians , and Sidqi in particular was vocal of his hate for them . This view was also shared by British officials who recommended to King Faysal not to send him to the north during the crisis . Husry , on the other hand , blamed the Assyrians for starting the crisis and absolved Sidqi from ordering the mass killing in Simele . He hinted that King Faysal I was the authority who might have issued orders to exterminate Assyrian males . Kanan Makiya , a leftist Iraqi historian , presents the actions taken by the military as a manifestation of the nationalist anti @-@ imperialist paranoia which was to culminate with the Ba 'athists ascent to power in the 1960s . <unk> al @-@ Barrak , an Iraqi Ba 'athist historian , puts Sidqi as the author of the whole campaign and the ensuing massacres . For him the events were part of a history of Iraq prior to the true nationalist revolution . 
 = = = British role = = = 
 Iraqi – British relations faced a short cooling down period during and after the crisis . The Iraqis were previously encouraged by the British to detain Mar Shimun in order to defuse tensions . The British were as well wary of Iraqi military leaders and recommended to transfer Bakr Sidqi , a senior ethnic Kurdish general who was stationed in Mosul , to another region due to his open animosity towards the Assyrians . Later , they had to intervene to dissuade King Faysal from personally leading a tribal force to punish the Assyrians . The general Iraqi public opinion promoted by newspapers , was that the Assyrians were proxies used by the British to undermine the newly established kingdom , was also shared by some leading officials including the prime minister himself . The British and European protests following the massacre only confirmed to them that the " Assyrian rebellion " was the work of European imperialism . 
 Both King George V of England and Cosmo Gordon Lang the Bishop of Canterbury took a personal interest in the Assyrian affair . British representatives at home demanded from Faysal that Sidqi and other culprits be tried and punished . The massacres were seen in Europe as a Jihad against a small Christian minority . 
 In the long term , however , the British backed Iraq and rejected an international inquiry into the killings , fearing that this may provoke further massacres against Christians . They also didn 't insist on punishing the culprits , who were now seen as heroes by Iraqis . The official British stance was to defend the Iraqi government for its perseverance and patience in dealing with the crisis and to attribute the massacres to rogue army units . A report on the battle of Dirabun blames the Assyrians , defends the actions of the Iraqi Army , and commends Bakr Sidqi as a good officer . 
 The change in British attitude towards the Assyrians gave rise to the notion of the British betrayal among some Assyrian circles . An idea which first gained popularity after 1918 when the Assyrians who were concentrated in Urmia did not receive the British relief which led to their massacre by the Turks and Kurds and their deportation to Hamadan . 
 = = Cultural impact and legacy = = 
 7 August officially became known as Martyrs Day or National Day of Mourning by the Assyrian community in memory for the Simele massacre , as it was declared so by the Assyrian Universal Alliance in 1970 . 
 In 2004 , the Syrian government banned an Assyrian political organization from commemorating the event and threatened arrests if any were to break the ban . 
 Assyrian music artist <unk> Bet Shmuel has written a song about the event . A number of poems and stories have been written about the incident , including one by the American William Saroyan , titled " Seventy Thousand Assyrians " , written in 1934 ; 
 ... We 're washed up as a race , we 're through , it 's all over , why should I learn to read the ( Assyrian ) language ? We have no writers , we have no news — well , there is a little news : once in a while the English encourage the Arabs to massacre us , that is all . It 's an old story , we know all about it . 
 The Simele massacre inspired Raphael Lemkin to create the concept of genocide . In 1933 , Lemkin made a presentation to the Legal Council of the League of Nations conference on international criminal law in Madrid , for which he prepared an essay on the Crime of <unk> as a crime against international law . The concept of the " crime of barbarity " evolved into the idea of genocide , and was based on the Simele massacre and the Armenian Genocide , later to include the Jewish Holocaust . 
 The massacres also had a deep impact on the newly established Kingdom of Iraq . Kanan Makiya argues that the killing of Assyrians transcended tribal , religious , ideological and ethnic barriers as Sunni Arabs , Shia Arabs , Sunni Kurds , Sunni Turkmen , Shia Turkmen , and Yazidis ; Monarchists , Islamists , nationalists , royalists , conservatives , <unk> , federalists , and <unk> , were all united in their anti @-@ Assyrian and anti @-@ Christian sentiments . According to him , the pogrom was " the first genuine expression of national independence in a former Arab province of the Ottoman Empire " and that the killing of Assyrian Christians was seen as a national duty . 
 The British were standing firmly behind the leaders of their former colony during the crisis , despite the popular animosity towards them . General Headlam of the British military mission in Baghdad was quoted saying " the government and people have good reasons to be thankful to Colonel Bakr Sidqi " . 
 = Audience ( Ayumi Hamasaki song ) = 
 " Audience " is a song by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki from her third studio album Duty ( 2001 ) . It was released as the album 's fifth and final single on 1 November 2000 by Avex Trax . Hamasaki wrote the track and Max Matsuura Lewis produced it . Dai Nagao and HΛL composed both the single and album version . The single artwork was shot by Japanese photographer Toru Kumazawa and features duplicate clones of Hamasaki , resembling an audience . Musically , " Audience " is a dance – pop and disco song . 
 " Audience " received positive reviews from music critics ; many highlighted it from the parent album and her music career . It achieved lukewarm success in compare to her previous singles , with a peak position of number three on the Oricon Singles Chart and a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . The single remains Hamasaki 's twenty – seventh best selling single in Japan . No music video was shot for the single . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Ayumi Hamasaki 's track " Audience " appeared on her third studio album , Duty ( 2000 ) . Hamasaki begun work on Duty and followed a similar musical concept like her first two albums A Song for × × ( January 1999 ) and Loveppears ( November 1999 ) . " Audience " was written by Hamasaki . Majority of the lyrics were about loneliness , chaos , confusion , and the burden of her responsibilities , aimed mostly towards her public image as an recording artist . In contrast to " Audience " , the trilogy singles focused on hopelessness , a reflection of Hamasaki 's disappointment that she had not expressed herself thoroughly in any of her previous lyrics . She described her feelings after the writing as " unnatural " and was constantly " nervous " for the final result . 
 The song was recorded in mid – 2000 in Tokyo , Japan . Max Matsuura produced both the single version and the album version , with additional production handling by Naoto Suzuki for the single version . HΛL played the keyboard , Suzuki played the guitar and all other instruments were handled by Dai Nagao . " Audience " is a dance song that employs elements of disco music . In comparison , Duty was a rock – influenced album and " Audience " was the only dance track on the album . 
 " Audience " was her third song to incorporate an English – language phrase , alongside her single " Whatever " ( February 1999 ) and the b – side to " Love ( Destiny ) " , " Love : Since 1999 " ( May 1999 ) . But because " Audience " and " Whatever " used one – worded phrases and " Love : Since 1999 " was not written by Hamasaki , it does not count in using English – language conversation like she did in her 2002 album Rainbow . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " Audience " was released on 1 November 2000 in CD format by Avex Trax , as the fifth single from Duty . The maxi single features over nine remixes , one instrumental and an acapella of " Seasons " . The cover sleeve features several clones of Hamasaki , representing an audience . The cover shoot was photographed by Japanese photographer Toru Kumazawa with a total off seven make – up and hair assistants . Shinichi Hara had directed the cover sleeve and has been Hamasaki 's creative director for promotional work and began collaborating with her in 1998 . His final work was directing the sleeve for Hamasaki 's 2009 single " Sunrise / Sunset ( Love Is All ) " . A digital release of the single was released in Australia , New Zealand , North America and the United Kingdom . A vinyl was released by Rhythm Republic Records and was distributed in Japan only . " Audience " has featured on three greatest hits compilation albums by Hamasaki including the white deluxe edition of A Best 2 ( 2007 ) , A Complete : All Singles ( 2008 ) and A Summer Best ( 2012 ) . 
 No music video was shot for the single . Only a video commercial for the single was aired in Japan . This became Hamasaki 's first single to not feature a music video ; her next single to not feature a music video was her 2001 single " Unite ! " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Audience " received favorable reviews from most music critics . Alexey Eremenko , who had written her extended biography at Allmusic , highlighted the song as an album and career stand out . A reviewer for CDJournal was positive towards the track , commending the production and calling it “ fun ” but “ aggressive ” Hamasaki hosted an online voting poll for fans to choose their favorite tracks to be featured on her Ayumi Hamasaki 15th Anniversary Tour Best Live Tour . As a result , " Audience " were featured on the list . 
 " Audience " debuted at number three on the Japanese Count Down TV chart . The song was unable to pass Misia 's single " Everything " and Southern All Stars ' single " Blue in Green " . It fell to number eight the next week . It fell to sixteen in its third week , and fell at number thirty and forty @-@ six in its fourth and fifth week , respectively . The song fell outside the top fifty at number fifty @-@ four and fell to seventy @-@ nine . " Audience " debuted at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart and lasted eight weeks . In the 2000 annual Count Down TV chart , " Audience " was placed at ninety @-@ two . 
 " Audience " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 units . " Audience " resulted in the lowest selling single off Duty , with only the lead " trilogy " singles selling over 500 @,@ 000 units in Japan . Despite this result , " Audience " now remains Hamasaki 's second best selling limited edition single to date with sales over 293 @,@ 000 units , just behind " Fly High " which sold 300 @,@ 000 units . " Audience " is her twenty – seventh best selling single . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Hamasaki has performed " Audience " in all of her New Years countdown concerts up until the Ayumi Hamasaki Countdown Live 2006 – 2007 A , which became the songs last live performance at the countdown shows . Additionally , Hamasaki has performed " Audience " twice in her involvement with Avex Trax 's concert A Nation , being performed in 2006 and the last performance being held in 2008 . 
 " Audience " has also been featured on several of Hamasaki 's national and international tours that has spread throughout many Asian territories . The song had made its debut tour performance on Hamasaki 's 2001 Ayumi Hamasaki Dome Tour 2001 A. Ever since the songs debut performance , " Audience " has appeared on several of Hamasaki 's arena tours including Ayumi Hamasaki Arena Tour 2002 A , 2002 Stadium Tour and 2005 My Story Tour . The song 's last live performance was her 2014 Ayumi Hamasaki <unk> <unk> : Feel the love , in which was supported by her 2014 studio album Colours . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the single 's liner notes . 
 = = = Song credits = = = 
 Ayumi Hamasaki – songwriting , vocal production 
 Dai Nagao – <unk> 
 Yasuyuki Tomita – A & R 
 Shigeo Miyamoto – mastering , engineering 
 Shinji Hayashi – additional production 
 Max Matsuura – executive producer , vocal production , additional production 
 = = = Cover credits = = = 
 Shinichi Hara – art direction 
 Shigeru Kasai and Takuma <unk> – design 
 Naoki Ueda – creative coordinator 
 Toru Kumazawa – photographer 
 Koji Matsumoto – fashion director 
 Hiroyuki Ishii and Takako Mishima – stylist 
 <unk> – hair assistant and make – up stylist 
 Kanako Miura – nail artist 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Ayumi Hamasaki . 
 = = Charts , peaks and positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = HIStory / Ghosts = 
 " HIStory " / " Ghosts " is a double A @-@ side single from Michael Jackson 's 1997 remix album Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix . The original version of " HIStory " was released as a track on Jackson 's 1995 studio album HIStory , but was never released as a single . " Ghosts " was a brand new recording . " HIStory " was composed by Michael Jackson , James Harris III and Terry Lewis before it was remixed by Tony Moran in 1997 . The original version contained many historic audio clips and samples . The remix does not have the audio clips and samples . 
 " Ghosts " was written , composed and produced by Michael Jackson and Teddy Riley in 1997 . Commentators made observations about the paranoid lyrics , a common theme in Jackson 's work . The double A @-@ side was promoted with a music video for each song . " HIStory " was set in a nightclub , in a futuristic era , and recalled Jackson 's filmography . " Ghosts " was a five @-@ minute clip taken from the much longer film of the same name . The song would become a top five hit in the UK and Italy , but did not chart as highly elsewhere . 
 = = HIStory = = 
 " HIStory " was originally written and composed by Michael Jackson , James Harris III and Terry Lewis in 1995 . It was the thirteenth track on the studio album HIStory , but was not released as a single . The song sampled multiple musical compositions and historical audio quotes , all of which were dispersed throughout the track . Early in the track , one even included quotes from an interview with a young Michael Jackson from 1970 . Musical compositions sampled include " Beethoven Lives Upstairs " and " Pictures at an Exhibition " . In reissues of the album , the " Pictures at an Exhibition " piece was replaced by a similar improvised orchestra piece , but the original sample was used in Jackson 's live performances in the HIStory Tour . Audio quotes sampled were the " Charles Lindbergh Report " by Lowell Thomas , a report on Hank Aaron , " Robert Kennedy Eulogy " by Ted Kennedy , " Farewell to Baseball " by Lou Gehrig , " Greetings to the Children of England " by Princess Elizabeth and Princess Margaret , quotes from Muhammad Ali , Thomas Edison , and Dr. Martin Luther King Jr . ' s " I Have a Dream " . 
 In 1997 , Jackson issued the remix album Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix ; the second single from the album would be the double A @-@ side " HIStory " / " Ghosts " . The " HIStory " portion was a Tony Moran remix of the original 1995 composition . The remix was entitled " Tony Moran 's HIStory Lesson " in the album booklet . 
 The music video that accompanied the remix opens with the scene of a woman , relaxing on a futuristic sofa , watching the music video through metallic virtual reality goggles . The video is set in a nightclub . Inside the club , televisions , monitors and walls display the history of Jackson 's filmography such as " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " , " Rock with You " , " Beat It " , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , " Man in the Mirror " , " Dirty Diana " , " Smooth Criminal " , " Black or White " , " Remember the Time " , " In the Closet " , " Jam " , " Will You Be There " , " Scream " , " Earth Song " , " They Don 't Care About Us " , " Stranger in Moscow " , " Blood on the Dance Floor " , scenes from his short film Ghosts , and live performances from the Bad World Tour and the Dangerous World Tour . Wearing the goggles , the woman is led to believe she is in the nightclub too . The video ends with the woman removing the goggles . 
 = = Ghosts = = 
 = = = Production , music and commentary = = = 
 " Ghosts " was one of the five new tracks on the album . It was written , composed and produced by Michael Jackson and Teddy Riley . Instruments played on the track include a guitar and piano . Jackson 's vocal range on the song is G3 @-@ A5 , the song is in the key E minor . The Washington Post noted , " ' Ghosts ' is another new jack swing collaboration with Teddy Riley for a similarly titled short film . It is a bit unsettling , particularly when Jackson spits out this line : ' Who gave you the right to shake my family tree ? ' " . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly , also highlighted those particular lyrics , speculating that " armchair psychologists will have a field day with the words " . 
 The Dallas Morning News described " Ghosts " as an angry tale of a back @-@ stabbing woman . Michael Saunders of The Boston Globe said that album cuts like " Is It Scary " and " Ghosts " " trample well @-@ trodden ground " . Sonia Murray of The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta Constitution said of the track , " ' Ghosts ' pounds with funk until Jackson 's weak vocals come in . Anthony Violanti of The Buffalo News said " Ghosts " ... [ is ] programmed plastic soul that makes you wonder how someone as talented as Jackson can churn out such tracks . Jim Farber of New York Daily News said of the single " ' Ghosts ' ... boast a few innovative sounds but no real melodies " . Roger Catlin of The Hartford Courant stated , " The most intriguing pairing is ' Ghosts ' and ' Is It Scary ' in which he asks those who 've only read about him in tabloids if he seems monstrous " . 
 Jennifer Clay of Yahoo ! Music noted that " Ghosts " sounded like material from the Thriller era . A longtime commentator on Jackson 's public life , J. Randy Taraborrelli , gave a retrospective analysis of the album in the biography , The Magic & the Madness . Taraborrelli explained , " Several of the other songs on Blood are also memorable . ' Ghosts ' stands out , perhaps because it 's so evocative of Michael 's spell @-@ binding Ghosts long @-@ styled video ... it 's classic , must @-@ see Michael Jackson " . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Ghosts " was a five @-@ minute clip taken from a film entitled Ghosts . Jackson unveiled the film at the Cannes Film Festival , as part of the album promotion . It was released theatrically in the US in October 1996 , as for the UK , it debuted at the Odeon Leicester Square in May 1997 . The UK event attracted fans , media and business organizations . It was released on cassette in most parts of the world . The film was written by Jackson and Stephen King and directed by Stan Winston . The story was based loosely on the events and isolation Jackson felt after he was accused of child sexual abuse in 1993 . The music video won the Bob Fosse Award for Best Choreography in a Music Video . 
 In the plot , the Maestro — played by Jackson — is nearly chased out of his town by the residents and the mayor — who deliberately looks very similar to Tom Sneddon , a prosecutor who led the child sexual abuse investigation against Jackson several years previously — because they believe him to be a " freak " . The film had similar imagery and themes to that of Thriller . It features many special effects and dance moves choreographed to original music , which Jackson himself authored . The film includes several songs and music videos from the albums HIStory and Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix . The video for Ghosts is over thirty @-@ eight minutes long and holds the Guinness World Record as the world 's longest music video . The short version is included in Michael Jackson Vision 's Video Collection . 
 = = Chart performance of HIStory / Ghosts = = 
 " HIStory / Ghosts " did generally well of music charts worldwide , having charted within the top — ten and top — twenty in multiple countries . The song 's highest peak position was in Italy , charting at number three . In the Netherlands , Belgium and Sweden " HIStory / Ghosts " spent seventeen to eighteen weeks on the charts . In Australia " HIStory / Ghosts " peaked at forty @-@ three before falling off the chart . The single did not appear on any United States Billboard charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 UK limited edition CD maxi single 
 " HIStory " ( 7 " HIStory Lesson Edit ) – 4 : 08 
 " Ghosts " ( Mousse T 's Radio Rock ) – 4 : 25 
 " Ghosts " ( Mousse T 's Club Mix ) – 6 : 03 
 " Ghosts " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 50 
 " HIStory " ( Tony Moran 's HIStory Dub ) – 7 : 56 
 12 " vinyl maxi 
 " HIStory " ( MARK ! ' s Vocal Club Mix ) – 9 : 14 
 " HIStory " ( MARK ! ' s Keep Movin ' Dub ) – 9 : 23 
 " HIStory " ( The Ummah DJ Mix ) – 3 : 04 
 " HIStory " ( The Ummah Main a Cappella ) – 4 : 04 
 " Ghosts " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 50 
 Cassette single 
 " HIStory " ( 7 " HIStory Lesson Edit ) – 4 : 08 
 " HIStory " ( radio edit ) – 4 : 04 
 " Ghosts " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 50 
 European CD promo 
 " HIStory " ( 7 " HIStory Lesson Edit ) – 4 : 08 
 " Ghosts " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 50 
 HIStory ( Mark Picchiotti Remixes ) 12 " promo 
 " HIStory " ( MARK ! ' s <unk> Vocal ) – 9 : 10 
 " HIStory " ( MARK ! ' s Future Dub ) – 9 : 16 
 Ghosts ( Mousse T Mixes ) 12 " promo 
 " Ghosts " ( Mousse T 's Club Mix ) – 6 : 03 
 " Ghosts " ( Mousse T 's Club Mix TV ) – 6 : 03 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = " HIStory " ( Tony Moran 's HIStory Lesson ) = = = 
 Written and composed Michael Jackson , James Harris III and Terry Lewis 
 Produced by Michael Jackson , Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis 
 Remix by Tony Moran 
 Additional production by Tony Moran and Bob Rosa 
 Mixed by Bob Rosa 
 Engineered and programming by Tony Coluccio 
 Additional programming by Giuseppe D. 
 Vocals by Michael Jackson and Boyz II Men 
 = = = " Ghosts " = = = 
 Written , composed and produced by Michael Jackson and Teddy Riley 
 Engineered by Teddy Riley and Eddie DeLena 
 Mixed by Dave Way 
 Solo and background vocals , vocal arrangement by Michael Jackson 
 Teddy Riley , Brad Buxer and Doug Grigsby : Keyboards and synthesizers 
 Matt Carpenter , Doug Grigsby , Andrew Scheps , Rob Hoffman and Alex Breuer : Drum programming 
 Additional engineering by Bobby Brooks , Matt Forger , Andrew Scheps , Armand Volker and Albert <unk> 
 Assistant engineers : Tony Black , Mike <unk> , Greg Collins , Gerd Krenz , Patrick <unk> , Paul <unk> , Andy Strange , Rob Hoffman and Tom Bender 
 = Debora Green = 
 Debora Green ( née Jones ; February 28 , 1951 ) is an American physician who pleaded no contest to setting a 1995 fire which burned down her family 's home and killed two of her children , and to poisoning her husband with ricin with the intention of causing his death . The case was sensational , and covered heavily by news media , especially in the Kansas – Missouri area , where the crimes occurred . Though Green has petitioned for a new trial twice in recent years , her requests have not been successful . 
 Green married Michael Farrar in 1979 while practicing as an emergency physician . The marriage was tumultuous , and Farrar filed for divorce in July 1995 . Between August and September 1995 , Farrar repeatedly fell violently ill , and despite numerous hospitalizations his doctors could not pinpoint the source of his illness . Green 's emotional stability deteriorated and she began to drink heavily , even while supervising her children . On October 24 , 1995 , the Farrar family home , occupied by Green and the couple 's three children , caught fire . Kate Farrar and Debora Green escaped without harm , but despite the efforts of firefighters , Timothy and Kelly Farrar died in the blaze . Investigation showed that trails of accelerant in the house led back to Green 's bedroom , and that the source of Michael Farrar 's intractable illness had been ricin , a poison served to him in his food by Green . 
 Upon her arrest on November 22 , 1995 , Green was charged with two counts of first @-@ degree murder , two counts of attempted first @-@ degree murder , and one count of aggravated arson . She was held on $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 bail — the highest ever required at that point in time by Johnson County , Kansas — and maintained her innocence throughout pre @-@ trial motions and a show cause hearing . However , when the defense 's own investigators verified the strength of forensic evidence against Green , she agreed to an Alford plea to all charges . On May 30 , 1996 , she was sentenced to two concurrent forty @-@ year prison sentences . Green has petitioned for a new trial twice since her conviction . Her first request , which she eventually withdrew , was based on a claim of having been rendered incompetent for plea bargaining by the psychiatric medications she was taking at the time of her hearings ; her second , which was denied by a judge , claimed that the evidence used to convict her of arson had been rendered obsolete by scientific advances . 
 = = Early life and medical training = = 
 Green was born February 28 , 1951 , the second of two daughters to Joan and Bob Jones of Havana , Illinois . She showed early intellectual promise , and is reported to have taught herself to read and write before she was three years old . Green participated in a number of school activities at the two high schools she attended and was a National Merit Scholar and co @-@ valedictorian of her high school class . Those who knew her at the time later described her as " [ fitting ] right in " and someone who was " going to be successful " . 
 Green attended the University of Illinois from the fall of 1969 , where she took a major in chemistry . Though she had intended to pursue chemical engineering as a career , she opted to attend medical school after graduating in 1972 , believing the market was flooded with engineers . She attended the University of Kansas School of Medicine from 1972 to her graduation in 1975 . Green chose emergency medicine as her initial specialty and undertook a residency in the Truman Medical Center Emergency Room after her graduation from medical school . 
 Throughout her undergraduate and medical school attendance , she dated Duane M. J. Green , an engineer . The couple married while she was studying at the University of Kansas . The couple lived together in Independence , Missouri , while Debora finished her residency , but by 1978 they had separated and then divorced . Debora cited basic incompatibility as the reason for the divorce — " [ ... W ] e had absolutely no common interests " , she was later quoted as saying — but the divorce was friendly . 
 During the period the Greens were separated , Debora met Michael Farrar , a student in his twenties completing his last year of medical school . Farrar was struck by Green 's intelligence and vitality , though he was embarrassed by her habit of explosively losing her temper at minor slights . In contrast , Green felt that Farrar was a stable , dependable presence . The couple were married on May 26 , 1979 . When Farrar was accepted for an internal medicine residency at the University of Cincinnati , the couple moved to Ohio . Green went into practice at Jewish Hospital as an emergency physician , but grew dissatisfied and eventually switched specialties . She began a second residency in internal medicine , joining Farrar 's program . 
 = = Farrar – Green marriage = = 
 = = = Children and medical career = = = 
 By the early 1980s , the Farrars were living in Cincinnati , Ohio . During this time Green suffered a number of medical issues , including surgery on an infected wrist , cerebellar migraines , and insomnia . The Farrars ' first child , Timothy , was born on January 20 , 1982 . After a six @-@ week maternity leave , Green returned to her fellowship in hematology and oncology at the University of Cincinnati . 
 Two years later , a second child , Kate , was born . Green again returned to her studies after maternity leave , and by 1985 had completed her fellowship . She went into private practice in hematology and oncology while Farrar finished the last year of his cardiology fellowship . Later Green and Farrar both joined established medical practices in the Kansas City , Missouri , area . After a year , Green started her own private practice , which prospered until she became pregnant and took time off work for another maternity leave . The couple 's third child , Kelly , was born on December 13 , 1988 . 
 As the Farrar children grew old enough , they were enrolled in The Pembroke Hill School , a private school in Kansas City . Green was reportedly a good mother who wanted the best for her children and encouraged them in their activities of choice . Though she attempted to resume her medical career after her last maternity leave , her practice faltered and her chronic pain increased . In 1992 , she gave up her practice and became a homemaker , working part @-@ time from the family 's house on medical peer reviews and Medicaid processing . Medical professionals who worked with her during this time described her as being distant and cold towards her patients and displaying obsessive behaviour towards her husband . 
 Farrar later alleged that Green had been self @-@ medicating with sedatives and narcotics to treat pain from infections and injuries periodically throughout their marriage . He recounted several episodes to author Ann Rule in which he had confronted Green with issues regarding her demeanor , handwriting , and speech patterns which indicated drug intoxication , and said that Green had agreed to stop using the medications each time he confronted her . 
 The Farrar children were all engaged in activities outside the home . Timothy played both soccer and ice hockey , while Kate was a ballerina with the State Ballet of Missouri by the age of ten . During this time , Farrar worked long hours and Green accompanied the children to their activities , though perception of her by other parents at the activities varied — some felt she was a supportive mother , while others believed she drove her children too hard and put down their efforts too often . 
 = = = Green and Farrar = = = 
 Farrar admitted that the marriage was never ideal . He later said that neither had expressed their love to each other , even at the early stages of marriage . Farrar recounted that Green seemed to lack the coping skills most adults bring to bear in challenging times ; when she went into a rage , she sometimes harmed herself or broke things , and rarely gave any thought to whether she was in private or in public during these episodes . By the early 1990s , Farrar worked long hours away from the home to avoid arguments and what he perceived as his wife 's shortcomings as a homemaker . When the couple fought , Green responded by treating the children , especially Tim , as small adults and telling them about what their father had done wrong . Swayed by their mother 's opinions about their father , the children began to resent and disobey Farrar , to the point where Timothy and Farrar had physical altercations . 
 In January 1994 , Farrar asked Green for a divorce . Although she believed Farrar was having affairs outside the marriage , she later claimed to have been taken by surprise by his desire to end the marriage and responded to his asking for a divorce explosively , shouting and throwing things . Farrar moved out of the family home , though the two remained in contact and informally shared custody of the children . With the pressure of living together removed , they attempted reconciliation , and decided that a larger house would ease some of the disorganization that had affected their marriage . In May , after four months of separation , they put in a bid on a six @-@ bedroom home in Prairie Village , Kansas , but backed out before the sale went through . Farrar later said that he had " backed down " in the face of his ongoing worries about the state of his marriage and the couple 's debt load . 
 Shortly after the Prairie Village home purchase fell through , however , the couple 's Missouri home caught fire while the family was out . Insurance investigators later determined that the fire was caused by an electrical short in a power cord . Though the house was <unk> and the couple 's home insurance paid out on the damage and lost property , the couple decided to move on , and Green and the children moved into the apartment in which Farrar had been living during the separation while the purchase of the Prairie Village home was re @-@ negotiated . 
 The couple put extra effort into avoiding the issues that had caused strife before their separation : Despite being an indifferent cook and housekeeper , Green tried to focus on cooking and keeping the new house cleaner , while Farrar vowed to curtail his work hours so that he could spend more time with the family . The improvements lasted mere months , however , and by the end of 1994 , both Green and Farrar had fallen back to their old habits and the marriage was again foundering . Fearful of another confrontation with Green , and looking forward to a trip to Peru the family had planned for June 1995 , Farrar nevertheless decided to wait until after the trip to raise the issue of a divorce again . 
 = = = Divorce = = = 
 During their trip to Peru in June 1995 , sponsored by The Pembroke Hill School , Farrar met and befriended Margaret Hacker , whose children also attended the school . Hacker was a registered nurse married to an anesthesiologist , and also unhappy with her marriage . The two began an affair shortly after both families returned from Peru . In late July , Farrar again asked Green for a divorce . Green responded hysterically and told the children that their father was leaving them . Green was especially upset that a broken home might later disqualify the children from debutante events such as the Belles of the American Royal . 
 Despite the impending divorce , Farrar initially declined to move out of the family home . He was concerned that Green , who had never been a heavy drinker of alcohol , was suddenly consuming large quantities of it while supervising the children . Though Green continued her routine of ferrying the children to after @-@ school activities , she would spend her evenings drinking at home , sometimes to the point of unconsciousness and nearly always until she lost what inhibitions she had left about her language in front of the children . On one occasion , Farrar was called home from work by the children , who had found their mother unresponsive . Green had disappeared from the home by the time Farrar arrived there , and though he eventually discovered that she had been hiding in the basement while he searched for her , she claimed at the time to have been wandering the town , hoping to be hit by a car . Farrar moved out of the family home in early autumn due to concerns about his personal safety . 
 = = Fire = = 
 On October 24 , during the early morning , Farrar received a phone call at his apartment from a neighbor who shouted that his house — meaning the Farrar – Green family home in Prairie Village — was on fire . Farrar immediately drove there . A 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 call placed from the house at 12 : 20 a.m. alerted police dispatchers to possible trouble , though the caller did not speak before hanging up . A police cruiser found the house on fire . Fire trucks were dispatched at 12 : 27 to what was classed as a " two @-@ alarm " fire . The first firefighters on the scene reported that Green and her ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter Kate were safely outside the house by the time they had arrived . Both were in their nightclothes . Kate begged firefighters to help her brother and sister , six @-@ year @-@ old Kelly and thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Timothy , who were still inside . Green stood next to her daughter , and was reported to have been " very calm , very cool " . At least two firefighters attempted to search inside the home for the missing children , but the building was so consumed by flames that they could only access a small portion of the ground level before the structure became unsafe . 
 By the time the fire was under control , the house was almost totally destroyed , leaving behind only the garage and some front stonework . The fire had spread rapidly , and although high winds contributed to the intensity , authorities deemed the speed with which the house had become fully involved suspicious enough to bring in arson investigators . The bodies of Tim and Kelly were not recovered until the following morning , when the house had cooled enough to permit safe searching . Kelly had perished in her bed , most likely of smoke inhalation . Tim 's body was found on the ground floor , near the kitchen . Investigators at first assumed he had died trying to escape , but later determined that he had perished in or near his bedroom , most likely of smoke inhalation and heat , and that his body had fallen through burned flooring to where it was discovered . 
 = = Police questioning = = 
 The surviving members of the Farrar – Green family were taken from the fire scene to police headquarters for questioning . Detectives were sent to the house to begin an investigation . Local Prairie Village detectives separated Green , Farrar , and their daughter ( who was accompanied by Farrar 's parents ) and began to question Green . 
 = = = Green 's account = = = 
 According to video of the police interview , Green reported that the family had a normal day before the fire . The children went to school and performed their chores before attending various after @-@ school activities — Kate went to her dance class , Tim to a hockey game . Farrar had taken Tim and Kelly to the hockey game , while Green took Kate to ballet lessons . The family regrouped around 9 p.m. when Tim and Kelly were dropped back at the Prairie Village house for dinner . 
 Green told police that she had one or two drinks after dinner and went to her bedroom , leaving it only to speak to Tim in the kitchen some time between ten and eleven in the evening , shortly before he went to bed . Kelly and Kate had gone to bed earlier , each taking one of the family 's two dogs with them . Green said that she had fallen asleep around eleven @-@ thirty . At some point before falling asleep , she recalled , she had spoken to Farrar , who had phoned asking which member of the household had paged him . She told police that she and Farrar were in the process of divorce , though she did not know how far along they were , and that although the children were very upset at the prospect , she herself was not and was looking forward to being able to rebuild her life . 
 Green was awoken some time after midnight by the sound of the home 's built @-@ in fire alarm system . She initially assumed that the sound was a false alarm caused by her dogs triggering the burglar alarm , but when she tried to shut off the alarm at the control panel in her bedroom and it continued sounding , she opened her bedroom door and found smoke in the hallway . She exited the house using a deck that connected to her first @-@ floor bedroom . While standing on the deck , she heard her son Tim on the home 's intercom system , calling to ask her what he should do . " He used to be my thirteen @-@ year @-@ old " , Green explained to police , and said that she had told him to stay in the house and wait for firefighters to rescue him . She had then knocked on a neighbor 's door to ask them to call 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . When she returned to the house , she found Kate , who had climbed through her second @-@ floor bedroom window , on the roof of the home 's garage . Green called to Kate to jump , and Kate landed safely on the ground in front of Green . 
 Detectives noted that during her interview Green did not appear to be or have been crying , and her manner was " talkative , even cheerful " . She repeatedly referred to Tim and Kelly Farrar in the past tense , and referred to all of her children by their ages rather than their names . Her accounts of times from the previous evening varied , and she seemed uncertain what time she had done things like gone to bed . 
 At 5 : 30 a.m. , a detective arrived from the fire scene to advise those at the police station that Tim and Kelly Farrar had been found dead in the home . Green initially reacted with sadness that quickly changed to anger . She shouted at detectives , claiming that firefighters had not done enough to save the children . Where previously she had been cooperative and friendly with the detectives interviewing her , she now began to attack them verbally , calling investigators and their methods " pathetic " , alleging that they had withheld from her knowledge of the children 's deaths , and demanding to be allowed to see Farrar and the remains of the family 's house . Though Green stressed to police that she wanted to be the one to " tell my husband our babies are dead , " her request was not granted . 
 Green was released from the police station in the early morning of October 24 after questioning . With the family home burned down , she had nowhere to stay . Farrar refused to let her stay in his apartment , but gave her some cash , and she rented a room in a local hotel . Ellen Ryan , Green 's divorce lawyer , found her there later in the day in a distraught state . She repeatedly asked Ryan whether her children had died , chanted rhythmically about their deaths , and seemed unable to care for herself . Green was transported to a local hospital for treatment but remained emotionally unstable , suffering from insomnia and appearing to Ryan to be unable to take care of day @-@ to @-@ day life , even after her release from the hospital . 
 = = = Farrar 's account = = = 
 Police interviewed Farrar at 6 : 20 a.m , informing him immediately that the bodies of Tim and Kelly had been recovered . He told police about the deterioration of his marriage and health over the past six months . In August 1995 , Farrar had fallen ill with nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea . He initially assumed it was a residual effect of the traveler 's diarrhea many people on the Peru trip had contracted while there . Though he recovered from the initial bout of symptoms , he relapsed about a week later , and on August 18 Farrar was hospitalized with severe dehydration and high fever . In the hospital , he developed sepsis . Doctors identified Streptococcus <unk> , which had probably leaked through damaged digestive tissue as a result of Farrar 's severe diarrhea , as the source of the sepsis ; however , they could not pinpoint the root cause of the gastrointestinal illness itself . Though Farrar 's illness was severe and possibly life @-@ threatening , he eventually recovered and was released from the hospital on August 25 . That night , however , shortly after eating a dinner that Green had served him , Farrar again suffered vomiting and diarrhea and had to be hospitalized . A third bout of symptoms struck on September 4 , days after he was released from the hospital for the second time . Basing their conclusions on the likelihood that his illness was related to the Peru trip , doctors narrowed down the possible causes for Farrar 's gastrointestinal issues to a handful , though none fitted his symptoms perfectly : typhoid fever , tropical sprue , or gluten @-@ sensitive enteropathy . Farrar had noticed that each time he returned home from the hospital , he became ill again almost immediately , and he speculated that it may have been due to the stress of his dissolving marriage or the change from a bland hospital diet to a normal home one . When Farrar 's girlfriend , Margaret Hacker , told him she suspected Green was poisoning him , he initially wrote off the idea as ridiculous . 
 Though Green was caring for Farrar in the family home while he recovered from his repeated bouts of illness , she was also continuing to drink heavily and , increasingly often , claiming to be contemplating suicide or to want Margaret Hacker dead . In late September , Farrar searched the house and her belongings . In her purse , he discovered seed packets labeled as castor beans , a copy of a supposedly @-@ anonymous letter that had been sent to Farrar urging him to not divorce Green , and empty vials of potassium chloride . He removed all three items from her purse and hid them . 
 The next day , he asked Green — who had no interest in gardening that he knew of — what she had intended to do with the seeds . Though she initially claimed that she was going to plant them , when pressed she said that she intended to use them to commit suicide . Green 's drinking was especially heavy that day , and as her behavior grew stranger , Farrar contacted the police for assistance in placing Green into psychiatric care . Police who responded to the home described Farrar and the children as " shaken " and Green 's behavior as " bizarre " . Though Green did not seem to hold the police 's presence against them and gave them no resistance , she denied being suicidal and called Farrar a series of obscenities . Farrar showed police the seed packets and other items he had found in her purse the day before , and the police transported Green to a nearby emergency room . The physician who attended her there found Green to be smelling strongly of alcohol , but not visibly drunk . Though Green appeared unkempt , the doctor felt her demeanor was not unusual for someone going through a bitter divorce and noted that Green professed no desire to hurt herself or others when the doctor interviewed her privately . However , when Farrar came into view in the hospital , Green 's demeanor changed . According to the doctor , Green spat at him , called him obscene names , and stated that " You 're going to get these kids over our dead bodies " . Though Green , with some persuasion by the doctor , initially agreed to a voluntary commitment , she shortly thereafter left the ER without informing anyone . She was found hours later , apparently having decided to walk home from the hospital , and brought back to the hospital . There , she agreed again to a voluntary commitment to the Menninger Clinic in Topeka , Kansas . 
 While in the hospital for treatment , Green was diagnosed with " major bipolar depression with suicidal impulses " and placed on Prozac , <unk> , and <unk> . She returned home after four days in the hospital . Farrar , who had researched castor beans in the interim and came to the conclusion that Green had poisoned his food with the ricin that could be derived from the beans , moved out immediately upon Green 's return home . 
 Farrar said that the day of the fire , about a month after Farrar 's last release from the hospital , he had taken the day off from work — the first day of what he intended to be a week @-@ long vacation to recover some strength after restarting his job post @-@ hospital . He had spent the afternoon with Margaret Hacker and then picked up Tim and Kelly for Tim 's hockey game . After dropping the children back off with their mother at about 8 : 45 , he had dinner with Hacker , leaving her around 11 : 15 in the evening . 
 Throughout the evening on October 23 , a series of phone calls between Green and Farrar escalated into a confrontation . Farrar was convinced that Green was continuing to drink heavily while she should have been caring for the children , and he told Green that he knew she had poisoned him and that Social Services might be called to protect the children if she failed to get her life in order . After the last call between Green and Farrar , Farrar watched television alone in his apartment until about 12 : 30 , when a neighbor 's phone call alerted him to the fire . 
 During his police interview after the fire , Farrar 's red eyes and trembling voice were apparent to detectives . He stated that Green had been " very concerned about money " in the context of their impending divorce , and that she may have set fire to the house to garner an insurance payout , but that she had never given any indication of intending to harm her children . 
 After his interview with the police , Farrar immediately filed for divorce from Green and for custody of Kate , who had been taken in by his parents while Green and Farrar dealt with the police . A court later awarded temporary custody of Kate to Farrar 's parents , due to Green 's instability and Kate 's professed anger with her father . Green was allowed supervised access during this period , while Farrar 's visits were not required to be supervised . 
 = = = Kate Farrar 's account = = = 
 Kate Farrar was interviewed by investigators on October 26 . She stated that on the night she had woken up to find the fire already burning . Seeing smoke seeping into her room , she opened the bedroom door and called to her brother , then closed the door and placed the hang @-@ up 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 call that alerted police . She then crawled out of her bedroom window to escape the fire . 
 Kate reported to police that when she called to her mother after escaping onto the garage roof , Green had been " terribly upset " and called to Kate to jump into her arms . Though Green missed catching her daughter when she did jump , Kate was not hurt . When the two ran into Farrar minutes later , Kate said that Farrar had been accusatory toward Green and Green had been crying and worried about her missing children . 
 According to Kate , Farrar had moved out of the family home and spurned Green 's desire for an amicable separation . Kate stressed that she loved and respected her mother and that all of the children had had good relationships with her , but that she was angry at her father for upsetting her mother by leaving . Pressed , she acknowledged that her mother had begun to drink large quantities of alcohol . She denied that she had ever seen matches in the house and expressed surprise that Tim had not escaped by the same route she had , which was via a bedroom window onto the roof . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 = = = Fire investigation = = = 
 The Eastern Kansas Multi @-@ Agency Task Force was called to conduct an arson investigation on the Prairie Village house on October 24 . Staffed by fire investigators and search teams from throughout the area , they focused on determining the origin and cause of the fire , searching through debris for usable evidence and interviewing witnesses . A dog trained to detect the scent of fire <unk> was brought in to assist in searching the house . 
 The investigators ruled out common causes of accidental fires , including electrical panels and furnaces . They determined that the basement level of the home , which contained the furnaces , had not been a point of origin , though two small orphan fires unconnected to the main burning had occurred in that area . Pour patterns were found on the ground and second floors , indicating that a flammable liquid had been poured there and covered many areas of the ground floor , blocked off the stairway from the second floor to the ground floor , and covered much of the hallway on the second floor . The pour patterns stopped at the door of the house 's master bedroom , but had soaked into carpeting in the hallway leading to the children 's bedrooms . Investigators could not determine the precise liquid used as an accelerant , though they proved that a can of gasoline the family kept in a shed had not been used . The amount of accelerant used was identified as between 3 and 10 US gallons ( 11 and 38 L ) . Concluding that the fire was a result of arson , the investigators on October 26 called in a second area task force , this one focused on homicide investigation . On October 27 , the district attorney for Johnson County was informed that the investigation was now criminal . 
 = = = Police investigations = = = 
 = = = = Arson case = = = = 
 In seeking to find who had set fire to the Farrar – Green home , investigators looked first for physical evidence of fire @-@ setting upon those who had been in the house . They suspected that because of the use of accelerant , the fire may have flashed over at the point of ignition and singed or burned the setter . Accordingly , they tested clothing worn by both Farrar and Green that night and took samples of the hair of both . Neither Green 's nor Farrar 's clothing showed evidence of having been in contact with accelerant ; Farrar 's hair showed no <unk> , but Green 's — which had been cut twice between the time of the fire and the time the police took hair samples from her — showed " significant <unk> " . Detectives recalled that Green had denied ever having been in close proximity to flames ; she had reported leaving the house after seeing smoke and not coming into contact with the fire either on the deck outside her bedroom or in the process of coaxing Kate off the garage roof . Neighbors of the family reported that when Green had come to their door to ask them to call for help , her hair had been wet . Though their suspicions pointed to Debora Green , investigators continued to receive tips attributing the fire to any number of people and the investigation continued with no public statement about suspects . 
 = = = = Poisoning case = = = = 
 When alerted to the possibility of Michael Farrar having been poisoned in the months before the fire , detectives investigated the origin of the castor beans that had led to police investigating the September domestic dispute . The label on the seed packets identified them as a product of the Earl May chain of stores . An officer found contact information for the Olathe , Kansas Earl May store in Green 's address book . The detectives contacted nearby Earl May stores to find if any employees remembered selling castor beans , which are out of season in the fall . A clerk in Missouri recalled that in September a woman had ordered ten packets of the out @-@ of @-@ season seeds and explained that she needed them for schoolwork . The clerk gave a description of the buyer that corresponded to Green , and tentatively identified her in a photo line @-@ up as the buyer . Register tapes in the store 's records showed that a purchase price corresponding to ten packets of castor beans had been rung up on either September 20 or 22 . No records were found in any Earl May store of earlier such purchases that would have corresponded to Farrar first having become ill earlier in the year . 
 Farrar underwent surgery in November 1995 to treat an aneurism that his doctors believed had been caused by the poisoning . Before the surgery , he submitted blood samples to Johnson County 's crime lab to be tested for ricin antibodies . 
 = = = Arrest = = = 
 Media reports in the first week of November 1995 suggested the investigation had narrowed the field of suspects , first to those intimately familiar with the house , and later to one person . Based on the trajectory of the police investigation , news reports in the following days speculated that the apparent poisoning of Michael Farrar may have been linked to the case , but officials declined to name the person suspected in either the arson or the poisoning . 
 Green was arrested on November 22 in Kansas City , Missouri , shortly after dropping off her daughter for ballet practice . Though Green 's attorneys had requested that if arrested , Green be allowed to turn herself in voluntarily , the police and district attorney felt that her behavior was too unpredictable , and chose to arrest her without warning . Green was charged with two counts of first @-@ degree murder , two counts of attempted first @-@ degree murder , and one count of aggravated arson . In a subsequent press conference , District Attorney Paul J. Morrison cited a " domestic situation " as the motive for Green 's alleged crimes . Green was initially held in a Missouri jail , then extradited to Johnson County Adult Detention Center in Kansas , on $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 bond , the highest bail ever asked for in Johnson County . 
 = = Show cause hearing = = 
 A pretrial show cause hearing in the Green case began in January 1996 , with Green represented by Dennis Moore and Kevin Moriarty . Green 's defense claimed that the fire in the family home had been set not by Debora Green , but by her son , Tim Farrar , who had once been caught by local police setting off Molotov cocktails . The defense also attempted to attribute Farrar 's poisoning to Tim , who did much of the cooking in the household . 
 = = = State testimony = = = 
 Michael Farrar underwent surgery in December 1995 to treat an abscess in his brain caused by the poisoning . Fearful that Farrar would not survive the proceedings , and knowing that his testimony was key to their case , prosecutors videotaped his testimony beforehand . The surgery was successful , and Farrar testified in person and recounted Green 's problems with alcohol and the break @-@ up of their marriage . Under cross @-@ examination by Green 's counsel , he admitted that both he and Green had contributed to the problems in the couple 's marriage and that his relationship with his son had been so adversarial that they had sometimes come to blows . 
 Witnesses called by the State supported Farrar 's and the prosecutors ' earlier claims that police had been called to the home a month before the fire , that Green 's behavior had been cause for concern at the time , and that Farrar had turned in to police at that time seed packets containing castor beans . The Earl May store clerk who had identified Green as the purchaser of multiple packets of castor bean seeds testified to that effect . Medical evidence was presented that Farrar 's illness had not fit neatly within the parameters of any known disease , but that its presentation matched the symptoms of ricin poisoning . An FBI criminologist provided testimony that he had tested for ricin antibodies in Farrar 's blood approximately two months after Farrar 's last acute symptoms , and found antibodies there in such large amounts that he could confidently state that Farrar had been subjected to repeated exposures to ricin . 
 A police officer testified that as the first responder to the fire scene in the early morning of October 24 , he had found Kate Farrar to be " very frantic " with worry over her siblings , but that Debora Green had showed little , if any , emotion or concern . The defense argued that the psychiatric medications Green had been taking since her September hospitalization could cause blunted affect , which could have led police and fire personnel to erroneously report that Green had been unemotional . 
 Arson investigators testified as to how they had located the origin and cause of the house fire , stressing that the multiple unconnected , small fires they had found in the home 's basement were evidence of the fire having been set purposely and that char patterns on the house 's floors were evidence of a liquid accelerant having been used to start the fire . The living room floor had contained the most significant amount of accelerant , and the trail of accelerant had ended at the door of the master bedroom , which had been open while the fire burned . The state of the bedroom door contradicted Green 's prior testimony to investigators that her bedroom door had been closed and she had only opened it briefly to look into the hallway . 
 Detectives who had spoken to both Green and Farrar the night of the fire testified as to Green 's unusual demeanor during their interview , and a videotape of the questioning was played , including Green 's statements about having urged Tim Farrar to stay in the burning house and her references to her children in the past tense . 
 The State rested on January 31 , 1996 . 
 = = = Defense testimony = = = 
 Defense testimony focused on the theory that Tim Farrar , angry at his father , had set fire to the home . Friends of Tim 's testified that Tim had had a fascination with fire and that he had told friends that he knew how to make bombs . A neighbor testified that he had once caught Tim burning some grass in the neighbor 's yard . A former nanny testified that she had heard Tim speak about wanting his father dead and planning to burn down the family 's house , and had caught him multiple times setting or with the implements to set fires . On cross @-@ examination , she admitted that she had not seen Tim Farrar for years and agreed that she had not reported Tim 's fascination with fire to his parents or the police when he had expressed it to her . 
 The defense rested on February 1 . The presiding judge ruled that probable cause had been shown to hold Debora Green for trial and her arraignment date was set for February 8 , with her trial being projected to start in the summer . 
 = = Post @-@ hearing events = = 
 As the crime involved more than one victim , the prosecutors decided to request the death penalty when the case went to trial . When faced with this possibility , Green 's defense team brought in Sean O 'Brien , a representative of a Missouri anti @-@ capital @-@ punishment group . 
 A series of legal maneuverings involving both sides took place in the late winter and early spring of 1996 . Defense attorneys requested that cameras be barred from Green 's eventual trial , but the request was rejected . Green was judged by court @-@ appointed psychologists to be competent to stand trial and denied a reduction in bail . The presiding judge ruled that she would stand trial once , for all of the charges against her , rather than be tried separately on each . 
 Her defense team undertook its own investigation , hoping to disprove state witnesses ' testimony identifying the fire as arson . They found that accelerant had , indeed , been used to stoke the fire and that a robe belonging to Green had been on the floor of the master bathroom , burned in a manner that indicated it had been worn while one of the unconnected fires was set . According to Ellen Ryan , when confronted with this evidence , Green acknowledged having set the fire that destroyed her home , but denied any clear memory of the event . She continued to claim that Tim Farrar had been the one who poisoned his father . Green agreed to place an Alford plea of " no contest " . 
 = = = Plea bargain = = = 
 On April 13 , the defense team notified Paul Morrison that Green wished to plea bargain . On April 17 the plea was made public when Debora Green appeared in court to plead no contest to five charges — two counts of capital murder , one of arson , and two of attempted first @-@ degree murder . In exchange for avoiding the death penalty , the no contest plea called for Green to accept a prison sentence of a minimum of forty years without the possibility of parole . Green denied being under the influence of any drug which would affect her judgment in making her plea or her ability to understand the proceedings in which she was participating . 
 After listening to a reading of the prosecution 's case against her , Green read a statement to the court in which she said that she understood that the state had " substantial evidence " that she had caused her children 's deaths , and that though her attorneys were prepared to provide evidence that she had not been in control of herself at the time of the children 's deaths , she was choosing not to contest the state 's evidence in the hope that the end of the case would allow her family , especially her surviving daughter , to begin to heal . In a subsequent press conference , defense counsel Dennis Moore told reporters , " She is accepting responsibility for [ the crimes ] " but said that " I don 't think she ever intended to kill her children . " 
 Green was formally sentenced on May 30 , 1996 , following testimony by the psychologist who had adjudged her competency . According to Dr. Marilyn Hutchinson , Green was immature and lacked the adult @-@ level ability to cope with emotion . Green read another statement to the court and was formally sentenced to two concurrent forty @-@ year prison sentences , minus the one hundred and ninety @-@ one days she had already served . Green is serving her sentence at the Topeka Correctional Facility . As of August 2012 , Kansas Department of Corrections records show her earliest possible release date as November 21 , 2035 — when she will be 84 years old . 
 = = After conviction = = 
 After her sentencing Green continued to maintain that her recall of the night of the fire was limited . In the summer of 1996 , she wrote to her daughter claiming that she had taken more than the recommended doses of her medications that night . Similar letters to Michael Farrar varied from claims that she had no recollection of the night to firmly stating that she was innocent of the arson . She theorized that Margaret Hacker had set fire to the family 's house , and reiterated her claim from the show @-@ cause hearing that Tim had been the one to poison his father . Green wrote to author Ann Rule in 1996 asserting that , due to alcohol abuse , she had not had the mental capacity to start a fire . In a later interview with Rule , she blamed her cloudy thinking during the court hearings on her Prozac prescription , and stated that once she was off the drug , her mind became much clearer . 
 In 2000 , represented by a new legal team , Green filed a request for a new trial on the basis of having been rendered incompetent by the psychiatric medications she was taking at the time of her hearings . She alleged that her original attorneys had failed to represent her adequately , instead focusing on avoiding a trial and the death penalty . She withdrew the request when prosecutors determined that they would seek the death penalty if a new trial was awarded . When , in 2004 , the Kansas Supreme Court ruled the state 's death penalty unconstitutional , she filed a second request for a new trial based on a claim of " manifest injustice " . Green 's attorneys claimed that new scientific techniques invalidated the evidence that the fire had been caused by arson . The request was denied in February 2005 . 
 = = = Evaluations of psychological state and motivation = = = 
 Though Green has granted no interviews regarding her mental state , a number of sources have attempted to classify her pathology , if any , and her motivation for committing the crimes of which she was convicted . During Green 's sentencing hearing , Marilyn Hutchinson , a psychologist hired by the defense , testified about Green 's mental state and capabilities . She characterized Green as cognitively competent and capable of controlling her emotion at a basic level , but noted that Green appeared to be lacking in emotion beyond the level of basic competence . Green was prone to monosyllabic answers during her interview with Hutchinson , and described herself as " tuning out " to avoid excessive emotion . Hutchinson described an affidavit from the doctor who had treated Green during her commitment to the Menninger Clinic , which reported that she had been admitted on the basis of having either major or bipolar depression . Evaluations at the Clinic showed Green to be minimally able to cope with the world , and her treating physician reported that Green had been found to have the emotional capabilities of " a very young child " , pursuant to unspecified " life experiences " she had undergone as a preadolescent . Hutchinson 's diagnosis for Green was schizoid personality disorder . Hutchinson 's opinion was that Green 's intelligence had generally allowed her to compensate for her limited emotional ability in day @-@ to @-@ day life , but that the external stressors of her impending divorce and the interpersonal conflict between Michael and Tim Farrar had overwhelmed her ability to compensate . She denied that Green was sociopathic . 
 Ann Rule began corresponding with Green in 1996 , and interviewed her in person in 1997 . Rule recalls in her book on the case that Green 's letters denied any unhappy childhood memories . Green claimed that though her behavior in the summer and fall of 1995 had been neglectful , she had neither the desire nor the wherewithal to set fire to her house or harm her children or her husband . Rule — who is neither a doctor nor a psychologist , but has a background in criminology and law enforcement — believes that even Green does not understand what caused her to attempt to murder Michael Farrar beyond the fact that she had come to hate him . Rule 's theory is that in destroying Farrar , Green would have been able to preserve her own ego , in that Farrar would not have been able to leave her for another woman . Psychiatrist Michael H. Stone , using Rule 's book as a source of information about Green , identifies Green as showing characteristics of psychopathy , borderline personality disorder , and narcissistic personality disorder . 
 Authors Cheryl Meyer , Michelle Oberman , and Michelle Rone , discussing the Green case in their book Mothers Who Kill Their Children : Understanding the Acts of Moms from Susan Smith to the " Prom Mom " , point out that Green was adjudged psychologically competent at what would be commonly considered the least @-@ controlled point of any mental illness from which she was suffering : she was on a cocktail of drugs which could treat the symptoms of mental illness but not the illness itself , she had been drinking alcohol in amounts which she had been warned could interfere with her medications , and she was coping with the loss of her children . Nevertheless , she spoke for her own mental competence at the time , a judgment which was echoed by the court . Meyer , Oberman , and Rone speculate that Green could meet the diagnostic criteria for several mental illnesses , including antisocial personality disorder , but add that the fact that her crimes were a combination of impulsive — arson and the murder of her children — and premeditated — the poisoning of Michael Farrar — makes any mental illness extremely difficult to diagnose . 
 = = In media = = 
 A May 1996 issue of Redbook featured an essay by Ann <unk> , a friend of Green 's who lived in the same neighborhood as the Farrar family . The article covered the author 's personal history with Green , the fire , and the subsequent investigation and ended with the author 's statement that " It is also possible that an entirely different personality — disassociated from the Debora I knew — committed this crime . [ ... ] The Debora I knew would not have killed her children . " 
 Crime author Ann Rule covered the case in her book Bitter Harvest : A Woman 's Fury , a Mother 's Sacrifice , which provided extensive detail on both the case 's development and Green 's personal biography . The book was a New York Times Bestseller , though one reviewer felt that Rule failed to address Green 's motivation for her crimes and that she had treated Green unsympathetically and Farrar over @-@ sympathetically . 
 Deadly Women , a true @-@ crime documentary program that focuses on crimes committed by women , featured Green 's case in a 2010 episode about women who kill their children . 
 A 2002 working paper on bioterrorism , intended to " enable policymakers concerned with bioterrorism to make more informed decisions " , included the Green case in a survey of illegal uses of biological agents . The paper noted that Green had refused to provide any detail on the manner in which she extracted and administered the ricin she used against her husband . 
 = The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 2012 film ) = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man is a 2012 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Spider @-@ Man , and sharing the title of the character 's longest @-@ running comic book of the same name . It is the fourth theatrical Spider @-@ Man film produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Entertainment , and a reboot of Sam Raimi 's 2002 – 2007 trilogy preceding it . The film was directed by Marc Webb . It was written by James Vanderbilt , Alvin Sargent and Steve Kloves and it stars Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man , Emma Stone as Gwen Stacy , Rhys Ifans as Dr. Curtis Connors , Denis Leary as NYPD Captain George Stacy , along with Martin Sheen and Sally Field as the uncle and aunt of Peter Parker , Ben Parker and May Parker . The film tells the story of Peter Parker , a teenager from New York who becomes Spider @-@ Man after being bitten by a genetically altered spider . Parker must stop Dr. Curt Connors as a mutated lizard , from spreading a mutation serum to the city 's human population . 
 Development of the film began with the cancellation of Spider @-@ Man 4 in 2010 , ending director Sam Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man film series that had starred Tobey Maguire as the titular superhero . Columbia Pictures opted to reboot the franchise with the same production team along with James Vanderbilt to stay on with writing the next Spider @-@ Man film while Alvin Sargent and Steve Kloves helped with the script as well . During pre @-@ production , the main characters were cast in 2010 . New designs were introduced from the comics , such as artificial web @-@ shooters . Using Red Digital Cinema Camera Company 's RED Epic camera , principal photography started in December 2010 in Los Angeles before moving to New York City . The film entered post @-@ production in April 2011 . 3ality Technica provided 3D image processing , and Sony Pictures Imageworks handled CGI . This was also the final American film to be scored by James Horner and released during his lifetime , before his death in 2015 from an aircraft accident . 
 Sony Pictures Entertainment built a promotional website , releasing many previews and launched a viral marketing campaign , among other moves . Tie @-@ ins included a video game by Beenox . The film premiered on June 30 in Tokyo , and was released in the United States on July 3 in 2D , 3D and IMAX 3D and released in home media in November 2012 . The reboot was well received by critics , praising mostly Andrew Garfield 's performance , the visual style , James Horner 's musical score , and the realistic portrayal of the title character . Both critics and audiences were mixed about the introduction of the character , the Lizard , which was considered too surreal for the film , and the reinvention of the title character , which was regarded as too soon after Spider @-@ Man 3 . The film was a box office success , grossing over $ 757 million worldwide , becoming the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 , and the highest @-@ grossing remake of all time . The film 's sequel , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 , was released on May 2 , 2014 . This film included Marc Webb and most of the first film 's main cast who returned to their previous roles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young Peter Parker discovers his father Richard Parker 's study has been burgled . Gathering up hidden documents , Peter 's parents take him to the home of his Aunt May and Uncle Ben , then mysteriously depart . 
 Years later , a teenaged Peter attends Midtown Science High School , where he is bullied by Flash Thompson and has caught the eye of the beautiful Gwen Stacy . At home , Peter finds his father 's papers and learns he worked with fellow scientist Dr. Curt Connors at Oscorp . Sneaking into Oscorp , Peter enters a lab where a " <unk> " is under development from genetically modified spiders , one of which bites him . On the subway ride home , he discovers that he has developed spider @-@ like abilities , such as sharp senses , reflexes and speed . 
 After studying Richard 's papers , Peter visits the one @-@ armed Connors , reveals he is Richard Parker 's son and gives Connors his father 's " decay rate algorithm " , the missing piece in Connors ' experiments on regenerating limbs . Connors is being pressed by his superior , Dr. Ratha , to devise a cure for the dying ( but unseen ) head of Oscorp , Norman Osborn . In school , Peter gets into trouble after a basketball challenge with Flash in which Peter accidentally shatters the backboard glass . His uncle changes work shifts to meet with the principal and asks Peter to replace him walking home with May that night . Peter gets distracted and helps Connors regenerate the limb of a laboratory mouse . Peter 's failure causes an argument with Ben and he leaves . At a nearby deli , a cashier refuses to let Peter buy milk when Peter is two cents short ; when a thief suddenly raids the store , Peter indifferently observes . While searching for Peter , Ben attempts to stop the thief and is killed . The thief escapes as Peter finds Ben on the sidewalk . 
 Afterward , Peter uses his new abilities to hunt criminals matching the killer 's description . After a fall lands him inside an abandoned gym , a luchador @-@ wrestling poster inspires him to create a mask to hide his identity . He adds a spandex suit and builds mechanical devices to attach to his wrists to shoot a <unk> " web " . Peter accepts a dinner invitation from Gwen , where he meets and has a tense conversation with her father , police captain George Stacy , over Spider @-@ Man 's motives . After dinner , Peter reveals his identity to Gwen and they kiss . 
 After seeing success with the mouse using lizard DNA , Ratha demands Connors begin human trials immediately if Osborn is to survive . Connors refuses to rush the drug @-@ testing procedure and put innocent people at risk . Ratha fires Connors and decides to test Connors ' serum at a Veterans Administration hospital under the guise of a flu shot . In an act of desperation , Connors tries the formula on himself . After passing out , he awakens to find his missing arm has regenerated . Discovering that Ratha is on his way to the VA hospital , Connors , whose skin is turning green and scaly , goes to intercept him . By the time he gets to the Williamsburg Bridge Connors has become a violent hybrid of lizard and man , tossing cars , including Ratha 's , over the side of the bridge . Peter , now calling himself Spider @-@ Man , snatches each falling car with his web @-@ lines . 
 Spider @-@ Man suspects Connors is Lizard and unsuccessfully confronts the creature in the sewers . Lizard learns Spider @-@ Man 's real identity via the name on an abandoned camera and follows Peter to school where they fight . In response , the police start a manhunt for both Spider @-@ Man and Lizard . The police corner Spider @-@ Man and Captain Stacy discovers that he is really Peter . Lizard plans to make all humans lizard @-@ like by releasing a chemical cloud from Oscorp 's tower , to eliminate the weaknesses he believes plague humanity . Spider @-@ Man eventually disperses an antidote cloud instead , restoring Connors and earlier victims to normal , but not before Lizard mortally wounds Captain Stacy . Before his death , Captain Stacy requests Peter to leave Gwen out of it to keep her safe . Peter initially does so , but later at school suggests to Gwen he may see her after all . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Connors , in a prison cell , speaks with a man in the shadows who asks if Peter knows the truth about his father . Connors replies , " No " , and demands Peter be left alone before the man <unk> 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man : 
 A teenager struggling to find his place in life ever since his parents disappeared when he was a child . A spider bites him on the back of his neck , giving him spider @-@ powers . He becomes Spider @-@ Man . Garfield described Parker as someone he can relate to and stated that the character had been an important influence on him since he was little . Garfield drew from his life experiences as inspiration for the role , revealing , " I was thinking of my history and thinking of the kid at school who I wasn 't as strong as , who behaved badly to a lot of people – including myself – and who I constantly tried to stand up to but never had the physical prowess to " . Discussing his predecessor , Garfield said he respects Tobey Maguire as an actor and that when he first saw Maguire play Spider @-@ Man he " was blown away by his interpretation . " Garfield said in interviews , including one in which he was interviewed by Maguire , that when he watched the film Spider @-@ Man when he was younger , he would jokingly recite Maguire 's lines in the mirror with a friend who joked that he would never be Spider @-@ Man . On accepting the role Garfield explained , " I see it as a massive challenge in many ways ... To make it authentic . To make the character live and breathe in a new way . The audience already has a relationship with many different incarnations of the character . I do , as well . I 'm probably going to be the guy in the movie theater shouting abuse at myself . But I have to let that go . No turning back . And I wouldn 't want to . " After taking the role , Garfield studied the movements of athletes and spiders and tried to incorporate them , saying Parker is " a boy / spider in terms of how he moves , and not just in the suit . " He did yoga and Pilates for the role in order to be as flexible as possible . When first wearing his costume Garfield admitted to shedding tears and trying to imagine " a better actor in the suit " , which he described as " uncomfortable " and admitted to wearing nothing beneath it since it is skintight . When filming Garfield explained that he had four months of training and described his physical roles on stunts as terribly challenging and <unk> Charles portrayed Peter Parker as a 4 @-@ year @-@ old . 
 Emma Stone as Gwendolyn " Gwen " Stacy : 
 A high school classmate and love interest of Parker 's , a smart and charismatic girl who is the chief <unk> at Oscorp . For the role , Stone went back to her natural blonde hair color , from her previously known color of red . She felt that she had a responsibility to educate herself on Spider @-@ Man , admitting she " hadn 't read the comic book growing up , and my experience was with the Sam Raimi movies ... I always assumed that Mary Jane was his first love " , and having only been familiar with her The Help co @-@ star Bryce Dallas Howard 's portrayal in Spider @-@ Man 3 . Stone said , " There 's a part of me that really wants to please people [ who ] love Spider @-@ Man or Gwen Stacy and want her to be done justice . I hope they 'll give me license to interpret her my way . " 
 Rhys Ifans as Dr. Curt Connors / the Lizard : 
 One of Oscorp 's leading scientific minds who attempts to engineer a revolutionary regeneration serum to help regrow limbs and human tissue . Something goes wrong , and he is transformed into the monster known as the Lizard . Ifans said his character spends the majority of the film as a human . While playing the 9 @-@ foot @-@ tall reptile , Ifans was required to wear a CGI suit . Initially , a large stunt @-@ double was used as a stand @-@ in for the role , but Ifans insisted on portraying the transformed character . Commenting on the technology used to bring his character to life , Ifans continued , " I had a green suit on , and then this cardboard head , and these small claws ... Each and every time you see the Lizard , the technology is so advanced now that when the Lizard 's eyes move , they 're my eyes . If I frown or show any emotion , they 're my emotions . That 's how spectacularly advanced technology is . " Ifans said that he voiced the man @-@ beast as well , explaining , " I 'm sure the voice will be toyed with in the eventual edits , but when I was shooting the CGI moments , when I wasn 't actually human , when I was Lizard , I looked like a crash @-@ test dummy in a green leotard thing . There were many moments when I had to speak to Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone as the Lizard . " 
 Denis Leary as Captain George Stacy : 
 Gwen 's father and a New York City Police Department captain who hunts both Spider @-@ Man out of distrust and the Lizard for his rampage . Leary explained that he did not know much about Spider @-@ Man in the comics and was " more of a Batman guy . Not the ' 60s [ TV version ] but the really dark Batman . But my wife was a Spider @-@ Man nut , which was why I went to Tobey Maguire ones . " He added that long before he was cast as George Stacy his friend Jeff Garlin , a Spider @-@ Man fan , " said to me , ' The first time I met you , I thought you were George Stacy ! ' This was like 30 years ago . I was like , ' What ? ! ' " Director Webb said of his casting , " [ W ] e all trust Denis Leary . He 's got this attitude , but you love him . In this movie , he puts pressure on Peter Parker . He 's on Spider @-@ Man 's case , but you understand him . I 've said this before , but good drama comes from competing ideas of what 's good . " 
 Martin Sheen as Ben Parker : 
 Peter 's uncle . Sheen admitted he was unfamiliar with Spider @-@ Man other than Maguire 's portrayal , and knew little of the character Ben Parker except for knowing Cliff Robertson had played the part . Sheen described his character as a surrogate father , saying , " I 'm dealing with this adolescent who is having problems with changes , with hormones changing and his getting out of hand . I have to give him the marching orders and so forth . " Webb said , " You think of Martin Sheen as President Bartlet [ of TV 's The West Wing ] . He has that sense of benevolent authority , but there 's something else that 's important , in terms of the dynamic that I wanted to explore , vis @-@ à @-@ vis Peter 's relationship with his absent parents . " Webb felt that unlike the scientifically inclined Peter , Uncle Ben represented the blue @-@ collar working man , a gap that could create a dynamic between the characters . 
 Sally Field as " Aunt " May Parker : 
 Ben Parker 's wife and Peter 's aunt . Field said the main reason she felt she had to be in the film was because of producer Laura Ziskin ( they worked together on the 1985 film Murphy 's Romance ) because she had an instinct that this was to be Ziskin 's last film . After Ziskin 's death Field expressed her gratitude of being a part of both Ziskin 's first and last films . Director Webb felt that " when you cast someone like Sally , they come with a certain level of awareness and real genuine affection , which for Aunt May is an incredibly important thing to have . " Webb said that while " we all love Aunt May " , he wanted to create a tension between May and Peter . " He 's got bruises on his face , and what happens in that moment ? That can create some tension , but you want there to be love there . That 's what someone like Sally Field gives you . " 
 Irrfan Khan as Dr. <unk> Ratha : 
 An Oscorp executive , Connors ' immediate superior . Khan said he was offered what he described as this " pivotal role " after appearing in the TV drama series In Treatment . Webb described himself as a fan of the actor when watching the series along with the films The Namesake and The Warrior . Khan said he was uninterested in the project at first , but that his sons were excited about it and insisted he take the role . 
 Chris Zylka as Flash Thompson : 
 A high school bully who picks on Parker . On playing the role , Zylka said , " You just try to focus . As an artist or as an actor , you just try to focus and stay in that world and block it all out . " 
 Campbell Scott and Embeth Davidtz portray Peter 's parents , Richard and Mary Parker . Leif <unk> plays the burglar who robs the convenience store . Hannah Marks portrays Missy <unk> , an unpopular girl who has a crush on Peter . Kelsey Chow 's brief role is simply credited as " Hot Girl " during the end credits of the film , but the actress revealed to media outlets around the time of the film 's release that her character is in fact Sally Avril . Similarly , C. Thomas Howell 's character is credited as " Jack 's Father " at the end of the film ( Jack being a boy that Spider @-@ Man rescues on the Williamsburg Bridge ) but he is referred to as Troy by one of his fellow construction workers in the film itself . Unlike the previous films , J. Jonah Jameson does not appear . Spider @-@ Man co @-@ creator Stan Lee has a cameo appearance , as he did in the previous films . At the 2011 Dallas Comic Con , Lee detailed that he plays a librarian listening to music on his headphones while stamping books , oblivious to the ongoing battle . Michael Massee plays the mysterious man in the shadows who talks with Connors in his prison cell in a teaser scene during the end credits . As to the man 's identity , director Marc Webb said , " It 's intentionally mysterious . And I invite speculation ... " In The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 , the character was revealed to be Gustav Fiers . Michael Papajohn , who played Uncle Ben 's killer in the 2002 film , has a cameo as Alfred , Dr. Ratha 's limo driver . Kari Coleman , Charlie <unk> , Skyler Gisondo and Jacob Rodier portray the Stacy family : Helen Stacy , Philip Stacy , Howard Stacy and Simon Stacy respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the release of Spider @-@ Man 3 , Sony Pictures Entertainment had announced a May 5 , 2011 , release date for Sam Raimi 's next film in the earlier series . By this time , screenwriters James Vanderbilt , David Lindsay @-@ Abaire and Gary Ross had all written rejected versions of a script and Ziskin 's husband Alvin Sargent , who wrote the second and third films , was working on yet another attempt . Raimi wanted John Malkovich to play his next villain . However , on January 11 , 2010 , Columbia Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that rather than continue the earlier saga , they were rebooting the series with a new cast and crew . Industry reports claimed that Raimi had admitted that he could not meet the scheduled release date and retain creative integrity . Avi Arad , Matt Tolmach and Ziskin continued as producers . 
 Arad later explained , " We were working on what we called Spider @-@ Man 4 and it was the same team [ as with the first three films ] . The problem was we didn 't have a story that was strong enough and warranted ... another movie . And Sam Raimi ... realized we [ didn 't ] have a good reason to make another one . And between [ him ] and Tobey and obviously the studio , we all went into it not feeling good about the next story . " Tolmach said one reason to restart the series was that the producers felt the core Spider @-@ Man story was that of a boy becoming a man . Screenwriter Steve Kloves did a polish of Sargent 's script , saying he had originally declined the opportunity to do so but relented " as a favor " to the filmmakers . " I also really wanted to write for Emma Stone , because I like to write for women and I particularly like Emma , " he explained . " So ... I did basically character and dialogue , and that was enjoyable for me . So that was my hand in it . And I did a little plot work , but a lot of the plot was done . " He did " a little bit " of dialog for Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man . In April 2012 , writer @-@ director Paul Feig said that Webb " invited me on set , and I did a little bit of writing for that movie , for one of the high school scenes " . 
 Days after announcing Raimi 's departure , the studio announced that Webb , whose previous film ( 500 ) Days of Summer was his directorial debut , would direct the reboot . Tolmach , now president of Columbia Pictures and Amy Pascal , co @-@ chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment , said they looked for a director who could give sharp focus to Parker 's life . Webb said he " was a little sceptical at first — you feel the presence of those other movies . But then I was like , ' How could I walk away from this ? What an opportunity ! ' " Webb said in the press release announcing him that , " Sam Raimi 's virtuoso rendering of Spider @-@ Man is a humbling precedent to follow and build upon . The first three films are beloved for good reason . But I think the Spider @-@ Man mythology transcends not only generations but directors as well . I am signing on not to ' take over ' from Sam . That would be impossible . Not to mention arrogant . I 'm here because there 's an opportunity for ideas , stories , and histories that will add a new dimension , canvas , and creative voice to Spider @-@ Man . " Webb felt Spider @-@ Man is different from the Harry Potter franchise , which is based on a few novels and " more like James Bond " because " there 's so much material in Spider @-@ Man that there are so many stories to tell and so many characters . " He described the film as " not a remake " explaining that " we 're not making Sam 's movie again . It 's a different universe and a different story with different characters . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In May 2010 , The Hollywood Reporter said the actors who met with Webb to be considered for the lead role included Jamie Bell , Alden Ehrenreich , Frank Dillane , <unk> <unk> , Garfield and Josh Hutcherson . In June 2010 the Los Angeles Times reported that the shortlist had expanded to include Aaron Johnson and Anton Yelchin . At least Bell , Ehrenreich , Garfield , Yelchin , Logan Lerman and Michael <unk> had screen tests . On July 1 , 2010 , the choice of Garfield was confirmed . Webb stated that he felt he knew Garfield was the right guy when they were filming a cutscene where he was eating a cheeseburger while telling Gwen to calm down . 
 Sony then held auditions for the role of the young Peter , who needed to resemble Garfield . Webb said , " I think we saw the origin of Spider @-@ Man before but not the origin of Peter Parker . " Webb felt that when you try to build the film you must build the protagonist from the ground up . That 's why he wanted Parker to begin as a child . 
 It was reported originally that the film would feature both Mary Jane Watson and Gwen Stacy as love interests , but the website The Wrap later reported that only Gwen Stacy would appear . In August 2010 , the list of candidates included Lily Collins , Ophelia Lovibond , and Imogen Poots , with Teresa Palmer , Emma Roberts , and Mary Elizabeth Winstead cited by The Hollywood Reporter as " potentially in the mix " . In September 2010 , Variety reported that the shortlist had expanded to include Stone and Mia Wasikowska . The shortlist was reported to then include Dianna Agron , Georgina Haig and Dominique McElligott . On October 5 , 2010 , the choice of Stone was confirmed . Webb noted that the chemistry between Stone and Garfield made her the clear choice . That chemistry inspired their off @-@ screen romance . 
 On October 11 , 2010 , Rhys Ifans was confirmed to be the unnamed villain , and two days later his character was revealed to be Dr. Curt Connors / The Lizard . Arad said that Lizard is his favorite Spider @-@ Man villain , and he had long wanted to use him in a film . Well before the choice of villain , Arad had had conceptual drawings prepared for the character . 
 In November , Martin Sheen was reported to be Uncle Ben while Sally Field was in negotiations to play Aunt May . That same month , Denis Leary was reported to accept the role of George Stacy . In December 2010 , Campbell Scott and Julianne Nicholson were in negotiations to play Peter 's parents . Khan was originally reported as playing Van Adder until the character 's name was revealed to be Dr. Ratha . Embeth Davidtz then replaced Nicholson . Annie <unk> was originally reported to play " the villain 's wife " , and Miles Elliot was reported to portray Billy Connors , son of Dr. Connors ; but they did not appear in the final cut of the film . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Webb felt a responsibility to reinvent Spider @-@ Man . One departure from the preceding trilogy was to have Spider @-@ Man build artificial web @-@ shooters , as the character does in the comics . In February 2011 , with the launch of the official website , the title and first official image of Garfield as Spider @-@ Man depicting both his costume and web @-@ shooters for the first time were revealed . Writer Geoff Boucher of the Los Angeles Times was skeptical of the change , feeling that it was too hard to believe that a financially strapped young man could conceive a wrist @-@ worn device that can instantly produce a strand of synthetic webbing and noted " the suit lives up to the challenge of being different from the Sam Raimi films but not too different from the classic suit that stands as one of the great comic @-@ book costumes ever . " Matt Goldberg of Collider admitted that he was not crazy about the costume , explaining that the bug @-@ yellow eyes felt weird to him and the mesh @-@ pattern felt too busy . He explained that the design of the gloves caused flashbacks to the Spider @-@ Man 2099 costume which he did not like , although he felt that the web @-@ shooters looked fine . Webb explained that he felt that " the web @-@ shooters were able to dramatize Peter 's intellect " . Webb paid attention to the question of " How would a kid make it ? " and then took some license with it . About the new costume , Webb explained that he and the crew " wanted a design that would make the body longer and more lithe , more of an acrobat , someone incredibly agile and the legs of the spider [ symbol on the chest ] were something we used to emphasize that . " He revealed that the film used varying suits for different lighting conditions . They made the webbing on the costume a little darker . Webb stated that " With the costume and the web @-@ shooters we wanted to emphasize that these are things that Peter Parker made " . Webb also looked at the Mark Bagley art in Ultimate Spider @-@ Man for the hero 's body . 
 While Webb introduced a few elements from Ultimate Spider @-@ Man , he wanted to keep the mainstream version of Gwen Stacy instead of that world 's punk rocker . 
 The release of Lizard merchandise designs along with unconfirmed concept art featuring a humanoid @-@ shape with a layer of scales on top instead of a pronounced snout ( similar to a dinosaur or crocodile ) as in the most recent comics , produced a mixed reaction . Many commenters compared it to other fictional characters instead of his rendering in comics . Russ Fischer of / Film described the character as looking more " Steve Ditko derived " ( the character 's original artist ) . Webb felt that there are different incarnations of Lizard in the comic book . He felt that he should do it without the snout because he was interested more in human emotions and wanted to keep Rhys ' presence in the creature . Webb wanted him to have emotion , have a face and have feeling . He stated " that in a comic book , you just put that thing up there , and you can say , oh , thought bubble , whatever . But when you try to do that and make it look real , it 's a different challenge , and I 'm creating a movie , I 'm not creating a comic book . That was part of the design . " 
 Webb " wanted to do something that felt more contemporary , and was less based in representing panels from the comics " and focus on spirit over style . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on December 6 , 2010 , in Los Angeles . The working title was Fiona 's Tale . The 90 @-@ day shoot included two weeks in New York City , while the bulk of filming occurred in and around Los Angeles , including such locations as the Henry Fonda Theater in Hollywood , St. John Bosco High School 's Gym , Immanuel Presbyterian Church in Mid @-@ Wilshire and various locations around South Pasadena , San Pedro and Woodland Hills . Sony Entertainment spokesman Steve <unk> explained , " [ T ] here is a comfort level in producing a project of this size and scope on your own backlot ... Basing the film on the lot also makes it easier for producers to interact with Sony 's in @-@ house visual effects team , and gives the studios greater control of quality and security . " 
 Some location shooting took place in New York City . The Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House served as the exterior for NYPD headquarters , and an apartment house at 15 West 81st Street , on Manhattan 's Upper West Side , was used as the exterior for the home of Gwen Stacy and her family . A row of houses on Fuller Place in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Windsor Terrace stood in for the Forest Hills , Queens neighborhood of Ben and May Parker . A web @-@ swinging stunt sequence takes place along the Riverside Drive Viaduct in Harlem . 
 The film was the first Hollywood production to be filmed with the Red Digital Cinema Camera Company 's RED Epic camera and was shot in 3 @-@ D at 5K resolution . Cinematographer John Schwartzman had this to say about the camera : " Today was Epic , Monday December 6 marks the first day the Red Epic camera was used to shoot a major studio motion picture . I can say for certainty the camera does exist and boy is it ready for primetime , as a matter of fact it 's a true game changer . " Schwartzman felt that the 3D would have been impossible without it . He said , " I can tell you without these cameras it would be impossible to move a 3D rig in the ways that THIS story demands , if Jim and the crew hadn 't made these cameras available to us I don 't think we could have shot this movie the way our director envisioned it in 3D . " Webb wanted cameras small enough to fit on the rigs and swing around very fast , saying that the " RED Epic cameras were the right cameras to do that . " Webb continued that " you need to shoot it with a level of velocity and 3D cameras can be very large ... and so we need those cameras to mount on rigs that could fly to the air and run to the streets in a certain pace . That allowed us to do it . " The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 's climax was filmed in a 1 : 78 : 1 aspect ratio for its IMAX DMR release . 
 On April 2011 , Stone revealed that the cinematography had wrapped and that post @-@ production began in May although some reshooting took place in New York City in November 2011 and in Los Angeles in December 2011 . 
 = = = = Stunts = = = = 
 Webb stated that he and the crew wanted to keep the stunts more grounded physically , a challenge for a superhuman character . The stunt performers included the Armstrong family , Vic and Andy , along with Richard Norton who plays a SWAT team member . Andy Armstrong was the stunt coordinator while Vic was the second unit director . To determine how Spider @-@ Man should swing , Andy videotaped an Olympic Games gymnast swinging on a horizontal bar . Andy noted that in the computer @-@ generated swing in the earlier Spider @-@ Man films , " he swings down at the same speed as he swings up , " and this " constant " speed is unlike a real gymnast 's movement where " he 's accelerating until he reaches the bottom , then as he starts to come up , he 's decelerating until he gets to the top of his swing and he actually gets negative gravity , where he 'll go weightless for a second , and then the next swing starts , and it becomes another violent swing again . " Vic felt that Spider @-@ Man 's moves were comparable to those of Tarzan , and he wanted to add that in the film . While filming in New York City , they swung a man through traffic down the street . Then , while the crew built a rig hundreds of feet long over Riverside Drive in Harlem , Andy built a car rig with a series of wires to help with effects which Webb said required an " incredible wealth of acrobatics " . These rigs were over 200 – 300 feet long and demanded months of rehearsals and design . According to Andy , operating the rigs " was a combination of a lot of human skills and mechanical engineering . " The purpose of the rigs was to depict Spider @-@ Man 's swing in a way that wasn 't computer @-@ generated . Garfield was reported to be involved with some of the stunts . Leaked pictures reveal Garfield with a nosebleed that reports claimed was from swinging . Arad explained that " Andrew is not only a brilliant actor but he is a sportsman . This gave us the opportunity to try things with him that were it not so it would have been almost impossible . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The company 3ality Technica of Burbank , California produced some of the equipment . The film was reported to be the first to adopt 3ality Digital 's TS @-@ 5 wireless and handheld <unk> mirror rig . 3ality technology helped make it possible to avoid 2D to 3D conversion . Webb wanted a new 3D experience for Spider @-@ Man : " Because we 're shooting in 3D , I wanted to conceive of certain things very specifically for 3D . There 's an experimental component to 3D that 's fascinating and we 're experimenting with generating that point of view – so you feel what Peter Parker feels , you feel what Spider @-@ Man feels when he 's jumping over buildings and over the streets . " He felt that Spider @-@ Man was ideal for 3D , admitting that they " started making the movie around the time Avatar came out " which made every studio want 3D . This was Webb 's first film using the technique , and he did not want a force @-@ fit or clumsy conversion as he had seen in other films . Webb cited childhood films such as Creature from the Black Lagoon and House of Wax for inspirations to push the 3D in his film even further than the type of depth that James Cameron uses in his film . 
 The Vancouver branch of Sony Pictures Imageworks was responsible for the digital touch @-@ up . The group improved the sewer and high school battle scene with many of Spider @-@ Man 's poses and environments that were used in the film . The comic book was cited as a basic source for Spider @-@ Man 's poses . The visual designers helped bring the Lizard to life by first building a digital version of a production design maquette . Many of the staff were involved with the process . They also started by thinking about lizard biology and how his muscles would work . A large man referred to as " Big John " stood in as the character during shooting , performing much of the interaction with other characters . The computer @-@ generated Lizard replaced him in post @-@ production . The creators would then fuse the design of the Lizard with the actor Rhys Ifans . Ifans then used motion capture for the Lizard 's speaking parts , which Webb found challenging to incorporate into the character 's final version . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 James Horner scored the film . Webb described Horner 's first musical cue as " spectacular " . Webb said , " I wanted to create a score that felt massive and huge but also intimate and small . " The film also features the Coldplay song " ' Til Kingdom Come " from the album X & Y. In May 2012 , Sony Classical revealed details about the soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 On February 10 , 2010 , Sony announced that the film would be released in 3D and IMAX 3D on July 3 , 2012 . Release dates outside the US were moved up to June in other countries to increase first @-@ week sales . Premieres took place in Tokyo , Japan on June 13 . The film is rated PG @-@ 13 for sequences of action and violence . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 = = = = Merchandising = = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man and Lizard <unk> dispensers were revealed at the November 2011 Comic @-@ Con first depicted the film 's Lizard . In December 2011 , it was revealed that Mega Brands had the rights to produce construction sets . A Marvel Select Spider @-@ Man action figure by Diamond Select Toys was announced on January 2012 — the fifth Marvel Select Spider @-@ Man figure , but the first based on a film . The first look at a Hasbro action figure of the film 's version of Spider @-@ Man was revealed at the July 2011 Comic @-@ Con. Hasbro made a radio control speed @-@ climbing figure . <unk> made action figures from the film . Other companies releasing action figures for the film include Hot Toys , <unk> and <unk> . OPI Products released a collection of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man nail polish . Trading cards were also available . 
 <unk> Restaurants , parent company of Carl 's Jr. and Hardee 's , helped sponsor the film . Chief marketing officer Brad Haley said they would market a new burger as part of the promotion . The burger was dubbed " The Amazing Grilled Cheese Bacon Burger " . It was promoted through film @-@ themed commercials and radio ads featuring Stan Lee . Spider @-@ Man @-@ themed premiums were offered as part of the Cool Kid 's Combo . Tours and PlayStation 3 game prizes were part of the promotion along with a video game . Stan Lee then helped spread the word that fans would also have been treated for a free Amazing Grilled Cheese Bacon Burger in Independence Day if dressed as Spider @-@ Man . 
 Big Cola was reported to enter a deal for promoting the film . The Kellogg Company and the Keebler Company built marketing campaigns around clips from the film . Sony launched a new augmented reality mobile application for the film using Qualcomm 's <unk> platform . Sony 's Dwight <unk> felt that the " use of augmented reality technology is a fun way of embracing the 3D aspects of the movie while nurturing the playful kid inside all of us who wants to collect items from their favorite superhero character to share with their friends and family . " Twizzlers challenged fans nationwide to help the hero build a virtual web of Twizzlers Twists to unlock prizes and exclusive content . D @-@ Box Technologies provide motion simulation for the film in select theaters . 
 As is common in Sony films , Sony product placements abounded , replacing the ubiquitous Apple Computer products often used by other studios . The film 's mobile phones , tablets , monitors and laptops all came from other Sony divisions . Other placements included Microsoft 's Bing search engine . 
 = = = = Previews = = = = 
 A teaser trailer was leaked on the Internet and aired at San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in July 2011 , attached to the superhero film Captain America : The First Avenger . Rob Keyes of Screen Rant felt that " it takes on a noticeably different tone from that of Raimi trilogy of Spider @-@ Man movies , and presents itself in a similar fashion to what Christopher Nolan did with Batman Begins . " Some writers observed that the trailer very closely resembles the 2008 video game Mirror 's Edge . After the third trailer was released , Webb defended the point of view footage , saying it was an early rendering and that the CGI was still in production . 
 A " sneak peek screening " of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was held on February 6 , 2012 in 13 cities internationally : Berlin , London , Los Angeles , Madrid , Mexico City , Moscow , New York City , Paris , Rio de Janeiro , Rome , Seoul , Sydney and Tokyo . On January 8 , 2012 , the Spider @-@ Man logo appeared on some of the world 's most iconic buildings , such as the Sydney Opera House , the Colosseum of Rome , the Kremlin in Moscow and the Arc de Triomphe in Paris . The screening revealed a second trailer in 3D , which thereafter appeared online . Glen Levy of Time magazine felt that the trailer 's " dialogue goes hand in hand with the action , rather than be dominated by it " and that the action scenes from the film looked " polished and slick " . The special screening included an eight and a half minute extended trailer . Scott Mantz of Access Hollywood felt that the extended footage seemed is edgier and more character @-@ driven and that " the Lizard looks like a great villain " . Peter Sciretta of / Film said that the trailers had left him " impressed " and had captured a feeling of dark naturalism alongside Spider @-@ Man 's trademark wisecracking . With the second official trailer and the sizzle reel , Webb felt that it was important to provide a more specific idea of the film , such as showcasing Peter and Gwen 's relationship and the visual effects , just to display the attitude of the film that he and the crew were trying to create . On February 7 , 2012 it was reported that the latest official trailer revealed a link to the viral marketing internet site for the film . 
 A third official trailer debuted on iTunes on May 3 , 2012 . The trailer was attached to the 3D première of The Avengers , the day after . The trailer contains what most reporters called a better and more fleshed Lizard . Adam Chitwood of Collider said , " The <unk> has an edge to it and The Lizard has much more texture . I like Andrew Garfield a whole lot , and the biggest draw for me here is the character work between Garfield and Emma Stone . They look to have some great chemistry and Garfield brings out a ... side of Peter Parker that we didn 't really see in Sam Raimi 's trilogy . " Sandy Schaefer of ScreenRant felt that " the darker color palette and 3D visuals shown here look overall quite crisp , even without the benefit of the big screen . " Webb felt that " there 's a small , intimate little indie movie at the heart of Spider @-@ Man " . 
 In May 9 , 2012 the first television trailer was revealed which teased an " 4 minute Super Preview " on NBC with the season premiere of America 's Got Talent on May 14 . The super preview revealed Spider @-@ Man saving a boy near a bridge . Fans and writers rated that scene the highest in the trailer . Angela Watercutter of Wired called the rescue scene " pretty freaking epic . " Kofi Outlaw of Screen Rant felt that the biggest thing to note " is the tone and composition of the film " and that most of the footage " manages to showcase a version of Peter Parker / Spider @-@ Man that is both familiar and fresh . " 
 A six @-@ minute 3D preview was tied in with IMAX 3D showings of Men in Black 3 . Sony 's Rory Bruer explained that the audience of Men in Black 3 should be a perfect match for this footage and that the six minutes should get everyone excited . The footage revealed an exchange between Peter and Gwen that Brad Williams from WhatCulture.com described as " brief and cutesy " . Brad found the CGI fairly clean and felt that the film seemed like a perfect match for 3D . 
 = = = = Viral campaign = = = = 
 The main viral marketing site was revealed in the second trailer in February 2012 . The official Twitter account revealed a scavenger hunt by posting " Property of Peter Parker ... Lost " with the longitude and latitude coordinates of direct markets in major US cities . The missing items included a <unk> backpack . One of the clues hidden in the backpack was a link to a page on the viral site that unlocked countdown timers for the cities of Los Angeles , New York City , Atlanta , Denver , Seattle and Phoenix , Arizona . Once the countdown was up , each of the city @-@ specific Twitter accounts for the marketing campaign sent out five locations in each city . A person at each spot waited to give the first person with the password a package and the tag @-@ name " operative " . These operatives painted the Spider @-@ Man logo as graffiti . The operatives then could view a scene related to the film . The main viral website revealed hints to other websites , such as a photo blog that expressed Peter Parker 's point of view . An unlocked puzzle there revealed the words " evolve " , " through " and " engineering " which when put together led to another website with design sketches on how to build a web @-@ shooter . 
 A Daily Bugle website revealed Denis Leary as George Stacy , lamenting the appearance of the wall @-@ crawler and asking whoever spots Spider @-@ Man to e @-@ mail the police . The site hosted the best fan @-@ made Spider @-@ Man scenes . People who uploaded images of " Spider @-@ Man " on the " <unk> Menace " viral site received a poster that sent them to a website for a boxing gym called " <unk> 's Boxing Gym " . The gym was funded by Peter Parker 's school . A viral website of that class was discovered . Entering the correct password revealed Parker 's class schedule . The Midtown High School site then revealed a Twitter user tracking down Lizard and asked people in Los Angeles , New York City , Atlanta , Chicago , Salt Lake City , Las Vegas , Phoenix , Austin , Tampa , Minneapolis and New Orleans to stay tuned for details . A viral site for Oscorp Industries was available . The Twitter account that coordinated a nationwide effort to track Lizard sightings revealed locations that had packages containing Connors ' shredded lab coat , an Oscorp ID badge and scientific samples of reptilian skin . When unscrambling the letters listed on each sample , the words " animal dynamics lab " led players to a new Oscorp Industries site focusing on a science program about reptile genetics . The site depicts Doctor Connors search for interns who could begin applying on May 14 . Completing the application and supplying the keyword " <unk> " unveiled a Lizard featurette . The Oscorp Industries website contained puzzles that revealed two in @-@ game documents , two video updates featuring Connors and a following cipher that as of July 2012 had yet to be cracked . From there images were then unscrambled , revealing a research project with spiders , a letter from Mary Parker to Richard Parker that exposed his workaholic habits and a Daily Bugle newspaper that contained notes about Oscorp . 
 On May 30 , 2012 , the third ( and apparently final ) set of challenges in the Animal Dynamics Lab was launched with two new video updates of Doctor Connors , an image of Richard and Mary Parker , letters from <unk> Ratha to Doctor Connors , one from Doctor Connors to Richard Parker and another note to Richard from Mary . In June 1 , 2012 , a Carl 's Jr. in Glendale , California hosted the next viral campaign by decorating webs and declaring a crime scene due to Spider @-@ Man 's apprehension of a serial car and motorcycle thief . It was announced via The Mark of the Spider @-@ Man Twitter feed , and with the code word " Web of Crime " , a hidden message was discovered , entitled a " Spider cipher " . The code name " adhere " named another sub @-@ site of the Mark of the Spider @-@ Man campaign that revealed crime reports . 
 Oliver Lyttleton of indieWire felt that viral ads such as the webbed menace website seemed a little forced and cribbed heavily from the example set by The Dark Knight with viral games . Silas <unk> of <unk> ! , on the other hand , described the film 's viral as " one of the most comprehensive film virals to date " . 
 = = = = Philanthropy = = = = 
 T @-@ shirts depicting the film 's Spider @-@ Man to help the cause for Stand Up to Cancer were available . Garfield wore the shirt , explaining that " these shirts underscore the idea that anyone has the power to be a hero . Cancer is one of our greatest villains . I 'm proud to join others in standing up to this disease . " Ziskin 's death from cancer was used as inspiration for the cause . Sony created a website for the cause . Columbia Pictures teamed up with New York City cultural institutions to create " Spider @-@ Man week " by helping out in the community . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray , Blu @-@ ray 3D , and digital download on November 9 , 2012 in North America . These releases contain a ninety @-@ minute behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary for the film along with UltraViolet download . Other special features include " Rite of Passage : The Amazing Spider @-@ Man reborn " and " The Oscorp Archives - Production Art Gallery " . The discs also contain audio commentary from Marc Webb , Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach . The deleted scenes included relationship @-@ building between Peter and Connors which Joey Esposito of IGN thought gives the Lizard a sense of sympathy that is lacking in the final film . The Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo pack contains three disks and also contains a second screen app for the iPad . Sony also included a limited edition gift set on November 9 , 2012 containing four disks with the special editions along with figurines of Spider @-@ Man and the Lizard from the film . 
 While released , the film was reported as dominating the sales chart on its first release until the end of November 11 , 2012 while its rental chart had The Amazing Spider @-@ Man at number two behind Prometheus . It then became number one in rental and dropped to number two in sales chart after its second week . FX has acquired the TV commercial rights to the film to air in late 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man earned $ 262 million in North America and $ 495 @.@ 9 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 757 @.@ 9 million . It is the 58th highest grossing film , the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing 2012 film , the 13th highest @-@ grossing superhero film , the fourth @-@ grossing Spider @-@ Man film , the sixth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Sony / Columbia and the highest @-@ grossing reboot of all @-@ time worldwide . 
 In North America , the film earned $ 7 @.@ 5 million during its midnight run at 3 @,@ 150 locations , including $ 1 @.@ 2 million from 300 IMAX venues . On its opening day , a pre @-@ holiday Tuesday , it set a Tuesday @-@ gross record with $ 35 million ( previously held by Transformers ) . The next day , the film dropped 33 @.@ 4 percent to $ 23 @.@ 3 million — the second @-@ highest non @-@ opening Wednesday . Over the three @-@ day weekend , it grossed $ 62 @.@ 0 million . This pushed the film 's six @-@ day gross to $ 137 @.@ 0 million , which was smaller than those of Transformers ( $ 155 @.@ 41 million ) and Spider @-@ Man 2 ( $ 180 @.@ 07 million ) among past Fourth of July releases . Although the film did not match its predecessors , Sony Pictures stated , " In the world of relaunched franchises , this is a spectacular success by any measure " . For example , both Batman Begins ( $ 79 @.@ 5 million ) and X @-@ Men : First Class ( $ 69 @.@ 9 million ) ( both were non 3D @-@ movies ) opened significantly below The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . It remained at the number 1 spot for ten consecutive days , until the opening day of Ice Age : Continental Drift . 
 Outside North America , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man grossed $ 51 @.@ 1 million on its five @-@ day opening weekend ( June 27 – July 1 , 2012 ) from 13 markets , with strong openings in many Asian countries . In India , it earned $ 6 @.@ 0 million , a record opening for a Hollywood film . <unk> <unk> of Sony Pictures in India felt very confident that the presence of famed Indian actor Irrfan Khan would enhance attendance . Opening in an additional 61 markets , the film made $ 127 @.@ 5 million over its second weekend . The movie ranked number one in over 30 countries . In Indonesia , it broke the opening @-@ weekend record with $ 4 @.@ 5 million while , in the UK , it opened to £ 11 @.@ 1 million ( $ 18 @.@ 1 million ) which is about equal with Spider @-@ Man 3 ( £ 11 @.@ 8 million ) . In its last market , China , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man grossed $ 33 @.@ 3 million over its seven @-@ day debut , which is more than Spider @-@ Man 3 ’ s lifetime box office in China . China is also the movie 's highest @-@ grossing territory with $ 48 @.@ 8 million . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man received generally favorable reviews by critics upon release with critics praising the performance of Andrew Garfield . The review aggregator film site Rotten Tomatoes reported a 72 % approval rating , based on 302 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 6 / 10 . The consensus : " A well @-@ chosen cast and sure @-@ handed direction allows The Amazing Spider @-@ Man to thrill despite revisiting many of the same plot points from 2002 's Spider @-@ Man . " On Metacritic , as of July 5 , the film had received an average score of 66 out of 100 , based on 42 critics , signifying " Generally favorable reviews " . According to Rotten Tomatoes yearly lists ( by using a weighted formula of the critics review in the site ) , it was placed number 32 on its list of best comic @-@ book movies in 2012 and was placed number 36 in 2013 . CinemaScore 's audience graded it an A- . 
 Jordan <unk> of The Hollywood Reporter felt that the film was satisfying , explaining that Webb directed with emotional and comedic touches and provided a darker depiction and a stronger romance than the original . Boyd Van <unk> of Variety described the film as a " mostly slick , entertaining and emotionally involving recombination of fresh and familiar elements " . A columnist of The Village Voice , Chris <unk> felt that the film was faithful to the comics and that " Garfield 's spindly physicality evokes the Marvel illustrations of the 1960s . " Conversely , Lou <unk> of the New York Post wrote that the film was dull and uninspiring and felt that it did not compare to Batman Begins and was " a pointless rehash in the mode of Superman Returns . " New Yorker critic Anthony Lane described the film as " running out of nimbleness and fun , and the promise contained in its title seems ever more tendentious . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times called the film " memorable in pieces but not as a whole " and said that its best element is the relationship between Peter and Gwen , while the Lizard " is not quite an opponent for the ages . " 
 Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an A- describing the film as " a <unk> , sweeter @-@ natured variation " when compared to Raimi 's work . She explained that the most " amazing " element was not the " blockbuster wow ! " but instead the " intimate <unk> . " Claudia Puig of USA Today explained that " as a new chapter in the superpowered arachnid saga , it stands on its own quite nicely , focusing more on human emotions than on a panoply of special effects . " She said " where Tobey Maguire in the original Spider @-@ Man trilogy was earnest , Garfield 's Spider @-@ Man is whip @-@ smart and likably cheeky , with an undercurrent of teenage angst . " She also called the film " as much a coming @-@ of @-@ age story as a crime @-@ fighting action saga . " Christy Lemire of the Associated Press described Garfield 's Spider @-@ Man as an arrogant and misunderstood outsider , giving the film a " restless , reckless energy and a welcome sense of danger . " She also concluded that Webb was a different sort of director , saying that while Webb 's big set pieces lacked Raimi 's imagination , they conveyed " emotional truth " and " a pervasive sense of humanity " . However , Ty Burr of The Boston Globe felt that the film lacked the original 's pop grace and the pulpy joy , saying the film was " dumbed down , tarted up " and " almost shockingly uninspired " . Burr evaluated it as " the worst superhero film since Green Lantern " . Colin Covert of the Star Tribune also felt that The Amazing Spider @-@ Man is weaker than its predecessor and described it as " The Notebook in spandex " . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times felt that the reboot provided better reasons for why Peter Parker adopts his superhero role , even if the origin story didn 't need to be told once again . He also remarked that it was " probably the second best " of the four Spider @-@ Man films after Spider @-@ Man 2 , explaining that Lizard was lackluster compared to that film 's villain , Doctor Octopus , and had the dramatic range of Godzilla . 
 Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal , pointed out that " the truly amazing thing is that most of what happens to Peter Parker in the first half of the film has already happened in previous chapters of the Spidey saga " , that " what 's old is old again . " However , Randy Myers from the San Jose Mercury News found it " the best Spidey yet " , describing it as " strong , bold and well @-@ acted . " He felt that a viewer couldn 't help but feel déjà vu , but that the work shows greater " dimension " . Dana Stevens at Slate magazine believed that the film was an " absolutely unnecessary " retelling of the origin story , although it avoided " the common comic @-@ book adaptation trap of gloomy self @-@ seriousness " . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone also opined that the " unnecessary " reboot pulled stellar performances from Garfield and Stone and touches the heart . 
 Andrew Garfield received good notices for his performance . Bob Mondello of NPR said , " Here comes another Spider @-@ dude : This Andrew Garfield guy . So he 'd better be really something , right ? Well , as it happens , he is . " Tom Charity of CNN found Garfield 's " combination of fresh @-@ faced innocence , nervous agitation and wry humor ... immediately appealing . " Stephanie Zacharek of Movieline said she " had no specific desire to see the series resuscitated . But watching Garfield and Stone made me think doing so wasn 't such a bad idea " . Mary F. Pols of Time said that even though the story was familiar Garfield and Webb made it feel " convincingly fresh and exciting . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Themes and analysis = = = 
 Webb described the film as " a story about a kid who grows up looking for his father and finds himself . " Both Webb and star Garfield described Parker as an outsider by choice , someone hard to get close to . As in the early comic books , the character " is a science whiz . If you look back to the early Stan Lee and Steve Ditko comics , he 's a nerd with big glasses , " said Webb . He explained " the idea of what a nerd is has changed in 40 or 50 years . Nerds are running the world . Andrew Garfield made a movie [ called The Social Network ] about it . ... What was important in those early comics was this notion that Peter Parker is an outsider and how we define that in a contemporary context . " Garfield compared his Spider @-@ Man façade as a metaphor for internet anonymity , saying , " You feel the power of it , the power of not being seen , the power of the mask . Peter becomes witty when he 's got that protective layer . It 's like he 's on a message board . He 's got the anonymity of the Internet within that suit , and he can say whatever the @ # ! * % he likes , and he can get away with anything . " Garfield tried to explore Parker as an orphan , whom he feels " are the strongest human beings on the planet . " He said Parker is " a human hero [ who ] goes through all of the same struggles that we all have gone through , especially the skinny ones [ who ] want more power than they feel they have . " He believes Parker represents " a very inspiring , aspirational character that symbolizes goodness — and how difficult it is to be good — but how worth it it is . " Rhys Ifans compared this film to William Shakespeare 's Hamlet on the grounds that Spider @-@ Man can be redone over and over in different ways . He felt that they are similar in that they both represent meaningful archetypal young men grappling with the loss of their father . Critics like Claudia Puig of USA Today felt that Garfield 's character as the superhero " embodies the nerdy Parker , the anguished fatherless teen and the cocky super @-@ hero in equal doses " . Boyd <unk> of Variety noted that Garfield 's character as Spider @-@ Man makes an interesting hero in the film because of how it establishes early on that Peter 's growing pains along with his search for an identity are common to any teenager and that " his struggles involve real people — and real lives . " 
 Stone described her character as " a daddy 's girl " who is very responsible and protective of her family and loves science . She said of her character , " she offers Parker a world of stability , of a family unit not marred with parental loss and , beyond physical allure , the two forge an intellectual connection over their shared love of science . " Her character , she explained , " is stuck between [ her father ] the Captain and Peter Parker and Spider @-@ Man , who have different ways about going about finding justice in their lives " which she felt was a fun thing to explore . Dana Stevens of Slate described her character " as the stuff of a comic nerd 's dreams : a sweet , smart , wisecracking dame in demure sweaters , miniskirts , thigh @-@ high stockings and boots . " Webb felt that the Lizard was the best villain because , " He 's the literal embodiment of the theme of the movie , which is we all have a missing piece . He has no arm . Peter has no parents , and he fills that void with Spider @-@ Man . " Producer Avi Arad felt likewise , explaining , " [ Y ] ou look at Peter , he misses the parents , [ and ] Connors has one arm . ... [ E ] <unk> , [ it ] is a very similar problem . It is a cautionary tale . " Webb said that the Lizard " is not the worst villain on the planet . He 's not a mustache @-@ twirling guy who wants to terrorize people . He believes he 's doing the right thing . " Actor Rhys Ifans described his character as a flawed character comparable to Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde . " Curt Connors is by no means an evil villain , " Ifans stated . " He 's not like the Batman villains , like the Joker , who are the embodiment of evil . Curtis Connors is a great man who makes a bad decision . ... [ T ] hat 's the whole magic of the Spider @-@ Man idea . These people are the embodiment of our flaws and our desires that lead to tragedy . " Ifans described Connors as a force for good throughout his life : " He 's a geneticist who wants to help people , like him , who are limbless . In his eagerness to advance that science , he makes a mistake and that 's an occurrence we 've seen throughout time , sometimes to our benefit , sometimes to our detriment . " " ... He is a broken man who wants to fix himself . " Ifans added , " I 'm not portraying a villain in any sense . Connors does feel cheated by God , and he 's looking for answers in science . God seems to intervene . " 
 Webb said that Oscorp Tower is pivotal as a part of a new mythology of the film . He liked that Parker was connected to the building in some way and to think of it as " a Tower of Babel in the middle of Manhattan that has something dark and seedy going on in there . " The critic Roger Ebert described the place as a " typical comic @-@ book mega @-@ corporation with a madman at the top . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The comic @-@ book website Newsarama placed The Amazing Spider @-@ Man on its top 10 list of comic @-@ book films . Mark Hughes of Forbes ranked the film as the seventh greatest comic book superhero film being the highest Spider @-@ Man film in the list while Jacob Hall of ScreenCrush ranked the film as 13th greatest modern Marvel film being the lowest Spider @-@ Man film in the list . 
 A scientist from Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center referenced the film to news organizations in explaining how scientists from the medical center are working on a long @-@ term project involving spider silks and potential human regeneration along with deciphering fact and fiction from the film . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 A video game of the same name developed by Beenox was announced at the 2011 New York Comic Con. They were the development team behind the previous two Spider @-@ Man games , Spider @-@ Man : Shattered Dimensions and Spider @-@ Man : Edge of Time . The game was released on June 26 , 2012 , in Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , personal computer , Nintendo Wii , Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS . Dee Brown of Beenox noted , " The fact that our game is based on the movie , and the movie is re @-@ approaching the universe in a completely different way — a more grounded , more realistic approach — gives us an incredible setting to play with " . The game takes place after the events of the film . Sony and Gameloft teamed up again to create an official mobile game for the film . Sky Betting and Gaming 's online casino website Sky Vegas created a related casino game . 
 The comic was released in June , named Amazing Spider @-@ Man : The Movie # 1 – 2 , written by Tom Cohen and illustrated by Neil Edwards . A trade paperback was published collecting the two @-@ parter a week before the film 's release , entitled Amazing Spider @-@ Man : The Movie Prelude , which also included The Amazing Spider @-@ Man issues # 75 – 77 . 
 The soundtrack album of the film was released the same day as the film , under the Sony Classical banner . 
 = = = Sequels and reboot = = = 
 The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was originally reported as being the first of at least three planned sequels . The first sequel , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 was released on May 2 , 2014 . On June 17 , 2013 Sony announced two more sequels to follow The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 , which were scheduled to release on June 10 , 2016 and May 4 , 2018 , respectively . However , in July 2014 , the third film was delayed to an unspecified date in 2018 @,@ 
 In November 2013 , Sony Pictures Entertainment chief Michael Lynton told analysts , " We do very much have the ambition about creating a bigger universe around Spider @-@ Man . There are a number of scripts in the works " . A Venom spinoff had been in early stages of planning at the studio since 2008 . In December 2013 , Sony announced plans for spinoffs featuring the supervillains Sinister Six and Venom . 
 In February 2015 , Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that Spider @-@ Man will appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , with the character appearing in an MCU film and Sony releasing a Spider @-@ Man film produced by Feige and Pascal on July 7 , 2017 . Sony will continue to finance , distribute , own and have final creative control of the Spider @-@ Man films . Marvel Studios will also explore opportunities to integrate other characters of the Marvel Cinematic Universe into future Spider @-@ Man films . 
 = Geology of Somerset = 
 Somerset is a rural county in the southwest of England , covering 4 @,@ 171 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 610 sq mi ) . It is bounded on the north @-@ west by the Bristol Channel , on the north by Bristol and Gloucestershire , on the north @-@ east by Wiltshire , on the south @-@ east by Dorset , and on the south west and west by Devon . It has broad central plains with several ranges of low hills . The landscape divides into four main geological sections from the Silurian through the Devonian and Carboniferous to the Permian which influence the landscape , together with water @-@ related features . 
 The low lying areas of the North Somerset Levels and Somerset Levels have been subject to thousands of years of flooding and man 's attempts to control the flow of water . In the north of the county the Limestone of the Mendip Hills dominates the landscape , while in the south the Blackdown and Quantock Hills rise out of the levels . The highest areas are on Exmoor . The wide variety of landscapes has led to several areas being designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest for geological reasons , and support a range of flora and fauna as can be seen from the List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Somerset 
 = = Rock ages = = 
 The oldest rocks are of Silurian age ( 443 – 419 million years ago ) , the most southerly known outcrop of rocks of this age in Britain . They make up a sequence of lavas , tuffs ( volcanic ash ) , shales and mudstones in a narrow outcrop to the northeast of Shepton Mallet , in the eastern Mendip Hills . 
 Rocks from the Devonian ( 419 – 359 million years ago ) are found across much of Exmoor , the Quantocks ( including Hangman Sandstone and <unk> tuff ) , and in the cores of the folded masses of the Mendip Hills . 
 Carboniferous Period ( 359 – 299 million years ago ) rocks are represented by the Carboniferous Limestone that forms the Mendip Hills , rising abruptly out of the flat landscape of the Somerset Levels and Moors . The limestones are very fossiliferous , and contain evidence of the abundant marine life that existed at the time of their creation , including fossil crinoids ( sea @-@ lilies ) , corals and brachiopods . 
 At the end of the Permian ( 299 – 252 million years ago ) and Triassic periods , the Variscan orogeny resulted in the formation of several mountainous areas including Dartmoor in the south , Exmoor and the Quantocks , and the Mendips . 
 In the Taunton area Permian ( 299 – 252 million years ago ) red sandstones and breccia outcrop , although rocks of Triassic age ( 252 – 201 million years ago ) underlie much of Somerset and form the solid geology of the Somerset Moors and Levels . There are no glacial deposits . 
 The Triassic rocks consist of red marls , sandstones , breccias and conglomerates which spread over the older rocks . The Dolomitic Conglomerate is an old shingle beach of Keuper Marl age . The <unk> Beds are full of fossils due to invasion of the Jurassic Sea . The Lias consists of clays and limestones , the latter being quarried and are famous for their fossils . Blue Lias was burnt locally to provide a source of lime for making lime mortar . It is still used as a decorative building stone . Blue Lias is believed to have been quarried on the Polden Hills as early as the 15th century and was quarried in Puriton from the early 19th century until 1973 , when the local cement works closed . 
 Above the Lias is the Lower Oolite Series which are chiefly clays and oolitic limestone . The famous Bath Stone is obtained from the Great Oolite bed . Oxford Clay is the chief member of the Middle Oolite Series ; and above this are the Upper Cretaceous rocks with Gault , Upper Greensand and Chalk . Alluvial flats and peat bogs occupy much of the centre of Somerset . 
 = = Coastline = = 
 In prehistoric times the coastline of Somerset was very different from the present one , the sea level at the last glacial maximum being several hundred feet lower than today so that the Bristol Channel was almost non @-@ existent . The Bristol Channel has one of the largest tidal ranges in the world , up to 12 metres ( 39 ft ) at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea for example , behind only the Bay of Fundy and <unk> Bay in Canada . Normal high tide may be enhanced by between 3 metres ( 10 ft ) and 4 metres ( 13 ft ) during storm surges . This feature has meant that large areas of the county have been liable to flooding by the sea . Thus the present coastline is partly due a belt of marine clay at the coast and partly due to seawalls built to reclaim areas previously flooded at high tide . The coastline contains exposures of Devonian sediments and tectonics west of Minehead adjoining the classic exposures of Mesozoic sediments and structural features which extend eastward to the Parrett estuary forming cliffs along the coastline near Clevedon and near Minehead , with low sandhills near Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . There are sandy beaches mainly at Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea , Brean and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . There are also storm ridges , salt marsh , and sand dunes . 
 = = Main river valleys = = 
 The main valleys between the hills are filled with alluvial deposits from the hills or sea . The county has many small rivers , most of which flow into the Bristol Channel . Many of the latter rivers now have <unk> ( the local name for a sluice ) on them to control the sea , but formerly they were tidal for some way inland . The main exception to this is the River Parrett , which still has a tidal bore . However the Chew and the Frome flow into the Avon which forms most of the northern county boundary with Gloucestershire . The Cale flows into Dorset through the Blackmore Vale , while the Exe flows into Devon . The ( Dorset ) Axe , the Culm and the Otter rise in Somerset but flow into Dorset . 
 The courses of the rivers Parrett , Somerset Axe , Brue and Cary run across the Somerset Levels and have generally been changed to improve the flow . The River Axe rises from Wookey Hole Caves , due to water draining into the ground at <unk> holes on top of the Mendips . The river passes through Panborough Moor , Wedmore Moor , Ox Moor , Stoke Moor and Mark Moor and reaches the sea at Uphill ( near Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare ) on Bridgwater Bay . 
 The River Brue rises at <unk> , close to the county border with Wiltshire . It flows through Bruton and is joined by the rivers Pitt and <unk> . The river then flows past East and West Lydford to Baltonsborough and then turns north to Street across Butts Moor , South Moor and Kennard Moor . Originally it then joined the Axe but now it flows west across Westhay Moor , Tealham and Tadham Moors , Chilton Moor , Mark Moor and Huntspill Moor . It is joined by the North Drain and the Hartlake river . In Huntspill Moor the Brue is linked to the man @-@ made Huntspill river by the artificial Cripps river . The Brue reaches the sea near Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 The River Cary originates in Castle Cary in the east of Somerset . It flows south @-@ west through Cary Moor to Cary Fitzpaine . The river then turns north @-@ west to the north of Somerton . It then used to turn south to join the Parrett but now passes through Somerton Moor and crosses Kings Sedgemoor in an artificial channel , the King 's Sedgemoor Drain , joining the Parrett at Dunball north of Bridgwater . 
 The River Parrett originates at Cheddington , Dorset , just over the border with Somerset . It enters Somerset at Haselbury Plucknett where it is joined by the Broad river . It passes to the east of South Petherton and flows north through Thorney Moor and Muchelney Level and it is then joined by the Isle and Yeo ( Ivel ) rivers . The Parrett flows through Langport and then through Middle Moor , Aller Moor to Burrowbridge where it is joined by the River Tone . It then passes through <unk> Moor , Hartlake Moor , Weston Level and South Moor . It continues north through Bridgwater , Horsey Level , past Pawlett Ham and Pawlett Level to the coast near Burnham @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 The River Tone originates at Beverton Pond on the Brendon Hills in the west of Somerset . It flows south into Clatworthy reservoir and then to Greenham where it changes course to go north @-@ east to Taunton . It continues east through West Moor , Curry and Hay Moors and Stan Moor to Burrowbridge where it meets the Parrett . 
 The River Exe rises at <unk> on Exmoor and flows south @-@ east to Exton where it is joined by the River <unk> . It then flows south to <unk> where it meets the Barle and passes into Devon . 
 = = Levels and moors = = 
 The North Somerset Levels are to the east of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , while the Axe valley is separated by the Isle of Wedmore from the Brue valley . The latter is separated by the Polden Hills from the main wetland of the Parrett / Tone / Cary valleys . The Poldens are a low narrow ridge of Blue Lias with alternating bands of limestone and clay . Because of the nature of the Levels and Moors , the Poldens have a significant visual impact . 
 The Somerset Levels run from the coast up to 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) inland . These wetlands cover 600 square kilometres ( 232 sq mi ) , most of which is no higher than 8 metres ( 26 ft ) above sea level . There are coastal marine clay deposits , and further inland there are many peaty areas . Dotted within this wetland landscape are slightly raised inter @-@ glacial " islands " called burtles . These have been settled from the Mesolithic onward , with wooden causeways linking them to higher ground . There are also rocky outcrops , such as Brent Knoll and Glastonbury Tor which have also housed ancient settlements . 
 The water levels in the moors and levels are controlled by a series of small narrow canals called rhynes ( known as ' <unk> ' in Avonmouth and Gloucestershire - both are pronounced ' reens ' ) . along with larger drains , gates and pumping stations . The rhynes are often used as field boundary ditches instead of hedges . Some parts are allowed to flood in winter . The area is mainly used for grazing but some peat extraction is carried out . 
 = = Northern uplands = = 
 This is the area between the River Avon to the north and the Axe valley . The north of Somerset is dominated by the tableland of the Mendip Hills , an area of outstanding natural beauty , stretching from Frome in the east to Crook Peak in the west , with outliers of Bleadon Hill and Brean Down as well as Steep Holm in the Bristol Channel . The highest point is Black Down at 324 metres ( 1 @,@ 063 ft ) . There is an escarpment facing south to the Levels and Moors while the dip slope to the north is broken up . 
 To the north of Bath are Lansdown , Langridge and Solsbury hills . These are outliers of the Cotswolds . Bath is noted for its thermal waters ( 48 ° C ) that are rich in calcium and sodium sulphates . 
 The Old Red Sandstone is a series of red sandstones , marls and conglomerates . It rises as an anticline in the Mendips and appears in the Avon Gorge and at Portishead . Carboniferous Limestone , of marine origin , covers the sandstone and appears in the Avon Gorge and at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare where it contains volcanic rocks . There are outlying hills at Worlebury , Middle Hope , the Failand Ridge , <unk> Down , Portishead Down and Wrington Hill . 
 The main geological component of the Mendips is Carboniferous Limestone . It represents the remnants of a much higher range of hills that existed hundreds of millions years ago . This has allowed the formation of features such as Cheddar Gorge , Ebbor Gorge and Burrington Combe . There are a wide variety of caves and <unk> holes caused by dissolution of the rock by water . Further east there are Silurian volcanoes , Carboniferous Limestone outcrops , Variscan thrust tectonics , Permo @-@ Triassic conglomerates , sediment @-@ filled fissures , a classic unconformity , Jurassic clays and limestones , Cretaceous Greensand and chalk topped with Tertiary remnants including <unk> Stones . These sediments have yielded a fairly rich fossil fauna of brachiopods and trilobites indicating that they were deposited in a shallow marine sea into which the lavas were extruded . The rocks are quarried at Moons Hill near Stoke St Michael for aggregate . 
 Coal measures appear in the Radstock district , and surrounding Somerset Coalfield ( largely concealed by Triassic and newer rocks ) . There are two series of coal @-@ bearing sandstones and shales separated by Pennant Sandstone . Locally the beds are folded and faulted . There were mines in the Radstock and Nailsea areas but these have closed . This was one of the first areas in the world to undergo systematic geological study and mapping by John Strachey and William Smith in the 18th century . They observed the rock layers , or strata , which led Smith to the creation of a testable hypothesis , which he termed the Principle of Faunal Succession . 
 The Mendips were mined for lead , silver , coal , ochre , fuller 's earth and zinc but this has finished . They were also quarried for stone , notably at Bath and Doulting . Today the Mendips are a major source of aggregates . 
 = = Southern uplands = = 
 To the south of Somerset there is an upland with a series of rolling valleys and scarps , from Penselwood in the east to the Blackdown Hills , another designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , in the west . This is a geologically complex area of clays , limestone and marl . The honey @-@ coloured limestone at Ham Hill ( also known as Hamdon Hill ) is particularly important to geologists because of the assemblages of fossils which it contains , the sedimentary features which it displays and the way it relates to other rocks of equivalent age in the close vicinity . It has been quarried since Roman times at least . 
 The Blackdowns are on the south @-@ west border of Somerset , extending into Devon . They are composed of Upper Greensand . The scarp faces north and is steep and wooded , with a south facing dip slope . There is an open plateau , which is not as high as the Mendips . 
 The Quantock Hills are a 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) long broad ridge from the coast near Watchet in the north to near Taunton in the south . They reach 384 metres ( 1 @,@ 260 ft ) high at Wills Neck and are separated from Exmoor and the <unk> by a rift valley . The Quantocks and the Brendon Hills at the eastern end of Exmoor are formed by thick sequences of slates and sandstones of Devonian age that were deposited by large deltas that built out into a shallow sea . 
 The Quantock Hills are largely formed by rocks of the Devonian Period , which consist of sediments originally laid down under a shallow sea and slowly compressed into solid rock . In the higher north western areas older Early Devonian rocks , known as Hangman Grits , predominate , and can be seen in the exposed rock at West Quantoxhead quarry , which were worked for road building . Further south there are newer Middle and Late Devonian rocks , known as Ilfracombe beds and Morte Slates . These include sandstone and limestone , which have been quarried near Aisholt . At Great Holwell , south of Aisholt , there is a limestone cave , which is the only one in the Devonian limestone of North Devon and West Somerset . The lower fringes around the hills are composed of younger rocks of the Triassic period , these are known as New Red Sandstone rocks which represent the deposits of large river systems that crossed a desert plain , and often contain irregular masses or veins of gypsum , which was worked on the foreshore at Watchet . The scarp is to the west with a dip slope to the east . The west side is cut by combes with broad valleys on the east . The hill tops are open heathland with woods on the slopes . 
 Several areas have outcrops of slates and between St Audries and Kilve , younger rocks of the Jurassic Period can be found . This area falls within the Blue Anchor to <unk> Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) and is considered to be of international geological importance . At Kilve are the remains of a red brick retort , built in 1924 , when it was discovered that the shale found in the cliffs was rich in oil . At Blue Anchor the coloured alabaster found in the cliffs gave rise to the name of the colour " Watchet Blue " . 
 = = Exmoor = = 
 Exmoor is a dissected plateau of Devonian sedimentary rock , rising to 517 metres ( 1 @,@ 696 ft ) at Dunkery Beacon . It extends into Devon but the majority of the area is in Somerset . Much of the area is a National Park . The landscape is one of rounded hills , with hogs @-@ back cliffs at the coast due to geological movements . Because of high rainfall there are boggy areas and the part by the Chains is a Geological Conservation Review site recognised as being nationally important for its south @-@ western lowland heath communities and for transitions from ancient semi @-@ natural woodland through upland heath to blanket mire . The Chains provides palynological record of a mid to late Flandrian vegetation history on Exmoor . The pollen sequence in the peat is calibrated by radiocarbon dating . The <unk> area demonstrates the Trentishoe Formation of the Hangman Sandstone Group . The Hangman Sandstone represents the Middle Devonian sequence of North Devon and Somerset . These unusual freshwater deposits in the Hangman Grits , were mainly formed in desert conditions . 
 As this area of Britain was not subject to glaciation , the plateau remains as a remarkably old landform . Quartz and iron mineralisation can be detected in outcrops and subsoil . The underlying rocks are covered by moors are supported by wet , acid soil . The highest point on Exmoor is Dunkery Beacon ; at 519 metres ( 1 @,@ 703 ft ) it is also the highest point in Somerset . 
 Exmoor has 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) of coastline , including the highest cliffs in England , which reach a height of 1 @,@ 350 feet ( 411 m ) at Culbone Hill . However , the crest of this coastal ridge of hills is more than 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 0 mi ) from the sea . If a cliff is defined as having a slope greater than 60 degrees , the highest cliff on mainland Britain is Great Hangman near Combe Martin at 318 metres ( 1 @,@ 043 ft ) high , with a cliff face of 214 metres ( 702 ft ) . Its sister cliff is the 218 metres ( 715 ft ) Little Hangman , which marks the edge of Exmoor . 
 Exmoor 's woodlands sometimes reach the shoreline , especially between Porlock and The Foreland , where they form the single longest stretch of coastal woodland in England and Wales . The Exmoor Coastal Heaths have been recognised as a Site of Special Scientific Interest due to the diversity of plant species present . 
 The high ground forms the catchment area for numerous rivers and streams . There are about 300 miles ( 483 km ) of named rivers on Exmoor . The River Exe , from which Exmoor takes its name , rises at Exe Head near the village of Simonsbath , close to the Bristol Channel coast , but flows more or less directly due south , so that most of its length lies in Devon . The river and the Barle Valley are both designated as biological sites of Special Scientific Interest . Another tributary , the River <unk> , flows from the <unk> Lake . 
 The action of streams has cut combes through the hills down to the sea , which are now wooded , although much of Exmoor is open heathland . There is an outlier of Exmoor at North Hill near Minehead . Iron working was formerly carried out , probably from the Roman period onward . 
 Because Exmoor was a royal forest , i.e. a hunting reserve , it was unpopulated in Medieval times . The first house on the moor was only built at Simonsbath in 1654 . It was not until the 19th century that farms were built around the moor . 
 The Brendon Hills are to the east of Exmoor and are an outlier of it . They are separated from Exmoor by the valley of the River Avill . They have the same undulating landscape . The <unk> reach a height of 422 metres ( 1 @,@ 385 ft ) at <unk> Hill . Iron ore mining was carried out from Roman times up to the early 20th century . 
 = Blackford County Courthouse = 
 The Blackford County Courthouse is a historic building located in Hartford City , Indiana , the county seat of Blackford County . The building stands on a public square in the city 's downtown commercial district . Built during the Indiana Gas Boom , most of the construction work was completed in 1894 . The current courthouse was preceded by an other courthouse building on the same site , which was declared inadequate by a judge in 1893 , and was torn down . Following the condemnation of the original courthouse , the county ’ s judicial activities were temporarily located in a building across the street . 
 The current courthouse was designed by architects Arthur LaBelle and Burt L. French , who were from nearby Marion , Indiana . The building ’ s architectural style is Richardsonian Romanesque , which was popular during the second half of the 19th century . The large corner tower of the building is the tallest structure in the downtown commercial district . Considered " the county 's most outstanding landmark " , the structure is often pictured on web sites associated with the area , and continues to house local government over 100 years after its construction . 
 In addition to the courthouse building , the buildings around the courthouse square are also historic in nature and considered contributing properties to the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District . The courthouse was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 and was included as a contributing property to the historic district in 2006 . Most of the buildings in the Courthouse Square Historic District continue to have facades that look similar to their original design . Although the interior has been remodeled , the exterior of the courthouse also retains its original appearance . 
 = = History = = 
 The small cluster of log cabins called Hartford was designated the county seat of Blackford County in 1837 , when legislation to create the county was proposed . Despite being created in 1838 , no county government was organized until 1839 , and there was some dissent over the location of the county seat . During June 1939 , Indiana Governor David Wallace appointed Nicholas Friend as the new county ’ s sheriff , and elections were held soon thereafter . The log cabin homes of county officials served as county government buildings during the first year of the county ’ s organized existence . County affairs were first handled at the log cabin home of Andrew Boggs , which was located just north of Little Lick Creek in Licking Township . This cabin was , in effect , the capitol of Blackford County for about three months . 
 = = = Site = = = 
 Among the first orders made by the new county government was a survey of 40 acres ( 16 ha ) of wilderness located to the north of Boggs ’ cabin , parts of which had been donated for the purpose of housing the seat of government . A public square was to be located on 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) of land , on which the seat of justice was to be located . It was also ordered that the seat of justice was to be named Hartford . The 40 acres ( 16 ha ) were owned by three individuals living in an adjacent county . The owners donated every other lot to the county as part of a plan to ensure that the county seat was located there — and increase the value of their property . Despite the county government 's orders and plans , no action was taken on constructing a courthouse . In September 1839 , the county commissioners began conducting business in the home of Jacob Emshwiller . For a few months , the Emshwiller home was the new capitol of Blackford County . 
 Montpelier , Indiana , is located in the northeastern portion of Blackford County , in Harrison Township . In late 1839 , the location of the county seat was formally contested , as the citizens of Montpelier believed their community would be a better location . Montpelier had been platted in 1837 , while the " town " of Hartford was still wilderness north of a cluster of log cabins . However , Licking Township , where Hartford was located , contained more of the county 's population . Licking township did not have a platted community like Montpelier , but had attracted farmers because the land near Lick Creek had acceptable drainage . 
 The board of commissioners ruled against Montpelier in a January 1840 , session . In November 1840 , the board ordered the construction of a courthouse — which was to be located in Hartford . The plan was for a 25 @-@ foot <unk> ( 8 m ) , two @-@ story , " hewed @-@ log " courthouse . The commissioners went into considerable detail describing the building . However , the courthouse was not constructed because of continuing controversy over the location ( Hartford or Montpelier ) of the county seat . 
 In 1841 , the commissioners again settled on Hartford as the location for the county seat , and planning for Blackford County ’ s original courthouse began . On September 11 , 1841 , the Blackford County board of commissioners ordered that written proposals should be received to build a courthouse on the public square in the town of Hartford . The building was to be 40 feet ( 12 m ) square , 25 feet ( 8 m ) high , and built of brick on a stone foundation . The courthouse grounds occupied 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 6 ha ) instead of the 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) proposed in 1839 . 
 = = = Original courthouse = = = 
 The contract for Blackford County 's first courthouse was let on December 7 , 1841 , and construction was supervised by Charles and William F. Jones . The proposed cost for the courthouse was $ 5 @,@ 600 . Until the courthouse was ready , rooms were rented from various members of the community for conducting county government . By May 1845 , an arrangement was made for the upper floor to be used for court proceedings until the entire building was completed . Finally , in a special session held October 31 , 1845 , the board of commissioners found that the courthouse had been completed according to contract . The total cost for the courthouse building was $ 5 @,@ 750 . 
 The small community grew to a population of 250 by 1850 , and it took 30 more years to get close to a population of 1 @,@ 500 . Early during that period , " Hartford " became known as " Hartford City " because another Hartford existed elsewhere in the state . In 1887 , Hartford City Gas and Oil Company drilled Hartford City 's first natural gas well , and Hartford City 's participation in the Indiana Gas Boom began . The area experienced a period of economic growth and prosperity as manufacturers moved to the region to utilize the low @-@ cost energy . 
 An 1887 description of the courthouse called it " a plain building … its architecture characteristic of the pioneer times " . It also said the building " is still good enough were it only in better repair . " On January 19 , 1893 , Judge Joseph L. Custer declared the " courtroom to be an inadequate place for the transaction of the business of this court " , and that court business " be held elsewhere in some suitable place in the county seat . " 
 = = = Current courthouse = = = 
 The county commissioners responded in March 1893 , to the Judge ’ s declaration that the ( original ) courthouse was inadequate . The three commissioners , T. T. <unk> , I. L. Hughs , and A. W. Miles , ordered that a new courthouse was necessary . A week later , they engaged the Marion firm of LaBelle and French as architects for the new courthouse . Since the original courthouse was condemned , and Judge Custer ( of the 48th Circuit Court of Indiana ) refused to use it , arrangements were made to use the nearby opera house for courtroom proceedings until a new courthouse was available . On May 20 , 1893 , the old courthouse building was sold for $ 20 , and removed from the grounds to enable construction of the new structure . In October , it was decided that the opera house was not suitable for courtroom proceedings because of possible theatrical conflicts , so rooms were rented at the newly built Briscoe Block building located on the south side of the courthouse square . Two rooms , with gas heat included , were rented for a total of $ 400 per year . One room would be for the circuit court , while the other was for the county clerk ’ s office . 
 On June 8 , 1893 , LaBelle and French provided the county commissioners with a complete plan for the new courthouse . The architects designed a monumental stone courthouse in the Richardsonian Romanesque architectural style that was popular in the United States at that time . The four @-@ story building measured 71 by 126 feet ( 22 by 38 m ) . It featured enormous arches on the northern and southern facades , semicircular towers on the east and west sides , and a 165 @-@ foot ( 50 m ) clock tower on the southwest corner . 
 Although the community planned to build the courthouse as a monument to the city ’ s ( Gas Boom @-@ related ) prosperity , the commissioners were still concerned with costs . In late July 1893 , the commissioners awarded the courthouse construction contract to the Fort Wayne firm of Boseker & Son . The price was cut to $ 97 @,@ 000 by altering some of the architect ’ s specifications . The stone chosen for the building was Amherst Blue from quarry number 9 in Amherst , Ohio . Work on the foundation was conducted in August , and the foundation stones were brought to town from Montpelier quarries located on the other side of the county . 
 On November 1 , 1893 , the city held a ceremony for the laying of the courthouse cornerstone . The local Free and Accepted Masons Lodge Number 106 ran the program . The ceremony included a parade , a welcome by prosecutor J. A. Hindman , a Masonic ceremony , an address by Mason Past Grand Master Martin H. Rice , and an address by historian Benjamin G. Shinn . 
 Although a harsh winter sometimes made work difficult , construction of the courthouse progressed far enough that work on the large ( 3 stories high ) arch on the southern façade began during February 1894 . Around the same time , work to carve the frieze above the second story was sublet to Gustave Steuber . Much of the carving work around the building 's entrances was conducted under Mr. Steuber 's direction . The building ’ s cornice was finished in April , and nearly all of the structure ’ s stone was cut by that time . By June , work was started on the clock tower , and almost all of the roof was completed in August . The tower 's 4 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ) clock arrived by rail in August from New Haven , Connecticut — although the tower was not ready to accommodate the timepiece until October . Installation of the clock was completed in November . By February 1895 , the courthouse contractor considered the courthouse finished . 
 On February 27 , 1895 , county officials began moving into the new courthouse . Total cost for the new courthouse was $ 129 @,@ 337 . Most of that expense was paid to the contractor , Boseker and Son . Among other expenses included in the total were $ 2 @,@ 000 paid to the E. Howard Clock Company of Boston , $ 7 @,@ 000 for furniture paid to the H. <unk> and Sons Company , and $ 6 @,@ 158 for architecture . 
 After the courthouse was completed , it was discovered that some modifications were needed for its plumbing and heating system . Outside of the courthouse , steps were also taken to beautify the surrounding grounds . Sidewalks were added , and eventually hitching racks for horses . A war memorial was added to the northeast corner of the courthouse grounds in 1921 , and this was the first of the major war memorials that occupy the corners of the courthouse lawn . A total of nine memorials , monuments and commemorative plaques have been added to the grounds within the courthouse square . 
 Today , the courthouse is still used by local government , and has a mailing address of 110 West Washington Street , Hartford City , Indiana . Hartford City 's ZIP code is <unk> . Courtroom facilities on the second floor of courthouse are used by the Blackford County Circuit Court and Blackford County Superior Court . The Blackford County Prosecutor also maintains an office in the building . The Blackford County commissioners meet on the first floor of the courthouse , and the county Clerk ’ s office is also located on that floor . Additional office space is provided in the Blackford County Courthouse Annex , which is located across the street on the west side of the courthouse . The annex has an address of 121 North High Street . Among the offices housed in the annex building are the Blackford County Community Foundation , the Blackford County Emergency Operations Center , and the Blackford County Economic Development Corporation ( including the County Assessor ) . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Designed by the firm known as LaBelle and French of Marion , Indiana , the Blackford County Courthouse is considered an excellent example of Richardsonian Romanesque architecture , which was popular at the time . LaBelle and French also designed the White County courthouse in Monticello , Indiana ; the Trumbull County courthouse in Warren , Ohio ; and other buildings in the region . Listed December 31 , 1974 , the Trumbull County courthouse is also part of the National Register of Historic Places . Unfortunately , the White County courthouse was severely damaged by a " direct hit " from a 1974 tornado ( rated as " EF4 " using the Enhanced Fujita Scale ) , and therefore demolished . LaBelle and French also designed one of Hartford City ’ s hotels , and one of the city 's many glass factories . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The courthouse was built using Henry Hobson Richardson 's variation of the Romanesque Revival style of architecture — which later became known as Richardsonian Romanesque . Constructed mostly during 1894 , the four – story building features a 165 @-@ foot clock tower located on the southwest corner , and is the tallest structure in the area . The roof is a high pitched hip roof , and exterior walls are made from stone . 
 The northern and southern facades of the structure are similar — each consisting of three bays . The central bay is occupied by a massive round @-@ arched portal with enriched archivolts and a fan window . From the ground @-@ floor doorway to the top of the large central bay arch measures about three stories high . A gabled dormer rises above the central arch . The dormer has three double @-@ hung windows , and a central arched window resides above the middle . Each of the side bays has a set of windows for each floor , and the third floor windows are crowned with arched windows . 
 The huge clock tower is the main difference between the north and south facades . Located on the southwest corner of the courthouse , it is topped by a steeply @-@ pitched roof with round corner piers . Blind arcading is used on the upper portion of the tower between the clock faces and the roof of the main portion of the building . Three rows of slit windows are utilized within the blind arcading . A clock face can be seen on all four sides of the tower . An arch supported by Corinthian pilasters houses each face of the clock . 
 The east and west sides of the courthouse are identical up to the roofline . The west side also has the corner clock tower , which appears on the right when viewing toward the east . Both east and west sides have six bays . The first , third , fourth , and sixth bays have dual windows on each floor . A fan window crowns the dual windows on the third floor . The second and fifth bays are occupied by semicircular towers that rise above the bottom of the main roofline . The towers have three main windows on each floor , and the third floor windows are crowned with transoms that are crowned with fan windows . Above the towers ’ third floor fan windows , near the top of the tower , are small arched windows resting above belt courses . 
 As time has passed , renovations and updates have been made to the courthouse and surrounding grounds . However , the courthouse exterior has retained its original form . Many of the nearby buildings , which were also built in the 1890s , also retain much of their original form . In 1940 , the hitching racks around the courthouse square were removed , as automobiles had replaced horses as the preferred mode of transportation . Parking meters were added to the square in 1952 . The building 's stone exterior was refreshed by a sandblasting treatment in 1963 . Exterior spotlights were added during the 1980s . The latest project to refurbish the courthouse moved forward during 2010 . On December 6 , 2010 , the county commissioners decided to proceed with a courthouse preservation project that was estimated to cost in excess of $ 325 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior of the Blackford County courthouse has a twenty @-@ two feet wide main hallway that runs between the northern and southern facades . The original floors were tiled , and the walls were wainscoted with marble . Stairways to the second floor are located on both the north and south sides . The south side stairway continues from the second floor to the third floor . The north side of the third floor is occupied by the courtroom , and this room accounts for about half of the floor . The space adjacent to the north @-@ south hallway on all three floors is used for offices with the exception of the third @-@ floor courtroom and a small library . The fourth floor is unfinished and used for storage . From the fourth floor , one can ascend a narrow stairway to the top of the bell tower . 
 The three finished interior floors have been renovated , modernized , and updated since the original construction . One step in modernization occurred in 1965 , when an elevator was installed in the building . Among various renovations , the second and third floors were updated around 1980 . Currently , the first floor has carpeting , fluorescent lighting , and acoustic ceiling tiles . The north and south facades now have modern glass doors that form vestibules at the entrances . The hallway ceilings have been molded with stenciling . Some painted scenes , which are not original to the building , can be found in the main hallway . One such scene includes a painting of the original courthouse surrounded by paintings of tablets representing each of the county 's four townships , each with local scenes . 
 = = Other features = = 
 The public square where the Blackford County Courthouse stands is the heart of the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District . In addition to the courthouse in the center of the square , each corner of the square is the site of a war memorial , including one that is considered a contributing property to the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District . Additional memorials are also located on the grounds . 
 = = = Revolutionary War memorial = = = 
 On the southwest corner of the courthouse stands the county ’ s Revolutionary War memorial . Consisting of a commemorative plaque on a large stone , the memorial was placed in honor of Blackford County ’ s five Revolutionary War veterans buried within the county . A dedication ceremony was conducted on June 17 , 1933 , by the Nancy Knight Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution . The dedicatory address was given by the Reverend H. C. Cornuelle , <unk> of the local First Presbyterian Church . The stone was from the Twin Hills gravel pit in nearby Jay County . 
 = = = World War I memorial = = = 
 Blackford County ’ s World War I memorial was unveiled on the northeast corner of the courthouse square on September 28 , 1921 , in a dedication ceremony with James Taylor , president of Taylor University as the speaker . The memorial is a reproduction of a sculpture known as the " Spirit of the American Doughboy " , which was created by Ernest Moore Viquesney . Beneath the Doughboy sculpture is a list of Blackford County residents that served in World War I. The monument was partially funded by a contribution from the ladies of the Service Star Legion . 
 = = = World War II memorial = = = 
 Blackford County ’ s World War II memorial is located on the northwest corner of the courthouse square . Its dedication ceremony was held on May 30 , 1950 . City attorney Robert Bonham gave the dedication address . The monument lists over 1 @,@ 880 names of veterans associated with Blackford County . 
 = = = Korea and Vietnam War memorial = = = 
 Blackford County ’ s monument to veterans of the Korean and Vietnam wars is located on the southeast corner of the courthouse square . Congressman David Dennis spoke at the 1973 dedication of this monument . The monument , originally contained a list of the county ’ s war dead from the two wars . It was expanded in 1987 to include all of the county ’ s veterans of the two wars . A tablet on the left of the monument lists veterans of the Korean War , while a tablet on the right side lists veterans of the Vietnam War . 
 = = = Monument to Veterans of the Civil War = = = 
 Blackford County ’ s Civil War monument is located on the southwest corner of the courthouse square . The Blackford County Civil War Re @-@ enactment Club is responsible for the monument . The project began with a Memorial fund in 1997 , and progressed for about 10 years to completion of the project . Construction of the monument began in 2004 with a granite base , pedestal , and walkway . A dedication for that portion of the monument was held on October 9 , 2004 . The sculpture of the civil war soldier was added a few years later . Stacks of black granite cannonballs were added to each corner of the monument in 2007 . The monument recognizes all soldiers associated with Blackford County : soldiers who lived in the county at the start of the war , soldiers who enlisted in the county , soldiers buried in the county , and veterans who moved to the county after the war . 
 = = = Other monuments and commemorative plaques = = = 
 The Blackford County Courthouse lawn is also the site of some smaller commemorative plaques . An early addition was the Orville Whitacre Memorial Marker , which was added in 1922 . The H. C. Cornuelle Memorial Marker was added in 1936 . The Reverend Herbert C. Cornuelle served in World War I as a chaplain in the United States Army . After the war , the American Legion named him chaplain for the state of Indiana . He also became the minister of Hartford City ’ s First Presbyterian Church — serving from 1928 until 1936 . During Work War I , Cornuelle suffered permanent injury from a gas attack , and his injury contributed to his death from pneumonia on April 21 , 1936 . A second plaque , the Bicentennial Capsule Marker , was also added in 1936 . Many years later , a Blackford County Courthouse Cornerstone Rededication Marker was added in a ceremony on November 13 , 1993 . The Free and Accepted Masons conducted the ceremony , and a time capsule was presented by the presidents of the Blackford County Historical Society and the Montpelier Historical Society . A Blackford County Courthouse Historical Marker was placed on October 1 , 1994 , by the Indiana Historical Bureau and the Blackford Lodge Number 106 of the Free and Accepted Masons . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Blackford County Courthouse was added to National Register of Historic Places on August 11 , 1980 . On June 21 , 2006 , its historic importance was reasserted when it was included as a contributing property in the Hartford City Courthouse Square Historic District 's listing on the National Register . On its original National Register nomination form , the building was cited as significant in the areas of " architecture " and " politics / government . " The courthouse has been " the focus of governmental , political and civic affairs , " and " its size and architecture dominate " downtown Hartford City . In addition , the war memorials on the courthouse grounds contribute to the sense of time and place that the Hartford City Courthouse Historic District conveys . 
 = Shotgun Willie = 
 Shotgun Willie is a 1973 album by Willie Nelson . The recording marks a change of style for Nelson , who later stated that the album " cleared his throat " . When Nelson refused to sign an early extension of his contract with RCA in 1972 , the label decided not to release any further recordings . Nelson hired Neil Reshen as his manager , and while Reshen negotiated with RCA , Nelson moved to Austin , Texas , where the ongoing hippie music scene at the Armadillo World Headquarters renewed his musical style . In Nashville , Nelson met producer Jerry Wexler , vice president of Atlantic Records , who was interested in his music . Reshen solved the problems with RCA and signed Nelson with Atlantic Records as their first country music artist . 
 The album was recorded in the Atlantic Records studio in New York City in February 1973 . Nelson and his backup musicians were joined by Doug Sahm and his band . After recording several tracks , Nelson was still not inspired . Following a recording session , he wrote " Shotgun Willie " — the song that would become the title track of the album — on the empty packaging of a sanitary napkin while in the bathroom of his hotel room . The album , produced mostly by Arif Mardin , included covers of two Bob Wills songs — " Stay All Night ( Stay a Little Longer ) " and " Bubbles in My Beer " — that were co @-@ produced by Wexler . Waylon Jennings and Jessi Colter collaborated on the album , providing vocals and guitar . 
 Shotgun Willie was released in June 1973 . In spite of poor sales , the album received good reviews and gained Nelson major recognition with younger audiences . The recording was one of the first albums of outlaw country — a new subgenre of country music and an alternative to the conservative restrictions of the Nashville sound , the dominant style in the genre at the time . 
 = = Background = = 
 In April 1972 , after Nelson recorded " Mountain Dew " , his final RCA single , the label requested that he renew his contract ahead of schedule , with the implication that RCA would not release any further recordings if he did not sign . Neil Reshen , who Nelson hired as his manager to negotiate with the label , got RCA to agree to end the contract upon repayment of US $ 1 @,@ 400 that Nelson had been overpaid . At the same time , Nelson had moved to Austin , Texas , to take a short break . Austin 's burgeoning hippie music scene at venues like Armadillo World Headquarters rejuvenated the singer . His popularity in Austin soared as he played his own brand of music that was a blend of country , folk , and jazz influences . 
 During a trip to Nashville , Tennessee , Nelson attended a party in Harlan Howard 's house , where he sang the songs that he had written for the album Phases and Stages . Another guest was Atlantic Records vice @-@ president Jerry Wexler , who previously had produced works for artists such as Ray Charles and Aretha Franklin . Wexler was interested in Nelson 's music , so when Atlantic opened a country music division of their label , he offered Nelson a contract that gave him more creative control than his deal with RCA . When Nelson was released from his RCA contract , he signed with Atlantic for US $ 25 @,@ 000 per year , becoming the label 's first country artist . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The recording sessions took place in February 1973 , Wexler provided Nelson and his band with a studio in New York City , where most of the recordings were produced . Doug Sahm and his band were also invited to the sessions . During the first session , Nelson recorded the songs for The Troublemaker . Later , he proceeded with Shotgun Willie . Wexler had encouraged Nelson after singing the gospel album to start with the new one , to couple old material with new , and covers . He initially recorded twenty @-@ three tracks along with his and Sahm 's band , but Nelson still was not inspired . He wrote the title song after one of the sessions . Pacing in his hotel room , he went to the bathroom , where he sat on the toilet and took the empty envelope from a sanitary napkin from the sink , and penned the song on that . The title of the song refers to the nickname Nelson received after his daughter , Susie , warned him of the domestic abuse suffered by her sister Lana . Nelson drove to Lana 's house , where he fought with her husband Steve Warren , and threatened to kill him if he repeated the assault . Soon after Nelson returned home , Warren arrived in his truck with his brothers . The men shot at the house with .22 caliber rifles . In response , Nelson and Paul English shot at the aggressors that retreated . When they returned later , Nelson took English 's M1 Garand and shot the truck , causing them to surrender . He completed the rest of the song with a reference to John T. <unk> , owner of the honky @-@ tonk <unk> 's Country Store . After hearing the completed song , Wexler decided that the album was to be named after it . 
 Most of the tracks were produced by Arif Mardin , with the exception of the two Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys covers , " Stay All Night ( Stay a Little Longer ) " and " Bubbles in My Beer , " which were produced by Mardin and Jerry Wexler . The album also included Johnny Bush 's " Whiskey River " . During the recording , there were rumors that there would be appearances by George Jones , Leon Russell , and Kris Kristofferson that ultimately did not happen . Waylon Jennings joined the backing band playing guitar , and provided backing vocals for " Stay All Night ( Stay a Little Longer ) " , along with Jessi Colter and Doug Sahm . Parts of the album were recorded in the <unk> studios in Nashville , as well as in the Sam Phillips Recording studio in Memphis . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The album was released in June 1973 . Although it received good reviews , it did not sell well , except in Austin , where it sold more copies than earlier records by Nelson did nationwide . The recording led Nelson to a new style ; he later stated regarding his new musical identity that Shotgun Willie had " cleared his throat . " It became his breakthrough record , and one of the first of the outlaw movement , music created without the influence of the conservative Nashville Sound . The album — the first to feature Nelson with long hair and a beard on the cover — gained him the interest of younger audiences . It peaked at number 41 on Billboard 's album chart and the songs " Shotgun Willie " and " Stay All Night ( Stay A Little Longer ) " peaked at number 60 and 22 on Billboard Hot 100 respectively . 
 Rolling Stone wrote : " With this flawless album , Willie Nelson finally demonstrates why he has for so long been regarded as a Country & Western singer @-@ songwriter 's singer @-@ songwriter ... At the age of 39 , Nelson finally seems destined for the stardom he deserves " . Robert Christgau wrote : " This attempt to turn Nelson into a star runs into trouble when it induces him to <unk> Memphis horns or Western swing . " 
 Billboard wrote : " This is Willie Nelson at his narrative best . He writes and sings with the love and the hurt and the down @-@ to @-@ earth things he feels , and he has a few peers . " Texas Monthly praised Nelson and Wexler regarding the change in musical style : " They 've switched his arrangements from Ray Price to Ray Charles — the result : a revitalized music . He 's the same old Willie , but veteran producer Jerry Wexler finally captured on wax the energy Nelson projects in person " . School Library Journal wrote : " Willie Nelson differs ( from ) rock artists framing their music with a country & western facade — in that he appears a honky @-@ tonk stardust cowboy to the core . This album abounds in unabashed sentimentalism , nasal singing , lyrics preoccupied with booze , religion , and love gone bad , and stereotyped Nashville instrumentation ( twangy steel guitars , fiddles , and a clean rhythm section characterized by the minimal use of bass drum and cymbals , both of which gain heavy mileage with rock performers ) . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote in his review for Allmusic : " Willie Nelson offered his finest record to date for his debut – possibly his finest album ever . Shotgun Willie encapsulates Willie 's world view and music , finding him at a peak as a composer , interpreter , and performer . This is laid @-@ back , deceptively complex music , equal parts country , rock attitude , jazz musicianship , and troubadour storytelling " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Willie Nelson , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser = 
 The Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser , often referred to simply as the Virginia Argus , was a weekly newspaper published between July 1850 and August 1861 in Romney , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . The paper 's circulation of 800 copies was the second @-@ highest in Hampshire County , after the South Branch Intelligencer 's . The Virginia Argus ceased publication following its closure by the Union Army during the American Civil War , after which it was not revived . 
 The Virginia Argus documented the pursuit of fugitive slave Jacob Green by the Parsons family of Romney in 1856 , and the ensuing dispute between the Parsons family and Charles James Faulkner over legal fees in 1857 . At the time of the dispute , Faulkner was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Virginia 's 8th congressional district ; he later served as the United States Minister to France , and again as a member of the United States House of Representatives from West Virginia 's 2nd congressional district . 
 Among the newspaper 's proprietors was Alexander W. Monroe , a prominent Romney lawyer who had previously served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates ( 1850 – 1851 ) . Monroe and co @-@ owner Job N. Cookus left the newspaper to serve in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War . Following the war , Monroe represented Hampshire County in the West Virginia House of Delegates ( 1875 – 1877 and 1879 – 1883 ) . During the 1875 – 1877 legislative session , he was the Speaker of the West Virginia House of Delegates . 
 = = History = = 
 A. S. Trowbridge founded the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser as a Democratic weekly newspaper in Romney in July 1850 . Trowbridge had been an educator in New Orleans , Louisiana , before moving to Romney . The Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser newspaper billed itself as " A Family Newspaper — Devoted to Politics , Agriculture , Education , General News , and Amusement . " By October 7 , 1852 , the Virginia Argus was being published by Trowbridge & <unk> ; on May 26 , 1853 , it reverted to being published by Trowbridge alone . After Trowbridge had edited and published the newspaper for seven years , its limited success did not meet his expectations , and in 1857 he sold the operation to Samuel R. Smith and John G. Combs . 
 Smith and Combs operated the newspaper until 1858 , when they sold it to James Parsons ; he in turn sold it to his younger brother William Miller Parsons in 1859 . After a few months of ownership and experience , Parsons sold the newspaper to Alexander W. Monroe , a prominent Romney lawyer and onetime member of the Virginia House of Delegates , and Job N. Cookus in 1861 . Monroe and Cookus continued serving as the proprietors , editors , and publishers until the outbreak of the American Civil War , when they joined the Confederate States Army . The newspaper was closed by the Union Army in August 1861 , and was not revived after the war . 
 Following his service in the war , Monroe was elected to represent Hampshire County in the West Virginia House of Delegates in 1875 , during which time he served as the Speaker . He again represented Hampshire County in the House of Delegates from 1879 to 1883 . He was the first delegate to represent Hampshire County in both the Virginia General Assembly and the West Virginia Legislature . 
 The Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser had a circulation of 800 copies distributed per week , which was the second largest of the three newspapers published in Hampshire County ; the other two were the South Branch Intelligencer of Romney , with a weekly circulation of 960 copies , and the Piedmont Independent of Piedmont ( now in Mineral County , West Virginia ) , with a weekly circulation of 600 copies . The offices of the Virginia Argus were housed in an old stone edifice north of the Hampshire County Courthouse that had previously served as the home of the Romney Academy before its 1846 disestablishment . 
 = = Jacob Green affair = = 
 In a series of articles published in the May 14 and May 21 , 1857 issues of the Virginia Argus , Romney resident Col. Isaac Parsons chronicled the 1855 arrest of his nephew , James Parsons , for attempting to capture Col. Parsons ' fugitive slave , Jacob Green , and the resulting dispute between the Parsons family and Charles James Faulkner over legal fees in 1857 . 
 In August 1855 , Green escaped from Parsons ' Wappocomo plantation with four other slaves from neighboring plantations . In October of that year , he returned to Col. Parsons ' plantation in Romney , and persuaded four or five slaves from neighboring farms owned by Parsons family relatives to escape with him to Pennsylvania . 
 A party of eight to ten men , including Col. Parsons and two of his nephews , James Parsons and a Mr. Stump , went north in pursuit of the escapees . In the course of the pursuit , they captured two of Stump 's escaped slaves , who were sent back to Hampshire County . With information obtained from the two recaptured slaves , Col. Parsons went to Johnstown , James Parsons to Hollidaysburg , and Stump to Altoona , where they hoped to intercept Green as he headed west on the Allegheny Portage Railroad and Main Line Canal toward Pittsburgh . James Parsons intercepted Green at Hollidaysburg , but local abolitionists thwarted his attempt to capture Green , and he was arrested and arraigned for kidnapping . 
 Upon learning of James Parsons ' arrest , Col. Parsons sought the assistance of Charles James Faulkner , a prominent Martinsburg lawyer and United States House Representative from Virginia 's 8th congressional district , and of James Murray Mason , a United States Senator from Virginia . Faulkner and Mason both offered their legal services for James Parsons ' defense . The Virginia General Assembly pledged its support to Parsons and to Virginia 's slaveowners in defending their constitutional rights and to protect them from prosecution . Virginia Governor Henry A. Wise appointed John Randolph Tucker to attend Parsons ' trial as a " special commissioner " of Virginia . The dispute between Virginia and Pennsylvania escalated , and on January 31 , 1856 , an article published in the New York Herald read " Threatened Civil War between Virginia and Pennsylvania . " 
 Col. Parsons , Faulkner , and Tucker traveled to Hollidaysburg for James Parsons ' trial . Faulkner provided for Parsons ' legal defense , leading to his acquittal as having acted legally under the provisions of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 . 
 In September 1856 , Faulkner billed Col. Parsons $ 150 for his legal services . Parsons disputed the charge . In a series of articles in the Virginia Argus , he declared that Faulkner had originally offered his services at no cost ; that he had been lauded publicly for his generosity in doing so without ever denying that he had been working pro bono ; and that he was practicing " duplicity and deception " in trying to win a reputation in his district through " specious acts of munificence " . 
 Faulkner later served as United States Minister to France ; following the American Civil War , he again served as a member of the United States House of Representatives , from West Virginia 's 2nd congressional district . James Parsons and his brother William Miller Parsons were later proprietors of the Virginia Argus . 
 = = Extant issues = = 
 Extant issues of the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser are maintained by four known institutions . The American Antiquarian Society Newspaper Project in Worcester , Massachusetts , maintains a 1852 issue of the newspaper ; West Virginia University Libraries in Morgantown , West Virginia , maintain issues dating from 1852 , 1853 , 1856 , 1857 , and 1859 ; the West Virginia State Archives in Charleston , West Virginia , maintain an issue dated July 5 , 1851 ; and the Duke University Libraries in Durham , North Carolina , maintain issues dating between 1858 and 1861 . The Library of Virginia in Richmond , Virginia also maintains microforms of issues of the Virginia Argus dating from 1852 , 1853 , 1856 , 1857 , and 1859 . 
 = Dinosaurs on a Spaceship = 
 " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " is the second episode of the seventh series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who . It first aired on BBC One in the UK on 8 September 2012 and on BBC America on the same date in the United States . It was written by Chris Chibnall and directed by Saul Metzstein . 
 The episode features alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) accompanied by Rory 's father Brian ( Mark Williams ) , Queen Nefertiti ( <unk> Steele ) , and John Riddell , a British big @-@ game hunter ( Rupert Graves ) . The group lands on a large spaceship that contains dinosaurs and discover that it is a Silurian ark , though the Silurians have been murdered by Solomon ( David Bradley ) , a black market trader who is intent on finding something of value . 
 " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " was conceived to be a fun episode , based on a suggestion from the special effects teams about incorporating dinosaurs into Doctor Who . The storyline and characters were developed between Chibnall and head writer and executive producer Steven Moffat . Due to budget limitations , a wider plot had to be developed because the dinosaurs could not be the centerpiece . The dinosaurs were a mix of props and computer @-@ generated imagery . Along with the third episode , " A Town Called Mercy " , " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " was in the first production block of the seventh series , with production commencing in early 2012 on large sets and Southerndown beach , Vale of Glamorgan . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 57 million viewers in the UK and received generally positive reviews from critics , though the reception of the gang of characters and Solomon 's robots were mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While in 1334 BC Egypt with Queen Nefertiti , after an unseen adventure , the Doctor receives a call from the " Indian Space Agency " in <unk> AD about a vast spaceship which will crash into Earth in six hours . The ISA plans to destroy it with missiles unless the Doctor stops it first . Taking Nefertiti with him , he picks up Edwardian explorer John Riddell from the African plains in 1902 AD . He then materialises the TARDIS around his companions Amy and Rory ten months after he last saw them in " Asylum of the Daleks " , inadvertently taking Rory 's father Brian on the TARDIS as well . They materialise in the spaceship and find that it contains dinosaurs . 
 When asking the ship 's computer for the engines , the Doctor , Rory , and Brian are transported to the " engine room " , a large beach on the ship which uses the waves as hydro @-@ power . Meanwhile , with Nefertiti and Riddell , Amy discovers that the ship is a Silurian ark designed to carry the reptilian humanoids to a new planet along with flora and fauna from their time period . It left Earth 65 million years ago to escape the meteor impact that wiped out the dinosaurs . The ship , however , registers no Silurian life forms left on board . After escaping from a group of pterodactyls , the Doctor , Rory , and Brian are escorted by two robots to the only human on board , a brutal man called Solomon who has been injured in a raptor attack and requires medical help . Scanning the Doctor to see who he is , Solomon is surprised that the Doctor does not appear in his universal database . Solomon reveals himself to be a lawless exotic black market trader who has raided the spaceship in order to steal the dinosaurs . Having had the robots murder all of the Silurians , Solomon was unable to take control of the ship himself and the computer defaulted to its point of origin , causing it to return to Earth . Discovering Queen Nefertiti 's identity and value , he decides to kidnap her and leave in his own ship . Though the Doctor refuses , Nefertiti agrees to go with him to save the others , despite the man 's obvious sadistic intentions towards her . 
 While Amy and Riddell shoot hostile dinosaurs with a tranquiliser gun , the Doctor disables Solomon 's robots and rescues Nefertiti , then tricks the ISA missiles into targeting Solomon 's ship rather than the ark : it is destroyed , taking him with it . Rory and Brian pilot the ark away from the Earth , as the ship can only be piloted by two people of the same gene chain . The Doctor then takes Amy and Rory back to their home after letting Brian view the Earth from orbit . Nefertiti , who has been flirting and clashing with Riddell , opts to go with him rather than return to her own time . Amy and Rory receive a series of postcards from all over the world sent by the previously travel @-@ shy Brian , along with one featuring the dinosaurs , the TARDIS , and a sign saying " <unk> " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 Showrunner Steven Moffat said that putting dinosaurs on a spaceship was " the secret of success " . The idea to use dinosaurs in Doctor Who came from the special effects teams The Mill and Millennium FX . As " Asylum of the Daleks " was a darker opening episode , " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " is more about fun . In Moffat 's pitch to writer Chris Chibnall , he proposed , " Maybe it 's a ship heading towards Earth , and Earth is on alert " . Chibnall had previously written the Doctor Who episodes " 42 " ( 2007 ) , " The Hungry Earth " / " Cold Blood " ( 2010 ) , as well as work for the spinoff series Torchwood . The Doctor had previously encountered dinosaurs in the 1974 serial Invasion of the Dinosaurs . Moffat suggested the spaceship was Silurian , and Chibnall , who had written the return of the Silurians in " The Hungry Earth " / " Cold Blood " , felt that it was " a nice reveal and shows you more about them , even in a story that isn ’ t really about them " . 
 Chibnall suggested including a " bonkers " gang of characters picked from around time and space . He felt that Doctor Who could have " collisions of characters that no other show in the world can do " , and that it was about finding a " disparate " group of characters who would " bounce " off each other . Nefertiti 's decision not to return to her own time fits in with the historical record , as the date and cause of her death are unknown . Chibnall asked to introduce Rory 's father , as Amy and Rory would be leaving in four episodes and Rory 's family life had not been explored yet . Mark Williams who played Rory 's father previously appeared in the Fifth Doctor audio adventure The Eternal Summer . Rupert Graves , who played an Edwardian hunter in this episode , previously worked with Moffat on the BBC series Sherlock . David Bradley 's character , Solomon , was modelled on a " well @-@ known nightclub owner with long hair " . Chibnall described him as " half businessman , half Somali pirate " . Bradley and Williams had previously worked together on the Harry Potter film franchise . Bradley was later cast as the First Doctor William Hartnell for the 50th anniversary documentary drama An Adventure in Space and Time . Comedy duo Mitchell and Webb provided the voices of Solomon 's two robots ; executive producer Caroline Skinner called the casting choice " perfect " . Richard Hope , who played the Silurian <unk> , previously appeared as Malohkeh in the episodes " The Hungry Earth " , " Cold Blood " and " The Wedding of River Song " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " and the following episode , " A Town Called Mercy " , were the first episodes to be produced for the seventh series , both directed by Saul Metzstein . The two episodes are Metzstein 's first Doctor Who credits . The episode contains one of the biggest sets ever built for the show . The scenes in the " engine room " were filmed at Southerndown beach , Vale of Glamorgan in late February 2012 . The beach had previously been used as " Bad Wolf Bay " in " Doomsday " ( 2006 ) and " Journey 's End " ( 2008 ) , and as the planet Alfava Metraxis in " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " ( 2010 ) . 
 The production team had to be mindful of the series ' budget when planning the effects and sets ; Chibnall commented that " it would be very easy to spend £ 300m on this but we don ’ t have it " . As such , the dinosaurs could not dominate the episode , and Chibnall had to tell " a big other story " . The scene where Amy , Riddell , and Nefertiti stumble upon a sleeping Tyrannosaurus rex was almost cut as it was originally intended to feature computer @-@ generated ( CGI ) raptors , which were too expensive . However , Millennium FX realised they could use a baby T @-@ Rex that had been in an exhibit they designed . The episode contains a variety of " favourite " dinosaurs ; some were built from scratch , while others were CGI . Smith had to wear padded trousers when riding the triceratops , and recalled it was " a painful couple of hours , a laugh though and definitely worth it " . Half of the triceratops was actually built and pushed by crewmen when Smith , Darvill , and Williams were riding it . The rest of it was filled in with CGI by The Mill . The Doctor Who logo in the title sequence featured the texture of a dinosaur 's hide , in keeping with the varied " blockbuster " themes for each of the opening five episodes of the series . A preview clip of the episode was released at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 8 September 2012 , and on the same date on BBC America in the United States . Overnight ratings showed that it had been watched by 5 @.@ 5 million viewers live in the UK . Final consolidated ratings rose to 7 @.@ 57 million viewers . The episode also received 1 @.@ 8 million requests during the month of September on BBC 's online iPlayer , placing it second on the chart behind " Asylum of the Daleks " . It also received an Appreciation Index of 87 , considered " excellent " . In Canada , on Space , the episode was watched by an average calculation of 575 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the most watched item on the channel that week . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " received generally positive reviews from critics , with a few detractors . Dan Martin of The Guardian described it as " fun " , with praise to the expensive @-@ looking sets and dinosaurs , the usefulness of Amy and Rory , and the concept of the gang . While he admitted it was " flimsy " and " pretty much a story built around a title " , he thought it was " the finest episode two from Doctor Who in some time " . However , he was unsettled by the underscore of darkness that was " almost disturbing enough to ruin everything " . Similarly , Charlie Anders of io9 called it " the most fun I can remember Doctor Who being in years " , while also noting gradual distancing between the Doctor and the Ponds and identifying a recurrent theme in this season : the Doctor " not being recognized " . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern was pleased that the " flawlessly realised " CGI dinosaurs redeemed the ones seen in Invasion of the Dinosaurs . He also praised Bradley 's Solomon and the " fresh slant " of having the ark built by Silurians , rather than humans as previously seen in the programme . The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave it a B , finding that it was formulaic but executed well . Unlike Martin , he enjoyed the dark turns . Will Barber – Taylor of The Consulting Detective , found the episode " A mixture between good CGI and a rather nicely paced story means that “ Dinosaurs on a Spaceship ” keeps you hooked to the end . " 
 Dave Golder of SFX gave the episode four out of five stars , describing it as " slight and fluffy and silly , with the occasional creaky bit of plotting ... but enormously entertaining " . He was pleased that the guest characters were played " straight " rather than for comedy , and found the dinosaur effects " great " and the Silurian twist " enriching continuity " . However , he felt that the teaser was too fast @-@ paced , Nefertiti was " rather bland " , and wrote that it was unlikely the Doctor would have a friendship with a big game hunter . IGN 's Matt Risley rated " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship " 7 out of 10 , noting that it " isn 't going to win any awards for scriptwriting or pathos , but it certainly succeeded on a family @-@ friendly level full of whimsy " . Though he wrote that Brian was " brilliant " , he overall criticised the " gang " , feeling that they " served little purpose other than to inject some conveniently timed plot devices when needed " . He also did not like the " bickering Marvin the Paranoid Android @-@ lite " robots . However , Neela Debnath of The Independent enjoyed the gang , writing , " the more companions there are the more variety it adds to the show because each one has their own flaws and backstory " . 
 Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery was more mixed , giving it three stars out of five . He described it as " rather over @-@ stuffed " , with Riddell and Nefertiti one @-@ dimensional and under @-@ used . He also criticised the robots and felt that the Doctor leaving Solomon to die might have been " a step too far " . However , he praised the three leads and Brian , as well as the foreshadowing with Amy and Rory . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph was even more negative , only rating it two stars out of five . He described it as " ultimately a bit of a mess " , calling the contrast between the " uneasy mix of the humorous and downright daft " gang and the " sinister " Solomon story " jarring " . Fuller also noted that the dinosaurs were " a sideshow to the main plot " . Like Morgan , he also felt that the Doctor 's actions at the end would " sit uneasily within the viewers " . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 A reference to the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey is made when The Doctor disables the two robots on Solomon 's ship . They begin to sing the song " Daisy Bell " , a nod to the deactivation of the HAL 9000 computer in the film . 
 = USS Connecticut ( BB @-@ 18 ) = 
 USS Connecticut ( BB @-@ 18 ) , the fourth United States Navy ship to be named after the state of Connecticut , was the lead ship of her class of six battleships . Her keel was laid on 10 March 1903 ; launched on 29 September 1904 , Connecticut was commissioned on 29 September 1906 as the most advanced ship in the U.S. Navy . 
 Connecticut served as the flagship for the Jamestown Exposition in mid @-@ 1907 , which commemorated the 300th anniversary of the founding of the Jamestown colony . She later sailed with the Great White Fleet on a circumnavigation of the Earth to showcase the US Navy 's growing fleet of blue @-@ water @-@ capable ships . After completing her service with the Great White Fleet , Connecticut participated in several flag @-@ waving exercises intended to protect American citizens abroad until she was pressed into service as a troop transport at the end of World War I to expedite the return of American Expeditionary Forces from France . 
 For the remainder of her career , Connecticut sailed to various places in both the Atlantic and Pacific while training newer recruits to the Navy . However , the provisions of the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty stipulated that many of the older battleships , Connecticut among them , would have to be disposed of , so she was decommissioned on 1 March 1922 and sold for scrap on 1 November 1923 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design that evolved into the Connecticut @-@ class battleship was conceived on 6 March 1901 when Secretary of the Navy John Davis Long asked the Board on Construction for a study of future battleship designs . When this was completed , different bureaus supported different designs . 
 The Board on Construction favored a ship on which 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) and 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns would be replaced by 24 newly designed 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) guns , which were the most powerful guns with shells that could be handled by one person . In addition , the ships would mount twenty @-@ four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ torpedo boat guns . The main armor would be thinner overall because it would be distributed over the entire length . The Board 's favored design would result in a ship weighing 15 @,@ 560 long tons ( 15 @,@ 810 t ) displacement . 
 The Bureau of Construction and Repair , however , proposed a modified Virginia @-@ class battleship with sixteen 8 @-@ inch guns , twelve in turrets and four in casemates ; the casemate guns were later eliminated , leaving twelve 8 @-@ inch , twelve 6 @-@ inch , and eight 3 @-@ inch guns on a ship of 15 @,@ 860 long tons ( 16 @,@ 110 t ) . This design was later rejected because the reduction in anti @-@ torpedo boat guns was too drastic . 
 Although one of the two designs had been rejected , the debate did not end . In November , the Board decided on a different plan , with eight 8 @-@ inch guns mounted in four waist turrets and 12 7 @-@ inch guns . This arrangement was chosen because the 8 @-@ inch gun could penetrate medium armor on battleships , and the 7 @-@ inch gun was capable of rapid fire . The new design also had heavier armor and a thicker belt than the first design . Two ships of this plan , Connecticut and Louisiana , were authorized on 1 July 1902 , and three more were added on 2 March 1903 : Vermont , Kansas , and Minnesota . New Hampshire was authorized on 27 April 1904 . 
 = = Launch = = 
 Connecticut was laid down on 10 March 1903 and launched on 29 September 1904 by the Brooklyn Navy Yard . She was sponsored by Miss Alice B. Welles , granddaughter of Gideon Welles , Secretary of the Navy during the American Civil War . A crowd of over 30 @,@ 000 people attended the launch , as did many of the Navy 's ships . The battleships Texas , Massachusetts , Iowa , Kearsarge , Illinois , Alabama , Maine , and Missouri were at the ceremony , along with the protected cruisers Columbia and Minneapolis and the auxiliary cruiser Prairie . 
 Three attempts to sabotage the ship were discovered in 1904 . On 31 March , rivets on the keel plates were found bored through . On 14 September , a 1 ⅜ in ( 3 @.@ 5 cm ) bolt was found driven into the launching way , where it protruded some 5 in ( 11 cm ) . Shortly after the Connecticut was launched on 29 September , a hole 1 in ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) in diameter was discovered drilled through a ⅝ in ( 1 @.@ 6 cm ) steel keel plate . The ship 's watertight compartments and pumps prevented her from sinking , and all damage was repaired . The incidents prompted the Navy to post armed guards at the shipyard , and an overnight watch was kept by a Navy tug manned by Marines who had orders to shoot to kill any unauthorized person attempting to approach the ship . 
 As Connecticut was only 55 % complete when she was launched , missing most of her upper works , protection , machinery and armament , it was two years before Connecticut was commissioned on 29 September 1906 . Captain William Swift was the first captain of the new battleship . Connecticut sailed out of New York for the first time on 15 December 1906 , becoming the first ship in the US Navy to ever go to sea without a sea trial . She first journeyed south to the Virginia Capes , where she conducted a variety of training exercises ; this was followed by a shakedown cruise and battle practice off Cuba and Puerto Rico . During the cruise , she participated in a search for the missing steamer Ponce . 
 On 13 January 1907 , Connecticut ran onto a reef while entering the harbor at Culebra Island . The Navy did not release any information about the grounding until press dispatches from San Juan carrying news of the incident reached the mainland on 23 January . Even then , Navy authorities in San Juan claimed to be ignorant of the situation , and , that same day , the Navy Department itself said that they only knew that Captain Swift thought she had touched bottom and that an examination of the ship 's bottom by divers had revealed no damage . The Navy amended this the next day , releasing a statement that Connecticut had been only slightly damaged and had returned to her shakedown cruise . However , damage to the ship was much more serious than the Navy admitted ; in contrast to an official statement saying that Connecticut had only " touched " the rocks , she actually had run full upon the reef when traversing " a course well marked with buoys " in " broad daylight " and did enough damage to probably require a dry docking . This apparent attempt at a cover @-@ up was enough for the United States Congress to consider an official inquiry into the matter . 
 On 21 March , the Navy announced that Swift would be court @-@ martialed for " through negligence , causing a vessel to run upon a rock " and " neglect of duty in regard to the above " . Along with the officer of the deck at the time of the accident , Lieutenant Harry E. Yarnell , Swift faced a court martial of seven rear admirals , a captain , and a lieutenant . He was sentenced to one year 's suspension from duty , later reduced to nine months ; after about six months , the sentence was remitted on 24 October . However , he was not assigned command of another ship . 
 Connecticut steamed back to Hampton Roads after this , arriving on 16 April ; when she arrived , Rear Admiral Robley D. Evans , commander of the Atlantic Fleet , transferred his flag from Maine to Connecticut , making her the flagship of the fleet . President Theodore Roosevelt opened the Jamestown Exposition on 25 April , and Connecticut was named as the official host of the vessels that were visiting from other countries . Sailors and marines from the ship took part in various events ashore , and foreign dignitaries , along with the governors of Virginia and Rhode Island , were hosted aboard the ship on 29 April . Evans closed the Exposition on 4 May on the quarterdeck of Connecticut . On 10 June , Connecticut joined in the Presidential Fleet Review ; she left three days later for an overhaul in the New York Naval Yard . After the overhaul , Connecticut conducted maneuvers off Hampton Roads and target practice off Cape Cod . She was ordered back to the New York Naval Yard once again on 6 September for a refit that would make her suitable for use as flagship of the Great White Fleet . 
 = = Flagship of the Great White Fleet = = 
