 Connecticut left the New York Naval Yard on 5 December 1907 and arrived the next day in Hampton Roads , where the Great White Fleet would assemble with her as their flagship . After an eight @-@ day period known as " Navy Farewell Week " during which festivities were held for the departing sailors , and all 16 battleships took on full loads of coal , stores , and ammunition , the ships were ready to depart . The battleship captains paid their respects to President Theodore Roosevelt on the presidential yacht Mayflower , and all the ships weighed anchor and departed at 1000 . They passed in review before the President , and then began traveling south . After steaming past Cape Hatteras , the fleet headed for the Caribbean . They approached Puerto Rico on the 20th , caught sight of Venezuela on the 22nd , and later dropped anchor in Port of Spain , the capital of Trinidad , making the first port visit of the Great White Fleet . With the torpedo boat flotilla that had left Hampton Roads two weeks previously , and five colliers to fill the coal bunkers of the fleet , Port of Spain had a total of 32 US Navy ships in the harbor , making it " [ resemble ] a U.S. Navy base " . 
 After spending Christmas in Trinidad , the ships departed for Rio de Janeiro on 29 December . A ceremonial Brazilian escort of three cruisers met the task force 12 nmi ( 14 mi ; 22 km ) outside Rio , and " thousands of wildly cheering Brazilians lined the shore " ; 10 days of ceremonies , games , and festivities followed , and the stopover was so successful that the visit was the cause of a major boost in US – Brazilian relations . The fleet left Rio on 22 January 1908 , still heading south , this time bound for the coaling stop of Punta Arenas , Chile . 
 Four cruisers from Argentina , San Martin , Buenos Ayres , 9 De Julio , and <unk> , all under the command of Admiral <unk> Oliva , sailed 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) to salute the American ships on their way to Chile . The fleet arrived at Punta Arenas on 1 February and spent five days in the town of 14 @,@ 000 . Heading north , they followed the coastline of Chile , passing in review of Chilean President Pedro Montt on 14 February outside Valparaíso , and they were escorted to Callao in Peru by the cruiser Coronel Bolognesi on 19 and 20 February . Peru 's president , José Pardo , came aboard Connecticut during this time , as Rear Admiral Evans was quite ill and could not go ashore . After taking on coal , the ships steamed for Mexico on 29 February , passing in review of the cruiser Almirante Grau , which had Pardo embarked , before leaving . 
 Arriving in Mexico on 20 March , the fleet underwent three weeks of target practice . Rear Admiral Evans was relieved of command during this time , as he was completely bedridden and in constant pain , so on 30 March , Connecticut set sail north at full speed . She was met two days later by the schooner Yankton , which took the admiral to a hospital . Connecticut traveled back south to rejoin the fleet , and Rear Admiral Charles M. Thomas took Evans 's place on Connecticut as the commander of the fleet , which continued its journey north , bound for California . 
 On 5 May , Evans returned to Connecticut in time for the fleet 's sailing through the Golden Gate on 6 May , although he was still in pain . Over one million people watched the 42 @-@ ship fleet sail into the bay . After a grand parade through San Francisco , a review of the fleet by Secretary of the Navy Victor H. Metcalf , a gala reception , and a farewell address from Evans ( who was retiring due to his illness and his age ) , the fleet left San Francisco for Seattle , with Rear Admiral Charles Stillman Sperry as commander . The ships all underwent refits before the next leg of the voyage . The fleet left the West Coast again on 7 July , bound for Hawaii , which it reached on 16 July . 
 Leaving Hawaii on 22 July , the ships next stopped at Auckland , Sydney , and Melbourne . High seas and winds hampered the ships for part of the voyage to New Zealand , but they arrived on 9 August ; festivities , parades , balls , and games were staples of the visits to each city . The highlight of the austral visit was a parade of 12 @,@ 000 U.S. Navy , Royal Navy , and Commonwealth naval and military personnel in front of 250 @,@ 000 people . 
 After stopping at Manila in the Philippines , the fleet set course for Yokohama , Japan . They encountered a typhoon on the way on 12 October , but no ships were lost ; the fleet was only delayed 24 hours . After three Japanese men @-@ of @-@ war and six merchantmen escorted the Americans in , festivities began . The celebrations culminated in the Uraga , where Commodore Matthew C. Perry had anchored a little more than 50 years prior . The ships then departed on 25 October . After three weeks of exercises in the Philippines ' Subic Bay , the ships sailed south on 1 December for Singapore ; they did not stop there , however , passing outside the city on 6 December . Continuing on , they stopped at Colombo for coal from 12 – 20 December before sailing on for the Suez Canal . It took three days for all 16 battleships to traverse the canal , even though it was closed to all other traffic . They then headed for a coaling stop at Port Said , Egypt , after which the fleet split up into individual divisions to call on different ports in the Mediterranean . The First Division , of which Connecticut was a part , originally planned to visit Italy before moving on to Villefranche , but Connecticut and Illinois were quickly dispatched to southern Italy on a humanitarian mission when news of an earthquake reached the fleet . Seamen from the ships helped clear debris and unload supplies from the U.S. Navy refrigerated supply ship Culgoa ; Admiral Sperry received the personal thanks of King Victor Emmanuel III for their assistance . 
 After port calls were concluded , the ships headed for Gibraltar , where they found a conglomerate of warships from many different nations awaiting them " with decks manned and horns blaring " : the battleships HMS Albemarle and Albion with the cruiser HMS Devonshire and the Second Cruiser Squadron represented Great Britain 's Royal Navy , battleships Tsesarevich and Slava with cruisers Admiral Makarov , Bogatyr and Oleg represented the Imperial Russian Navy , and various gunboats represented France and the Netherlands . After coaling for five days , the ships got under way and left for home on 6 February 1909 . 
 After weathering a few storms , the ships met nine of their fellow U.S. Navy ships five days out of Hampton Roads : four battleships ( Maine , Mississippi , Idaho , and New Hampshire – the only sister of Connecticut to not make the cruise , two armored cruisers , and three scout cruisers . Connecticut then led all of these warships around Tail @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Horseshoe Lightship on 22 February to pass in review of President Roosevelt , who was then on the presidential yacht anchored off Old Point Comfort , ending a 46 @,@ 729 nmi ( 53 @,@ 775 mi ; 86 @,@ 542 km ) trip . Roosevelt boarded the ship after she anchored and gave a short speech , saying , " You 've done the trick . Other nations may do as you have done , but they 'll follow you . " 
 = = Pre @-@ World War I = = 
 Following her return from the world cruise , Connecticut continued to serve as flagship of the Atlantic Fleet , interrupted only by a March 1909 overhaul at the New York Navy Yard . After rejoining the fleet , she cruised the East Coast from her base at Norfolk , Virginia . For the rest of 1909 , the battleship conducted training and participated in ceremonial observances , such as the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . In early January 1910 , Connecticut left for Cuban waters and stayed there until late March when she returned to New York for a refit . After several months conducting maneuvers and battle practice off the New England coast , she left for Europe on 2 November to go on a midshipman training cruise . She arrived in Portland , England on 15 November and was present during the 1 December birthday celebration of Queen Alexandra , the queen mother . Connecticut next visited Cherbourg , France , where she welcomed visitors from the town and also hosted commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the French Navy Vice @-@ Amiral Laurent Marin @-@ <unk> , and a delegation of his officers . While there , a boat crew from Connecticut engaged a crew from the French battleship Charles Martel in a rowing race ; Connecticut 's crew won by twelve lengths . Connecticut departed French waters for Guantánamo Bay , Cuba on 30 December , and stayed there until 17 March , when she departed for Hampton Roads . 
 Connecticut was the leader of the ships that passed in review during the Presidential Fleet Review in New York on 2 November ; she then remained in New York until 12 January 1912 , when she returned to Guantánamo Bay . During a March overhaul at the Philadelphia Naval Yard , the battleship relinquished her role as flagship to the armored cruiser Washington . After the overhaul 's completion , Connecticut 's activities through the end of 1912 included practicing with torpedoes in Fort Pond Bay , conducting fleet maneuvers , and battle practice off Block Island and the Virginia Capes . Stopping in New York , Connecticut conducted training exercises in Guantánamo Bay from 13 February to 20 March ; during this time ( on the 28th ) , she once again became the Atlantic Fleet flagship for a brief and final time when she served in the interim as Rear Admiral Charles J. Badger transferred his flag from Wyoming to Utah . After taking on stores in Philadelphia , Connecticut sailed for Mexico and arrived on 22 April ; she was to patrol the waters near Tampico and Vera Cruz , protecting American citizens and interests during disturbances there and in Haiti . 
 On 22 June 1912 , Connecticut departed Mexican waters for Philadelphia , where she was dry docked for three months of repairs . Upon their completion , Connecticut conducted gunnery practice off the Virginia Capes . On 23 October , Connecticut became the flagship of the Fourth Battleship Division . After the division passed in review before Secretary of the Navy George von Lengerke Meyer on the 25th , Connecticut left for Genoa , Italy , where she remained until 30 November . The battleship departed Italy for Vera Cruz and arrived on 23 December . She took refugees from Mexico to Galveston and carried officers of the Army and representative from the Red Cross back in the opposite direction . 
 On 29 May 1914 , while still in Mexico , Connecticut relinquished the duty of flagship to Minnesota , but remained in Mexico until 2 July , when she left for Havana . Arriving there on 8 July , Connecticut embarked Madison R. Smith , the US minister to Haiti , and took him to Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , arriving five days later . Connecticut remained in Haiti for a month , then left for Philadelphia on 8 August and arrived there on 14 August . 
 Connecticut then went to Maine and the Virginia Capes for battle practice , after which she went into the Philadelphia Naval Yard for an overhaul . After more than 15 weeks , Connecticut emerged on 15 January 1915 and steamed south to Cuba , where she conducted training exercises before returning to Philadelphia . She remained there until 31 July , when she embarked 433 men from the Second Regiment , First Brigade , of the United States Marine Corps for transport to Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , where they were put ashore on 5 August as part of the US occupation of Haiti . Connecticut delivered supplies to amphibious troops in Cap @-@ Haïtien on 5 September and remained near Haiti for the next few months , supporting landing parties ashore , including detachments of Marines and sailors from Connecticut under the command of Major Smedley Butler . After departing Haiti , Connecticut arrived in Philadelphia on 15 December and was placed into the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . 
 = = World War I = = 
 As part of the US response to Germany 's unrestricted submarine warfare , Connecticut was recommissioned on 3 October 1916 . Two days later , Admiral Herbert O. Dunn made her the flagship of the Fifth Battleship Division , transferring his flag from Minnesota . Connecticut operated along the East Coast and in the Caribbean until the United States entered World War I on 6 April 1917 . For the duration of the war , Connecticut was based in York River , Virginia . More than 1 @,@ 000 trainees — midshipmen and gun crews for merchant ships — took part in exercises on her while she sailed in Chesapeake Bay and off the Virginia Capes . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 At the close of the war , Connecticut was assigned to the Cruiser and Transport Force for transport duty , and from 6 January – 22 June 1919 she made four voyages to return troops from France . On 6 January , she left Hampton Roads for Brest , France , where she embarked 1 @,@ 000 troops . After bringing them to New York ( arriving on 2 February ) , Connecticut traveled back to Brest and picked up the 53rd Pioneer Regiment , a company of Marines , and a company of military police , 1 @,@ 240 troops in all . These men were delivered to Hampton Roads on 24 March . After two months , Connecticut made another run overseas : following a short period of liberty in Paris for her crew , she embarked 891 men variously from the 502nd Army Engineers , a medical detachment , and the Red Cross . They were dropped off in Newport News on 22 June . On 23 June 1919 , after having returned over 4 @,@ 800 men , Connecticut was reassigned as flagship of the Second Battleship Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet , under the command of Vice Admiral Hilary P. Jones . 
 While based in Philadelphia for the next 11 months , Connecticut trained midshipmen . On 2 May 1920 , 200 midshipmen boarded the ship for a training cruise . In company with the other battleships of her squadron , Connecticut sailed to the Caribbean and through the Panama Canal in order to visit four ports @-@ of @-@ call : Honolulu , Seattle , San Francisco , and San Pedro Bay ( Los Angeles and Long Beach ) . After visiting all four , the squadron made their way back through the canal and headed for home . However , the port engine of Connecticut gave out three days after transiting the canal , requiring New Hampshire to tow the battleship into Guantánamo Bay . The pair arrived on 28 August . The midshipmen were debarked there , and Vice Admiral Jones transferred his flag from Connecticut to his new flagship , Kansas . The Navy repair ship Prometheus was dispatched from New York on 1 September to tow Connecticut to Philadelphia ; they arrived at the Navy Yard there on 11 September . 
 On 21 March 1921 , Connecticut again became the flagship of the Second Battleship Squadron when Rear Admiral Charles Frederick Hughes took command . The ships of the squadron departed Philadelphia on 7 April to perform maneuvers and training exercises off Cuba , though they returned to take part in the Presidential Review in Hampton Roads on 28 April . After participating in Naval Academy celebrations on Memorial Day , Connecticut and her squadmates departed on a midshipman cruise which took them to Europe . On 28 June , Connecticut hosted a Norwegian delegation that included King Haakon VII , Prime Minister Otto <unk> , the Minister of Defence , and the First Sea Lord of the Royal Norwegian Navy . After arriving in Portugal on 21 July , the battleship hosted the Civil Governor of the Province of Lisbon and the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Portuguese Navy . Six days later , Connecticut hosted the Portuguese president , António José de Almeida . The battleship squadron departed for Guantánamo Bay on 29 July and , after arrival there , remained for gunnery practice and exercises . Connecticut , leaving the rest of the squadron , departed for Annapolis and disembarked her midshipmen on 30 August , then proceeded to Philadelphia . 
 Connecticut departed Philadelphia for California on 4 October for duty with the Pacific Fleet . After touching at San Diego on the 27th , she arrived on 28 October at San Pedro , where Rear Admiral H.O. Stickney designated her the flagship of Pacific Fleet Training . For the next few months , Connecticut cruised along the West Coast , taking part in exercises and commemorations . Under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , which set tonnage limits for its signatory nations , the Navy designated Connecticut for scrapping . Getting under way for her final voyage on 11 December , she made a five @-@ day journey to the Puget Sound Navy Yard , where she was decommissioned on 1 March 1923 . On 1 November , the ex @-@ Connecticut was sold for scrap to Walter W. Johnson of San Francisco for the sum of $ 42 @,@ 750 . 
 = Salt ( 2010 film ) = 
 Salt is a 2010 American action thriller film directed by Phillip Noyce , written by Kurt Wimmer , and starring Angelina Jolie , Liev Schreiber , Daniel Olbrychski , August Diehl and Chiwetel Ejiofor . Jolie plays Evelyn Salt , who is accused of being a Russian sleeper agent and goes on the run to try to clear her name . 
 Originally written with a male protagonist , with Tom Cruise initially secured for the lead , the script was ultimately rewritten by Brian Helgeland for Jolie . Filming took place on location in Washington , D.C. , the New York City area , and Albany , New York , between March and June 2009 , with reshoots in January 2010 . Action scenes were primarily performed with practical stunts , computer @-@ generated imagery being used mostly for creating digital environments . 
 The film had a panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con on July 22 and was released in North America on July 23 , 2010 , and in the United Kingdom on August 18 , 2010 . Salt grossed $ 294 million at the worldwide box office and received generally positive reviews , with praise for the action scenes and Jolie 's performance , but drawing criticism on the writing , with reviewers finding the plot implausible and convoluted . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc were released December 21 , 2010 , and featured two alternate cuts providing different endings for the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Evelyn Salt ( Angelina Jolie ) is being tortured in a North Korean prison on suspicion of being an American spy . Her boyfriend , arachnologist Mike Krause ( August Diehl ) , generates so much publicity that the CIA is forced to arrange a prisoner exchange , despite the agency 's policy against it . Salt 's CIA colleague Ted Winter ( Liev Schreiber ) greets Salt at the border . As they drive away , Mike proposes marriage , despite Salt 's admission that she is in fact a CIA operative . 
 Two years later , on Salt and Mike 's wedding anniversary , a Russian defector named Oleg Vasilyevich Orlov ( Daniel Olbrychski ) walks in to Salt 's office . Salt interrogates him , with Winter and CIA counterintelligence officer Darryl Peabody ( Chiwetel Ejiofor ) observing . Orlov claims that , on " Day X , " highly trained Russian sleeper agents known as ' <unk> ' will destroy the U.S. Orlov tells them that Agent " KA @-@ 12 " will assassinate Russian president Boris Matveyev ( Olek Krupa ) at the funeral of the American Vice President . Orlov reveals that KA @-@ 12 is named Evelyn Salt , and lie detectors confirm his entire story . Peabody orders Salt be detained , but Orlov kills two agents and escapes . In the confusion , Salt is able to escape as well , running barefoot through the street . While she is being chased , she discovers that Mike was kidnapped . 
 Later , at the funeral , Salt appears to succeed in killing President Matveyev , and then surrenders herself . Matveyev is declared dead . Salt escapes again and heads to a barge where Orlov is hiding with other sleeper agents . In a series of flashbacks , Salt recalls growing up in the Soviet Union and being trained with other children . On the barge , Orlov welcomes her back and has Mike killed in front of her . When Salt shows no reaction , Orlov is convinced she is loyal and begins briefing her on her next mission . She is to rendezvous with another KA who will help her assassinate the American president . Salt then kills Orlov and all of the other agents on the barge . She then meets with KA <unk> ( Corey Stoll ) , who uses his cover as a NATO liaison to get Salt into the White House . Once inside , <unk> launches a suicide attack to force agents to move the President ( Hunt Block ) to an underground bunker , accompanied by Winter . Salt follows them and manages to enter the bunker before it is sealed . 
 The US President learns that Russia has mobilized its nuclear arsenal in response to their president 's death . He orders American nuclear weapons readied in response . CIA Agent Winter then suddenly kills everyone except the President and introduces himself as Nikolai Tarkovsky , another KA . Winter incapacitates the President and begins aiming nuclear missiles at Mecca and Tehran to incite millions of Muslims against the United States . Salt tries to persuade Winter to let her inside the sealed room , but then he sees a television report that President Matveyev is alive and well : Salt had used spider venom to cause a simulated death of Matveyev . Winter refuses her entry and reveals that Mike 's kidnapping and her blown cover were his idea . Winter plans to place full blame for the nuclear attacks on Salt . Salt breaks into the room before he can launch the missiles . The two wrestle for control of the nuclear football , with Salt aborting the missile strikes before being captured . 
 As Salt is being led out in chains , Winter grabs a pair of scissors , apparently to attack her or to defend himself if necessary . She unexpectedly hooks her chain around Winter 's neck and jumps over the stair railing , choking him to death . On the helicopter ride to be interrogated , Peabody questions her . Salt explains that she killed Winter because he orchestrated the death of her husband , and promises to hunt down the remaining KA agents if freed . Peabody is convinced after receiving a text that Salt 's fingerprints were found on the barge where the sleeper agents were killed , supporting her story . Salt is allowed to escape , jumping out of the helicopter into the river below and escaping into the woods . In an alternate ending Salt jumps out of the helicopter and arrives in disguise at the place where she was trained as a child in the Soviet Union , she is then seen by the water as the place blows up and Salt smiles . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 The early development of the script began while Kurt Wimmer was doing interviews promoting Equilibrium . In a November 2002 interview , he discussed what scripts he was working on . He stated that " I have several scripts – foremost of which is one called The Far @-@ Reaching Philosophy of Edwin A. Salt – kind of a high @-@ action spy thriller ... " In another interview , Wimmer described the project as " very much about me and my wife " . The plot incorporated many elements from Equilibrium , with an oppressive and paranoid political system of brainwashing that gets overthrown by one of its high @-@ ranking members who rebels due to an emotional transformation . With the shortened title Edwin A. Salt , the script was sold to Columbia Pictures in January 2007 . By July 2007 , the script had attracted the attention of Tom Cruise . 
 Terry George was the first director to join the project , and he also did some revisions to the script , but he soon left the project . Peter Berg was the next director to consider , but he too , eventually dropped out for undisclosed reasons . A year later it was confirmed that Phillip Noyce would direct . Noyce was attracted to Salt for its espionage themes , which are present in most of his filmography , as well as the tension of a character that tries to prove his innocence yet also does what he was previously accused of . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initial discussions took place in 2008 between Tom Cruise and Noyce about Cruise playing Edwin A. Salt . These discussions were ongoing for more than a year between the pair and their representatives . It was finally decided that Cruise was unable to commit to the script , because he feared that the character was too close to his Mission : Impossible character Ethan Hunt . Cruise decided to work on Knight and Day instead . The filmmakers tried to differentiate the character from Hunt , but eventually came to accept they were too similar and decided not to change the characteristics of Salt . Noyce said " But , you know , he had a valid point . It was kind of returning to an offshoot of a character that he ’ d already played . It ’ s like playing the brother , or the cousin , of somebody that you played in another movie " . 
 Columbia Pictures executive Amy Pascal suggested Angelina Jolie to Noyce , who had often spoken to Jolie in the past about a desire to create a female spy franchise . Pascal even invited Jolie for a Bond girl role , but the actress playfully replied that she was more interested in playing James Bond himself instead . Jolie was sent Salt 's script in September 2008 and liked it . Wimmer , Noyce , and producer Lorenzo di Bonaventura went to visit Jolie at her home in France to discuss a possible script and character change . Writer Brian Helgeland helped with the character development and dialogue of the script based on the notes that came out of those discussions with Jolie and to accompany the gender change , the title character 's name was changed to Evelyn Salt . 
 One of Jolie 's requests was to rework the third act , which originally had Salt rescue his wife and son from a coalition of villains , because she did not believe a mother would neglect her child in this kind of situation . Wimmer decided to then make Salt more crucial to the villain 's schemes , and add a sequence where Salt breaks into " a place harder than Fort Knox " – after considering Camp David , Wimmer settled on the White House . When asked if the script written for Cruise was the same for Jolie , he said " I think that it ’ s just been a continual process , obviously accelerating by changing the central character . But the ideas – the locomotive of ideas that drive the film are the same . An undercover CIA operative is accused of being a Russian mole , and has to go on the run to defend himself . That ’ s been the same since day one . The tone of the film has changed in this evolution . In the same way , I guess , as – you know – action thrillers have changed along the lines of the Bond films and the Bourne films " . 
 On February 19 , 2009 , it was reported that Liev Schreiber would play the role of Ted Winter , Evelyn Salt 's friend and colleague in the CIA . Three days later Chiwetel Ejiofor named as CIA Officer Peabody , who is in pursuit of Salt . Noyce said Ejiofor , whom he first saw in Dirty Pretty Things , seemed to have the " intelligence and disarming sort of obsessiveness " that a counter @-@ intelligence officer would need . August Diehl , who played Salt 's husband Mike Krause , came after a recommendation from Jolie 's partner Brad Pitt , who had worked with Diehl in Inglourious Basterds , and Daniel Olbrychski was chosen for Orlov because Andrei Konchalovsky told Noyce that such an evil Russian character could only be played by a Polish actor . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On a budget of $ 110 million , principal photography took place mostly on location in New York and Washington , D.C. from March to June 2009 . Noyce decided to avoid " typical post @-@ card views of Washington DC " to reflect " the more day @-@ to @-@ day environment of massive federal buildings inhabited by the typical bureaucrat " . The opening sequence in North Korea was shot at the Floyd Bennett Field , with an extra who had experience with prisoner exchange acting as a consultant . Salt 's rendezvous with Orlov was shot on the " Frying Pan " , a former lighthouse ship , now moored in the Hudson River , at 26th Street in New York . The outside of the KA training facility was the <unk> Monastery in Russia , while the interior was the Russian Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Virgin Protection in New York 's East Village . Filming for a chase sequence took place in Albany on Water Street near the Interstate 787 ramp between April and May . Studio production took place at Grumman Studios in Bethpage , Long Island , New York . While the film was in post @-@ production , di Bonaventura became dissatisfied with some scenes . Steven Zaillian was brought for uncredited rewrites , and reshoots , mostly of action scenes , were held in New York during January 2010 . Filming also took place in upper Manhattan 's neighborhood Washington Heights on 157th St and Riverside Dr. Some scenes were also filmed outside of Manhattan including The Bronx , Queens , Staten Island , and in Westchester County . 
 After Jolie had just given birth to twins , she spent time training before filming to get fit in order to perform almost all of the stunts herself . Bonaventura said , " She is so prepared and so ready and gung @-@ ho , she 'll do any stunt . We had her jumping out of helicopters , shooting , jumping off of all sorts of things and infiltrating places that are impossible to infiltrate " . Salt 's fighting style was described as a mixture of Muay Thai , Shaolin Kung @-@ Fu , & Jeet Kune Do , which was considered by the stunt team the most fit for Jolie 's physique , and Krav Maga , for its rawness and aggressiveness . Noyce wanted to film the scene where Salt hangs from the edge of the building in a studio with chroma key , but Jolie insisted on doing it herself in the actual location . On May 29 , 2009 , filming was temporarily halted after Jolie suffered a minor head injury during filming an action scene . She was taken to a hospital as a precautionary measure and released on the same day with no serious injuries , allowing filming to resume . Salt 's escape after being captured in St. Bartholomew 's originally involved jumping her off a building into a window cleaning machine , but budgetary constraints caused the scene to be changed into a car chase . 
 Computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) was used extensively throughout the film to create environments and elements , such as bullet holes and flames . More dangerous objects such as a taser or the handcuffs used to strangle Winter were also made from CGI . Five companies were responsible for visual effects . The two most involved were CIS Vancouver and Framestore . CIS Vancouver recreated the White House since the crew did not have permission to shoot in the building , and made a digital elevator shaft for the scene where Salt goes down into the White House bunker . Framestore was responsible for the assassination attempt on the Russian president , which combined actual shots of St. Bartholomew 's Church , a digital recreation of the church 's interior , and scenes with actor Olek Krupa falling down a collapsing floor . 
 Female CIA officers were consulted about the creation of disguises , leading to the scene where Salt undergoes subtle changes to disguise herself as a Puerto Rican . The " sweet and caring " blonde Salt dyeing her hair black would represent the shift to <unk> , the menacing Russian agent . For the scene where Salt disguises herself as a Major , pictures of Angelina Jolie were treated on Adobe Photoshop to create a believable male version , with the resulting image being used by the make @-@ up team as an inspiration for the prosthetics . 
 = = = Versions = = = 
 Director Phillip Noyce has said that due to the extensive usage of flashbacks , " there was always going to be a mountain of alternative material that would not fit into the theatrical version . " The film ended up having two extra versions , the Director 's Cut and the Extended Cut – which Noyce refers to in his audio commentary as the film 's original cut – both included on the DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc deluxe editions . 
 The Director 's Cut was described by Noyce as " my own personal take on the material , free from the politics and restrictions of producers , studio or censorship ratings . " Four minutes of film are added , leading to a running time of 104 minutes . More flashbacks are added , and the violence is amped up – for example Mike being drowned rather than shot to death . The ending is also different : in the bunker scene , Winter shoots the President instead of only knocking him unconscious , and a media report during the final scene reports that the new US President had been orphaned on a family visit to Russia , implying he is also a sleeper agent . Noyce has described this ending as " an ending yet just a beginning – and it 's an ending that turns the whole story on its head " . 
 The Extended Cut increases the running time by only one minute , but rewrites the plot by removing , rearranging and adding scenes . The ending has Salt escaping custody from the CIA and going to Russia , where she kills Orlov – his death scene at the barge does not appear in this cut – and destroys the facility where new child spies are being trained . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Salt : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on July 20 , 2010 on iTunes and on August 11 , 2010 as on @-@ demand CD @-@ R from Amazon.com. The music was composed by James Newton Howard and released by Madison Gate Records . The song " Orlov 's Story " includes a Russian lullaby which music editor Joe E. Rand found at Amoeba Music , and which served for inspiration for the choir heard in other tracks – but the chants in the rest of the score are only random syllables , as Rand and Howard thought actual Russian words would spoil about Salt 's allegiance . 
 Track listing 
 All songs written and composed by James Newton Howard . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film 's marketing campaign included a panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con on July 22 2010 , and an episodic advergame titled " Day X Exists " , where players watched webisodes and performed missions to unveil the terrorist plot . It was released in North America on July 23 , 2010 . It was released on August 18 in the United Kingdom , despite poster advertisements suggesting it would be released on August 20 . The Deluxe Unrated Edition Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD was released on December 21 , 2010 by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment . It includes three versions of the film : the original theatrical film and two additional unrated extended cuts not seen in theaters with two alternate endings . A Theatrical Edition DVD was also released . In the home video charts , Salt debuted at first in the rentals and third in sales . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Sony predicted an opening weekend take in the low- $ 30 @-@ million range , while commentators thought it would come in closer to $ 40 million and beat Inception for the number one spot at the box office . Salt opened in 3 @,@ 612 theaters , with an opening day gross of US $ 12 @,@ 532 @,@ 333 – $ 3 @,@ 470 per theater – and on its opening weekend , $ 36 @,@ 011 @,@ 243 – $ 9 @,@ 970 per theater – behind only Inception , which made $ 42 @,@ 725 @,@ 012 in its second weekend . Salt also grossed $ 15 million from 19 minor international markets . On its second weekend , it declined in ticket sales by 45 @.@ 9 % making $ 19 @,@ 471 @,@ 355 – $ 5 @,@ 391 per theater and placed number three behind Dinner for <unk> , but by opening in 29 countries that same weekend , it grossed $ 25 @.@ 4 million internationally . Salt ended up grossing $ 118 @,@ 311 @,@ 368 in the United States and Canada and $ 175 @,@ 191 @,@ 986 in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 293 @,@ 503 @,@ 354 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Salt received generally positive reviews from critics . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 62 % based on 231 reviews , with a rating average of 6 out of 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads : " Angelina Jolie gives it her all in the title role , and her seasoned performance is almost enough to save Salt from its predictable and ludicrous plot . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from film critics , gave the film a score of 65 based on 42 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " Many reviewers highlighted the coincidence of Salt getting released shortly after the reveal of real Russian sleeper agents in the <unk> Program , with a few comparing Salt to one of the agents , Anna Chapman . 
 Kirk Honeycutt of the Hollywood Reporter said that , " While preposterous at every turn , Salt is a better Bond movie than most recent Bond movies , as its makers keep the stunts real and severely limit CGI gimmickry " . Chicago Sun @-@ Times critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars ( his maximum ) , saying " Salt is a damn fine thriller . ... It 's gloriously absurd . This movie has holes in it big enough to drive the whole movie through . The laws of physics seem to be suspended here the same way as in a Road Runner cartoon . " 
 Time 's reviewer Richard Corliss praised the action scenes and Noyce 's persistence in keeping a serious tone – " he ignores the story 's preposterous elements and lets the audience decide whether to laugh , shudder or both " . Empire 's William Thomas praised Jolie 's performance remarking that " when it comes to selling incredible , crazy , death @-@ defying antics , Jolie has few peers in the action business " , and Village Voice 's Karina Longworth considered that original star Tom Cruise would never express the protagonist 's ambiguity as well as Jolie . 
 Among negative responses , The New Yorker 's David Denby said Salt " is as impersonal an action thriller as we ’ ve seen in years " , finding the supporting cast underexplored – " the tricky plot locks them into purely functional responses " . Claudia Puig of the USA Today considered the film a " by @-@ the @-@ book thriller " with Jolie 's performance as the only distinguished feature . Lawrence Toppman of The Charlotte Observer was mostly critical of the writing , describing the film as absurd , overplotted and incoherent , and saying the villainous schemes " would have been called off 20 years ago at the latest , when the Soviet Union dissolved " . Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer described Salt as " commendably swift and progressively inane " , saying the script was a " sloppy concoction of story elements from ' 70s espionage classics " that ended up not working right with its " nonsensical setups and wildly illogical twists " . James Berardinelli of Reelviews considered that , while the film was fast @-@ paced and the action scenes competently shot , the plot was predictable and " the spy aspects , which are by far the most intriguing elements of the movie , are shunted aside in favor of spectacular stunts and long chases " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Salt received one Academy Award nomination , for Best Sound Mixing ( Jeffrey J. Haboush , Greg P. Russell , Scott Millan and William Sarokin ) , which it lost to Inception . The film won Best Action / Adventure Film at the Saturn Awards , with Angelina Jolie being nominated for Best Actress , and the Deluxe Unrated Edition being nominated for Best DVD Special Edition . At the Taurus World Stunt Awards , stuntwoman <unk> Carleton 's jump on a moving truck won Best Overall Stunt by a Stunt Woman , and the film was nominated for Best Stunt Coordinator and / or 2nd Unit Director . It was also nominated for Satellite Awards for Cinematography and Original Score , a Golden Reel Award for Sound Effects and Foley , a People 's Choice Award for Favorite Action Movie , and two Teen Choice Awards . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Director Phillip Noyce was optimistic about a sequel , saying " Hopefully within a couple of years , we 'll have another one . Angelina 's so great in this part . When audiences see the movie they 're going to feel like it 's only just the beginning . " Producer Lorenzo <unk> also expressed further interest : " Angie , I know , loved that character , and would love to explore the character some more first and foremost . " 
 Noyce later said he had other projects and would not participate . " Those 3 Blu @-@ ray Disc cuts represent just about everything I have to offer on Evelyn Salt . If there ever is a sequel , better it 's directed by someone with a completely fresh take on what I believe could be a totally entertaining and complex series of stories . " 
 On June 6 , 2011 , Wimmer was announced as screenwriter , but Jolie equivocated , " if it comes together right " . On December 10 , 2012 Sony Pictures announced hiring screenwriter Becky Johnston ( known for Prince of Tides , Seven Years in Tibet , and Arthur Newman ) , as well as producers Lorenzo di Bonaventura and Sunil <unk> . 
 = Climate of Florida = 
 The climate of the north and central parts of the US state of Florida is humid subtropical . South Florida has a tropical savanna climate . There is a defined rainy season from May through October , when air mass thundershowers that build in the heat of the day drop heavy but brief summer rainfall . Late summer and early fall bring decaying tropical lows ( and occasionally landfalling tropical cyclones ) that contribute to late summer and early fall rains . 
 In October the dry season sets in across much of Florida and lasts until late April in most years . Fronts regularly sweep through the northern and central parts of the state which bring winter rainfall , but winter is often quite dry and sunny in much of Florida . Towards the end of the dry season in the spring , brush fires may become common statewide . In some years the dry season becomes quite severe in Florida and water restrictions are imposed to conserve water . While most areas of Florida do not experience any type of frozen precipitation , north Florida can see fleeting snow or sleet a few times each decade . 
 The Gulf Stream running through the Florida Straits and then north off the Florida East Coast keeps temperatures moderate a few miles inland from around Stuart on the east coast to Ft . Myers on the west side of the state year round , with few extremes in temperature . 
 = = Pressure = = 
 The low pressure measured from an extratropical cyclone was 28 @.@ 84 inches / 976 @.@ 7 hPa during the Storm of the Century ( 1993 ) . From a tropical cyclone , the lowest pressure measured was 26 @.@ 35 inches / 892 hPa in the Florida Keys during the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 . The highest known pressure measured statewide was 30 @.@ 74 inches / 1041 @.@ 1 hPa in Tallahassee on February 5 , 1996 and January 4 , 1979 . 
 = = Wind = = 
 Over the winter prevailing winds are out of the north across the panhandle south to near Orlando , but are variable in the rest of the state . The summer season sees generally east and southeast winds across the peninsula . During the summer months , the average wind pattern implies a surface ridge axis which normally lies across central Florida , with easterly winds from Tampa southward and southwest winds across northern Florida . The peak wind gust during the 1930 through 1997 period was 115 mph ( 100 knots ) at Miami International Airport during Hurricane Andrew . 
 = = = African dust outbreaks = = = 
 In July the trade winds south of the northward @-@ moving subtropical ridge expand northwestward into Florida . On occasion , dust from the Sahara moving around the southern periphery of the ridge moves into the state , suppressing rainfall and changing the sky from a blue to a white appearance and leads to an increase in red sunsets . Its presence negatively impacts air quality across the Southeastern United States during the summer , by adding to the count of airborne particulates . This is in sharp contrast to the normally clean air over Florida and the southeastern USA , which on average is the cleanest air in the USA . Over 50 % of the African dust that reaches the United States affects Florida . Since 1970 , dust outbreaks have worsened due to periods of drought in Africa . There is a large variability in the dust transport to the Caribbean and Florida from year to year . Dust events are possibly linked to a decline in the health of coral reefs across the Caribbean and Florida , primarily since the 1970s . 
 = = = Winter = = = 
 On average , Florida has some of the mildest winters in the United States . Average lows range from 65 ° F ( 18 ° C ) in Key West to near 41 ° F ( 5 ° C ) degrees Fahrenheit at Tallahassee , whereas daytime highs range from 64 ° F ( 18 ° C ) at Tallahassee to 77 ° F ( 25 ° C ) at Miami . <unk> easterly winds across southern Florida keep temperatures moderate during the winter , as the nearby Gulf Stream modifies cooler air moving in from the northeast . The Gulf Stream is of little effect , however , when strong cold fronts move southward down the peninsula and freezing temperatures are not unusual in the inland areas of South Florida with even Miami experiencing occasional temperatures in the thirties ( F ) . El Niño winters tend to be cooler due to increased cloud cover , but tend to have fewer freezes . 
 Three hardiness zones exist . USDA zone 10 is in coastal South Florida where annual extreme low temperatures range from 30 to 40 ° F ( − 1 to 4 ° C ) . Next is zone 9 , found in Central Florida , where low temperatures range from 20 to 30 ° F ( − 7 to − 1 ° C ) . The coolest , zone 8 , is located in northern Florida from roughly Gainesville and northwest including Tallahassee . Low temperatures range from 10 to 20 ° F ( − 12 to − 7 ° C ) . 
 = = = Summer = = = 
 During the summer , minima range from near 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) in northern Florida to near 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) in the Keys . High temperatures during the summer average in the lower 90s Fahrenheit statewide . Relief from the heat during the summer comes in the form of afternoon and evening thunderstorm activity , late morning and afternoon sea breezes off the relatively cooler ocean , and during the passage of a tropical cyclone . The passage of a cold front through the state is rare during the warm season . The record high temperature for the state is 109 ° F ( 43 ° C ) at Monticello in 1931 . 
 = = Fog = = 
 Like the remainder of the Southeastern United States , Florida has a winter maximum in dense fog conditions . Unlike the remainder of the region , the maximum in Florida contains roughly half of the annual occurrences per year , on average . Its summer minimum is less than the remainder of the Southeast . The annual number of heavy fog days ( with visibility of .25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) or less ) has ranged from 50 in Tallahassee , to 1 in Key West , the least foggy region in the state . The two types of fog that are most common in Florida are advection and radiational . Fog can be hazardous to early morning commuters . On January 9 , 2008 , when fog on Interstate 4 combined with smoke from a nearby fire , visibility was reduced to nearly zero . As a result , five individuals died in a 70 @-@ car pileup . 
 = = Precipitation = = 
 = = = Averages = = = 
 Statewide , the highest rainfall amounts occur during the summer months . In northern Florida , there is a weak winter secondary maximum while statewide the driest months of the year are during the spring . During El Niño , Florida sees greater rainfall between November and March . Due to the lack of the secondary maximum across the peninsula , a distinct dry season is seen in the averages from winter through spring . This dry season provokes brush fires annually as temperatures rise during the late spring , before they fade during early June as the rainy season gets underway . 
 = = = Extremes = = = 
 The heaviest rainfall to occur in 24 hours was measured in Yankeetown during Hurricane Easy ( 1950 ) , 38 @.@ 70 inches ( 98 @.@ 3 cm ) . This is also the highest known point storm total maximum related to any tropical cyclone which has impacted Florida , and by itself would be the highest known rainfall total for any month from any location within Florida . This rainfall amount remained the national 24 @-@ hour rainfall record until Tropical Storm Claudette ( 1979 ) . Heavy rainfall events have fallen due to stalled fronts near the state as well , and occur during the March through May and October through November timeframe . 
 The wettest month recorded at a Florida climate station was during May 1891 when Gainesville , Florida received 30 @.@ 90 inches ( 78 @.@ 5 cm ) . The wettest year on record for a Florida climate station was during 1879 when 127 @.@ 24 inches ( 323 @.@ 2 cm ) fell at Pensacola , Florida . The driest year for a climate station statewide was during 1974 when only 19 @.@ 99 inches ( 50 @.@ 8 cm ) fell at Key West . 
 One of the worst years for wildfires was in 1998 , at the end of an El Nino cycle . 480 wildfires consumed 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 km2 ) statewide . In 2010 , the National Weather Service issued more fire alerts in Florida than anywhere else in the nation . 
 A statewide drought began in November 2005 , one month after Hurricane Wilma 's passage through the state , and persisted until 2009 . The previous significant drought occurred in 2000 , which was the state 's driest year on record . 
 = = = Snowfall = = = 
 The earliest recorded occurrence of snow or sleet occurred in 1774 . The latest occurrence of snow or sleet in the spring fell on January 7 , 8 , and 9 , 2010 , as a cold front brought scattered snow flurries along with widespread sleet and freezing rain , especially in the northern and central portions of the state . 
 The state record for snowfall is 5 inches ( 13 cm ) , set in northern Florida during January 1800 . The earliest in the season that frozen precipitation has fallen was during the Late November 2006 Nor 'easter on November 21 across central Florida . The latest in the season that snow or sleet has fallen was on April 8 , 2007 . A trace of snowfall has been recorded as far south as Homestead , mainly during a January 19 , 1977 event . 
 = = Thunderstorms = = 
 Florida reports more thunderstorms than any other US state . Some places report in excess of 90 thunderstorm days per year , making Florida one of the most <unk> regions outside of the tropics . Florida receives the highest density of lightning strikes within the United States . Several deaths per year are blamed on lightning , making lightning one of the deadliest weather @-@ related phenomenon in the state . However , since 1992 , the number of lightning deaths has been slowly dropping despite a rising population , suggesting that lightning awareness programs are effective . The most likely targets of lightning strikes are construction workers and others who work outside , though 12 percent of the cases occurred indoors to people using electronic devices . Severe thunderstorms can sometimes produce hail , very strong straight line winds and tornadoes . Very heavy rainfall from thunderstorms can result in flash flooding . Thunderstorms occur most often during the summer but can occur at any time of the year . 
 = = = Tornadoes = = = 
 There are more tornadoes per square mile in Florida than any other state . However , these tornadoes tend to be much weaker and short @-@ lived than in other states like the Midwest or Great Plains . Strong tornadoes do occasionally form in Florida , usually in conjunctions with a cold frontal passage in the winter or spring . A total of 42 people died in February 1998 from the deadliest such tornado outbreak in Central Florida , which occurred during the nighttime hours . 
 While tornadoes in the Midwest are more severe , a higher rate of deaths are experienced in Florida , and Brevard County , specifically , due to higher population density and quantity of manufactured homes . 
 = = Tropical cyclones = = 
 The earliest in the year a tropical cyclone has struck the sunshine state was the Groundhog Day Tropical Storm in 1952 . The latest impact was from a hurricane which struck near Tampa on December 1 , 1925 . The strongest hurricane to strike Florida was the Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 . Hurricane Easy in 1950 produced the wettest known point total from any tropical cyclone . The record number of hurricane strikes on the state in one season is four in 2004 . Hurricanes typically spawn tornadoes within their northeast quadrant . 
 Tropical cyclones have affected Florida in every month of the year but January and March . Nearly one @-@ third of the cyclones affected the state in September , and nearly three @-@ fourths of the storms affected the state between August and October , which coincides with the peak of the hurricane season . Portions of the coastline have the lowest return period , or the frequency at which a certain intensity or category of hurricane can be expected within 86 mi ( 139 km ) of a given location , in the country . Monroe County was struck by 26 hurricanes since 1926 , which is the greatest total for any county in the United States . 
 = = Effect of climate cycles = = 
 El Niño has the following effects on Florida climate : above average rainfall in the spring . This is followed by wildfire threat when rain dries up . Northern Florida is more susceptible to severe weather ; below normal temperatures , increased number of low pressure systems in the Gulf of Mexico during the winter , and " almost always " reduces the frequency of storms and hurricanes . 
 La Niña has the following effects : often dry conditions prevail in late fall , winter and early spring , increased risk of wildfires in spring and summer months , the temperatures average slightly above normal , and the chance of hurricane activity increases substantially . 
 Long term forecasts are made based on these effects . However , they are easily overridden , in winter , by the Arctic oscillation and North Atlantic oscillations , which can only be predicted about two weeks in advance . These can drop the temperature noticeably from seasonal norms . 
 = = Climates of selected Florida cities = = 
 The climate regime for much of the state is humid subtropical ( Köppen Cfa ) , though portions of the Gold Coast of southeast Florida , as well as all of the Florida Keys , qualify as tropical wet @-@ and @-@ dry ( Köppen Aw ) . 
 A narrow eastern part of the state including Orlando and Jacksonville receives between 2 @,@ 400 and 2 @,@ 800 hours of sunshine annually . The rest of the state , including Miami , receives between 2 @,@ 800 and 3 @,@ 200 hours annually . 
 = April in Quahog = 
 " April in Quahog " is the 16th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on April 11 , 2010 . The episode features the Griffin family as they attempt to live out their last day on Earth , after hearing an announcement on the local news about a black hole that is sucking in the entire solar system . As the countdown approaches zero , Peter suddenly reveals his secret dislike of being in his children 's presence , seconds before the world is expected to end . Then it is revealed that it is all an April Fools ' joke , and Peter is left to attempt to win back his children 's respect . 
 The episode was written by John Viener and directed by Joseph Lee . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 93 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by James Burkholder , Anne Hathaway and Jason Mraz , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " April in Quahog " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The local news reports that Stephen Hawking has discovered a new black hole at the edge of the solar system , but the Griffin family pays no attention to the announcement . Peter alerts the family that he has been selected for jury duty , which he believes is an exclusive experience . After Brian informs him that everyone serves jury duty at some point , Peter tries to be kicked out of court by annoying the others , expressing fabricated prejudices , singing Surfin ' Bird , and attempting to discuss the trial outside of the courtroom . When Peter returns home that night , the local news announces that the Earth will be destroyed by the newly discovered , and continually expanding , black hole within the next 24 hours . Frantic over the news , everyone in Quahog attempts to live out the best last day possible . Herbert finally attempts to have sex with Chris , Quagmire has sex with Bonnie , and Peter finally manages to steal a lion from the zoo and say the " you @-@ know @-@ what word " in a black neighborhood ( he is well respected as a result ) . As the countdown reaches its final seconds , Peter confesses to Lois that while he loves her , he hates spending time with his kids . Immediately afterward , the news anchors reveal the black hole report was an April Fools ' joke . 
 Stunned at their father 's newly revealed hatred , Meg , Chris and Stewie avoid Peter . After realizing how angry they are , Peter tries to reconcile with his kids by spending time with each of them . However , he and his kids share no common interests and Peter only makes things worse by using the methamphetamine he had wanted to share with Chris . After a heartfelt speech does not work , Peter finally buys his kids ' love by giving them a new Xbox 360 , and they proclaim Peter " the best father ever " . At the end of the show , Peter plays Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 , albeit terribly , much to the other players ' fury , two of them being Quagmire and Joe who tell Peter he sucks at the game . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 As his first official episode for the series , the episode was directed by Joseph Lee , who had previously served as an assistant director and storyboard artist for the show . In addition , the episode was written by series regular John Viener , his second episode for the season , the first being " Jerome is the New Black " . In promoting the episode , an image of Stan and Francine Smith meeting and speaking with Lois and Peter , along with an image of Peter , Brian , Joe and Quagmire drinking cans of beer in front of the house from King of the Hill was released by 20th Century Fox . A press release of a purported crossover was also made public . Having released the information on April Fools ' Day , the crossover was revealed to be an April Fools ' joke after the episode aired without a crossover occurring . 
 " April in Quahog " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor James Burkholder , actress Anne Hathaway and singer and performer Jason Mraz guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , Johnny Brennan , Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , writer and showrunner Mark Hentemann , voice actor Phil LaMarr , writer Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring guest voice actors Adam West and Patrick Warburton made guest appearances as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , the Griffin family is seen watching the Channel 5 News , with Tricia Takanawa then beginning an interview with Stephen Hawking . Hawking , who is paralyzed due to neuro @-@ muscular dystrophy , is seen sitting in his wheelchair . After the camera cuts , Hawking then jumps up from his chair , and admits it is just an act , before deciding to go surfing at the nearby beach . 
 In mentioning that he has been summoned for jury duty , and implying its exclusivity , Peter is confronted by Brian who reveals that the only reason he was selected was because he had voted in the last election . Peter goes on to state that he actually stuffed the ballot box at the Oscars , when the nominees included Grover from Sesame Street , Bluto from Popeye , and Daniel Day @-@ Lewis , among others . Actress Anne Hathaway presented the award . Going on to find out that everyone is asked to do jury duty , Peter soon seeks to be kicked out , just as he was from the rock band Coldplay once he suggested that they write a song that is " not whiny <unk> " . Further attempting to be kicked out of jury duty , Peter begins singing the song " Surfin ' Bird " by The Trashmen , a song that was first introduced in the series in the seventh season episode " I Dream of Jesus " . 
 Before Peter is preparing to leave for jury duty , the family is seen watching a television sitcom entitled How Henry Kissinger Met Your Mother , a parody of the CBS sitcom How I Met Your Mother , which features Henry Kissinger , whose heavy accent makes his speech unintelligible . Once Peter is dressed for court , he explains that even the vending machines at the courthouse are out of order , with Brian then being shown dressed and laughing in a similar manner as the Hanna @-@ Barbera cartoon character <unk> . 
 Having learned of the impending doomsday , Mayor Adam West angrily writes an angry letter to outer space , expressing his intention of punching the constellation Orion . West then straps on a jetpack , as well as a fishbowl for his helmet , and flies into space , punching the constellation , causing the stars to form into the Orion Pictures company logo . After it is revealed by Channel 5 News that the impending doomsday was actually an April Fools ' Day joke , Brian reacts by angrily yelling , " You dicks ! " , a line uttered by Jeff <unk> , as portrayed by Sean Penn , in the 1982 comedy film Fast Times at Ridgemont High . Unable to win over his children 's affection , Peter decides to buy them an Xbox 360 to earn the respect once more . Before the end credits , Peter is then shown playing the Xbox 360 game Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 ( Team Deathmatch on <unk> ) , much to his children 's chagrin . Peter , gamertag ' <unk> ' , is killed by Infinity Ward 's former Creative Strategist Robert Bowling , gamertag <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight decrease from the previous week , the episode was viewed in 6 @.@ 93 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons and The Cleveland Show , as well as the return episode of American Dad ! , which had been put into a temporary hiatus , in order to accommodate Sons of Tucson . In addition , the episode significantly edged out all three shows in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly mixed , calling it a " tragedy , " but " funnier than [ ... ] expected . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club noted that there are " funny lines tucked around the edges of every episode [ ... ] but there 's nothing here that justifies the needlessly elaborate plots . " Jason Hughes of TV Squad gave the episode a more positive review , stating that Peter 's attempts to bond with his children " brought some of the most hilarious visuals . " Ramsey Isler of IGN gave the episode a much more negative review , noting that it did not " have many redeeming qualities , " and the jokes were " mediocre . " In a subsequent review of Family Guy 's eighth season , Isler listed " April in Quahog " as being " full of the lowest of the lowest @-@ common @-@ denominator ' jokes ' , with heavy reliance on toilet humor and the characteristic cutaway gags that have steadily gotten more random and less funny . " 
 = Anthony Moon = 
 Anthony Moon is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Matt Lapinskas . He was introduced on 25 July 2011 as an extension to the Moon family . The son of Eddie Moon ( David Essex ) , half brother of Michael Moon ( Steve John Shepherd ) and brother of Tyler Moon ( Tony Discipline ) , his storylines have focused on the friendship between him and Tyler , and his relationships with Poppy Meadow ( Rachel Bright ) , Jodie Gold ( Kylie Babbington ) , Amira Masood ( Preeya Kalidas ) and Alice Branning ( Jasmyn Banks ) . 
 Anthony , along with brother Tyler , were announced as new characters in May 2011 , played by Lapinskas and Discipline respectively , although Tyler made his debut at an earlier date . Described as someone who " will rely on his brains and natural wit to find a more sensitive solution to any conflict " , it is found out that Anthony has a gambling problem before his character arrived in Walford , which is later a focus of one of the storylines . Lapinskas said of his relationship with half @-@ brother Michael that Anthony " idolises " him , and that Michael " corrupted " Anthony . When Eddie leaves , Anthony takes charge of his antiques business . Executive producer Bryan Kirkwood said that the Moon brothers would bring a new element to the show . Inside Soap held a poll to see which of the new Moon family members , Eddie , Tyler or Anthony , its readers were most looking forward to seeing ; Anthony came third with 12 per cent of the vote . Lapinskas quit the show in May 2012 . He left EastEnders on 30 August 2012 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Anthony first appears when he poses as a member of the Walford council to help Eddie eject a squatter from a premises that they want to move their antiques business into . He then decides to remain in Walford and helps his father set up the business . Anthony buys some candlesticks from Cora Cross ( Ann Mitchell ) , though she does not know their true value , but when Cora finds out their true value , she accuses Anthony of scamming her . Eddie sells the candlesticks for £ 8000 , and when Tyler decides to take part in an unlicensed boxing match , Michael convinces Anthony that Tyler will win and that it would be a good idea to place a bet on him , knowing that Anthony suffers with a gambling addiction . Anthony steals £ 8000 from Eddie 's safe , but bets on Tyler 's opponent Artie Stiller ( Maurice Lee ) , which leaves Michael unimpressed , as he has researched Artie and found out he is tough . During the fight , however , Tyler narrowly wins so Anthony has to confess to Eddie that he has lost the money . Shortly after he does , Tyler collapses and has a seizure , so is rushed to hospital . Eddie is sickened by Anthony 's actions and tells him he wishes he was dying in a hospital bed , rather than Tyler . Distraught , Anthony storms out and attends a party run by Mandy Salter ( Nicola Stapleton ) , culminating in him kissing her . Afterwards , Anthony returns to the hospital to learn that Tyler has been taken for a life @-@ saving operation and is furious that Eddie was not around . Eddie then admits that his children would be better off without him . Tyler survives and recovers , but the brothers are told by Eddie that Michael set up an unfair fight to punish the family , leading Tyler and Anthony to reject Michael . Eddie then leaves Walford , leaving Tyler and Anthony the antiques business . 
 When Jodie Gold ( Kylie Babbington ) and Poppy Meadow ( Rachel Bright ) become homeless , Anthony asks them to move in with him and Tyler . The girls move in , and it soon emerges that Poppy is attracted to Anthony . He prefers Jodie though , but nevertheless asks Poppy out on a date . After he and Jodie talk , Anthony suddenly kisses her , but she pulls away immediately . Jodie later reveals she is moving out and later confesses that she and Anthony kissed , which greatly upsets Poppy . Jodie and Poppy reconcile and decide to move away from Walford which upsets Anthony . Anthony takes a romantic interest to Amira Masood ( Preeya Kalidas ) when she kisses him , however Anthony becomes frustrated when she pays more attention to her soon to be ex @-@ husband Syed ( Marc Elliott ) , who she is trying to win back . Amira later invites Anthony for a meal at her family 's home , but it is awkward . 
 When Derek Branning ( Jamie Foreman ) demands £ 4000 for some goods he asked Anthony and Tyler to sell , Anthony says he only has £ 3000 as he needed to pay some bills . He agrees to sell a necklace to get some of the money , but instead , he gives it to Amira . He then gambles the rest but loses it . Derek then asks Anthony and Tyler to either pay up or steal cable from the railway , otherwise he will break their legs . Anthony goes to Michael for financial help but Michael locks Anthony in his office and calls the police , who arrest Derek and Patrick Trueman ( Rudolph Walker ) , who offered to help the brothers . They are released without charge , but Derek then accuses Anthony and Tyler of calling the police , and increases their debt to £ 8000 . They realise Michael called the police and confront him , and his partner Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) discovers what is going on . She pays off the debt , but Michael takes a beating from Derek . 
 Amira and Anthony 's relationship continues and after having a small argument with Christian Clarke ( John Partridge ) , Amira goes over to Anthony 's house and the pair end up having sex for the first time . However , she later cries afterwards and appears to regret it . She tells him it felt wrong , but it is not his fault . She then decides to leave Walford without telling him . Anthony later learns that Amira has left after Syed tells him . When Alice Branning ( Jasmyn Banks ) takes a liking to Anthony , her father Derek forces Anthony to take her out . Anthony is not interested in Alice , but is scared of Derek so cannot refuse . They have a couple of dates , but they go badly . Several weeks later , Alice receives flowers and assumes they are from Anthony . Anthony is then forced to take her out again , as he does not want to upset her . However , he tries to put her off by behaving and dressing badly . Later , during a game of spin the bottle , Anthony and Alice kiss , and he then decides that he really does like her and invites her on a proper date . Alice decides she is ready to lose her virginity to Anthony , although he does not pressure her . Her brother Joey ( David Witts ) overhears and manipulates Anthony into playing poker with Derek . Anthony cannot resist due to his gambling addiction and ends up losing the emporium . Both Derek and Joey tell him to leave and Alice is left stood up . Joey tells her Derek drove Anthony away , so she rushes to the emporium to find Anthony , but is too late as he leaves Walford via the tube station . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Anthony appears in the third series of the spin @-@ off series EastEnders : E20 . In episode 8 , he is supervising Faith Olubunmi ( Modupe Adeyeye ) , Ava Bourne ( Sophie Colquhoun ) and Donnie Lester ( Samuell Benta ) while they do community service in The Queen Victoria . Anthony jokes that Ava and Donnie are a couple , which leads to Donnie attempting to attack Anthony . Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) says it makes a change for someone to show the ladies some respect . He starts to chat Ava up but Donnie interferes once again and Anthony simply ignores him . 
 = = Introduction , casting and characterisation = = 
 The character was announced on 10 May 2011 , as an extension to the Moon family , with the part being cast to Matt Lapinskas . The character was announced at the same time as Anthony 's brother Tyler , which was to be played by Tony Discipline . Lapinskas said he was over the moon over his casting and said it 's good that he will be appearing on a show that he has been a lifelong fan of . He also added that the cast and crew ere very welcoming . Executive producer Bryan Kirkwood said that Lapinskas and Discipline are great additions to the show and that along with Eddie , they could become an established family on the Square . Tyler and Anthony were suspected to be " a couple of likely lads who are more than likely to cause a stir in Albert Square . " Anthony first appears on 25 July 2011 . Lapinskas appears as Anthony in EastEnders E20 before starting in EastEnders , saying that it " broke him in " . In February 2012 , Lapinskas said to Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy that he was " really enjoying " EastEnders and that it is " a real learning curve " . 
 In an interview with Inside Soap , Kirkwood said that Anthony and Tyler would bring a new element to EastEnders , " There 's been no shortage of brilliant and sexy women in EastEnders over the past few years and it was about time there were some blokes to join them . Tony and Matt are great actors , and the fact that they 're easy on the eye is a great advantage " . " What the brothers bring is romance and fun , because that 's something we 've been a little short @-@ changed on in EastEnders recently . The Moons are a very interesting family to work with – they 're all big characters . It 's a great new era for that clan " . Kirkwood added that " there is more to the pair than meets the eye " saying that there " are a couple of buried secrets between Eddie and his sons " confirming it will be " a big story for the summer " . He finished , " there 'll be consequences for all concerned " . Kirkwood later added , " What I hope we 've created in Tyler and Anthony are blokes you might see in the pub on a Friday night with an appetite for life – and for women . " 
 When Anthony was introduced , it was revealed that he was a gambling addict . Of this , Lapinskas said , " it 's a great thing that our executive producer Bryan Kirkwood and the EastEnders team came up with for Anthony – that he does have this gambling problem and various insecurities connected with it . It adds some more depth to the character and it 's brilliant when we can explore that . With every topic and every storyline that crops up , I think Anthony 's background will always have an effect and impact on it . That 's really nice to play . " 
 Anthony is described as someone who " will rely on his brains and natural wit to find a more sensitive solution to any conflict " and " calm " by Digital Spy and the BBC . Tyler and Anthony were described as " heart @-@ throbs " and " <unk> " , with the official EastEnders website adding that Anthony is a " well groomed & reliable young lad " . Anthony and Tyler 's different personalities are teased in the promotional video , which sees them recalling a prank Tyler played on his older brother before he mocks Anthony 's inability to speak to " gorgeous " girls " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Notable relationships = = = 
 = = = = Eddie and Michael = = = = 
 Anthony 's relationship with father Eddie was not as good as Tyler 's relationship with Eddie , Lapinskas told Digital Spy of this , " [ Anthony ] wants to show his dad that he 's the man to take over the [ family ] business . For Anthony , his main interest is the antiques emporium – forget the girls ! " . Of his relationship with his half brother Michael ( Steve John Shepherd ) , he said that Michael " corrupted " Anthony explaining , " Anthony just idolises him , the fact of the matter is that Michael has his own business and has all this money coming in , without having to worry about all the family politics , so Anthony 's in awe of that " . 
 = = = = Jodie Gold and Poppy Meadow = = = = 
 Lapinskas previously had teased that Anthony would get a love interest and in November 2011 , Anthony started dating Poppy Meadow ( Rachel Bright ) . Lapinskas deemed his character " pleased that somebody likes him " , and said that while he was also interested in Jodie Gold ( Kylie Babbington ) , he was put " on the spot " by Poppy and so did what he thought was expected of him in asking her out . He and Jodie later kissed ; Lapinskas revealed that Jodie would be angry with herself for betraying Poppy and decide to leave London . An Inside Soap writer predicted that Anthony had landed himself in a big mess , and that he was " playing with fire " by kissing both Poppy and Jodie . A source told RTÉ , " [ Jodie ] and Poppy have never let a man come between them . Poppy may have something to say to Jodie when she finds out they have kissed . " 
 = = = = Amira Masood = = = = 
 In January 2012 , Anthony takes an interest to Amira Masood ( Preeya Kalidas ) , Amira states in EastEnders to Zainab Masood ( Nina Wadia ) that Anthony ' brightens up her life by treating her like a princess ' . Speaking of his relationship with Amira , Lapinskas told Digital Spy , " From the very first time Anthony saw Amira at the pub , he said she was a goddess . Since then , he 's been helping her out a bit , and she 's warming to him . You never know what could happen – watch this space . It could turn into something beautiful ! He added , " I think at first she might have wanted to use him to make Syed ( Marc Elliot ) jealous , but over a period of time , she might start warming to him . He is genuinely a nice guy and quite charming , so she could fall for him " . 
 = = = = Derek Branning = = = = 
 In February 2012 , Anthony and Tyler get involved with criminal Derek Branning ( Jamie Foreman ) . Of this storyline <unk> said , " I loved the challenge . Every time you get a big storyline and lots of scripts , it 's fantastic – there 's lots to sink your teeth into . Myself , Jamie and Tony Discipline sat down and spoke about the scenes beforehand , discussing how we were going to perform them . It 's like taking on a new project , so every time I get a new storyline , I 'm hands @-@ on and ready to go for it . " On the scenes involving Anthony , Tyler and Derek , Lapinskas said , " I think it was definitely a shock for them to see his true colours ! Anthony was really worried as he didn 't want them to get into trouble , so as we saw , he was trying his best to get them out of it . But even though they were scared of Derek , Anthony and Tyler are brothers and they 've got each other 's backs , so it was nice that we saw them standing up to Derek in some of the scenes . " 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 9 May 2012 , Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy reported Lapinskas would be leaving EastEnders . His character departed 30 August 2012 . Of his exit , Lapinskas said " I 'm having a fantastic time working on EastEnders and playing the role of Anthony Moon . Working with David Essex , Tony Discipline and the EastEnders cast has been an absolute pleasure . Although I will really miss EastEnders and everyone involved , I am very excited about future projects and what is next for me as an actor . " Lapinskas revealed that Anthony 's exit plot sees him make a " big mistake " . Anthony realises how much he loves Alice Branning ( Jasmyn Banks ) but is unsure how to deal with her brother and father Joey ( David Witts ) and Derek Branning ( Jamie Foreman ) respectively . Speaking to Soap Life , Lapinskas said " Joey manipulates Anthony into challenging Derek , which is a big mistake . I can 't give too much away , but I can tell you that after going up against Derek , Anthony has no choice but to leave the Square . " Magazine reports claim that Anthony packs his bags after losing everything to Joey and Derek , revising his gambling problem . Lapinskas hopes that Anthony will return someday . In an interview with Inside Soap , Lapinskas said that EastEnders was his first job outside of drama school and added that he has learnt a lot from the people he worked with . He also added " I was quite disappointed when I found out Anthony would be leaving , I 'd have liked to do a lot more stuff with him . It 's a shame to not be a part of what 's coming up . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Inside Soap held a poll to see which of the new Moon family members , Eddie , Tyler or Anthony , its readers were most looking forward to seeing . Anthony came last with 12 % of the vote . During an Inside Soap feature on the Moon brothers vs the Mitchell brothers , Kate Woodward said " Two sexy brothers to shake up Albert Square ? That sounds familiar ! But are Anthony and Tyler really the new Grant and Phil Mitchell ? " Lapinskas commented on this , saying " It 's a lot of pressure to put us both under , but what a duo to be compared to ! ... Phil and Grant were in the show together for at least 10 years , and they were fantastic – so to be linked to them is phenomenal . It really is a lot to live up to , but Tony and I are hoping to come in with out own energy and bring something completely new to EastEnders . Rachel Tarley from the Metro said " it 's nice to have a bit of fresh blood in the soap , especially since the appearance of another one of his siblings always seems to leave Michael a little more demented than he was before . Lapinskas revealed to the Daily Mirror that because of his role in EastEnders , he is recognised in public , calling the experience " surreal " . Cecile Metcalf of the Daily Mail branded Anthony " the loveable rogue of the square , with a cheeky answer for everything " . 
 = Chrystal Macmillan = 
 Chrystal Macmillan ( 13 June 1872 – 21 September 1937 ) was a Scottish Liberal politician , barrister , feminist and pacifist , and the first female science graduate from the University of Edinburgh as well as that institution 's first female honours graduate in Mathematics . She was an activist for women 's right to vote , and for other women 's causes . She was the first woman to plead a case before the House of Lords , and was one of the founders of the Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom . 
 In the first year of World War I , Macmillan spoke for the peace @-@ seeking women of the United Kingdom at the International Congress of Women , a peace congress convened at The Hague . Afterward , she met with world leaders such as President Woodrow Wilson , whose countries were still neutral , to present the proposals formulated at The Hague . Wilson subsequently used these proposals as some of his Fourteen Points , his justification for making war to forge a lasting peace . At war 's end , Macmillan served as a delegate at the Paris Peace Conference , 1919 , and helped encourage the founding of the League of Nations . Macmillan tried but did not succeed in getting the League to establish nationality for women independent of the nationality of their husbands . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Macmillan was born Jessie Chrystal Macmillan on 13 June 1872 to Edinburgh tea merchant , John Macmillan and his wife Jessie Chrystal Finlayson . She was the couple 's only daughter among their eight sons . After an early education in Edinburgh she boarded at St Leonards School and St <unk> School for Girls in St Andrews on the east coast of Scotland . She returned to enroll at the University of Edinburgh in October 1892 . Among the first female students there , she was not the first to graduate , as others were more advanced in their studies when they entered as graduate students , and earned Master 's degrees before she finished her undergraduate work . Macmillan studied science subjects including Honours Mathematics with George Chrystal , Astronomy with Ralph Copeland , and Natural Philosophy with Peter Guthrie Tait and Cargill <unk> Knott . She earned her Bachelor of Science degree in April 1896 , the first woman at Edinburgh to do so . 
 In the summer of 1896 she went to Berlin for further university study , then returned to Edinburgh and passed an examination in Greek language to enter the Faculty of Arts in October 1896 . She studied a number of social subjects including politics , and graduated in April 1900 . Macmillan was the first woman to earn First @-@ class honours from Edinburgh in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy , also earning Second @-@ class honours in Moral Philosophy and Logic . During this time she was a member of the Edinburgh Ladies ' Debating Society , a forum which helped her gain confidence arguing in the face of opposition . She also joined the Edinburgh Mathematical Society in May 1897 , the second woman member after Flora Philip in 1896 . 
 = = Women 's rights = = 
 Macmillan was active in the Edinburgh National Society for Women 's Suffrage ( <unk> ) . In 1897 , two women 's groups in Great Britain united to become the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies ( NUWSS ) , of whom Macmillan , along with Louisa Stevenson , served as executive committee members from Edinburgh . She was known as Chrystal Macmillan — she did not use the name Jessie , her mother 's first name and her own birth name . 
 As graduates , Macmillan and four other women were full members of the General Council of Edinburgh University , but they were denied the opportunity to vote in February 1906 to determine the Member of Parliament who would represent the university seat . Macmillan argued that the wording of the General Council 's voting statutes used the word persons throughout , and that she and the other female graduates were indeed persons . In March , Macmillan wrote to Elizabeth Clarke Wolstenholme Elmy to ask for aid , as Elmy was the author of the pamphlet The Enfranchisement of Women . Macmillan told Elmy " I formed my beliefs on your pamphlet . " Elmy recommended she contact Charlotte Carmichael Stopes for additional useful arguments . Macmillan brought the case before the University Courts in 1907 but lost , and lost a subsequent appeal . Scottish suffragists banded together to raise the £ 1000 required to present a case to the House of Lords . They hoped to raise awareness in Great Britain of the absurdity and injustice of denying the vote to educated women such as themselves . 
 In November 1908 , Macmillan appeared in London to argue , as a university graduate , for her right to vote for Scottish University seats . During her speech , the buildings of Parliament were made to suspend the temporary arrangements put in place to prevent women from entering — such arrangements had been instituted after the first militant suffrage agitations . Macmillan was the first woman to argue a case before the bar of the House of Lords . She was backed by her contemporary , Frances Simson , one of the first eight female graduates of Edinburgh . Given audience late in the day , Macmillan spoke for three quarters of an hour . Press reports of the appearance described her as a " modern Portia . " In Scotland , Glasgow 's The Herald reported that she began nervously but warmed to her subject and " argued law in an admirable speaking voice " . Two days later she continued to plead her case , this time in " complete self @-@ possession " , wearing a dark red outfit and hat trimmed with ermine furs . Like other suffragists in Britain and the United States , she based her case on the words person and persons in the voting statutes , arguing that such unspecific words were no basis for the exclusion of one entire sex from voting . The court upheld both lower courts ' decisions that the word persons did not include women when referring to privileges granted by the state . She lost the case , but The New York Times reported that she responded to the decision against her with the words " We 'll live to fight another day " . In Wellington , New Zealand , the Evening Post wrote a less strident account , noting that Macmillan was cheerful in defeat . After the court adjourned , she said to a reporter from the London Daily Chronicle , " I don 't suppose that there is anything more to be done just now , but we shall live to fight another day . " No matter her exact words , her time at the House of Lords attracted worldwide publicity which proved valuable to the women 's cause . 
 In 1911 , Macmillan attended the sixth congress of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance ( IWSA ) in Stockholm . There , she embarked upon a long @-@ term project , in cooperation with Marie <unk> , president of the German Union for Woman Suffrage , and Maria <unk> , president of the French League for Women 's Rights , to document women 's voting conditions around the world . In May 1913 , after two years of correspondence with widely separated women 's rights activists to gather global information , the women completed Woman Suffrage in Practice , 1913 , a book to which Carrie Chapman Catt added a foreword . Published in conjunction with the NUWSS and the National American Woman Suffrage Association , the book described current women 's voting practices in 35 countries and empires , with the authors dividing the work by country . Macmillan was responsible for writing about the UK , the US , New Zealand , Australia , India , China , South Africa and five smaller countries . Macmillan noticed that in few countries and empires were women excluded specifically by statute — they were instead kept from voting by custom alone . She wrote from both personal experience and outside observation of women 's activists : " as soon as they become alive to this fact , they have tested the legality of their exclusion in the law courts . " In 1913 , Macmillan attended the seventh IWSA congress in Budapest , and began to serve the IWSA as vice president , a position she would hold for ten years . In 1914 , she authored a 30 @-@ page booklet entitled Facts versus fancies on woman suffrage published by the NUWSS . 
 = = Peace activism = = 
 When World War I began , Macmillan looked for peace activism on the part of NUWSS . Instead , she found a majority of British women were in favour of helping the men win the war . Her pacifism was not at all passive — soon after hostilities broke out , she travelled to Flushing , Netherlands on a mission of mercy . By late October 1914 she was providing food for refugees from the fall of Antwerp . Macmillan signed the Open Christmas Letter , a peace @-@ seeking exchange between women of warring nations , in late 1914 . 
 Elsewhere in the world , pacifist women were forced to adjust to the realities of war . After " the guns of August " , <unk> Schwimmer , a native of Austria – Hungary working in England but prevented by war from returning home , outlined her idea for an international conference of neutrals to mediate between warring nations . In September 1914 , <unk> wrote to Catt in America with " deep personal regret " for the " terrible war " . The pacifist women of Germany were forced by war to withdraw their invitation to host the annual IWSA congress which was to have been held nine months later in Berlin . In December 1914 , Canadian Julia Grace Wales , a professor at the University of Wisconsin – Madison , published her views about working toward a mediated peace in a pamphlet entitled " Continuous Mediation Without Armistice " , popularly known as the Wisconsin Plan . Taking these messages as her inspiration , Catt proposed that , rather than holding a woman suffrage convention in Berlin , an international peace congress of women should meet in The Hague for four days beginning 28 April 1915 . 
 When this announcement reached the UK , the NUWSS was divided on the one hand by patriots such as Millicent Fawcett who were devoted to war work and on the other by the signers of the Christmas letter who wished to send peace delegates . However , the majority of the NUWSS were nationalistic more than they were peace @-@ minded . They rejected a resolution favored by internationalists Helen Bright Clark and Margaret Bondfield which would have supported a delegation of women at The Hague . Because of this , women such as Margaret Ashton , Helena Swanwick and Maude Royden resigned from the NUWSS and made plans to attend at The Hague , some 180 women in total . Macmillan was the only internationalist executive of NUWSS who did not resign ; she was away performing relief work . Volunteering near The Hague , Macmillan prepared to join the ex @-@ NUWSS members after the group crossed the English Channel . 
 At The Hague 28 April to 1 May 1915 , a large congress of 1 @,@ 150 women from North America and Europe gathered to discuss peace proposals . The event was called the International Congress of Women , or the Women 's Peace Congress . The 180 @-@ strong contingent of British women was greatly reduced by Winston Churchill 's purposeful cancellation of British ferry service across the Channel , stranding most of the British activists . Already in Antwerp , Macmillan easily attended the women 's conference to speak for the UK — she was one of only three British women present . Macmillan was selected as a member of the international committee who were to travel to neutral nations and champion the proposal of the Congress . The Wisconsin Plan was unanimously adopted as the optimum method for returning peace to the world , and Macmillan , Schwimmer and the committee travelled to the neutral US to present President Woodrow Wilson with it . Many of the women 's peace proposals were used by Wilson in his Fourteen Points , and the women 's efforts helped encourage the later founding of the League of Nations . 
 After the war , Macmillan went to Zürich in May 1919 as a delegate to the International Congress of Women . The Congress strongly condemned the harsh surrender terms that were being planned for Germany in the Treaty of Versailles to be signed the next month . Macmillan carried the Congress ' condemnation to the ongoing Paris Peace Conference , but no changes were made to the treaty . 
 = = Lawyer = = 
 By early 1918 , British women who had attained the age of 30 were given the right to vote and hold office . Following the passing of the Sex Disqualification ( Removal ) Act 1919 , which enabled women to become members of the legal profession , Macmillan applied to Middle Temple as a pupil barrister . She was called to the bar on 28 January 1924 and in 1926 joined the Western Circuit , becoming only the second women to be elected to its Bar Mess . Between then and 1929 she acted as counsel for defence in the six cases in which she appeared on the Circuit , and she took 65 cases in the North London Session courts between 1927 and 1936 . From 1929 , she appeared at the Central Criminal Court in five cases for the prosecution , and one for defence [ court books ] . There are no records available for her civil cases . As she was studying for the bar , she co @-@ founded the Open Door Council for the repeal of legal restraints on women . Macmillan worked to lift restrictions and so give women of all stations an equal opportunity in the workplace . NUWSS was re @-@ organised in 1918 as the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship , but Macmillan disagreed with the group 's stance on protective legislation for women workers . In 1929 , she co @-@ founded a global group , the Open Door International for the Economic Emancipation of the Woman Worker — she served as president of this group until her death . 
 = = Politician = = 
 At the 1935 general election , Macmillan unsuccessfully stood for election as the Liberal candidate in Edinburgh North . She came third , with less than 6 % of the votes . 
 In the same period , she worked to stem the traffic in females used as sexual slaves . To that end , she worked with Alison Roberta Noble <unk> ' Association for Moral and Social Hygiene . Feminist writer Cicely Hamilton wrote of Macmillan that " she was the right kind of lawyer , one who held that Law should be synonymous with Justice ... Her chief aim in life — one might call it her passion — was to give every woman of every class and nation the essential protection of justice . She was , herself , a great and very just human being ... She could not budge an inch on matters of principle but she never lost her temper and never bore a grudge in defeat . " 
 = = Women 's nationality = = 
 In 1917 , Macmillan spoke out against the practice of assigning a woman 's national citizenship depending on whom she married . From 1905 , this had been the vocal position of <unk> Hamilton @-@ Gordon , Marchioness of Aberdeen and <unk> , known as Lady Aberdeen , but Macmillan saw the issue in a new light during the war . Women who were married to foreigners were , upon declaration of war , faced suddenly with status as enemy nationals within the land of their birth . From the same legal basis , a number of British women were enjoying full citizenship in enemy territories . Macmillan was in favour of women retaining their existing citizenship through marriage . To that end , she wrote a piece entitled " The Nationality of Married Women " that was published twice in Jus <unk> , once in July 1917 and again with updated statistics in June 1918 . However , no new laws were passed about it , and a woman 's citizenship remained tied to that of her husband . 
 The subject came up again in 1930 , during the Conference on Codification of International Law , held in The Hague . A strong contingent of women from America joined international women 's groups to change the existing nationality laws , but the women were unable to agree on wording . Intense lobbying by women , and a massive parade demonstration , failed to influence the <unk> , and the international law continued to hold that a woman 's nationality followed her husband 's . In response , Macmillan organised an International Committee for Action on the Nationality of Married Women early the next year . Six of the most influential international women 's groups sought a broad base of support from working women . Macmillan 's stated goal was to delay ratification of the Hague Convention , and to make certain that a woman 's nationality would not change without her consent , and that the nationality of a couple 's children would not be more influenced by the father 's nationality . The new committee was successful in lobbying the League of Nations to address the problem , but when the League constituted a study group , that group was split between two intractable factions . On one side were those who wanted a married couple to have exactly one nationality , based on that of the husband , and on the other side were those like Macmillan who favoured independent citizenship between spouses , with the possibility of wives having different citizenship than their husbands , and children to be allowed dual citizenship . In 1932 , the women 's group , at an impasse , were pushed aside as ineffectual by the League of Nations , who decided in favour of ratifying the Hague Convention . The women 's group disbanded , and the Hague convention was ratified in 1937 . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1937 , Macmillan 's health was failing . In June , a leg was amputated , and her heart was weak . On 21 September she died of heart disease , at home in bed at 8 Chalmers Crescent , Edinburgh . On 23 September her body was cremated . In her will , she specified bequests to the Open Door International for the Economic Emancipation of the Woman Worker , and to the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1957 , the United Nations established independent nationality for each married person , a ruling Macmillan had worked toward without success in her lifetime . 
 A building at the University of Edinburgh is named for her , the Chrystal Macmillan Building at the north @-@ west corner of George Square . Since 2008 , it houses the majority of the School of Social and Political Science . The Chrystal Macmillan Prize is a £ 100 award given " at the discretion of the Scholarships and Prizes Committee " of the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple in London , a professional group of attorneys . The prize was founded as an annual grant to benefit female law students scoring the highest in the bar 's final examination , and to support societies with which Macmillan was associated . A Millennial Plaque honouring Macmillan is placed at the King 's Buildings , a science campus at the University of Edinburgh . The plaque notes that she was a " suffragist , founder of Women 's International League for Peace and Freedom " , as well as the being the " first woman science graduate of the University " , an honour she achieved in 1896 . 
 = USS Yorktown ( PG @-@ 1 ) = 
 USS Yorktown ( Gunboat No. 1 / PG @-@ 1 ) was lead ship of her class of steel @-@ hulled , twin @-@ screw gunboats in the United States Navy in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . She was the second U.S. Navy ship named in honor of the American Revolutionary War 's Battle of Yorktown . 
 Yorktown was laid down by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in May 1887 and launched in April 1888 . She was just over 244 feet ( 74 m ) long and 36 feet ( 11 m ) abeam , and displaced 1 @,@ 710 long tons ( 1 @,@ 740 t ) . She was equipped with two steam engines which were supplemented with three schooner @-@ rigged masts . The ship 's main battery consisted of six 6 @-@ inch ( 15 @.@ 2 cm ) guns and was augmented by an assortment of smaller @-@ caliber guns . 
 At launch , Yorktown joined the Squadron of Evolution of " New Navy " steel @-@ hulled ships . Detached from that squadron , Yorktown , under the command of Robley D. Evans , sailed to Valparaíso , Chile , during the 1891 Baltimore Crisis and relieved USS Baltimore at that port . After that situation was resolved , Yorktown took part in the joint British – American sealing patrol in Alaskan waters and duty on the Asiatic Station before returning to the United States in 1898 . Yorktown was out of commission during the Spanish – American War , but took part in actions in the Philippine – American War and the Boxer Rebellion in 1899 and 1900 , respectively , after she had been recommissioned . 
 After three years out of commission from 1903 to 1906 , Yorktown hosted the Secretary of the Navy on board when he greeted the Great White Fleet on its arrival in San Francisco in May 1908 . Over the next five years , most of Yorktown 's time was spent in sealing patrols in Alaska and duty in Latin American ports . From July 1912 , Yorktown was out of commission for alterations , but resumed duties off the Mexican , Nicaraguan , and Honduran coasts beginning in April 1913 . Through World War I , Yorktown continued in the same role , until she departed for the East Coast of the United States in April 1918 . She served an escort for one convoy headed to Halifax in August , and remained in coastal escort duties in the east until January 1919 . After arrival at San Diego in February , she was decommissioned for the final time in June 1919 ; she was sold in 1921 to an Oakland , California , firm and broken up that same year . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The Yorktown class gunboats — unofficially considered third @-@ class cruisers — were the product of a United States Navy design attempt to produce compact ships with good seakeeping abilities and , yet , able to carry a heavy battery . Yorktown was authorized in the 1886 fiscal year , and the contract for her construction was awarded to the William Cramp and Sons shipyard of Philadelphia . The hull for Yorktown was designed by the Navy 's Bureau of Construction and Repair while the mechanical design was left to the Cramp yard . Yorktown 's keel was laid on 14 May 1887 . 
 The ship was launched on 28 April 1888 and sponsored by Mary Cameron , the daughter of U.S. Senator Don Cameron of Pennsylvania . The dynamite @-@ gun cruiser Vesuvius was launched a few minutes after Yorktown in the same ceremony . According to a news account , 25 United States Senators , 180 Congressmen , the Secretary of the Navy William Collins Whitney , and the governors of six states attended the dual ceremony , many arriving from Washington , D.C. , via the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad 's passenger steamer SS Columbia . By 19 March 1889 , Cramp had completed Yorktown and was prepared to turn her over to the Navy . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 As built , Yorktown was 244 feet 5 inches ( 74 @.@ 50 m ) in length and 36 feet ( 11 m ) abeam . Her steel hull had an average draft of 14 feet ( 4 m ) , which was expected to give her the ability to escape from larger ships into shallow water . At the waterline was a turtleback deck of ⅜ -inch ( 9 @.@ 5 mm ) steel that formed a watertight seal over the lower spaces . The deck had a crown at the level of the waterline and curved downwards to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) below the waterline at the sides of the ship . Below this armored deck were twelve compartments separated by watertight bulkheads ; the spaces above were equipped with watertight doors intended to be closed during battle . 
 Above the armored deck , Yorktown had forecastle and poop decks with an open gun deck that spanned the length of the ship between them . The conning tower was located forward on the forecastle deck and was oval @-@ shaped to deflect shot . It was outfitted with a steam @-@ powered steering wheel , an telegraph , and speaking tubes ; it was protected by 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of steel armor plate . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Yorktown was powered by two triple @-@ expansion steam engines which each drove one of the pair of 10 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) , three @-@ bladed screw propellers . The cylinders of each engine were 22 , 31 , and 51 inches ( 56 , 79 , and 130 cm ) in diameter and had a 30 @-@ inch ( 76 cm ) stroke . Each engine was rated at 3 @,@ 400 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 500 kW ) and together were designed to move the ship at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) , though the ship exceeded that in her trials . 
 The engines , situated in separate watertight compartments , were each fed by a pair of coal @-@ fired boilers . Each boiler was horizontally mounted and was 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 90 m ) in diameter and 17 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 33 m ) in length with a total grate area of 220 square inches ( 1 @,@ 400 cm2 ) . Yorktown 's coal bunkers could carry up to 400 long tons ( 410 t ) of the fuel , and were shielded from " shot and shell " . At a near top @-@ speed of 16 knots , the ship could cover 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ) in 6 ½ days ; at the more economical speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) she could cruiser 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ) over 62 days . 
 To supplement her steam power plant , Yorktown was built with three masts that were schooner @-@ rigged . She had a total sail area of 6 @,@ 300 square feet ( 590 m2 ) . The steam and sail combination was expected to allow Yorktown to remain at sea for months at a time during wartime . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Yorktown 's main battery consisted of six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) / 30 caliber Mark 3 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 11 @,@ 000 pounds ( 5 @,@ 000 kg ) . Two were mounted on the forecastle deck , two on the poop deck , and the other pair amidships on the gun deck . The two guns on the gun deck were mounted 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above the waterline , while the other four were 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) above . The guns fired 105 @-@ pound ( 48 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles with a propellant charge weighing 18 @.@ 8 pounds ( 8 @.@ 5 kg ) at 1 @,@ 950 feet per second ( 590 m / s ) . At an elevation of 30 @.@ 2 ° , the guns had a range of 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) . Each gun was shielded with steel plating 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick . 
 Yorktown 's secondary battery consisted of two 6 @-@ pounder ( 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 24 in ) ) guns , two 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 85 in ) ) guns , and two 1 @-@ pounder ( 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) ) guns . All were based on designs of the French arms company Hotchkiss . According to a 1902 Bureau of Ordnance publication , an armor @-@ piercing round fired from a 6 @-@ pounder gun could penetrate 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of armor at a distance of 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) . 
 = = 1889 – 1897 = = 
 The ship was commissioned at the League Island ( Philadelphia ) Navy Yard on 23 April 1889 under the command of Commander French E. Chadwick . After Yorktown conducted her final sea trials , she was assigned to the " Squadron of Evolution " — sometimes also referred to as the " White Squadron " — in late 1889 . Yorktown operated with that unit as it developed tactical maneuvers for use by the new steel @-@ hulled naval vessels then coming into service in the United States Navy . After this duty , Yorktown departed the east coast of the United States on 7 December 1889 , bound for European waters ; stopped briefly at Fayal in the Azores ; and arrived at Lisbon , Portugal , two days before Christmas . The ship subsequently cruised the Mediterranean into the early spring of the following year , calling at ports in Spain , Morocco , France , Italy , Greece , and Malta . Following her return to the United States on 17 June 1890 , the warship entered drydock at the New York Navy Yard on 1 July for repairs that lasted until 8 August . Upon the completion of these alterations , Yorktown took part in the ceremonies marking the embarkation of the remains of the noted inventor , John Ericsson — of Monitor fame — for transportation back to his native Sweden for burial . 
 Yorktown next again operated in the Squadron of Evolution off the eastern seaboard and into the Gulf of Mexico into the summer of 1891 . Under Acting Rear Admiral John Grimes Walker , the squadron normally cruised in the Gulf of Mexico from January to April and off the east coast from May to October . While in the gulf , the ships called at Galveston , Texas ; New Orleans ; and Pensacola , Florida ; and carried out target practice in Tampa Bay . Later , the squadron conducted small arms practice at Yorktown , Virginia , after arriving at Hampton Roads . In July 1891 , the squadron carried out exercises and maneuvers in connection with the naval militias of New York and Massachusetts during which it added torpedo attacks upon the Fleet to the usual target practices . In addition , it conducted drills and landing exercises . The Secretary of the Navy 's report for the fiscal year 1891 noted that " useful experience " had been gained by the Squadron of Evolution in the training of commanding , navigating , and watch officers in skillfully and safely maneuvering vessels in formation and in restricted waters . In addition , engineers were trained in regulating and maintaining economical coal consumption . 
 = = = Baltimore crisis = = = 
 On 8 October 1891 , Yorktown , under the command of Commander Robley D. Evans , departed New York to join the Pacific Squadron . The gunboat put in to Charlotte Amalie , Danish West Indies , to " coal ship " on 14 October . While the ship was engaged in this duty , Yorktown was ordered to Valparaíso , Chile , in response to the Baltimore Crisis . 
 During the 1891 Chilean Civil War , the Itata , a cargo ship employed by Chilean Congressionalists , had loaded weaponry in California , but was detained in San Diego by U.S. officials . After Itata was able to slip away from San Diego , Charleston caught up with the ship at the Chilean port of Iquique in July 1891 and escorted the ship back to San Diego before her cargo could be unloaded . In October , some months after the Itata Incident had ended , the American cruiser Baltimore put in at Valparaíso . On 16 October , a group of sailors from Baltimore ashore on liberty were attacked by Congressionalists , still angry at the Itata affair . Two of Baltimore 's sailors were killed and eighteen wounded ; thirty @-@ six other American sailors were arrested by the local authorities . Tensions ran high in both Chile and the United States . 
 Yorktown , a part of the United States ' response , departed Charlotte Amalie for Valparaíso on 17 October for a six @-@ week , storm @-@ tossed voyage around the South American continent via the Straits of Magellan . Less than two weeks after Yorktown 's 30 November arrival , Baltimore departed , leaving American interests in the hands of Evans and Yorktown . Over the ensuing weeks , Chile and the United States came close to war , but cooler heads prevailed . Locally , Evans ' patience was " dangerously tested " , but it held . One inflammatory incident occurred when Chilean torpedo boats bore down on Evans ' ship , turning their helms hard over at the last possible instant to avoid a collision . On another occasion , a group of locals threw rocks at Evans and his gig as it lay at the foot of a jetty . 
 After a month at Valparaíso , Yorktown took on refugees from the American , Spanish , and Italian legations in mid @-@ January 1892 . She got underway on the 19th and arrived at Callao , Peru , on the 25th . While Yorktown lay anchored there , tension between the United States and Chile relaxed and the crisis abated , and the Chilean later government provided compensation for the families of the American sailors that were killed . 
 = = = Sealing patrol = = = 
 Yorktown stood out of Callao on 4 March 1892 , steamed northward via San Diego and San Francisco , and eventually arrived at the Mare Island Navy Yard , Vallejo , California . The gunboat subsequently underwent repairs there until late in the following month . Having weathered one diplomatic storm and international incident , Evans and his command soon set sail on another mission that , if handled wrongly , could have caused ill @-@ feeling with the British . 
 That spring , Yorktown — along with two other naval vessels and a trio of revenue cutters — headed toward Arctic waters on 27 April to protect the great herds of seals in the Bering Sea from poachers . Traveling along the west coast of the United States , the gunboat and her crew " braced " , in Evans ' words , " at the prospect of doing something " . As at Valparaíso , Evans faced the possibility of becoming involved in an international incident arising from possible confrontations with Canadian sealers . Operating under the protection of the British crown , the latter had taken particularly heavy catches . Many American vessels put to sea under the British flag in an attempt to evade prosecution by their own government . The British agreed to help put an end to the slaughter of seals and decided upon joint action with the United States in prosecuting the poachers . About 110 schooners , large and small , made up the sealing fleet , typically " armed " with double @-@ barrelled shotguns for killing the animals and Winchester rifles for dealing with any humans who attempted to interfere . The fact that the great majority of seals killed had been female — still with young in many cases — almost doubled the toll of slain seals . As Evans noted : " the slaughter in the North Pacific was fearful " . 
 Arriving at Port Townsend , Washington , on 30 April , Yorktown put to sea on 13 May , arriving at <unk> , Unalaska , one week later . Coaling there , the gunboat skirted the ice floes near the seal rookeries of the Pribilof Islands , reconnoitering the vicinity for sealers . Assisted by a revenue cutter , Yorktown guarded the passes to the Bering Sea . The crews of the patrolling American ships lacked fresh provisions but carried on in spite of the hardships imposed by both diet and climate . Fresh fish , however , proved abundant . Codfish was the staple with an occasional gourmet treat of salmon . 
 = = = Telescopic gunsight = = = 
 Besides the patrols made during this deployment in northwestern waters , Yorktown conducted routine operations such as target practices . Among the officers assigned to the ship at that time was Lt. Bradley Fiske , a young officer who had invented and constructed a practical telescopic gunsight . Fiske 's sight had been tested in Baltimore and had favorably impressed that ship 's officers — including her commander , Captain <unk> S. Schley . Evans , however , had not taken a liking to Fiske 's newfangled gadget but nevertheless consented to allow a second test on board Yorktown ( the first one had failed miserably ) . On the afternoon of 22 September 1892 , during scheduled target practice , Fiske 's invention worked as designed and elicited praise from Evans . As Fiske himself later wrote in the United States Naval Institute 's magazine Proceedings , modern naval gunnery had its birth not in the British Navy but in the American — off Unalaska on 22 September 1892 , in Yorktown . 
 Yorktown continued her task of patrolling until 21 September when she departed Unalaska for the Mare Island Navy Yard . From 11 to 24 October , the ship underwent repairs there before proceeding on to the east coast via Cape Horn . Yorktown eventually arrived at Norfolk , Virginia , on 24 February 1893 . 
 After repairs at the New York Navy Yard from 25 April to 26 July , Yorktown retraced her route south and sailed again around Cape Horn back into the Pacific . She then moved north to resume patrolling the Bering Sea . She protected seal rookeries into 1894 before returning to Mare Island for repairs which lasted into mid @-@ September . 
 On 24 September 1894 , Yorktown sailed for the western Pacific and duty on the Asiatic Station . Sailing via Honolulu , she reached Yokohama , Japan , on 8 December 1894 and spent the next three years , under the command of Commander Charles Stockton touching at the principal ports @-@ of @-@ call along the coasts of China and Japan . She departed Yokohama early in the autumn of 1897 and made port at Mare Island on 18 November 1897 . Subsequently laid up at Mare Island and decommissioned on 8 December , the gunboat remained inactive there through the Spanish – American War in 1898 . 
 = = 1898 – 1903 = = 
 Recommissioned on 17 November 1898 , with Commander Charles S. Sperry in command , Yorktown sailed again for the Far East on 7 January 1899 . Rumors of German machinations in Samoa lengthened Yorktown 's stay at Hawaii from a few days to a few weeks ; but , when the anticipated trouble failed to materialize , Yorktown resumed her voyage to the Philippine Islands . On 23 February , she arrived at Cavite Navy Yard , near Manila where patrolled to prevent gun @-@ runners thought to be supplying guns and ammunition to the Insurrectos , Filipinos fighting for independence . 
 At one point , rumors flew concerning possible German gun @-@ running activities ; and Yorktown patrolled off the entrance to Subic Bay and from thence to Lingayen to keep a lookout for the filibusters . She continued coastal patrol work over the next three years , cooperating with the Army , transporting and convoying troops , and patrolling wide areas of often badly charted waters . Upon occasion , Yorktown served as " mother ship " to smaller gunboats , providing officers and men to staff the smaller patrol craft . Ensigns William Harrison Standley and Harry E. Yarnell ( both future admirals ) and future naval historian and archivist Dudley Wright Knox were among the junior officers who served in Yorktown during this time . 
 = = = Philippine – American War = = = 
 During the Philippine – American War , Yorktown stood in to Baler Bay , on the west coast of Luzon , on 11 April 1899 , on a mission to relieve a Spanish garrison that had been under siege by Filipino troops for nine months . Lt. James C. Gillmore and a party of sailors in the ship 's whaleboat provided a decoy , ostensibly taking soundings of a nearby river . Meanwhile , Standley and an enlisted man landed farther up the coast to reconnoiter . The next day , Gillmore and his boat crew drifted into a trap , running aground too far from the river 's mouth and out of sight of Yorktown . Filipino troops , hidden in the jungle @-@ covered banks , raked the boat with rifle fire . Two American sailors were killed ; two were mortally wounded ; and the remainder , including Gillmore , were slightly wounded . The survivors were taken prisoner until freed by U.S. Army troops . Standley completed his mission and , together with the enlisted signalman , made it back to the ship . 
 = = = Boxer Rebellion = = = 
 In 1899 , the situation in China worsened until it culminated in the Boxer Rebellion . The following spring , Yorktown was withdrawn from her patrol duties in the northern Philippines to provide assistance to the operations off the coast of North China . She departed Manila on 3 April 1900 , bound for China ; and , after she reached the mainland , her landing force served ashore at Taku . In addition , Marines from Yorktown participated in the actions at Tientsin between June and July . Under the command of Commander Edward D. Taussig from June 1900 to June 1901 , she continued to support the China Relief Expedition forces . In June 1900 , she assisted Oregon back off a reef near that Chinese port . 
 = = 1900 – 1903 = = 
 The gunboat departed Shanghai on 10 September 1900 and reached Cavite on the 17th . In the Philippines , she resumed her cooperation with Army forces , still engaged in pacification operations , and continued these duties for the next two years . In between pacification missions , she performed survey work : at Guam in November 1901 and at <unk> Bay , Philippines , in February 1903 . In April 1902 , Yorktown 's Coxswain Joseph Quick rescued a shipmate from drowning while the ship was in port at Yokohama , Japan . For his efforts , Quick was awarded a peacetime Medal of Honor . 
 Yorktown departed the Far East in early 1903 and returned to Mare Island on 3 June . Two weeks later , on the 17th , she was decommissioned . 
 = = 1906 – 1912 = = 
 Recommissioned at Mare Island on 1 October 1906 , with Commander Richard T. Mulligan in command , Yorktown was fitted out there until 9 November . Underway on that day , she operated off the west coasts of Mexico , Honduras , and Nicaragua into the following summer . After repairs at San Francisco and Mare Island , Yorktown conducted target practice at Magdalena Bay , Mexico , and relieved Albany as station ship at Acapulco . She then cruised with the 2d Squadron of the Pacific Fleet to Magdalena Bay and San Francisco . Over the ensuing months , Yorktown continued her regular local operations . 
 Yorktown hosted the Secretary of the Navy , Victor H. Metcalf , to witness the arrival of the Great White Fleet — commanded by Yorktown 's former commander , Robley " Fightin ' Bob " Evans — into San Francisco . The fleet arrived on 6 May 1908 , and the flagship Connecticut saluted the secretary 's flag on Yorktown with the discharge of seventeen guns . Metcalf also boarded Yorktown on the 8th to review the assembled battleships , armored cruisers , and torpedo boats of the Pacific and Great White Fleets . On 30 May 1908 , Yorktown participated in festivities for the Rose Festival at Portland , Oregon . From June to September , Yorktown conducted seal patrols in Alaskan waters , out of Nome , Unalaska , and Sitka and , between 15 and 19 September , established a site for a wireless station at Valdez . Afterwards , Yorktown sailed south to rejoin the Pacific Fleet , conducting battle practices between 19 November and 1 December at Magdalena Bay . She later joined the armored cruisers West Virginia and Colorado and the tender Glacier at <unk> , El Salvador , before sailing for Corinto , Nicaragua , in March 1909 . After more target practices at Magdalena Bay , Yorktown was repaired at Mare Island in June and into July before shifting to Seattle , to participate in festivities for the Alaska @-@ Yukon @-@ Pacific Exposition . Later in July , the ship visited Esquimalt , British Columbia . She subsequently cruised off the Pacific coast and participated in the <unk> Festival at San Francisco in October . 
 From 13 December 1909 to 27 March 1910 , Yorktown operated off Corinto , Nicaragua , with the Nicaraguan Expeditionary Squadron . She then pursued a schedule of exercises and maneuvers , operating between California and British Columbia through June and July . She returned to a posture of readiness off Corinto and San Juan del Sur between 13 August and 7 September . She then operated off Ecuadorian , Colombian , and Peruvian ports , with the United States Consul General at Large embarked , between 19 September and 16 October before putting into Panama for coal and stores . She subsequently patrolled at <unk> , Honduras , and the familiar Corinto for most of November and December . She spent Christmas at Corinto before shifting to <unk> , en route to San Francisco and Mare Island . From March to July 1911 , Yorktown cruised off the west coasts of Mexico , Nicaragua , and Honduras . On 29 May , she rescued the survivors from the foundered Panamanian steamer <unk> , which had sunk with the loss of 60 of its 100 passengers and crew . Another period of repairs and upkeep in the late summer of 1911 proceeded the ship 's duties off the Pacific coasts of South and Central America . She returned to Mare Island in May 1912 , and was decommissioned there for alterations on 15 July . 
 = = 1913 – 1919 = = 
 Recommissioned on 1 April 1913 , with Commander George B. Bradshaw in command , Yorktown operated out of San Diego on shakedown into mid @-@ April . She was soon back at Corinto , however , remaining in Nicaragua until 5 June . After a brief period of operations off the coast , she returned to Corinto on 21 June and remained there for over a month before departing on 31 July to coal at Salina Cruz , Mexico . She moved to Mazatlán on 10 August and there picked up mail , delivering it to the port of Topolobampo , Mexico , on the 11th . Yorktown remained there until mid @-@ September . 
 For the remainder of 1913 , Yorktown conducted local operations out of San Diego and San Francisco . In January 1914 , though , the gunboat returned to Mexican waters and investigated local conditions at Ensenada between 3 and 6 January before moving , in subsequent months , to a succession of Mexican ports : Mazatlán , San Blas , Miramar , Topolobampo , and La Paz . Following an overhaul at Mare Island from 24 June to 2 September 1914 , Yorktown served in Mexican waters again into June 1915 . From that point until the entry of the United States into World War I in April 1917 , Yorktown continued her routine of patrols off Mexican , Nicaraguan , and Honduran ports with occasional repairs at Mare Island and maneuvers out of San Diego . 
 After the United States joined the Allies , Yorktown operated off the coast of Mexico until August 1917 , when she paused briefly at San Diego . On 18 July 1917 , Yorktown rescued the last surviving members of an abandoned guano mining settlement on Clipperton Island . From a peak population of roughly 100 in 1915 , only four women and seven children survived . After her time off the Mexican coast , Yorktown then cruised off the west coasts of Central and South America into 1918 . After a refit at Mare Island , Yorktown , sailed for the east coast on 28 April 1918 , transiting the Panama Canal en route , and arrived at New York on 20 August . The gunboat escorted a coastal convoy to Halifax , soon there after before returning to New York . She performed local coastwise escort duties through the end of World War I. After a period of upkeep at the New York Navy Yard in December , she departed the east coast on 2 January 1919 on her last voyage to California . 
 Arriving at San Diego on 15 February 1919 , Yorktown was placed out of commission at Mare Island on 12 June 1919 . On 17 June 1920 , she was assigned the hull number PG @-@ 1 . The veteran steel @-@ hulled gunboat was sold to the Union Hide Company of Oakland , California , on 30 September 1921 ; she was broken up in Oakland sometime after that . 
 = Brian Horrocks = 
 Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Brian Gwynne Horrocks , KCB , KBE , DSO , MC ( 7 September 1895 – 4 January 1985 ) was a senior British Army officer . He is chiefly remembered as the commander of XXX Corps in Operation Market Garden and other operations during the Second World War . He also served in the First World War and the Russian Civil War , was a prisoner of war twice , and competed in the 1924 Paris Olympics . Later he was a television presenter , authored books on military history , and was Black Rod in the House of Lords for 14 years . 
 In 1940 Horrocks commanded a battalion during the Battle of France , the first time he served under Bernard Montgomery , the most prominent British commander of the war . Montgomery later identified Horrocks as one of his most able officers , appointing him to corps commands in both North Africa and Europe . In 1943 , Horrocks was seriously wounded and took more than a year to recover before returning to command a corps in Europe . It is likely that this period out of action meant he missed out on promotion ; his contemporary corps commanders in North Africa , Oliver Leese and Miles C. Dempsey , went on to command at army level and above . Horrocks ' wound caused continuing health problems and led to his early retirement from the army after the war . 
 Since 1945 , Horrocks has been regarded by some as one of the most successful British generals of the war , " a man who really led , a general who talked to everyone , down to the simplest private soldier " , and the " beau ideal of a corps commander " . General Dwight D. Eisenhower called him " the outstanding British general under Montgomery " . 
 = = Early life and First World War = = 
 Horrocks was the only son of Colonel Sir William Horrocks , a doctor in the Royal Army Medical Corps . Educated at Uppingham School , an English public school , he entered the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , in 1913 . His score was sixth @-@ lowest of the 167 successful applicants for <unk> — even after the addition of 200 bonus points for an Officer Training Corps ( OTC ) certificate , which not all the other candidates had . An unpromising student , he might not have received a commission at all but for the outbreak of the First World War . 
 Commissioned as a second lieutenant into the 1st Battalion of the Duke of Cambridge 's Own ( Middlesex Regiment ) on 8 August 1914 , Horrocks joined the British Expeditionary Force 's retreat following its baptism of fire at the Battle of Mons . On 21 October , at the Battle of Armentières , his platoon was surrounded , and he was wounded and taken prisoner . Incarcerated in a military hospital , he was repeatedly interrogated by his German captors , who believed that the British Army were using expanding bullets in contravention of the 1899 Hague Convention . Horrocks ' captors refused to change his clothes or sheets , and denied him and a fellow officer basic amenities . Both had temporarily lost the use of their legs , and were forced to crawl to the toilet , which caused Horrocks ' wounds to become infected . Conditions improved after his discharge and transfer to a prisoner of war camp . On his way to the camp , Horrocks befriended his German escort — he attributed their rapport to the mutual respect that front @-@ line troops share . He was promoted to lieutenant on 18 December 1914 , despite being in enemy hands , and often tried to escape , once coming within 500 yards ( 460 m ) of the Dutch border before being recaptured . He was eventually placed in a compound for Russian officers , in the hope that the language barrier would hinder his escape attempts ; Horrocks used the time to learn the Russian language . Years later , working in the House of Commons , he surprised Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin by greeting them in their native tongue . In the latter part of the war he was held in Holzminden prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp . His resistance in captivity would earn him the Military Cross , awarded in 1920 and backdated to 5 May 1919 . 
 Repatriated at the end of the war , Horrocks had difficulty adapting to a peace @-@ time routine . He went on sprees in London , spending four years of accumulated back @-@ pay in six weeks . He returned to active service in 1919 when the War Office called for volunteers who knew Russian . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 In 1919 Horrocks was posted to Russia as part of the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . After landing at Vladivostok on 19 April , he was briefed at British headquarters . The White Army under Admiral Kolchak , with the help of released Czechoslovak Legion prisoners , had driven the Red Army out of Siberia . However , Kolchak 's Czech troops were returning home , and the British military contingent was urgently trying to replace them with Russians . To accomplish this , the British had just two infantry battalions and two small administrative missions , one charged with training and arming the Russians with British war @-@ surplus equipment , and the other with improving the White Army 's communications . 
 Horrocks ' first task , along with a party of 13 British officers and 30 other ranks , was to guard a train delivering 27 carriages of shells to the White Army in Omsk , 3 @,@ 000 miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ) away on the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway . The journey took more than a month , and as the only party member fluent in Russian , Horrocks had to deal with many of the difficulties encountered . At every station , he had to ward off station masters intent on acquiring the cars . While stopped in <unk> , the British officers ' presence provoked a duel between two Cossack officers . Horrocks accepted an invitation to act as a second , but the pair were arrested before the duel could take place . He managed to defuse the situation before it came to trial , by claiming his faulty Russian had been the cause of the misunderstanding . The train eventually arrived in Omsk on 20 May , with a full cargo . 
 His next assignment was in Yekaterinburg in the Urals , where he was appointed second in command of a training school for non @-@ commissioned officers attached to the Anglo @-@ Russian Brigade . He found this post frustrating , having to dismiss nearly a third of his initial cadre on medical grounds , and struggling to get supplies and support from the White Army authorities . Despite this , he developed a rapport with his men and an admiration for the Russian soldier . 
 Although British forces were ordered home shortly afterwards , Horrocks and another officer , George Hayes , remained to advise the First Siberian Army . The White Army was in retreat , and Horrocks joined them as they fell back to Vladivostok , 3 @,@ 000 miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ) away . He was captured by the Red Army on 7 January 1919 , in the town of Krasnoyarsk , and spent 10 months as a prisoner , narrowly surviving severe typhus . The British government negotiated a prisoner release , and Horrocks left Russia on 29 October , returning home on the Royal Navy cruiser HMS Delhi . 
 = = = Back home = = = 
 Horrocks rejoined his regiment , based in Germany with the British Army of the Rhine , and followed it to Ireland , then embroiled in the Anglo @-@ Irish War . His duties included searching for arms and dealing with ambushes and road @-@ blocks , which he called " a most unpleasant form of warfare " . This was followed by a short period in Silesia to deal with tensions between the Polish and German populations . 
 On his return to Britain , Horrocks took up the modern pentathlon . He competed successfully in army tournaments , and was picked for the British Olympic team for the 1924 Paris Olympics , where he finished 19th out of 38 . Horrocks spent the remainder of the inter @-@ war years in postings that included adjutant for the 9th Battalion , Middlesex Regiment of the Territorial Army ( 1926 – 1930 ) ; student at the Staff College , Camberley ( 1931 – 32 ) ; Staff Captain at the War Office ( 1934 – 36 ) ; brigade major with the 5th Infantry Brigade ( 1936 – 38 ) ; and instructor at the Staff College . The Territorial Army posting , which Horrocks considered to be among his happiest periods , provided experience in dealing with citizen soldiers , which would prove highly valuable during the Second World War . He received a brevet majority in 1935 , and was promoted to substantive major in 1936 , and brevet lieutenant colonel in 1937 . 
 In 1928 , Horrocks married Nancy Kitchin , daughter of an architect for the Local Government Board . They had one child , a daughter named Gillian , who drowned in 1979 while swimming in the River Thames . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War , Horrocks was working as an instructor at the Staff College , Camberley , where he had taught since 1938 . After helping organise a new , shorter , officer @-@ training course , in December 1939 he was promoted to substantive lieutenant colonel . The following May , he was despatched to France to command the 2nd Battalion , Middlesex Regiment , a machine @-@ gun battalion directly subordinate to the 3rd Division headquarters of Major @-@ General Bernard Montgomery . British doctrine at the time retained heavy machine guns under the direct command of a corps or division , rather than as an organic part of subordinate formations . He joined the battalion during its retreat to Dunkirk , and after only 17 days had impressed his superiors sufficiently to be given the temporary rank of brigadier , and the command of 11th Brigade . The brigade 's previous commander , Kenneth Anderson , had been promoted to General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) 3rd Division during the evacuation , when Lieutenant @-@ General Alan Brooke , commander of II Corps , was recalled to the United Kingdom and Montgomery took over the corps . On Horrocks ' return to Britain , he was given command of 9th Brigade and assigned to defend against a possible German invasion . A short stint as Brigadier General Staff of Western Command followed , before promotion to acting major @-@ general and command of 44th ( Home Counties ) Infantry Division on 25 June 1941 . In addition to his acting rank , he was promoted to substantive colonel on 28 May 1941 ( with seniority backdated to 1 July 1940 ) . 
 In March 1942 , Horrocks was given command of the newly formed 9th Armoured Division and gained the temporary rank of major @-@ general on 27 June . Horrocks , an infantry soldier with no experience in dealing with cavalry , was an unusual choice for commander of an armoured division . He trained the division hard , organising exercises to improve the effectiveness of his troops , and to familiarise himself with armoured warfare . Despite never having commanded a division in battle , he was further promoted to acting lieutenant @-@ general and sent to Egypt to command the Eighth Army 's XIII Corps , under Montgomery . General Sir Harold Alexander and Lieutenant @-@ General Montgomery had decided to make a " clean sweep " when replacing the dismissed Claude Auchinleck as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief ( C @-@ in @-@ C ) Middle East and Eighth Army commander respectively . Officers perceived to have failed under the old regime were removed , and Montgomery 's favoured commanders were brought in . Among these was Horrocks , an officer whom Montgomery felt was " exactly what was wanted for the job that lay ahead " . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 On arriving in North Africa , Horrocks ' corps was ordered to defend the Alam el Halfa ridge from an expected attack by the Afrika Korps . Concerned that heavy casualties would jeopardise his planned El Alamein offensive , Montgomery instructed Horrocks to repel Erwin Rommel 's forces " without getting unduly mauled in the process " . Horrocks prepared for a purely defensive battle , with his armour dug in around the ridge . When the Germans attacked on 30 August , they failed to lure the British tanks towards their 88mm guns — a tactic that had previously been used with great success — and found themselves battered by both artillery and the Desert Air Force . The battle ended with the Germans in control of <unk> hill , but at a high cost , and the Allied forces unwilling to try to re @-@ take it after a failed attack by the 2nd New Zealand Division . The army 's defensive success raised morale , and Horrocks was praised by his subordinate , Brigadier George Roberts , for his " wonderful knack of inspiring confidence and enthusiasm wherever he goes " . Montgomery , too , was pleased , saying " he deserves great credit for his action on that day " . 
 Horrocks was offered the command of X Corps , an armoured corps , in the planned Alamein battle . He refused it , believing that Major @-@ General Herbert Lumsden , a cavalry officer , would be more suited to the role . Instead he retained command of XIII Corps , and was given the task of making a feint to the south to deceive Axis forces , while the main thrust was made by XXX Corps and X Corps to the north . Montgomery told Horrocks that he was not to incur tank losses , so XIII Corps ' offensive operations were limited to small @-@ scale raids . In the aftermath of the landmark British victory that followed , Horrocks ' corps was assigned to the reserve , and was reduced in size while the rest of the Eighth Army pursued the retreating Axis forces . At one point the only formation under his command was a salvage unit clearing the wreckage of the battlefield , which he visited daily . In December , he took over command of X Corps , the lead corps in the advance of the Eighth Army , after Lumsden 's dismissal for poor performance during the pursuit . Horrocks was appointed a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order on 31 December 1942 . 
 Following the fall of Tripoli in January 1943 , the remaining Axis forces retreated to prepared defences in Southern Tunisia , in front of the Mareth Line built by France before the war . Here in March , Horrocks carried out one of his most successful actions . His corps , composed of the 1st Armoured Division , a Free French brigade and the attached New Zealand Corps ( which included the 2nd New Zealand Division and the British 8th Armoured Brigade ) , was ordered to attack as part of Operation Supercharge after XXX Corps failed to breach the line . He carried out a flanking manoeuvre through a pass judged by the Germans to be impenetrable , rendering the Mareth position untenable and forcing the Axis into another retreat . Three Italian divisions were destroyed , and the German 15th Panzer Division , 21st Panzer Division and 164th Division were heavily depleted . Horrocks was then transferred to the First Army to take over IX Corps after its previous commander , Lieutenant @-@ General John T. Crocker , was wounded in a training accident . He led this corps in the final Allied offensive in Tunisia during April and May 1943 , capturing Tunis and accepting the surrender of the remnants of Rommel 's Army Group Africa . He was mentioned in despatches on 24 June , and for his service in Tunisia , was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 5 August . He was also given the rank of temporary lieutenant @-@ general and war substantive major @-@ general . 
 In June 1943 , Horrocks sustained serious injuries during an air raid at Bizerte , while watching an amphibious rehearsal . Bullets from a strafing German fighter struck his upper chest and carried on through his body , piercing his lungs , stomach , and intestines . He underwent five operations and spent fourteen months recovering . This injury caused him pain for the rest of his life , and continuing health problems later led to his early retirement from active service . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 It was a year before Horrocks recovered sufficiently to tell Alan Brooke , the Chief of the Imperial General Staff ( CIGS ) , that he was " very anxious to be given another corps " . Restored to the acting rank of lieutenant @-@ general in August 1944 , he was sent to France to assume command of XXX Corps during the cataclysm engulfing the trapped German 7th Army and 5th Panzer Army in the Falaise Pocket . Montgomery had been dissatisfied with the performance of the corps and its commander , Gerard C. Bucknall , since the landings in Normandy two months earlier . Horrocks retained control of XXX Corps during the advance through Belgium , taking Brussels , and at one point advanced 250 miles ( 400 km ) in only six days . Supplies were a constant concern , with the major French deep @-@ water ports still in German hands , and Allied supply lines stretching perilously back to the Normandy beaches . Montgomery 's 21st Army Group was by now operating 300 miles ( 480 km ) from its ports — twice the distance logistical planners had accounted for — so XXX Corps was diverted towards Antwerp to secure its docks and harbour . The city and port fell to the 11th Armoured Division in early September , but Montgomery halted XXX Corps for resupply short of the wide Albert Canal to the north of the city , which consequently remained in enemy hands . Horrocks regretted this after the war , believing that his corps might have advanced another 100 miles ( 160 km ) with the fuel available , although it is doubtful this could have been achieved without delays . Unknown to the Allies , at that time XXX Corps was opposed by only a single German division . The pause allowed the Germans to regroup around the Scheldt River , and by the time the Allies resumed their advance , General Student 's First Paratroop Army had arrived and set up strong defensive positions along the opposite side of the canal . The task of breaking the strengthened German line , which stretched from Antwerp to the North Sea along the Scheldt River , would fall to the First Canadian Army in the month @-@ long , costly Battle of the Scheldt . By mid @-@ September , XXX Corps had been diverted again , this time to the east . 
 In September , Montgomery , now a field marshal , made his ambitious thrust across the Rhine and into Germany 's industrial heartland , codenamed Operation Market Garden , a priority for 21st Army Group . XXX Corps under Horrocks was to lead the ground assault , passing along a corridor held by airborne forces in order to link up with the British 1st Airborne Division in Arnhem within four days . In the event XXX Corps never arrived , and although 1st Airborne clung on to their tenuous position for a further five days , by 21 September almost three @-@ quarters of the division was destroyed or captured . Postwar analyses have been divided , some stressing a perceived lack of urgency on the part of Horrocks ' men , while others note that German defences in the area were severely underestimated by First Allied Airborne Army 's intelligence . Particularly important was the failure to identify the remnants of two SS Panzer divisions , which after Normandy had been sent to the Arnhem area for rest and refitting ; intelligence had stated that only " a few infantry units and between 50 and 100 tanks " were in the Netherlands . A series of counterattacks by Army Group B under Field Marshal Walter Model kept Horrocks ' units on the defensive , and delayed their advance by forcing the British to halt and secure their flank . The terrain over which Horrocks ' men had to move was unsuitable , restricting the vanguard ( Guards Armoured Division ) to a single narrow raised highway through flat or flooded countryside . Additionally , the Nijmegen Bridge , just 8 miles ( 13 km ) from Arnhem , was not captured by the 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment ( PIR ) on the first day as planned , and XXX Corps had to assist in its capture on their arrival in Nijmegen two days later , causing a further delay of 36 hours . Horrocks was not personally blamed for the operation 's failure ; during this period Major General James Gavin 's U.S. 82nd Airborne Division came under Horrocks ' command , and Gavin later wrote : 
 He was truly a unique general officer and his qualities of leadership were greater than any I have ever seen . In lecturing at the American service school I stated frequently that General Horrocks was the finest general officer I met during the war , and the finest corps commander " . 
 During the Battle of the Bulge , Horrocks was temporarily relieved of his command of XXX Corps by Field Marshal Montgomery and sent back to England to rest . Montgomery had taken this move because Horrocks had become " nervy and difficult with his staff " and had " attempted to act foolishly " with XXX Corps . The corps was temporarily commanded by Major @-@ General Gwilym Ivor Thomas , GOC 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division . 
 In early 1945 , XXX Corps took part in Operation Veritable , during which the German Army was finally forced back over the Rhine . The corps employed firepower on a massive scale , and " every trick that had been learnt during the past two and a half years was brought into play , and several new ones added " . For a short period XXX Corps had nine divisions under its command . Before the operation , Horrocks accepted an offer to use Bomber Command to attack the town of Cleves , assisting the advance of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division . The bombers released 1 @,@ 384 long tons ( 1 @,@ 406 t ) of high explosive that devastated the town . Horrocks later said that this had been " the most terrible decision I had ever taken in my life " and that he felt " physically sick " when he saw the bombers overhead . Operation Veritable was successful ; by the evening of 9 February ( D + 1 ) XXX Corps had broken through the Siegfried Line and into Germany with only light casualties . Bremen was captured on 26 April , exposing the <unk> concentration camp , Stalag X @-@ B. The corps had reached Cuxhaven by the time hostilities ceased . 
 Horrocks received two further mentions in despatches for his service in north @-@ west Europe on 22 March and 9 August 1945 , and was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 5 July . In addition to his native country 's recognition , he was honoured by the governments of Belgium ( the Croix de Guerre 1940 with Palm and Grand Officer of the Order of the Crown with Palm ) , France ( Croix de Guerre and Commandeur of the Légion d 'honneur ) , the Netherlands ( Knight Grand Officer of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau ) , Greece ( Commander of the Order of King George I ) , and the United States ( Legion of Merit ) . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Horrocks continued to serve in the armed forces after the war , initially as GOC @-@ in @-@ Chief of Western Command , receiving substantive promotion to lieutenant @-@ general in 1946 , with seniority backdated to 29 December 1944 . He briefly commanded the British Army of the Rhine , until he fell ill in August 1948 ; he was invalided out of the service early in January 1949 by the lingering effects of the wounds he had received in North Africa . Promoted to Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in the King 's Birthday Honours that year , he served as Honorary Colonel of a Territorial Army unit of the Royal Artillery . In 1949 he was appointed Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod , a post traditionally held by retired officers ; this appointment was confirmed on the accession of Elizabeth II in 1952 . Black Rod has the responsibility of supervising the administration of the House of Lords , controlling admission to it , and taking part in ceremonies . In 1957 , Horrocks had the unusual duty of ordering Vivien Leigh out of the House when she interrupted proceedings to plead that the St James 's Theatre be saved from demolition . On other occasions , because the Black Rod had to remain in place during long debates , Horrocks relieved his boredom by completing football pools coupons . This had the advantage of looking like note @-@ taking to the assembled lords . Horrocks held the post of Black Rod until 1963 . 
 Horrocks became interested in writing , and submitted articles about military matters to newspapers and magazines including the Picture Post and The Sunday Times . This led to a short but successful career as the presenter of a series of television programmes , British Castles ( 1962 ) , Men in Battle and Epic Battle , produced by Huw Wheldon . In these , Horrocks lectured on great historical battles , " highlighting excitement and interest " to allow the programmes to appeal to the widest possible audience . He was interviewed extensively for the Thames Television series , The World at War , and , to his embarrassment , appeared on the cover of the BBC 's Radio Times magazine . After his television career ended , he served on the board of the housebuilding company Bovis , and continued writing , contributing a column to The Sunday Times and editing a series of British Army regimental histories . In 1968 Horrocks collaborated with J & L Randall as editor of the ' Merit ' board game ' Combat ' . His portrait and signature appear on the box and in his introduction to the game he states " In war no two battles are ever the same because the terrain is always different and it is this , more than anything else , which influences the composition of the different armies and the tactics employed by the rival Commanders " . His autobiography , A Full Life , was published in 1960 , and he co @-@ authored Corps Commander , an account of his battles in north @-@ west Europe , published in 1977 . 
 Horrocks acted as a military consultant for the 1977 film A Bridge Too Far , based on Operation Market Garden . The actor Edward Fox played Horrocks in the film , and later commented : 
 I enjoyed all of the films but A Bridge Too Far is the one I enjoyed the most because of the character I had to play , Lieutenant @-@ General Brian Horrocks . Brian was alive then and I knew him well – we were friends until his death . He was a very particular type of general and it was important that I play the role correctly . 
 Horrocks died on 4 January 1985 , at the age of 89 . The memorial service , held at Westminster Abbey on 26 February , was attended by Major @-@ General Peter Gillett and Secretary of State for Defence Michael Heseltine , who represented the Queen and Prime Minister respectively . Thirty regiments and many other formations and associations were represented at the service . 
 = Discipline Global Mobile = 
 Discipline Global Mobile ( DGM , or Discipline GM ) is an independent record label founded in 1992 by Robert Fripp ( best known as guitarist and main composer for the band King Crimson ) and producer / online content developer David Singleton . DGM has released solo music by Fripp as well as work by various affiliated musicians and bands including King Crimson , The Vicar , the California Guitar Trio and others . The label has offices in Salisbury , England , and Los Angeles , California ; 
 According to Fripp , DGM has aimed to be " a model of ethical business in an industry founded on exploitation , oiled by deceit , riven with theft and fueled by greed , " according to Fripp . Its policy is that its artists retain all copyrights ; consequently , even DGM 's corporate logo is owned by its designer . The label was an early adopter of the digital download system . DGM 's aims have been hailed as " exemplary " , and the label has been credited with having expanded " the possibilities of experimental music " and having improved the environment for King Crimson . 
 The DGM label name is derived from the title of a 1981 King Crimson album ( Discipline ) and from the name of Singleton ’ s previous recording business ( The Mobile ) . The label logo also partly reflects the artwork for the Discipline album ( featuring a new but similar knotwork commissioned from the artist Steve Ball ) . 
 = = Foundation and business aims = = 
 Having been a professional musician since the mid- ' 60s ( and the guitarist for King Crimson since 1969 ) , by the late 1980s Robert Fripp found himself in conflict with his longtime record label E.G. Records and management company ( E.G. Management ) over royalties allegedly owed by E.G. to himself and to other band members . During this period , Fripp met and began working with producer and online developer David Singleton , initially on a Guitar Craft tour in 1990 and subsequently on the production of two albums - the League of Crafty Guitarists ' Show of Hands and the eponymous album for the Fripp @-@ and @-@ Toyah @-@ fronted group Sunday All Over the World . Fripp and Singleton 's production partnership was sealed by work on two King Crimson boxed sets ( 1991 's Frame by Frame and 1992 's The Great Deceiver ) and continues to the present day under the name of <unk> . 
 After seven years , Fripp and E.G. reached a settlement but the experience left Fripp determined to take control of his own work and financial affairs wherever possible . As part of this aim , he founded Discipline Global Mobile ( DGM ) as an independent music label in 1992 , as a fifty @-@ fifty partnership with Singleton . 
 DGM 's mission statement consists of five " DGM business aims " , as follows : 
 " The first aim of DGM is to help bring music into the world which would otherwise be unlikely to do so , or under conditions prejudicial to the music and / or musicians . " , 
 " The second aim of DGM is to operate in the market place , while being free of the values of the market place . " 
 " The third aim of DGM is to help the artists and staff of DGM achieve what they wish for themselves . " 
 " The fourth aim of DGM is to find its audience . " 
 " The fifth aim of DGM is to be a model of ethical business in an industry founded on exploitation , oiled by deceit , riven with theft and fueled by greed . " 
 These aims were called " exemplary " by Bill Martin , who wrote that " Fripp has done something very important for the possibilities of experimental music " in creating DGM , and that DGM " has played a major role in creating favorable conditions for " King Crimson . 
 Since at least the early 1960s , the recording industry has required artists to sign over copyrights and moral rights to their cover art , music , and lyrics . DGM rejects this practice , and since its 1992 founding has maintained its policy that its artists retain the copyrights and the moral rights to their works , be those works musical or visual art . Fripp wrote , 
 " The phonographic copyright in these performances is operated by Discipline Global Mobile on behalf of the artists , with whom it resides , contrary to common practice in the record industry . Discipline accepts no reason for artists to assign the copyright interests in their work to either record company or management by virtue of a ' common practice ' which was always questionable , often improper , and is now indefensible . " 
 This extends even to DGM 's knotwork corporate logo , the copyright of which is owned not by the company , but by its designer , Steve Ball . 
 DGM does not require that its artists sign written contracts . Former Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones said , " It 's pure trust , " and noted that " there are dangers on both sides . I could have a successful album and just sign with a major , or they could decide not to pay me . " Jones explained that he was accustomed to " working in situations that do rely on trust and integrity , those old @-@ fashioned words " because Led Zeppelin had no contract with its manager . Another DGM band , alternative rock group The Rosenbergs , opted to work with the label following conflicts with their previous label Universal Records , which had even demanded control of the band 's domain name : in contrast , DGM had encouraged them to retain control of their own master recordings and provided them with funds for touring and promoting their album . 
 Royalties are paid above the prevailing rate , as announced at DGM 's launch . In return , DGM artists are responsible for promoting their albums through concert tours and interviews . 
 = = Artists and back catalogue = = 
 Discipline Global Mobile specializes in art rock , progressive rock , jazz , and assorted experimental and crossover music ( the label has also released recordings of Renaissance lute music and mainstream alternative rock ) . DGM has released more than a hundred King Crimson recordings , including remastered albums with bonus tracks and DVDs with archival footage . In addition to King Crimson , DGM 's current active roster includes assorted Robert Fripp projects and The Vicar ( a songwriter project ) . The label has previously released music by various Fripp @-@ affiliated ensembles ; The League of Crafty Guitarists , Les Gauchos <unk> , the California Guitar Trio and the Robert Fripp String Quartet ( all of which stem from or are connected with Fripp 's Guitar Craft courses ) 
 = = = Current / recent DGM artists = = = 
 King Crimson ( over 100 releases of archive material and additional releases outside of current major @-@ label product ) 
 The <unk> ( King Crimson subgroups ) 
 Robert Fripp ( solo releases , Soundscape recordings ) 
 Fripp & Eno 
 The Vicar 
 David Sylvian & Robert Fripp ( reissues ) 
 <unk> , Fripp & Collins 
 = = = Past DGM artists = = = 
 Adrian Belew 
 BPM & M 
 Bill Bruford ( with Ralph Towner & Eddie Gomez ) 
 Bill Bruford ’ s Earthworks 
 Bruford Levin Upper <unk> 
 California Guitar Trio 
 Europa String Choir 
 Robert Fripp String Quintet 
 Tony <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Trey Gunn 
 Peter Hammill 
 Steve <unk> 
 Jacob <unk> 
 John Paul Jones 
 Tony Levin 
 Los Gauchos <unk> 
 Mr McFall 's Chamber 
 Bill Nelson 
 Opus 20 
 Juan Carlos Quintero 
 The Rosenbergs 
 Ten Seconds 
 = = Mail @-@ order and on @-@ line services = = 
 According to a 1998 profile in Billboard magazine , Discipline Global Mobile had seven staff members in Salisbury , England , and three in Los Angeles , California . DGM " is actually housed in a dull <unk> building in a village near Salisbury , south @-@ west England " . 
 Its label manager reported that the country with the largest market was Japan , where mail @-@ orders accounted for only 10 % of sales , but 50 % of profits . In 1998 , DGM was distributed in Japan by Pony Canyon ; in the United Kingdom by Pinnacle ; and in the United States by Rykodisc . Sound samples have been offered in addition to DGM 's mail @-@ order services . Free downloads from DGM have strengthened the relations between artists and fans . 
 In 2012 , DGM 's site had the following introduction : " The aim of DGM is to connect music , musician and audience in a way that supports the power of music , the integrity of the musician and the needs of the audience . DGM Live offers music for download with photographs , diary archives and audience commentary for browsing " . DGM 's successful transition to an age of digital distribution was called " unique " among music labels in 2009 ; this success was credited to its provision of legal , high @-@ quality recordings of concerts , which effectively reverse @-@ engineered the distribution @-@ networks for unlicensed recordings ( " bootlegs " ) of concerts . 
 DGM publishes on @-@ line diaries by Robert Fripp , David Singleton and The Vicar . A moderated forum allows fans to ask questions or to leave comments . Together , the diaries and the fan forum display delayed dialogs in which the artists and fans discuss diary @-@ entries and forum @-@ postings . Fripp 's public writing of his diary has challenged his readers to become more active listeners and intelligent participants in performances of music . 
 = = = Conflict with Grooveshark = = = 
 Fripp 's diaries were internationally discussed following his publication of documents from a dispute with Grooveshark , an on @-@ line distributor of music . Fripp and Singleton complained that Grooveshark had been continuing to distribute his music , even after repeated takedown notices and other complaints . Their correspondence with Grooveshark was published by Digital Music News and in his DGM diary . Fripp 's exchange with Grooveshark was included in a suit against Grooveshark by Universal Music Group , which was filed in November 2011 . 
 = No. 72 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 72 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing that operated during World War II . It was formed in April 1943 at Townsville , Queensland , as part of North @-@ Eastern Area Command . Led by Group Captain Charles Eaton , the wing soon deployed to Merauke , Dutch New Guinea , where it comprised three squadrons flying CAC Boomerang and P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters , and A @-@ 31 Vengeance dive bombers . Eaton was succeeded by Group Captain Allan Walters in mid @-@ 1943 . No. 72 Wing took part in the defence of Torres Strait , undertaking interception , patrol and occasional ground @-@ attack and anti @-@ shipping duties . By July 1944 , its original squadrons had all been disbanded or transferred to other operational formations . No. 120 ( Netherlands East Indies ) Squadron , which had arrived in May 1944 , operating Kittyhawks , remained at Merauke until February 1945 . The wing headquarters returned to Australia that May , and disbanded the following month . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 72 Wing was formed on 23 April 1943 at Townsville , Queensland , under the command of Group Captain Charles Eaton . Early the next month , its headquarters deployed to Merauke , described by the official history of the RAAF in World War II as " a desolate marshy little port in Dutch New Guinea " . Controlling No. 84 Squadron ( flying CAC Boomerang fighters ) , No. 86 Squadron ( P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters ) , and No. 12 Squadron ( A @-@ 31 Vengeance dive bombers ) , the wing 's purpose was to assist in the defence of Torres Strait . 
 The Boomerangs , operating out of Horn Island , undertook air defence and patrol tasks in and around western New Guinea , first making contact with enemy forces on 16 May 1943 ; they exchanged fire with three Japanese bombers , but the latter escaped into cloud . Merauke airfield was only completed in late June , and Nos. 86 and 12 Squadrons began arriving early the next month ; by then the wing had also acquired No. 44 Operational Base Unit and its own medical receiving station and mobile fighter sector headquarters . Eaton 's relations with North @-@ Eastern Area Command in Townsville had meanwhile became strained . In his opinion , " the problems of Merauke were not understood from there ... mountains were made out of molehills " , and he was posted that July to lead a bombing and gunnery establishment in South Australia . Later in the year he would form No. 79 Wing at Batchelor , Northern Territory . 
 Group Captain Allan Walters , formerly in charge of No. 1 ( Fighter ) Wing in Darwin , assumed command of No. 72 Wing following Eaton 's reassignment . Enemy contact was generally sporadic and inconclusive , but on 9 September 1943 a force of over thirty Japanese bombers and escorting fighters heading for Merauke were intercepted by fourteen of No. 72 Wing 's Kittyhawks and four of its Boomerangs ; although most of the Kittyhawks ' guns failed to fire through oil clogging , and none of the Boomerangs made contact , the Australian aircraft claimed one bomber and two fighters destroyed without loss . No. 12 Squadron became fully operational at Merauke in September , but was mainly given patrol duty and only rarely saw enemy activity . The following month , No. 84 Squadron converted to Kittyhawks and transferred to a new formation , No. 75 Wing , which controlled units on Horn Island , Thursday Island and Higgins Field . During late 1943 and early 1944 , No. 86 Squadron was actively engaged in air defence , enjoying some success against Japanese bombers and their escorts , as well as participating in attacks on infrastructure and shipping in Dutch New Guinea . 
 No. 86 Squadron departed Merauke on 25 April 1944 ; the squadron was subsequently reduced to a cadre and its Kittyhawks transferred to Nos. 78 and 81 Wings of No. 10 Operational Group on Noemfoor Island . It was replaced by the Dutch @-@ Australian No. 120 Squadron , which arrived from Canberra in early May and became operational on the 9th of the month . The same month , Walters handed over command of the wing to Group Captain Bill Hely . In July , No. 12 Squadron was withdrawn to Strathpine , Queensland , where it was reduced to cadre status ahead of converting to B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers and eventually serving with another new formation , No. 85 Wing . Hely departed in September 1944 to establish an army cooperation formation , No. 84 Wing , at Cairns . Most of the RAAF units at Merauke were redeployed in late 1944 but No. 120 Squadron remained there until February 1945 , when it was declared non @-@ operational . The squadron returned to operational status and departed for eventual service at Biak in April that year . No. 72 Wing headquarters returned to Townsville in May 1945 , disbanding on 20 June . 
 = Utricularia inflata = 
 Utricularia inflata , commonly known as the swollen bladderwort , inflated bladderwort , or large floating bladderwort , is a large suspended aquatic carnivorous plant that belongs to the genus Utricularia . It is a perennial that is native to the southeastern coastal plains of the United States . It has often been confused with U. radiata , which is similar but smaller than U. inflata . Since 1980 , U. inflata has been reported to exist in locations beyond its traditional range , such as the Adirondack Mountains in New York , southeastern Massachusetts , and in Washington State . Studies on the populations in the Adirondacks suggest that an introduction of U. inflata to a location where it <unk> can lead to altered sediment chemistry by reducing the net primary productivity of native species . It is also listed by the state of Washington as a problematic species because of the dense mat @-@ forming habit of this aquatic Utricularia . It is one of the few carnivorous plants that can be invasive . 
 = = Description = = 
 U. inflata is one of the larger suspended aquatic species in the genus Utricularia . Like all aquatic Utricularia , U. inflata has no true roots or leaves . The filiform stolons are the main vegetative " stem " of the plant and can be up to one meter long or longer but are only 1 – 2 mm thick . The stolons are glabrous with 1 – 5 cm between branched divisions . Occasionally the stolons will produce floating air shoots at the water 's surface and tuber @-@ like organs in the substrate . Its filiform leaf @-@ like structures appear to be additional branches off the main stolon and are tiny , filament @-@ like structures that are not true leaves , though the terminology is often disputed among experts . The leaf structures are numerous and anywhere from 2 – 18 cm long , originating from the stolon base into two primary and unequal segments , which are further divided extensively into additional segments . The stalked , ovoid traps , 1 – 3 mm long , are produced on the latter leaf segments and are very numerous . 
 In its native range , U. inflata , a perennial species , can begin to flower in January and may continue through June . In this phase of its growth it produces the most visible and noticeable morphological features of the species : a floating spoke @-@ like whorl of spongy structures at the water 's surface that support the inflorescences , often called a " float " . U. inflata typically produces 6 to 8 spokes on the float ( sometimes anywhere from 5 to 10 ) , with each spoke 3 – 10 cm long and up to 8 mm wide . The apical half of the spokes bear numerous , dichotomously branched leaf @-@ like segments that can also possess some traps . The 20 – 50 cm long erect inflorescences are produced from the center of the floating whorl and are usually solitary or possess very few scapes for each whorl . An individual plant can produce several whorls and inflorescences , but they are typically distant from each other . The inflorescences produce 9 @-@ 14 ( sometimes 4 @-@ 17 ) flowers with unequal calyx lobes , 3 – 5 mm long . The entire corolla can be 2 @-@ 2 @.@ 5 cm long and is bright yellow with brown @-@ colored veins on the spur and brown markings on the lower corolla lobe . 
 This species has a diploid chromosome number of 2n 
 = 18 for the most common form and 2n = 
 36 for the larger tetraploid populations . The larger tetraploid " race " , as Peter Taylor called it , can be up to twice as large as the regular diploid species . Populations of this race have been located in Florida . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 U. inflata is native to the southeastern United States . Peter Taylor 's 1989 taxonomic monograph listed the following states where native populations of this species have been located : Alabama , Arkansas , Delaware , Florida , Georgia , Kentucky , Louisiana , New Jersey , North and South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , and Virginia . In addition to these states , the United States Department of Agriculture 's online PLANTS database acknowledges populations in Connecticut , Maryland , Michigan , Mississippi , New York , Oklahoma , and Pennsylvania . The states of Maryland , Michigan , and New York have classified U. inflata as an endangered or threatened species while Tennessee has listed it as a species with " special concern " . 
 U. inflata inhabits aquatic environments such as lakes , ditches , and swamps from shallow to deep waters at low altitudes . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 As early as 1980 , specimens of U. inflata were beginning to be collected or recorded outside its traditionally accepted range . Populations have been established in Washington state , New York , and Massachusetts . The colonies in Washington are obvious introductions , but while the populations in New York and Massachusetts are most likely the result of recent introductions , it is more difficult to say with certainty how they were introduced . 
 In southeastern Massachusetts , several samples of U. inflata have been gathered from Federal Pond beginning in 1990 , representing its first collection north of New Jersey on the east coast . Bruce Sorrie has identified a substantial population in this location . Sorrie indicated that human @-@ aided introduction of this species to Massachusetts is likely since Federal Pond has been used for various purposes since the late 18th century , though Sorrie also notes that transfer of propagules by waterfowl or herons from U. inflata 's native range may be just as likely . 
 Three years after the first collection in Massachusetts , a study of the area around Spruce Pond in Orange County , New York yielded the first record for U. inflata in New York State . The authors of the study speculate that , unlike the population found in Massachusetts , it is unlikely that the population in Spruce Pond was the result of human introduction because the pond is in a remote area and rarely used . More recently in 2005 , a study in northern New York identified populations of U. inflata in six lakes in the Adirondack Mountains , representing another northern extension of its range . In two of these lakes U. inflata was the most frequently encountered species in 2000 , whereas a census of the lakes found no U. inflata whatsoever in 1983 . This impressive growth in what is probably a new location for the species is similar to the growth patterns of other invasive aquatic plant species . The authors of this study also noted that at one of these sites , many of the native species declined in frequency or could not be found , possibly due to the presence and proliferation of U. inflata . Lab experiments and observations in the field supported the authors ' hypothesis that the presence of U. inflata in Adirondack lake systems damages the natural nutrient cycles that sustain the native flora . U. inflata likely shades out the native flora , specifically Eriocaulon <unk> , a submersed <unk> <unk> that releases oxygen into the sediment . In this case , U. inflata could indirectly change the biogeochemical cycle in the Adirondack lakes by hindering the growth of native <unk> macrophytes and subsequently having a negative effect on the proper balance of sediment chemistry . The consequence of this may include enhanced growth of algae and other changes to the ecology of the freshwater ecosystems that it may invade . 
 Even earlier than the collections in Massachusetts and New York , a population of U. inflata was located in Horseshoe Lake in Kitsap County , Washington in 1980 . Since then , further specimens of U. inflata have been recorded from other Puget Sound area lakes in Kitsap , Mason , Pierce , and Thurston counties . One population has even been recorded from the more southern Silver Lake in Cowlitz County . Information on this species in Washington State provided by the state 's Department of Ecology includes a statement that U. inflata 's presence in Horseshoe Lake was " probably the result of a discarded aquarium . " Washington 's Department of Ecology also indicates that in the areas where it occurs , U. inflata forms dense floating mats , becoming a nuisance for recreational activities . Residents of Lake Limerick , which has extensive populations of U. inflata , spend thousands of dollars each summer to rid their lake of the dense , weedy mats . A variety of control methods have been used to control the weed , including a sonar treatment , biocontrol utilizing grass carp , and manual extraction . Washington considers this species to be problematic but has not classified it as a noxious weed . Instead , it is on a monitor list of wetland and aquatic species under quarantine , meaning that it is prohibited to sell this species and it may be included on the state 's noxious weed list in the future . 
 Most carnivorous plant species require very specific environmental conditions to thrive . This narrow habitat tolerance means that many carnivorous plants are threatened or endangered in their native ranges . U. inflata 's ability to thrive in a variety of locations that it has been introduced to represents an ability to tolerate a much larger range of habitats than most carnivorous plant species . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 U. inflata is one of the many Utricularia species that is cultivated by carnivorous plant enthusiasts . Because it requires no dormancy and due to its swift growth , it is one of the easier suspended aquatic species to cultivate . Barry Rice , author of Growing Carnivorous Plants , says that this species is the easiest suspended aquatic Utricularia that he has grown . Rice also mentions that U. inflata has been used as an aid in the cultivation of particularly difficult species , such as Aldrovanda vesiculosa , that are much more sensitive to high nutrient concentrations . When growing these species together , U. inflata will grow rapidly in the presence of higher nutrients , which allows A. vesiculosa to enjoy the conditions it thrives in . 
 Rice , the Washington Department of Ecology , and the United States Geological Survey 's <unk> Aquatic Species information resource all indicate that cultivation of this species is suspected as the most likely source of its introduction into Horseshoe Lake in Washington . The spread from lake to lake in Washington is probably the result of waterfowl moving from lake to lake and carrying plants or propagules with them . 
 = = Botanical history = = 
 U. inflata was first named and described by Thomas Walter in 1788 . U. radiata has often been mistaken for U. inflata because of their similar morphology and overlapping distribution . In the past , U. radiata has been misidentified as U. inflata or placed at the rank of variety . U. radiata was first identified by Alvan Wentworth Chapman in 1860 as U. inflata var. minor and noted that it was " in every way smaller " than U. inflata . John Kunkel Small in 1903 was the first to elevate U. inflata var. minor to the species level under the name U. radiata . Further studies of the two taxa were mixed on how to treat them . In 1950 , Merritt Lyndon Fernald treated them as two varieties of the same species while Henry Gleason considered them to be different , but allied species in 1952 . In 1962 , Grady Reinert and R. K. Godfrey further supported the separation of the two taxa into different species . Peter Taylor 's authoritative monograph of the genus in 1989 solidified the distinctiveness of the two species . 
 = Yankees – Red Sox rivalry = 
 The Yankees – Red Sox rivalry is a rivalry between the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox baseball teams of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . The two teams have competed in MLB 's American League ( AL ) for over 100 seasons and have since developed one of the fiercest rivalries in sports . In 1919 , Red Sox owner Harry Frazee sold star player Babe Ruth to the Yankees , which was followed by an 86 @-@ year period in which the Red Sox did not win a World Series . This led to the popularization of a superstition known as the " Curse of the Bambino " , which was one of the most well @-@ known aspects of the rivalry . 
 The rivalry is often a heated subject of conversation , especially in the home region of both teams , the Northeastern United States . Until the 2014 season , every season 's postseason had featured one or both of the AL East rivals since the inception of the wild card format and the resultant additional Division Series ; they have faced each other in the AL Championship Series three times . The Yankees won twice , in 1999 and 2003 ; while the Red Sox won in 2004 . In addition , the teams have twice met in the last regular @-@ season series of a season to decide the league title , in 1904 ( when the Red Sox won ) and 1949 ( when the Yankees won ) . 
 The Yankees and the Red Sox finished tied for first in 1978 ; subsequently , the Yankees won a high @-@ profile tie @-@ breaker game for the division title . The first @-@ place tie came after the Red Sox had enjoyed a 14 @-@ game lead over the Yankees more than halfway through the season . Similarly , in the 2004 AL Championship Series , the Yankees ultimately lost a best @-@ of @-@ 7 series after leading 3 – 0 . The Red Sox comeback was the only time in baseball history that a team has come back from a 0 – 3 deficit to win a series . The Red Sox went on to win the World Series , effectively ending the 86 @-@ year @-@ old curse . 
 The Yankees – Red Sox match @-@ up is regarded by some sports journalists as the greatest rivalry in sports . Games between the two teams often generate considerable interest and receive extensive media coverage , including being broadcast on national television . Many national networks , including ESPN and Fox Sports , broadcast the games on the weekend . Yankees – Red Sox games are some of the most @-@ watched MLB games each season . Outside of baseball , the rivalry between the two teams has led to violence between fans , along with attention from politicians and other athletes . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since before the start of the American Revolution , Boston and New York City have shared an intense rivalry as cities . For more than a century after its founding , Boston was arguably the educational , cultural , artistic , and economic power in the United States . Boston 's location as the closest American port to Europe and its concentration of elite schools and manufacturing hubs helped maintain this position for several decades . During this time period , New York was often looked down upon as the upstart , over @-@ populated , dirty cousin to aristocratic and clean Boston . 
 In the 19th century , however , New York 's economic power soon outpaced Boston 's , fueled by possession of the terminus of the Erie Canal , which spurred massive growth in the manufacturing , shipping , insurance and financial services businesses . Another factor was its more rapid population expansion in comparison to that of Boston , driven by the growth of these industries , by New York 's popularity as an immigration port of entry , and enhanced by a larger population base to begin with , even prior to the construction of the Canal – on the eve of the Revolution , New York , with 30 @,@ 000 people , had nearly twice the population of Boston , with about 16 @,@ 000 . By the start of the 20th century the original dynamic , centered on Boston , had completely shifted as New York became the focus of American capitalism ( especially on Wall Street ) ; this change was reflected in the new national pastime . In fact the cities played two different versions of early baseball . The " Massachusetts Game " , as it was called , was played on a field with four bases and with home plate in the middle ; whereas , the " New York Game " , popularized by the New York Knickerbocker Club , was played on a diamond with three bases . The " New York Game " spread throughout the nation after the American Civil War and became the foundation for the modern game of <unk> . 
 = = Early history : Glory of the Red Sox = = 
 The Red Sox were one of the most successful teams in baseball from 1901 to 1918 . They won the inaugural World Series in 1903 ( as the Boston Americans ; the team changed its name to Red Sox in 1908 ) and four more between 1912 and 1918 . In 1901 , the Yankees , then known as the Baltimore Orioles , played in Maryland for two seasons before moving north . The two teams had their first meeting while the Yankees franchise was in Baltimore on April 26 , 1901 , the inaugural year of the American League . On May 7 , 1903 , both teams played for the first time after the franchise moved to New York and became the Highlanders , in reference to playing games in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan . The game was marked by a fight when Boston pitcher George Winter was knocked down . Boston would eventually go on to win the pennant and the inaugural 1903 World Series . The 1904 season featured the teams facing each other on opening day . Later in the season , the Highlanders , led by pitcher Jack Chesbro in his record @-@ setting 41 game @-@ winning season , met the Boston Americans in the season 's final game to decide the American League pennant winner . Chesbro threw a wild pitch in the top of the ninth inning , allowing the winning run to score from third base , and Boston won the game , and the pennant . The New York Giants , who had already clinched the National League pennant , refused to play in the 1904 World Series because of a perception of the " Junior Circuit " as being inferior ( and because of alleged animosity between American League founder and first president , Ban Johnson , and the hierarchy of the Giants , owner John T. Brush and his team 's Hall of Fame coach , player @-@ manager John McGraw ) ; thus , there was no World Series that year . Not until 2004 would the Red Sox again defeat the Yankees in a title @-@ deciding game . 
 Years later , on April 11 , 1912 , the Highlanders debuted their pinstripes in a game against Boston , by then known as the Red Sox . Nine days later , Boston opened Fenway Park with a game against the Highlanders , who had left their home field of Hilltop Park to play in the newly @-@ rebuilt Polo Grounds ; soon thereafter , in 1913 , the team changed dropped the nickname Highlanders in favor of Yankees . Tris Speaker hit an RBI single in the bottom of the eleventh to give the Red Sox a 7 – 6 victory . Boston 's victory in their first game at the new park failed to become front page news , however , due to the coverage being devoted to the days @-@ prior sinking of the Titanic . The 1912 team would go on to win a team record 105 games and their second World Series title , defeating the New York Giants . 
 Six years later , the Chicago Cubs scored two runs off of Babe Ruth in game 4 of the Series , snapping his then record World Series scoreless inning streak at 29 2 ⁄ 3 innings . The Red Sox won the game , 2 – 1 , and went on to capture their fifth Series title , their third in four years , and fourth in seven years . 
 The Yankees would however receive one notable moment of glory against the Red Sox during this era . On April 24 , 1917 Yankee pitcher George <unk> threw a no @-@ hitter at Fenway Park , the first in the ball park 's history and first in Yankee history . It would also turn out to be the Yankees ' only no @-@ hitter where they allowed a run as they would win the game , 2 – 1 . 
 = = Babe Ruth sold to Yankees = = 
 In 1916 , Harry Frazee purchased the Red Sox , on credit , for $ 500 @,@ 000 . Despite Ruth 's success with the Red Sox , owner and Broadway producer Frazee lost his patience with Ruth , who had threatened to hold out in lieu of a larger contract and become a distraction . After the Red Sox finished sixth in the American League in 1919 , Frazee , needing money to finance a Broadway musical , No , No Nanette , sold pitcher @-@ turned @-@ outfielder Babe Ruth to the Yankees . Frazee received $ 125 @,@ 000 and a loan of $ 300 @,@ 000 — secured on Fenway Park , the Red Sox ' home stadium — for Ruth , despite Ruth having set the record for home runs with 29 in 1919 . This began a series of deals with the Yankees that resulted in a long period of mediocrity for the Red Sox while the Yankees began their dynasty . 
 Ruth 's arrival in New York simultaneously launched the Yankee dynasty while ravaging the Red Sox . While the Red Sox 's five World Series titles were a record at the time , 1918 would be the team 's last championship for 86 years . Meanwhile , Ruth 's home run @-@ hitting prowess anchored the Yankee line @-@ up , which became known as " Murderers ' Row " in the late 1920s . The Yankees reached the World Series seven times during Ruth 's New York years , winning four . This abrupt reversal of fortunes for the Red Sox marked the beginning of the supposed " Curse of the Bambino . " But it was not the Ruth deal alone that reversed the fortunes of both clubs . Frazee also sold many other players to the Yankees . 
 Robert W. Creamer reported that " [ the ] loan was made and relations between the two clubs continued to be cordial , with Frazee sending player after player to the Yankees over the next few seasons for more and more cash . This was no accident . Frazee and Yankees owner Jacob Ruppert were friends , and American League president Ban Johnson 's attempts to drive Frazee out of the game had caused the five teams loyal to Johnson to make no deals with the Red Sox as long as Frazee owned the club , leaving only the Yankees and White Sox as trading partners . When the White Sox 's reputation was destroyed in the Black Sox Scandal , Frazee 's only option for trades was to deal with the Yankees . 
 The Red Sox soon became a baseball disaster area , finishing dead last nine times in eleven seasons . " Among others , Wally Schang , Everett Scott , Carl Mays , Waite Hoyt , Joe Bush and Sam Jones went from the Sox to the Yankees in the next one to three years , along with Ed Barrow , the former Red Sox manager who became the Yankees ' general manager and empire @-@ builder for the first quarter @-@ century of the Yankees ' dynasty . Scott , a former Red Sox team captain , actually took the reins as Yankee captain from Ruth when he arrived and in doing so became the only player in history to be named captain for both teams . 
 = = Curse of the Bambino = = 
 From 1920 through 2003 , the Yankees won 26 World Series championships and 39 pennants , compared to only four pennants for the Red Sox . In every year that the Red Sox won the pennant — 1946 , 1967 , 1975 and 1986 — they lost the World Series four games to three , leaving them with no World Series titles . During this time , the Red Sox finished second in the standings to the Yankees on twelve occasions — in 1938 , 1939 , 1941 , 1942 , 1949 , 1977 , 1978 , and every year from 1998 to 2003 . During the 84 @-@ year period , the Yankees finished with a better regular @-@ season record than the Red Sox 66 times , leading one sportswriter to quip that the Yankees ' rivalry with the Red Sox was much like the rivalry " between a hammer and a nail . " The Yankees finished second in the standings to the Red Sox twice , in 1986 and 1995 . 
 = = = 1920s and 1930s : First Yankee dynasty = = = 
 Just two years after Ruth 's sale , he went on to have a record setting season — statistically , one of the greatest in major league history for a batter . This propelled the Yankees to capture their first pennant and face their rival Giants . On October 5 , 1921 , the Yankees appeared in and won their very first World Series game . Ruth got hurt during the Series , and the Yankees eventually dropped the last three games , losing the Series five games to three to the Giants in the last ever best @-@ of @-@ nine Series . Both the Yankees and Giants would play in the 1922 World Series as well , a series that would be the Yankees ' last in the two teams ' shared stadium at the Polo Grounds as the Giants served the Yankees an eviction notice after the 1921 season . 
 The Yankees would eventually move across the Harlem River to the Bronx into Yankee Stadium . On April 18 , 1923 , both the Red Sox and Yankees played for the first time at the Yankees new home . Over 74 @,@ 200 people watched the Yankees defeat the Red Sox , 4 – 1 , in the first game played at the stadium . Babe Ruth hit the new stadium 's first home run , christening the stadium as " the House that Ruth Built . " Ruth would finish the year with a .393 batting average , while being walked a then @-@ record 170 times . The Yankees met the New York Giants for the third straight year in the World Series . The 1923 World Series resulted with the Yankees winning their first World Championship . Of the 24 players on the Yankees ' first championship team , 11 came from the Red Sox . 
 Several lesser known moments in the rivalry occurred during the 1930s . Pitcher Red Ruffing was traded in 1930 from the Red Sox to the Yankees . Ruffing , who had limited success with the Red Sox , would go on to a Hall of Fame career with the Yankees winning 6 World Series with them . On August 12 , 1934 , then the largest crowd in the history of Fenway Park , 46 @,@ 766 , witnessed Babe Ruth 's final game at Fenway Park in a Yankees uniform in a game Boston would lose . A year later , the crowd record would be broken again when the two teams met again on September 22 , 1935 . Record crowds would also show up at Yankee Stadium . On May 30 , 1938 , before 83 @,@ 533 spectators , Yankees outfielder Jake Powell and Red Sox player @-@ manager Joe Cronin fought on the field and beneath the stands . Both players were fined and suspended for 10 games . The Yankees and Red Sox would finish first and second in the League respectively that year as well as the following . The Yankees went on to sweep the Chicago Cubs in the World Series and the Cincinnati Reds in the World Series a year later . 
 = = = 1940s – 1960s : Teddy Ballgame , <unk> ' Joe the Yankee Clipper = = = 
 The rivalry intensified in 1941 when Ted Williams of the Red Sox batted .406 , becoming the last player to bat over .400 in a season . Despite his accomplishment , Williams lost the AL MVP race to the Yankees ' Joe DiMaggio , who holds the record for a hitting streak , with 56 straight games in which he had a hit . DiMaggio 's unprecedented streak started on May 15 , 1941 in a game where the Yankees lost 13 – 1 to the Chicago White Sox . Williams later reminisced about his rivalry with DiMaggio saying " ( Joe ) DiMaggio was the greatest all @-@ around player I ever saw . His career cannot be summed up in numbers and awards . It might sound corny , but he had a profound and lasting impact on the country . " Both teams almost swapped the two players . In 1947 , Boston Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey and Yankees GM Larry MacPhail were rumored to have verbally agreed to trade DiMaggio for Williams , but MacPhail refused to include Yogi Berra and the deal fell through . Joe DiMaggio 's younger brother Dom would play for the Red Sox his entire career during the 1940s . 
 The Red Sox won 15 games in a row in 1946 . They were unstoppable and were in first place all but two days in the season , and would play in their first World Series game since 1918 , having finished ahead of the Yankees in the American League for the first time since selling Babe Ruth . Since the Red Sox last pennant in 1918 , the Yankees had won 14 pennants and 10 World Series . Although the tide against the Yankees had turned , Boston would eventually lose the Series four games to three to the St. Louis Cardinals . 
 Former manager for the Yankees , Joe McCarthy came out of retirement after a feud with Yankee ownership to sign with the Red Sox as their manager in 1948 . Both the Yankees and the Red Sox were involved in a tight pennant race with the Cleveland Indians until the final weekend . The Red Sox eliminated the Yankees in the final series at Fenway Park , overcoming four DiMaggio hits in the final game to tie Cleveland for the pennant . The situation forced the first @-@ ever one @-@ game playoff in AL history , which the Indians won 8 – 3 at Fenway Park . The city of Boston missed out on a chance for its first all @-@ Boston World Series , as the Indians went on to defeat the Boston Braves in the Series , the last one the Indians have won to date . 
 A year later , the Red Sox entered the final series of the season at Yankee Stadium needing only one win over the Yankees to advance to the World Series . The Red Sox found themselves up by one game with two games left against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium . The Sox lost 5 – 3 on the last day of the season after falling 5 – 4 the previous day , resulting in the Yankees winning their 16th American League pennant . The Yankees went on to defeat the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1949 World Series for their 12th World Championship . 
 The 1951 season opened up at Yankee Stadium . The Yankees defeated the Red Sox , which was PA announcer Bob Sheppard first game . Sheppard would go on to serve PA duties at Yankee Stadium for another 56 years . On September 28 of that year , Yankees pitcher Allie Reynolds pitched a no @-@ hitter against the Red Sox . A year later , Red Sox outfielder Jimmy Piersall and Yankees second baseman Billy Martin exchanged insults before a game in Boston , and ended up fighting in the tunnel under the stands . The fight was eventually broken up by Yankees coaches Bill Dickey and Oscar <unk> , and Boston starting pitcher Ellis Kinder . Piersall changed out of his bloody shirt and promptly fought with teammate Maury McDermott . The Red Sox won 5 – 2 with Piersall sitting the game out . 
 Starting in 1949 , the Yankees began a streak of five consecutive World Series titles from 1949 to 1953 and breaking their previous streak of four straight titles from 1936 to 1939 . They would also go on to win 14 pennants in 16 years starting in 1949 . 
 = = = 1961 – 1980 : Milestones , fights , neck and neck finishes and the Bucky Dent game = = = 
 The 1961 season saw the chase of Babe Ruth 's 1927 single season home run record by Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle . Both Maris and Mantle would continue to reach the home run record until Mantle got injured late in the season , leaving Maris to reach the record . On the last day of the season , Maris broke the record with his 61st home run of the year off Red Sox pitcher Tracy Stallard at Yankee Stadium . Former Hall of Fame shortstop for the Yankees , Phil Rizzuto , called the shot in what was one of his first games as an announcer . The Yankees won the game 1 – 0 to win their 26th American League pennant and then to win their 19th World Series title . 
 The next year in 1962 , the Red Sox had been in the middle of a streak of 8 losing seasons . The team was so bad , that after a 13 @-@ 3 loss to the Yankees on July 26 , Red Sox ace Gene Conley got off the bus and attempted to leave the country and go to Israel . Conley was denied his request because he did not have a passport . Nonetheless , Conley did stay away from the team for 3 days . 
 Years later in 1967 , Red Sox pitcher Billy Rohr came within a single strike of a no @-@ hitter at Yankee Stadium . Elston Howard hit a two @-@ out , two @-@ strike single in the ninth to break the no @-@ hit bid . Rohr completed the one @-@ hitter , but ultimately finished his career with only two wins , both coming against the Yankees . Later that year , Red Sox third baseman Joe Foy hit a grand slam during the first game of a two @-@ game series . In the second game , Yankee pitcher Thad Tillotson threw two <unk> pitches at Foy before <unk> him in the batting helmet . In the next inning , Red Sox pitcher Jim <unk> beaned Tillotson . Both pitchers yelled at each other , and then a brawl ensued . During the fight , Red Sox outfielder Reggie Smith picked up and body @-@ slammed Tillotson to the ground . Just two months later , both teams were involved in the longest game ever played ( by innings ) at Yankee Stadium . New York recorded a 20 @-@ inning , 4 – 3 victory over Boston . Earlier that year on August 3 , the Yankees traded Howard , the first African @-@ American player in franchise history , to the Red Sox to help bolster their team during the pennant race . When Howard returned to Yankee Stadium in a Red Sox uniform , the Yankee fans gave him a standing ovation . Boston would be led by Hall of Famer Carl Yastrzemski 's historic season winning the batting triple crown , leading the Red Sox to the pennant in what was a dream year for the Sox . Howard 's contribution would be instrumental in the 1967 World Series , but he and Yastrzemski would lose to Bob Gibson and the St. Louis Cardinals four games to three . 
 In 1973 , the American League decided to adopt the designated hitter rule . On April 6 , opening the season at Fenway Park , Ron Blomberg of the Yankees became the first designated hitter in Major League history . Red Sox pitcher Luis Tiant walked Blomberg in his first plate appearance of the game . Later that year at Fenway Park , with the score tied 2 – 2 in the top of the ninth , Yankees catcher Thurman Munson attempted to score from third base on a missed bunt by Gene Michael . He crashed into Red Sox catcher Carlton Fisk resulting in a fight with Munson punching Fisk in the face . The rivalry intensified in the 1970s with the fans too , as just a year later in 1974 at Fenway Park , Yankees first baseman Chris Chambliss was struck in the right arm with a dart thrown from the stands after hitting an RBI ground @-@ rule double . Two years later , Yankee outfielder Lou Piniella would crash into Fisk feet first in an attempt to score in the sixth inning of a game at Yankee Stadium . The two benches cleared while Piniella and Fisk brawled at home plate . After the fight apparently died down and order appeared to be restored , Sox pitcher Bill Lee and Yankee third baseman Graig Nettles and center fielder Mickey Rivers began to exchange words , resulting in another fight . Lee suffered a separated left shoulder from the tilt and missed the next 51 games of the 1976 season . He would continue to pitch until 1982 . The 1976 season saw the Yankees win the pennant , but lose to the Big Red Machine in the 1976 World Series , just like the Red Sox had done a year prior in the 1975 World Series in which Carlton Fisk hit his famous home run off of the left field foul pole at Fenway Park . 
 After the Yankees ' loss to the Reds , owner George Steinbrenner committed to sign marquee free agent Reggie Jackson to help win a championship . The Yankees , Red Sox , and Baltimore Orioles would keep leap frogging each other the entire year during the division race . The Yankees would win the division for the second year in a row , while the Orioles and Red Sox finished tied for second , 2 1 ⁄ 2 games behind the Yankees . Jackson 's entry onto the Yankees initially had caused a lot of friction on them . In the middle game of what would prove to be a three @-@ game series sweep by the Red Sox at Fenway Park , Yankees manager Billy Martin pulled Reggie Jackson off the field in mid @-@ inning for failing to hustle on a ball hit to the outfield . The extremely angry and highly animated Martin had to be restrained by coaches Yogi Berra and Elston Howard from getting into a fistfight with Jackson in the dugout during the nationally @-@ televised Saturday afternoon game . Eventually , emotions calmed down for the season and the Yankees came together to recapture the pennant and defeat the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 1977 World Series , their first since 1962 . 
 In 1978 , the Red Sox , led by Jim Rice , Carl Yastrzemski , Fred Lynn and catcher Carlton Fisk , and managed by future Yankee coach Don Zimmer , were looking good for the World Series ( aka " Fall Classic " ) for the second time in the decade . They led the Yankees in the standings by 14 games in mid @-@ July , with less than three months to go in the regular season . The Yankees turned their season around just as the Red Sox seemed to collapse . By September 7 , the Yankees had whittled down the 14 @-@ game deficit to only four games , just in time for a four @-@ game series at Fenway Park in Boston . The Yankees won all four games in the series by a combined score of 42 – 9 . This series became known as the " Boston Massacre " . On September 16 , the Yankees held a 3 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ game lead over the Red Sox , but the Sox won 12 of their next 14 games ( and their last eight in a row ) to overcome that deficit and finish in a first @-@ place tie with the Yankees . A one @-@ game playoff was scheduled in Boston to determine who would win the AL East pennant for 1978 . 
 Boston pitted former Yankee pitcher Mike Torrez against the Yankees ' Cy Young Award winner , Ron Guidry , who took a 24 – 3 record into the game . The Sox were beating Guidry 2 – 0 in the top of the seventh inning when light @-@ hitting Yankee shortstop Bucky Dent hit a two @-@ out , three @-@ run home run over Fenway Park 's Green Monster to take a 3 – 2 lead . It was only his fifth home run of the season . The Yankees later led 5 – 2 and held on to win 5 – 4 when Yastrzemski popped out with runners on first and third , ending the Red Sox ' season . Yankees closer Goose Gossage notched his 27th save of the season . Gossage would later comment years later about how he was spat on at Fenway Park and had beer thrown in his face . " There is no rivalry in sports that rivals the Yankees — Red Sox ... that playoff game in ' 78 – it felt like the playoffs and World Series were exhibition games after that . " The headline in The Boston Globe the next day summed it all up : " Destiny 5 , Red Sox 4 . " New York went on to defeat the Kansas City Royals in the ALCS and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series for their second straight championship . 
 = = 1980s and early 1990s = = 
 = = = 1980s : No championships = = = 
 The 1980s was the only decade that neither the Yankees nor the Red Sox won a World Series . Although both teams went to a World Series during that decade , the Red Sox were not serious contenders in the Yankees ' playoff years ( 1980 and 1981 ) , but the Yankees seriously contended in the Red Sox ' playoff years ( 1986 and 1988 ) . 
 The Yankees lost the World Series in 1981 , while the Red Sox loss came in 1986 . Both times , the teams lost after being up 2 – 0 in their respective World Series , and both losses happened in New York ( The Red Sox lost the 1986 World Series at Shea Stadium ) . For the Yankees , the loss in 1981 marked the beginning of the team 's demise and downfall in the 1980s and early 1990s . Despite the lack of championships , the rivalry between the teams did have some memorable highlights . Yankee left @-@ hander Dave Righetti threw a no @-@ hitter against the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium . One of the game 's greatest hitters , Wade Boggs , struck out to end the game . This was the first no @-@ hitter thrown by a left @-@ hander at Yankee Stadium and the first no @-@ hitter by a Yankee since Don Larsen 's perfect game against Subway Series rival Brooklyn Dodgers in Game five of the 1956 World Series and the first regular no @-@ hitter by a Yankee since 1951 . 
 On October 4 , 1986 , Righetti once again made history against the Red Sox when he saved both games of a doubleheader against them , finishing the season with 46 saves , and breaking the major league record shared by Dan Quisenberry and Bruce Sutter . The record would stand until Bobby Thigpen saved 57 games for the Chicago White Sox in 1990 , which would also be Righetti 's last season with the Yankees . Righetti retained the single @-@ season record for left @-@ handers until 1993 , when Randy Myers saved 53 games for the Chicago Cubs ; Righetti still owns the AL record for left @-@ handers . 
 Righetti 's teammate , first baseman and defending American League MVP Don Mattingly , came into the last game batting .352 , second in the league to Boston 's Wade Boggs . With Boggs sitting out the game , Mattingly needed to go 6 for 6 to win the batting title . Although Mattingly would hit a home run in his first at bat and a double later on , he fell short and Boggs won the batting title . Mattingly would be named most outstanding player that year by the press , but fell short to Boggs ' teammate Roger Clemens in the AL MVP voting . 
 Despite Righetti 's pitching on the last day of the season , the Red Sox still won the division and marched on in the playoffs . The Yankees ' bad performance during the 1980s came when the Red Sox faced the Yankees ' cross @-@ town rivals , the New York Mets , in the World Series . The New York Times called the series a " painful series " . Newsday called it " woeful days for Yankee fans " . Mike Lupica of the New York Daily News called the series " the World Series that is the Yankee nightmare " . Both Newsday and The Boston Globe said there were Mets T @-@ shirts saying " Steinbrenner 's nightmare , " referring to Yankees owner George Steinbrenner . John Powers of the Globe quoted Claire Smith , who covered the Yankees for the Hartford Courant , as having said " this really is the World Series of the nightmares " . 
 In game six of the World Series , Boston ( leading the series three games to two ) took a 5 – 3 lead in the top of the 10th inning . In the bottom half of the frame , Red Sox reliever Calvin Schiraldi retired the first two batters , putting the team within one out of winning the World Series . The Mets , however , scored three unanswered runs , tying the game on a wild pitch from Bob Stanley and winning it when Boston first baseman Bill Buckner allowed a ground ball hit by the Mets ' Mookie Wilson to roll through his legs , scoring Ray Knight from second base . In the seventh game , the Red Sox took an early 3 – 0 lead , only to lose 8 – 5 . The collapses in the last two games prompted a series of articles by George Vecsey of The New York Times fueling speculation that the Red Sox were " cursed " . 
 The 1987 season saw rivalry at the end of the season , as on September 29 , Yankee first baseman Don Mattingly set a MLB record by hitting his sixth grand slam home @-@ run of the season against the Red Sox 
 The competitiveness of the teams continued the following year . Co @-@ captains Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph had led the Yankees to first place two weeks after the All @-@ Star break started . On July 28 , the Yankees fell out of first place , and the Red Sox won their second division title in three years . Boston went on to face the Oakland Athletics in the 1988 American League Championship Series , but would end up getting swept . 
 = = = 1990 – 1995 = = = 
 The tone of baseball rivalries changed in the early 1990s ; fraternization between players who had moved to different teams or knew each other from various ventures kept baseball rivalries to a " friendly " level . Major League Baseball 's 1994 divisional re @-@ alignment solidified the rivalry between the Yankees and Red Sox . Prior to the realignment , the American League East Division contained seven teams , spread out over a wider geographical area , including the Cleveland Indians and the Milwaukee Brewers . 
 In the early to mid @-@ 1990s , the two teams were seldom equally good . The Yankees had the worst record in the American League when the Red Sox won their third division title in five years in 1990 . In 1992 , both teams finished at or near the bottom of the AL East . 
 In 1990 , Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy wrote a book titled The Curse of the Bambino , criticizing the Red Sox for the sale of Babe Ruth , and publicized the curse . When the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium during a weekend in September 1990 , Yankee fans started to chant " 1918 ! " to taunt the Red Sox , reminding them of the last time they won a World Series . Each time the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium afterward , demeaning chants of " 1918 ! " echoed through the stadium . Yankee fans also taunted the Red Sox with signs saying " 1918 ! " , " <unk> OF THE <unk> " , pictures of Babe Ruth , and wearing " 1918 ! " T @-@ shirts each time they were at the Stadium . 
 On June 6 , 1990 , before a Yankees – Red Sox game at Fenway Park , the Yankees fired Bucky Dent as their manager , making Fenway Park the scene of his worst moment as manager , although he had his greatest moment as a player there . Red Sox fans felt retribution as Dent was fired on their field , while players on the Yankees , including former Red Sox catcher Rick Cerone and Mattingly felt Dent was used as a scapegoat . Dan Shaughnessy criticized Steinbrenner for firing Dent in Boston and said he should " have waited until the Yankees got to Baltimore " to fire Dent . He said that " if Dent had been fired in Seattle or Milwaukee , this would have been just another event in an endless line of George 's jettisons . But it happened in Boston and the nightly news had its hook . " He also said that " the firing was only special because ... it 's the first time a Yankee manager ... was purged on the ancient Indian burial grounds of the Back Bay . " 
 On July 30 , almost two months after firing Dent at Fenway Park , Steinbrenner was suspended from day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the Yankees . There were cheers at both Yankee Stadium and Fenway Park over the news of the suspension of Steinbrenner . At Yankee Stadium , fans chanted and cheered " It 's Over ! It 's Over ! " However , the players said it was sad Steinbrenner was suspended . 
 Mel Hall 's game @-@ winning three @-@ run home run in the ninth inning gave the Yankees a dramatic Memorial Day win over the Red Sox in 1991 . Announcer John Sterling accentuated the word " the " when saying " the Yankees win ! " This accentuation would become a characteristic trademark of Sterling for the rest of his broadcasting career . 
 The 1993 season saw long @-@ time Red Sox fan favorite Wade Boggs defect to the Yankees after eleven seasons with Boston . Later in September 1993 , the Yankees defeated Boston at Yankee Stadium via a last @-@ moment reprieve . Trailing 3 – 1 , Mike Stanley 's apparent fly out with two outs in the ninth was nullified by a fan running on to the field prior to the pitch being thrown . The umpire had called time and when play resumed , Stanley singled . The Yankees would rally to score three runs and win on a Mattingly single . 
 The Yankees ' 1980s demise and downfall continued into the early 1990s and was at its frustrating peak in 1994 , when they finished with the best record in the American League in a season that was prematurely halted by the 1994 – 95 Major League Baseball strike , which left New York sports fans disappointed that Mattingly had not played in a postseason despite being poised to do so that year . At that time , he led active players in both games played and at @-@ bats without participating in a postseason game . Throughout October , the news media added to the embarrassment when they often made references to dates that games in the World Series would have been played . That year , the Yankees and Red Sox would have finished the season against each other at Fenway Park . Both managers , Buck Showalter of the Yankees and Butch Hobson of the Red Sox , who made their managerial debuts against each other , were fired as a result of or during the strike . 
 The strike was the harbinger of the 1995 season for the Yankees . Although the Red Sox jumped out to a fast start and finished the season in first place , the Yankees were not serious contenders for the division title . With the Yankees clinching the inaugural American League Wild Card on the last day of the season , the Yankees and Red Sox reached the post @-@ season in the same season for the first time . Before the postseason began , Mattingly contemplated about the first @-@ ever playoff series in the rivalry , saying , " That would be pretty cool . It wouldn 't hurt the rivalry any . There 'd be a few deaths ... just kidding " . Both teams lost in separate ALDS series , with the Red Sox being swept by the Cleveland Indians and the Yankees losing in five games to the Seattle Mariners . For the Yankees , the loss led to another post @-@ strike fallout : both Showalter and general manager Gene Michael were fired as a result of the loss . Similarly , the firing of Michael as Yankees manager and the loss in the 1981 World Series were fallouts from the strike that year . In fact , the 1981 strike was <unk> to the Yankees ' demise and downfall of the 1980s and 1990s and the strike in 1994 was part of that demise . 
 Beginning with the 1995 playoffs , every playoffs have featured the Yankees and / or the Red Sox . As of 2012 , the two rivals have made up 25 out of 34 possible playoff appearances , with the two teams reaching the playoffs in the same year eight times ( 1995 , 1998 , 1999 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2007 , and 2009 ) . The streak ended in 2014 . 
 = = 1996 – 2003 : Yankee dominance and first postseason meetings = = 
 = = = Late 1990s : Yankee dynasty = = = 
 A year after captain Don Mattingly 's retirement in 1995 , the Yankees won the 1996 World Series . It was their first in 18 years and the first of former Red Sox player Wade Boggs ' career , coming almost 10 years to the day he lost it to Mets . Boggs celebrated the victory with a memorable moment of jumping on the horse of a NYPD officer during the celebration . The Yankees , like the rest of baseball , were still reeling from what was lost in 1994 , because many members of the 1994 team were not there in 1996 . Showalter said the 1994 strike " sits in my <unk> " , and that he could not watch the World Series because " I feel badly for the fans " . 
 The Yankees did not reach the World Series in 1997 , but came back with one of the better seasons in baseball history in 1998 , which culminated in a win over the San Diego Padres in the 1998 World Series . The Red Sox , too , made the playoffs in 1998 , but as a Wild Card , they did not seriously contend for the division title . They ultimately lost their ALDS . 
 About four months after victory , the Yankees controversially traded fan favorite David Wells to the Toronto Blue Jays for Roger Clemens , a fan favorite with the Red Sox between 1984 and 1996 . Clemens was coming off two consecutive season with the Blue Jays where he had won both the pitching triple crown and the Cy Young Award in both 1997 and 1998 . 
 Once the 1999 season started , a moment of peace occurred between the fans . Yankees manager Joe Torre returned to Fenway Park for his first game following a battle with prostate cancer . While the managers were exchanging lineup cards , the Boston crowd gave Torre a long standing ovation , to which he tipped his cap . Good relations were seen during the All @-@ Star Game at Fenway Park . Yankee manager Joe Torre , manager for the American League team , replaced starting shortstop Nomar Garciaparra of the Red Sox with Derek Jeter . Garciaparra received a standing ovation from the fans after Jeter came in to replace him ( they also embraced each other at this time ) . Later in the game , when he came to bat , Jeter gave Garciaparra a tribute by mimicking his batting stance . Nine years later , in a similar fashion , Red Sox manager Terry Francona managed the American League team at the All @-@ Star Game at Yankee Stadium , in the stadium 's final season . 
 On September 10 , 1999 , Chili Davis ' second @-@ inning home run was the only hit by the Yankees against Pedro Martínez , who struck out 17 Yankees — the most strikeouts against a Yankee team ever . Martínez retired the last 22 batters after giving up the home run , including striking out eight of the final nine batters . The teams finished first and second in their division and both made the playoffs in the same season . This led to the very first post @-@ season meeting in the longtime rivalry . 
 = = = = 1999 ALCS : First postseason meeting = = = = 
 In 1999 , the Yankees and Red Sox faced each other for the first time in the ALCS . The Yankees were the defending World Series champions and in the midst of a run of three consecutive World Championships , while Boston had not appeared in the ALCS since 1990 . The Yankees won the first game of the ALCS against the Red Sox on a 10th @-@ inning walk @-@ off home run by Bernie Williams off Boston reliever Rod Beck . The game was the first actual postseason meeting between the rivals because the one @-@ game playoff in 1978 technically counted as a regular season game . Intensity built up due to this historic , first @-@ ever postseason meeting between the two longtime rivals . The Yankees would win the first two games at home with 7th @-@ inning comebacks . 
 The lone bright spot for the Red Sox came in Game 3 at Boston 's Fenway Park , in what had been a much anticipated pitching match @-@ up of former Red Sox star Roger Clemens , who was now pitching for the Yankees , and Boston ace Pedro Martínez . Martínez struck out twelve and did not allow a run through seven innings of work ; Clemens was hit hard , giving up five earned runs and only lasting two innings of a 13 – 1 Red Sox victory . The Yankees rebounded to win Games 4 and 5 , clinching the American League pennant and advancing to the Series , where they swept the Atlanta Braves , ( including two 8th @-@ inning comebacks ) . The loss to Pedro Martínez was the Yankees ' only postseason loss , as the team went 11 – 1 . 
 The following year at Fenway Park , the Yankees beat the Red Sox , 22 – 1 , handing Boston its most lopsided home loss ever . The Yankees scored 16 total runs in the 8th and 9th innings . The Yankees lost 15 of their final 18 games that season and finished with a record of 87 – 74 , but the Red Sox failed to catch up and finished 2 @.@ 5 games out of first to lose another division title to the Yankees . Despite having the lowest winning percentage of any postseason qualifier in 2000 , the Yankees won their third consecutive World Series and 26th overall , in the first Subway Series since 1956 , over their cross @-@ town rivals , the New York Mets , in 5 games . 
 A year later , David Cone , one of the key players in the then @-@ most recent Yankee dynasty , started for the Red Sox against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium to the sound of a standing ovation despite playing for the arch @-@ rival Red Sox . It marked Cone 's first return to Yankee Stadium since leaving the team . Cone would later take part in another notable game later that year when he went up against newly acquired Yankee pitcher Mike Mussina . Mussina had come within one strike of pitching a perfect game against the Red Sox at Fenway Park . Carl Everett 's 9th @-@ inning two @-@ out , two @-@ strike single was the only baserunner allowed by Mussina in a 1 – 0 Yankee win . Coincidentally , David Cone was the last Yankee pitcher to throw a perfect game , in 1999 . 
 On September 10 , the two teams had a game against each other rained out . The next day , the country saw one of its biggest tragedies bring both sides together . Following the terrorist attacks on New York City 's Twin World Trade Center Towers , Boston fans displayed signs saying " Boston Loves New York " in a rare moment of peace between the two sides of the rivalry . On September 23 , the Yankees ' home field hosted a memorial service titled , " Prayer for America " . The warm feeling of solidarity would once again be short @-@ lived as just prior to the 2003 season , Red Sox President Larry Lucchino labeled New York Yankees the " Evil Empire " after Cuban free agent José Contreras opted to sign with the Yankees instead of the Red Sox . The new ownership group had made it their personal mission to win a championship . 
 = = = 2001 – 2003 : Unbalanced schedule = = = 
 Major League Baseball changed its scheduling format beginning in 2001 , further intensifying division matchups throughout the league . The new " unbalanced schedule " allowed for additional games in each season between divisional rivals , replacing additional series with teams outside the division . Due to the change , the Red Sox and Yankees now played each other 17 or more times each season ( 18 times in 2001 ) . The scheduling drew criticism both when it was enacted and after the fact , with some analysts even positing the unbalanced schedule hurt intra @-@ divisional play . 
 In 2002 , the Red Sox asked the Yankees for permission to interview one of George Steinbrenner 's assistants , former Yankees general manager Gene Michael , for their vacant general manager position , but Steinbrenner declined their request . Boston Red Sox then hired Theo Epstein , a protégé of Red Sox President and CEO Larry Lucchino , as general manager , and at 28 years old , he was the youngest general manager in baseball history . 
 = = = = 2003 ALCS = = = = 
 Both teams would face off in the ALCS once again in 2003 . Entering the series , the Red Sox were the favorites to reach the 2003 World Series and The New York Times had endorsed a showdown between the Red Sox and the Chicago Cubs , the latter of whom had not been to the World Series since 1945 and had not won a championship since 1908 . 
 Due to the unbalanced schedule , when Boston forced the ALCS to a full seven games , the seventh game set a major league record for the rivalry between the two teams : it marked the first time two major league teams have played more than 25 games against each other over the course of a single season . 
 In the top of the fourth inning of Game 3 of the ALCS at Fenway Park , Red Sox starting pitcher Pedro Martínez hit Yankee batter Karim García , prompting an argument between the two players , which ended with both teams clearing the benches but no punches being thrown . In the bottom half of the inning , a pitch from Roger Clemens to Manny Ramírez was high and inside , and a brawl ensued . Ramírez swore at Clemens for the pitch . Yankees bench coach Don Zimmer , then 72 years old , and who had been the manager of the " doomed " 1978 Boston Red Sox , charged at Martínez ; the pitcher grabbed Zimmer by the head and swung him to the ground . Later , midway through the ninth inning , García and Yankee pitcher Jeff Nelson fought with a Fenway Park groundskeeper , Paul Williams , in the bullpen . Two Boston Police officers issued a report saying Nelson and García engaged in " an unprovoked attack " on Williams and summonses would be sought for the two New York Yankees for assault and battery . After reviewing the incident , MLB Commissioner Bud Selig said he was " very disappointed " by the behavior of the participants and fined Martínez $ 50 @,@ 000 , Ramírez $ 25 @,@ 000 , García $ 10 @,@ 000 , and Zimmer $ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 In game seven at Yankee Stadium , the Red Sox held a 5 – 2 lead through seven innings due to an ineffective start by Roger Clemens , but the Yankees remained in the game because of three shutout innings of relief by Mike Mussina in his first career relief appearance . After Boston Red Sox starter Pedro Martínez gave up a run in the eighth , manager Grady Little visited the mound but elected to leave a tiring Martínez to complete the inning . Martínez then gave up a ground @-@ rule double to Hideki Matsui , and Yankees catcher Jorge Posada <unk> a double into center field that drove in two runners and tied the game . The game went into extra innings and in the bottom of the eleventh inning , leadoff hitter Aaron Boone , grandson of Ray Boone , a ( retired ) longtime scout with the Red Sox , hit a solo home run off of Tim Wakefield to left field , ending the game and the series , giving the Yankees their 39th American League pennant . The Long Island , New York , newspaper Newsday went to the press before the game was over , and thinking Boston would win the game , editorialized as to what was wrong with the Yankees , and why they had lost the ALCS to the Red Sox . In a postgame interview , Red Sox <unk> Kevin Millar described the emotions in the Red Sox locker room : " It was like we were all back in high school , like we 'd all just gotten beat in the state playoffs , and everyone was going to graduate .... When you 're a teenager and you lose the big football game , that 's when you see guys cry uncontrollably . You don 't [ usually ] see that much at this level . " 
 Two days later , the Red Sox fired Grady Little . People blamed him for the game seven loss , claiming he left Martínez in for too long . 
 = = 2004 – present : The Curse is broken = = 
 = = = 2004 : Red Sox win World Series = = = 
 In an effort to build up their lineup , the Red Sox set up a potential deal that would send reigning AL MVP Alex Rodriguez to Boston and Red Sox Manny Ramírez and other players to Texas . The deal eventually fell through after Rodríguez indicated he would not go against the MLBPA , which opposes a proposed renegotiation , which would have potentially reduced Rodríguez 's earnings in the later years of his contract . A freak off @-@ season basketball injury to Aaron Boone just several months removed from his historic home run had Yankees management looking at possible options to replace him . Despite being courted by Boston for nearly three months , Rodríguez was traded from Texas to New York . 
 New Red Sox pitcher Curt Schilling , who had confounded New York in the 2001 World Series as an Arizona Diamondback , appeared at an ice hockey game in Boston wearing a " Yankee hater " hat . 
 That year , the Red Sox won an eventful season series against the Yankees . A 13 @-@ inning comeback win for the Yankees on July 1 was punctuated by a catch from Derek Jeter , who ran and dove into the stands at full speed and came out with facial lacerations when Trot Nixon hit a pop up in an area deep behind third base . On July 24 , Jason Varitek shoved his glove into the face of the Yankees ' Álex Rodríguez after Rodríguez was hit by a pitch from Bronson Arroyo , causing a bench @-@ clearing brawl . Though he was ejected ( along with Rodríguez ) from the game following the incident , the moment sparked Boston to an 11 – 10 come @-@ from @-@ behind victory . Both Rodríguez and Varitek were each suspended four games and fined $ 2 @,@ 000 for the brawl . 
 Despite their success in the rivalry series , the Red Sox still finished second to the Yankees in the AL East for the seventh straight season . Both teams would advance to the ALCS for the second straight year . 
 = = = = 2004 ALCS : The curse is broken = = = = 
 This was the series everybody wanted to see because of what happened in the 2003 ALCS . Yankees general manager Brian Cashman said " I think Boston ... really are ... a mirror image of us in terms of ... aggressiveness and desire to win " . Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina summarized the build @-@ up : " This is what everyone was hoping for ... it 's a rematch of last year , with the best two teams in the American League " . 
 Outfielder Johnny Damon said of Boone 's home run : " If we do advance to the World Series and win , it 's a better story that we went through New York . We needed to get back here . This is where a lot of hearts were broken , and we 're in a perfect seat to stop the hurting . " Damon told USA Today : " If we are going to win the World Series , it 's better to beat the Yankees to get there . Otherwise , everybody will say , ' Well , you didn 't have to face the Yankees . ' I think we have the best team , so I hope the best team wins . But the Yankees are no slouches . We know that [ Gary ] Sheffield can hit every single pitch thrown to him . " 
 The Yankees won the first three games of the series , including a 19 – 8 rout in Game 3 . No team in the history of baseball had ever won a best @-@ of @-@ seven series after being down three games to none . Entering the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 4 at Fenway Park , Yankees reliever Mariano Rivera was attempting to close out a 4 – 3 lead . But after issuing a leadoff walk to Kevin Millar , pinch @-@ runner Dave Roberts stole second and came around to score on an RBI single by Bill Mueller . Boston won the game in the bottom of the 12th inning on a home run by David Ortiz . Game 5 featured another extra @-@ inning Boston comeback , as the Red Sox tied the game in the 8th inning , and won it in the 14th on a single hit by Ortiz that drove in Damon from second to make it 4 @-@ 3 Red Sox . In Game 6 , Curt Schilling , who tore a tendon sheath in his right ankle during the American League Divisional Series against Anaheim , pitched seven innings of one @-@ run ball . 4 innings in and the Yankees had still yet to get a hit off Schilling . Schilling 's tendon was sutured to his ankle to relieve the discomfort and was given local anesthetic and painkillers for the game . During the game , his sock started to absorb the blood from his freshly sutured ankle , dubbed " the bloody sock " . During the game a controversial call was called on Alex Rodriguez when he knocked the ball out of Arroyo 's hand on his sprint to first . Boston won the contest , 4 – 2 . They then completed their historic comeback with a blowout win in Game 7 , by a score of 10 – 3 . New York Yankees blowing the 3 – 0 lead has been considered the biggest collapse in the history of the rivalry . 
 In Boston , celebrations marking their win over the Yankees was marred by a tragedy . Moments after the Red Sox beat the Yankees , Victoria Snelgrove , an Emerson College junior , was mortally wounded after being hit in the eye by a non @-@ lethal crowd control projectile fired by police . Boston Red Sox outfielder Trot Nixon said in response " I 'd give Game 7 back to have her back . " The funeral services for Snelgrove took place on October 26 , 2004 , the day before the Curse of the Bambino died . The Red Sox won their first World Series championship in 86 years , completing a sweep of St. Louis in the 2004 World Series . 
 When the Red Sox held their World Series victory parade , Manny Ramírez was handed a sign by one of the spectators part of the way through the parade , which read , " Jeter is playing golf today . This is better ! " He held on to this sign for the rest of the parade . 
 = = = 2005 – 2009 : Yankees , Red Sox win titles = = = 
 When the two teams played for the first time at Yankee Stadium , on April 3 , Yankee fans started new taunts , saying " The Curse of 1918 is finally over ( 86 years ) . Let the new curse 2090 begin . " They also projected the next Red Sox championship with signs saying " 1918 @-@ 2004 @-@ 2090 . " Just a week later , the Red Sox received their World Series rings at Fenway Park before they played the Yankees . All of the Yankees went to the top step of the dugout to applaud the Red Sox accomplishment . During the announcement of the lineups , Red Sox fans reciprocated by giving Yankee closer Mariano Rivera ( who had struggled against the Red Sox ) a loud , standing ovation , despite their booing of Alex Rodriguez . Rivera laughed and tipped his cap . In New York , the YES Network , the Yankees television network , declined to broadcast it . Instead , a fixed camera shot was focused tightly on correspondent Kimberly Jones as she described in general terms the events surrounding her ; afterwards , YES was roundly criticized for the move . The Red Sox won the game 8 – 1 . 
 Just days later , Yankee right fielder Gary Sheffield 's cap was knocked off by a Red Sox fan while trying to pick up a fair ball in right field at Fenway Park . In response , Sheffield pushed the fan . The conflict was quickly stopped by security guards . The fan was ejected from the game for interfering with play and eventually stripped of his season tickets . The season ended with both teams , already with guaranteed playoff berths , playing each other for the division crown on the last day of the season in a game that had the Yankees come out on top . Both teams wound up losing in the 2005 ALDS , the Yankees to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim and the Red Sox to the eventual World Series champion that year , the Chicago White Sox . 
 The Red Sox acquired starting pitcher Josh Beckett , who pitched a complete game shutout for the Marlins against the Yankees to end the 2003 World Series , the end of the 2005 season . The Yankees would follow with their own off @-@ season acquisition of former Red Sox outfielder Johnny Damon , a fan @-@ favorite during his four years in Boston . Damon returned to Fenway Park the following May to a mix of cheers and boos as he tipped his helmet to the fans . 
 The Yankees defeated the Red Sox at Fenway Park and completed a five @-@ game sweep of the Red Sox in the first five @-@ game series between the teams in 33 years , evoking memories of 1978 's " Boston Massacre " . The Yankees outscored the Red Sox 49 – 26 and pushed their division lead from 1 1 ⁄ 2 games all the way to 6 1 ⁄ 2 games over the second place Sox . Boston Globe columnist Dan Shaughnessy dubbed it the " Son of Massacre . " The second game of the series , which the Yankees won 14 – 11 , took four hours and 45 minutes to complete , making it the longest nine @-@ inning game in Major League Baseball history . Months after the Yankees loss to the Tigers in the 2006 ALDS and manager Joe Torre 's controversial decision to drop a struggling Alex Rodriguez to 8th in the lineup , Rodriguez in an interview with Sports Illustrated , claimed that he had preferred to go to the Red Sox before being traded to the Yankees . The incident would be one of contention between Torre and Rodriguez as noted in Torre 's book , The Yankee Years . 
 During the third inning of a 2007 game at Fenway Park , Manny Ramírez , J. D. Drew , Mike Lowell , and Jason Varitek hit four consecutive home runs off Yankee pitcher Chase Wright , powering a comeback from a three @-@ run deficit and completing a three @-@ game sweep of the Yankees at Fenway Park for the first time since 1990 . By May , after long speculation about what team he would play for after retirement , Roger Clemens chose to return to the Yankees as opposed to the Red Sox ( where he started his career ) or the Houston Astros ( his hometown and last team he played for ) . Clemens helped the Yankees overcome a 14 @-@ game deficit in the standings to roar back to reach the playoffs again , however , this was not enough to win the division . On September 28 , Boston won the AL East after a win against the Minnesota Twins and a loss by the Yankees against the Baltimore Orioles . This was the first AL East Championship for the Red Sox since 1995 , ending the Yankees ' nine @-@ year reign in the division . 
 The Red Sox went on to sweep the Colorado Rockies in the World Series . Series MVP Mike Lowell remarks , upon receiving his trophy , that " the Red Sox are expected to win . " Controversy erupted during the eighth inning of the final game when Alex Rodriguez 's agent Scott Boras announced that Rodriguez had decided to opt out of his contract , in what was seen by many as an attempt by Boras to overshadow the series . 
 The off @-@ season after the 2007 Series showed a war of words between management of both teams . Boston GM Theo Epstein called Yankee pitcher Mike Mussina a " bad apple " for complaining about the Yankees ' 2004 trip to Japan as the Red Sox were gearing up for their own trip there . Epstein claimed that Mussina had used it as a crutch during the season . Mussina retorted back saying " Yea , we used it as a crutch to win the division ! " Later that month , Hank Steinbrenner , who had taken a bigger role with the Yankees operation from his father George , responded in a feisty manner to the popularity of Red Sox Nation in The New York Times supplemental Play Magazine : " ' Red Sox Nation ? ' What a bunch of ( expletive ) that is . That was a creation of the Red Sox and ESPN , which is filled with Red Sox fans . Go anywhere in America and you won 't see Red Sox hats and jackets , you 'll see Yankee hats and jackets . This is a Yankee country . We 're going to put the Yankees back on top and restore the universe to order . " In response , Red Sox principal owner John W. Henry inducted Hank Steinbrenner into Red Sox Nation . Steinbrenner went on to praise Henry 's handling of the Red Sox and said they would always be competitive under him . 
 In 2008 , the Red Sox clinched a playoff berth and while the Yankees ' streak of 13 consecutive postseason appearances dating back to 1995 ended . 
 In the 2008 off @-@ season , first baseman Mark Teixeira signed an eight year , $ 180 million contract with the Yankees . Tony <unk> of The Boston Globe summed up his feelings by calling it a " kick in the pants " . 
 In August , the Yankees had 23 hits and the Red Sox had 12 in a 20 – 11 Yankees victory where the total runs scored ( 31 ) is the most runs collected by both teams in the history of their rivalry . 
 Both teams made the playoffs in 2009 . During the ALDS , the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins to face the Angels who had knocked out the Red Sox at Fenway after being one strike away from losing Game 3 , and rallying against Papelbon to take the division series in 3 games . The Yankees beat the Angels and went on defeat the Philadelphia Phillies in the 2009 World Series , 4 – 2 , to earn their 27th World Series title and their first championship in their first year in the new Yankee Stadium . Former Red Sox pitcher Pedro Martínez was the losing pitcher of record for the defending champions in the last game of the series . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Yankees fall short , Red Sox champions again = = = 
 2010 saw the Yankees and the Red Sox start and finish the season against each other at Fenway Park , the first time since 1950 this happened . The Red Sox beat the Yankees in the first meeting of the two teams , the 30th time that the two teams played on Opening Day , improving to 11 – 18 – 1 against the Yankees whenever the two teams play each other on Opening Day . 
 In July , with the passings of Bob Sheppard , public address announcer for the Yankees , on July 11 at the age of 99 , and principal owner and managing partner of the Yankees , George Steinbrenner , at the age of 80 , both teams opened the second half at their respective stadiums with a moment of silence for Steinbrenner and Sheppard . The Red Sox , struggling to get out of third place , failed to make the playoffs for the second time in five years , but played spoiler during the final series of the season , knocking the Yankees out of first place in the American League East , relegating them to the wild @-@ card for the 2010 season . 
 In 2011 , the Red Sox went 12 – 6 against the Yankees , including beating Yankees ace CC Sabathia four times during the season and sweeping two three @-@ game sets at Yankee Stadium , the only sets of three games of more where the Yankees have been swept at home since it opened in 2009 . Critics and writers forecasted overwhelmingly that the Red Sox would win the 2011 World Series easily . The Red Sox spent a great deal to build the team in the off @-@ season , and were about to sell at least two Red Sox as Most Valuable Player candidates by mid season . Following a disastrous first month , the Red Sox climbed in the standings . The Yankees claimed the AL East crown after the Red Sox 's September struggles left them battling for the wild @-@ card with the Rays , with whom they went into the season 's final game tied . On September 28 , the Tampa Bay Rays staged a dramatic comeback from 7 – 0 to win 8 – 7 over the Yankees in the 12th inning . Only three minutes earlier , Red Sox closer Jonathan Papelbon blew a 3 – 2 lead over the Orioles in the bottom of the 9th inning , handing a 4 – 3 walk @-@ off victory to the Orioles . The Rays claimed the AL Wild Card and eliminated the Red Sox from the post @-@ season . It marked the first time in baseball history that a 9 @-@ game lead had been blown in September , becoming the worst collapse in baseball history . Dan Shaughnessy of The Boston Globe said that " the greatest choke in baseball history ... feels like revenge for 2004 and 2007 . " Yankee fans everywhere rejoiced , as it was a greater collapse than the 1978 Red Sox , as well as 2004 . 
 During the series the final weekend of the season , Russell Martin of the Yankees said of the Red Sox about their collapse that " I hate the Red Sox " and that " anything to get the Red Sox out would be awesome for me . " 
 In response to the historic September collapse by the Red Sox , they hired outspoken manager Bobby Valentine to take Francona 's place . After his signing , Valentine immediately inserted himself into the rivalry when he said he hated the Yankees . 
 On the weekend series of April 20 – 22 , 2012 , the Red Sox celebrated the 100th anniversary of Fenway Park against the Yankees , who they played to open up the park . Both teams wore their 1912 uniforms on April 20 , which the Yankees won 6 @-@ 2 . The Yankees came back from down , 9 – 0 , to win , 15 – 9 , the next day , the largest deficit they have ever overcame . They won the season series 13 – 5 , their best record against the Red Sox since 2001 , when they also went 13 – 5 against them , and swept the final three @-@ game series of the season at Yankee Stadium to clinch the AL East while the Red Sox finished last in the division for the first time since 1992 with their worst record since 1965 . Valentine was fired soon after . Later in 2012 , the Yankees acquired 2004 ALCS Game 7 winner Derek Lowe . He was the latest member of the 2004 team to play for the Yankees after beating them in 2004 . 
 After the 2012 season , Kevin Youkilis , who the Red Sox traded to the Chicago White Sox earlier in the season , signed with the Yankees as a free agent . He had previously clashed with Joba Chamberlain when he was with Boston . 
 On Opening Day April 1 , 2013 at Yankee Stadium , the Yankees and Red Sox honored the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown , Connecticut , located in between New York and Boston . On April 16 , 2013 , the Yankees put aside their rivalry with the Red Sox and played the song " Sweet Caroline " , a Fenway Park tradition , at the end of the third inning of their game against the Arizona Diamondbacks to honor the victims of the Boston Marathon bombings that took place one day earlier . On September 15 , 2013 , the Red Sox honored Yankees closer Mariano Rivera in his final game in Fenway Park , in which both the Red Sox fans and players gave Rivera a standing ovation when he entered the field . The Red Sox took the regular season series over the Yankees 13 @-@ 6 . The Red Sox finished the season with the best record in the American League and went on to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2013 World Series to capture their eighth World Series title , while the Yankees failed to make the playoffs . 
 On December 3 , 2013 , one month after winning the 2013 World Series , Boston outfielder Jacoby <unk> and the Yankees agreed in principle to a seven @-@ year $ 153 million deal , including an option for an eighth year that could increase the value of the contract to $ 169 million . 
 On April 10 , 2014 , Yankees pitcher Michael Pineda was believed to have been using pine tar in a Yankee @-@ Red Sox game at Yankee Stadium . This was never brought to the umpires attention , therefore it was never tested and no actions were taken . On April 23 , 2014 , at a Yankee Red Sox game in Fenway Park , John Farrell noticed that Pineda was using pine tar again . Farrell walked to the home plate umpire and got Pineda ejected from the game in the 2nd inning . 
 On Tuesday , May 6 , 2014 , former Yankee Mariano Rivera debuted his new book , The Closer . In it , Rivera talks about both second basemen Robinson Cano , Rivera 's former teammate , and the Red Sox captain Dustin Pedroia . Rivera created controversy when he stated Cano lacks hustle and heart despite his unending talent and that he would prefer to pick Pedroia on a team over Cano as a result . 
 After a 1 – 1 tie between aces Jon Lester and Yankees ' rookie Masahiro Tanaka on June 27 , 2014 , Tanaka threw a fastball to Red Sox first baseman Mike Napoli that Napoli hit for the go @-@ ahead home run that won the game for the Red Sox . As Napoli returned to the dugout to his cheering teammates , he screamed out how Tanaka was an " idiot " for throwing him a fastball when his splitter was fooling him all night . 
 On July 31 , 2014 , the Yankees acquired Stephen Drew in exchange for Kelly Johnson in the first trade between the two teams since 1997 . Both teams missed the playoffs in 2014 , which is the first time in the wildcard era , and also since 1993 . 
 Both teams played each other in the last series of the season in what would be Derek Jeter 's final games as a player before retirement . Jeter said he would not play shortstop for the last series of the season in Boston , but would still bat as a designated hitter out of respect for the rivalry . Boston honored Jeter with a pregame ceremony including Red Sox retired stars Carl Yastrzemski , Jim Rice , Fred Lynn , Luis Tiant and Rico <unk> , the Boston Bruins ' Bobby Orr , New England Patriots receiver Troy Brown and the Boston Celtics ' Paul Pierce . In his last at bat as a professional player , Jeter grounded out , but drove in a run . Writer Peter Gammons who was in attendance at the game was also at Fenway during Ted Williams ' final at bat where he hit a homerun 54 years prior to the day . Despite the rivalry , many Boston fans at Fenway Park loudly cheered for Jeter and gave him a standing ovation . The Yankees , though unable to reach the playoffs , finished in second place , while the Red Sox finished in last place , 25 games behind the first place Orioles . 
 To start the 2015 MLB season edition of the rivalry , the Red Sox team 's first game at Yankee Stadium on Friday , April 10 went into extra innings ended up being one of the longest games ever played — at six hours and 49 minutes — going 19 innings , with the Yankees tying the game three times in the bottom of the 9th , 14th , and 16th , ending in a 6 @-@ 5 victory for the Sox . During the first game of the first series at Fenway on May 1 , Alex Rodriguez , coming of a suspension for PED use the year prior , hit his first ever career pinch hit homerun that would prove to be the winning run in the game and tie him with Willie Mays on the all @-@ time homerun list . On May 3 , the Yankees completed a weekend sweep of the Red Sox at Fenway . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Using Facebook Like button data , Ben Blatt of the Harvard College Sports Analysis Collective found in 2012 that Red Sox fans are east of the New York State – Vermont / Massachusetts border , and Yankees fans are west . Blatt wrote , " I had thought that it was possible that Red Sox Nation might extend into northern New York or Yankee territory might extend into Vermont . This turned out not to be the case " . Connecticut divides support between the two teams ; he found that 56 @.@ 6 % of Facebook users in Hartford , often cited as being on the border between the two teams ' fans , supported the Yankees . While Blatt found that identifying an exact border within the state was impossible , Guilford and Middletown are almost exactly divided , with 50 @.@ 7 % in each supporting the Yankees . 
 = = Violence over rivalry = = 
 There have been occasions that there have been arrests because of violence over the rivalry . In May 2008 , a Yankees fan in Nashua , New Hampshire was arrested and charged with reckless second @-@ degree murder for killing two people outside a bar , which resulted from an argument over the rivalry . Later in 2008 , a man driving a car with New York license plates in Massachusetts was pulled from his car and savagely beaten because locals suspected the man of being a Yankees fan . During the final series of the 2010 season , Boston Police arrested a Yankees fan for stabbing a Red Sox fan over an argument about the rivalry . 
 = = Rivalry outside of baseball = = 
 Don Mattingly had appeared in public service announcements airing on the Spike TV network advocating fathers to spend time with their children as part of the " True Dads " campaign to encourage men to take an active role in their children 's lives . Mattingly jokes at the end of the commercial about the impatience of one of the characters in the commercial by calling him a Red Sox fan . 
 On April 13 , 2008 , rumors of a construction worker burying a Red Sox jersey in the concrete of the new Yankee Stadium were verified after anonymous tips led to the location of the jersey . The worker , identified as Gino <unk> , had buried a David Ortiz jersey in what would become a service corridor in the hopes of cursing the new stadium . After extracting the jersey from underneath two feet of concrete , Yankees ' President Randy Levine indicated that the shirt would be donated to the Jimmy Fund to be auctioned for the charity long associated with the Red Sox . Whatever curse was intended failed to bear fruit with the Yankees winning the World Series in their first year at the new stadium . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 On October 23 , 2007 , former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani , who is a Yankee fan , said at a New Hampshire event for his presidential campaign that he was going to cheer for the Red Sox during their World Series appearance against the Colorado Rockies . Giuliani justified his support of the Red Sox by proclaiming he was a fan of American League baseball . The following day , the New York Post and New York Daily News printed doctored photos of Giuliani as a Red Sox fan on their covers with the headlines " RED <unk> " and " <unk> ! " respectively . Topps parodied this in a 2008 baseball card altered to depict Giuliani on the field with the Red Sox as the team celebrated their 2007 World Series championship . 
 A month later , he was asked about his support for the Red Sox by one of the questioners in a YouTube Republican Presidential Debate run by CNN . In response to the mayor 's answer , former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney , who was in office during the Red Sox 2004 win , claimed that all Americans are united in hatred of the Yankees . 
 Former New York City Public Advocate turned New York City Mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio openly supported the Red Sox during his campaign . De Blasio won the general election by a huge margin in 2013 . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 In 2002 , when the New England Patriots held their victory celebration after winning their first Super Bowl and the first championship for the city of Boston since the Celtics won the 1986 NBA Championship , linebacker Larry Izzo fired up the crowd , chanting " Yankees suck ! " The chant would become a fixture of Patriots Super Bowl victory rallies following their victories in Super Bowls XXXVIII in 2004 and XXXIX in 2005 , which were sandwiched around the Red Sox 2004 World Series win . Dan Shaughnessy wrote about the chant : " Can you imagine a Giants or a Jets celebration in New York City in which a New York player would take the time to chant , ' Red Sox suck ? ' " Shaughnessy opined that should such a thing occur , it would be more likely at a Jets celebration , as a Giants celebration , like those of the Mets and the Rangers , would be more likely to feature such chants made in reference to the Philadelphia teams , as one of the Giants ' primary rivalries is with the Philadelphia Eagles . 
 The rivalry was played out during Super Bowl XLII in February 2008 , as it was a showdown between football teams from each metropolitan area , the New York Giants and the New England Patriots . The Giants defeated the Patriots in what was considered one of the greatest upsets in Super Bowl history . After the game Giants fans chanted " 18 and 1 ! 18 and 1 ! " , reminiscent of the infamous " 1918 " chant , towards Patriots fans as they left the stadium . ( Had they won the game , the Patriots would have become the first NFL team to ever finish with a 19 – 0 record ; incidentally , New England had defeated the Giants in the last regular season game of that season to achieve the first perfect regular season since 1972 . ) Giants fans called this revenge for the Red Sox comeback in 2004 . The Giants and Patriots faced off again in Super Bowl XLVI ; with the Giants once again defeating the Patriots . Dan Shaughnessy 's piece in The Boston Globe on the Giants victory over the Patriots was headlined , " History Repeats . " 
 During the 2008 NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers , movie director Spike Lee , a season ticket holder of the New York Knicks , wore a Yankee jersey and cap at Game 3 of the Finals in Los Angeles . Lee sat behind the Boston bench while loudly cheering for the Lakers , though he has a friendship with Ray Allen of the Celtics . 
 For the 2010 NHL Winter Classic outdoor ice hockey game held at Fenway Park , Boston Bruins then @-@ backup goaltender Tuukka Rask had artwork on his " special event " goalie mask 's upper front area depicting a roaring bear with a ripped New York Yankees home " pinstripe " jersey falling from its lower jaw . 
 In 2011 , Miami Heat star LeBron James of the NBA worked a deal with Red Sox owner John Henry to take partial ownership of Henry 's soccer subsidiary Liverpool Football Club of the Premier League . James was criticized in the New York media for spurning New York due to his being a purported Yankee fan . 
 Rivalries between other New York sports teams and other Boston sports teams have been attributed to the Yankees @-@ Red Sox rivalry . For example , some have pointed out the connections between this rivalry and those of the New York Jets and the New England Patriots in the National Football League and the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics in the National Basketball Association . 
 Since the owners of the Yankees are involved with Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan , owner of Manchester City F.C. , the Major League Soccer team New York City FC , and the Red Sox being involved with Liverpool F.C. , the 2014 International Champions Cup match between Manchester City and Liverpool at Yankee Stadium carried the classic angle of the Yankees and Red Sox rivalry . Liverpool defeated City in a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 = = Broadcasts on television = = 
 The nature of the rivalry has led to games between the two teams being broadcast on national television . Whenever the two teams play a weekend series , the Friday game is broadcast on MLB Network , the Saturday game is broadcast on either Fox or Fox Sports 1 , while the Sunday game is broadcast on either TBS in the afternoon or ESPN as part of Sunday Night Baseball ; the New England Sports Network in the Boston market and the YES Network in the New York City market always carry games not assigned on either FOX , FS1 ( unless specified ) , or on ESPN 's Sunday Night Baseball . Whenever they play games during the week , there are games broadcast on MLB Network , FS1 , and ESPN . 
 When the games are broadcast on Fox , Joe Buck and Tim McCarver call the game and , thus the duo has called many significant moments in the rivalry . In 2004 , the first game of the season between the two teams , on April 16 , a Friday night , was nationally broadcast on Fox , because it marked the first time the two teams were facing each other since the memorable 2003 ALCS . Fox Sports President Ed Goren said of decision to have the game broadcast on Fox : " We started thinking about this at some point after the Yankees closed the deal with A @-@ Rod . ... This is sort of a relaunch of the season in the middle of April . This is going to be an event . " MLB Commissioner Bud Selig called the broadcast " an extension of the postseason brought into April . " This was the first broadcast of a regular season game in prime @-@ time since Mark McGwire hit his 62nd home run to break Roger Maris ' record in 1998 . In October , when the two teams met in the ALCS , Selig moved Game 5 of the series to primetime due to the rematch . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The broadcasts of the games between the rivals have led to an increase in television ratings . These games have had at least 50 % higher ratings than all of the other games broadcast , sometimes almost twice as high than locally broadcast games . In most cases , the most @-@ watched MLB game on any network during a season is a game between the Yankees and the Red Sox . 
 Since 2003 , ratings for Yankees – Red Sox games on Fox have averaged 2 @.@ 6 percent of homes – 44 percent better than other weeks , while ESPN has averaged 3 @.@ 96 million viewers for Yankees – Red Sox games on Sunday nights , compared to the average of 2 @.@ 18 million for all other games . Game 7 of the 2003 ALCS drew a 17 @.@ 1 rating , the highest for a League Championship Series game since Game 6 of the 1993 National League Championship Series . 
 In 2004 , the first game between the two teams drew a 3 @.@ 6 national rating , and with an average audience of 5 @.@ 3 million , it was the most @-@ watched regular @-@ season telecast since Mark McGwire 's record @-@ breaking home run game . In 2003 , Saturday games on Fox averaged a 2 @.@ 5 rating ; prime @-@ time entertainment got a 3 @.@ 3 , but Goren said that he expected the game " will perform much higher than those ( prime @-@ time ) figures " as a reason to have the game broadcast nationally . 
 In 2011 , the three @-@ game series between the two teams on the weekend of August 5 – 7 drew large television viewers . The Friday game ( August 5 ) on MLB Network drew 563 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the most @-@ watched game on the network during the 2011 season and the second @-@ most watched game on the network , behind Stephen Strasburg 's debut . In New York and Boston , it was blacked out because the YES Network had local rights in New York City and <unk> in Boston . The Saturday game on Fox was most @-@ watched non @-@ primetime regular season MLB telecast on the network in more than three years with 4 @.@ 10 million viewers . The last Fox non @-@ primetime telecast to record higher numbers also was Boston vs. New York on July 5 , 2008 . The Sunday game on ESPN drew 4 @.@ 72 million viewers , making it the most @-@ watched baseball game on ESPN since June 3 , 2007 , when both teams faced each other , and the most @-@ watched MLB broadcast of the 2011 season on any network . 
 = Kellie Loder = 
 Kellie Loder ( born 1988 ) is an independent singer @-@ songwriter from Newfoundland , Canada , who plays drums , guitar , and piano . She has released two Contemporary Christian music ( CCM ) albums : The Way in 2009 and Imperfections & Directions in 2010 . With a voice that St. John 's @-@ based newspaper The Telegram has described as " powerful yet serene and soulful " , she has been nominated for awards at the annual MusicNL awards in Newfoundland , as well as at the Juno Awards , Canada 's top music prizes . 
 Loder wrote her first song at age 16 about a cousin who had died in a traffic accident . She was studying nursing at the Grenfell Campus of Memorial University of Newfoundland when she released The Way in August 2009 . Also that year , she won a talent @-@ search contest hosted by YC Newfoundland , a Christian youth conference , and , as part of the award , was given time with music professionals who helped her with Imperfections & Directions , which was released at the 2010 YC Newfoundland . Loder 's nursing studies hampered her ability to showcase Imperfections & Directions by touring . Loder was nominated as Female Artist of the Year at the 2010 MusicNL awards , and then as Gospel Artist of the Year in 2011 . Imperfections & Directions was nominated as Contemporary Christian / Gospel Album of the Year at the 2012 Juno Awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kellie Loder was born to Christina and Bob Loder in 1988 , and was raised in Badger , a town in the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador . She considers her first introduction to music to have taken place before she was born ; her mother frequently played Michael W. Smith songs to her through headphones while she was still in the womb . Loder claims to have " natural rhythm " and that she began emulating the drummer at her Pentecostal church by beating on a pew with pencils at the age of two . At age 10 , Loder was placed in her church 's drumming ensemble . 
 Loder 's younger brother taught her three guitar chords when she was 14 , and she received her first guitar later that year . She began writing songs at age 16 . Her first song , which was about a cousin who had died in a traffic accident , used lyrics from a poem by one of their mutual friends . With encouragement from her family , Loder concentrated on her singing and songwriting and performed this in addition to another she subsequently wrote for a friend 's graduation . 
 Loder was raised as a Christian by her parents , and considers herself to have become serious about her faith in 2007 , when she " started to accept [ her ] gifts for what they were ... and just assumed it was [ from ] God . " After this experience , she began playing piano , and credited God with teaching her how to play . Loder favours the piano , considering it the most beautiful of the instruments she plays . The first song she wrote after beginning the piano was " Giants " , also for a graduating class ; the song uses the story of Goliath as its theme , generalizing the story to apply to each individual 's internal struggles . " Giants " eventually appeared on both of her albums : The Way and Imperfections & Directions . 
 = = Music career = = 
 In 2008 , while studying nursing at the Grenfell Campus of Memorial University of Newfoundland through the Western Regional School of Nursing , Loder met Devin Robinson , a record producer . The meeting led to him producing her first album , an independent release called The Way , which was recorded at Sweet Music Studios . Loder wrote all 11 songs on the album , which was released in August 2009 . The initial run of the album sold out , and she subsequently went door @-@ to @-@ door in small Newfoundland communities selling a second run of the album . On her most lucrative day selling albums in this manner , she made $ 1000 . Loder later said that this manner of selling her album proved to be a good way to develop a fanbase ; people invited her into their homes for meals , prayer , and discussions . Also that year , she won a talent @-@ search contest hosted by YC Newfoundland , a Christian youth conference , where she performed " Giants " . 
 As part of the award , which was valued at C $ 20 @,@ 000 , Loder was given a membership for both the East Coast Music and MusicNL trade associations , and was given time at a recording studio and advice from music industry and production professionals . She was also engaged in a featured performance slot at the following year 's YC Newfoundland . Loder later referred to the music professionals she met ( including Scott Mansfield , Mark Peddle , and <unk> Studios ' Peter Newman ) as " the top players " in the music industry of Newfoundland and Labrador , and the producers helped Loder with Imperfections & Directions , her second album . She was particularly appreciative of Newman , who produced the album , mixing Imperfections & Directions with Tom <unk> in Nashville , Tennessee . Loder originally conceived " Fearless " ( one of the album 's tracks ) as a techno song , and believes that Newman was the one who made that techno feel a reality . 
 On November 14 , 2009 , Loder opened for the Newfoundland @-@ based Christian rock band Anyday , which was launching its debut album , Got Extraordinary , at a benefit concert at Springdale 's Indian River High School . This concert , which was Loder 's first performance in Springdale and her first time performing with Anyday , raised $ 675 to support David Willis and his family in Willis 's battle with lymphoma at Daffodil House in St. John 's , with more than 100 people in attendance . She and Anyday were scheduled to perform together again on November 28 at Dorset Collegiate on Pilley 's Island . 
 Loder moved to St. John 's in January 2010 , and performed alongside <unk> and Roy Martin later that year at the Exploits Valley Salmon Festival gospel concert in Grand Falls @-@ Windsor . She also performed at the 2010 One Worship Festival in Springdale , and officially released Imperfections & Directions , another independent release , at YC Newfoundland that October . Loder 's nursing studies hampered her ability to showcase this album by touring . A reporter for The Telegram , a St. John 's @-@ based newspaper , noted that Imperfections & Directions " demonstrates how Loder wears her faith and love of God on her sleeve . " Loder was nominated as Female Artist of the Year at the 2010 MusicNL awards with Mary Barry ; Teresa Ennis ; Irene Bridger ; and Amelia Curran , the eventual winner . Loder was nominated for another MusicNL award the following year , this time in the Gospel Artist of the Year category ; this nomination was , in part , due to Imperfections & Directions . 
 In early 2012 , Loder made a music video for " Your Love Alone " , one of the album 's tracks , which was uploaded to YouTube . She later said she had written the song during a difficult phase in her life , and the song 's lyrics revolve around the idea that the grace and mercy of God can be found in the most difficult situations . Through her experience , she became convinced that knowing God is all @-@ important , expressing this concept in the chorus : " Your love alone is sufficient . It needs no company . " She stated that she wrote the song " One Name Away " after having watched The Tyra Banks Show . The episode featured an interview with a girl who had been forced into prostitution at a young age ; despite smiling on screen , the girl hopelessly declared that she would probably die before she turned 22 . 
 Imperfections & Directions was nominated as Contemporary Christian / Gospel Album of the Year at the 2012 Juno Awards , Canada 's top music awards . Loder said the nomination was a surprise ; she learned about it in a text message from Newman after missing a call from him . Her fellow nominees in the Contemporary Christian / Gospel Album category were Jon Bauer 's Forevermore , <unk> 's On the Altar of Love , Sky Terminal 's Don 't Close Your Eyes and Hawk Nelson 's Crazy Love . Loder travelled to Ottawa , Ontario on March 28 to attend the awards ceremony , which was hosted by William Shatner at Scotiabank Place on April 1 . Her album was one of three Newfoundland nominees at the Juno Awards that year ; the other two were rock band Hey Rosetta ! and The Once 's folk album , Row Upon Row of the People We Know . Loder said that " on a scale of 1 to 10 " , her excitement about her Juno nomination was " probably a 10 . " 
 Although Loder lost the Juno Award to <unk> , an alternative rock band , she said she enjoyed walking down the red carpet and would never forget meeting major Canadian musicians such as Blue Rodeo and Sam Roberts ; Loder had an opportunity to sing and play guitar with Blue Rodeo 's Jim Cuddy at the Junos . She competed in the Juno Cup hockey game , in which , at 5 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 63 m ) , she was considerably shorter than most of the other players . Playing for the Rockers team of Juno nominees against the Greats team of former National Hockey League players , she was awarded a penalty shot after a fight with Troy Crowder . The Greats threw their sticks in her way as she took the shot , which was stopped with ease by goaltender David <unk> , a Juno nominee who had been traded to the Greats . 
 Loder returned to Newfoundland on April 2 ; the following month , she performed at Gros Morne National Park 's Trails , Tails & Tunes Festival with Dave <unk> . That July , she performed alongside Nick Hamlyn at Corner Brook 's Downtown Days festival . In December 2012 , she held two free coffeehouses in Newfoundland : at the Stavanger Drive Second Cup on the 15th and at Cornerstone Ministry Centre on the 21st . Over the subsequent months into the middle of 2013 , she performed on a monthly basis at the Stavanger Drive Second Cup , which is owned by Newman . She also performed at the Majestic Theatre and the Fat Cat Blues Bar in St. John 's . In 2013 , she was named a showcase winner by the Christian Women in Media Association ( <unk> ) and was selected to perform at the organization 's national conference . 
 Loder performed six songs live as part of an interview on CBC Radio in April 2013 . She had written five of these songs , and four of them had not been previously released . The unreleased songs were " Playground " , " Nursing a Broken Heart " , " Like a Flower " , and " One Girl " , and the fourth song was " On This Drive " , which had appeared on Imperfections & Directions . The fifth song was a cover version of Johnny Cash 's " Folsom Prison Blues " . She was inspired to write the song " Nursing a Broken Heart " after watching George Stroumboulopoulos Tonight on which Hugh Jackman uttered the phrase " nursing a broken heart " as part of an interview . She wrote " Like a Flower " after a friend challenged her to write a song directed at herself as a child . 
 Listeners unfamiliar with Contemporary Christian music ( CCM ) often assume that Loder sings hymn @-@ style music . Her career is unusual in that it began in CCM ; most young musicians choose music genres such as country and pop , which are generally considered more likely to bring commercial success . Loder has asserted that she chose CCM because it gives purpose to her music ; many of her songs are about God , but they may also be interpreted as being about other subjects . In 2013 , she said that she was starting to write and perform songs in other genres , and hoped that she would be able to transition out of CCM as Katy Perry , Lifehouse , and Creed had done previously . In transitioning out of CCM , she wished to assure the public that she had " definitely not turned [ her ] back on [ her ] faith . " 
 Loder believes everything that she sings is for God , regardless of the song 's subject . She sees her music as a Christian ministry , the goal of which is to inspire people to live happier , better lives . A reporter for The Telegram called Loder 's voice " powerful yet serene and soulful " . Her songs have been played regularly on Rogers TV and CBC Radio . Specifically , her song " Raise You Higher " was selected for several song countdowns and was played across Canada by both secular and Christian radio stations . A CBC Radio reviewer called Loder " amazingly talented " , her music " gorgeous " and her song " Playground " in particular " absolutely beautiful " . In April 2012 , Loder said that she had not decided whether she would focus on medicine or music . In April 2013 , she said that music was now her focus and that she was considering moving to Toronto in hopes of increasing her opportunities to develop her music career . She was working as a Child and Youth Worker at a company called Blue Sky at the time . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 2009 – YC Newfoundland talent @-@ search contest winner 
 2010 – Female Artist of the Year nominee at the MusicNL awards 
 2011 – Gospel Artist of the Year nominee at the MusicNL awards 
 2012 – Contemporary Christian / Gospel Album of the Year nominee at the Juno Awards for Imperfections & Directions 
 2013 – Showcase winner at the <unk> National Conference 
 = Heavy Traffic = 
 Heavy Traffic is a 1973 American adult animated comedy @-@ drama film written and directed by Ralph Bakshi . The film , which begins , ends , and occasionally combines with live @-@ action , explores the often surreal fantasies of a young New York cartoonist named Michael Corleone , using pinball imagery as a metaphor for inner @-@ city life . Heavy Traffic was Bakshi and producer Steve Krantz 's follow @-@ up to the successful and coolly controversial film Fritz the Cat , the first animated feature to receive an X rating . Though producer Krantz made varied attempts to produce an R @-@ rated film , Heavy Traffic was given an X rating by the MPAA . The film received positive reviews and is widely considered to be Bakshi 's biggest critical success . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film starts out in live action , introducing the protagonist Michael Corleone , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old virgin ( inaccurately referred to as 24 in the movie 's trailer ) playing pinball in New York City . The scene then transitions into animation . New York has a diseased , rotten , tough , and violent atmosphere . Michael 's Italian father , Angelo " Angie " Corleone , is a struggling mafioso who frequently cheats on Michael 's Jewish mother , Ida . The couple constantly bicker and try to kill each other . Michael <unk> through a catalog of freaks , greasers , and dopers . Unemployed , he dabbles with cartoons , artistically feeding off the <unk> of his environment . He regularly hangs out at a local bar where he gets free drinks from the female black bartender , Carole , in exchange for sketches of the somewhat annoying Shorty , Carole 's violent , legless bouncer devotee . One of the regular customers at the bar named Snowflake , a nymphomaniac transvestite , gets beaten up by a tough drunk who has only just realized that Snowflake is a man in drag and not a beautiful woman . Shorty throws the drunk out and the bar 's white manager abusively confronts Carole over this . Fed up with her manager , Carole quits . 
 Shorty offers to let Carole stay at his place , but not wanting to get involved with him , Carole tells Shorty that she 's staying with Michael , and that they 've been " secretly tight for a long time . " Michael is turned on by her no @-@ nonsense attitude and strong sense of self @-@ reliance . This relationship also arouses his father 's racist fury , as well as the jealousy of Shorty . But Rosa comes over to rape Michael while Angie slaps Ida in the face with a gun . Michael and Carole decide to move out of Michael 's parents ' house and try to earn enough money to move to California , in order to avoid Shorty . Michael gets a chance to pitch a comic strip idea to an old executive lying on his death bed , who seems enthusiastic enough to listen to the idea . 
 Michael 's story is too much for the mogul and he dies during the pitch . Meanwhile , Carole tries to work as a taxi dancer . Michael , acting as her manager , tries to pass her off as " the fourth Andrews Sister " ( " ' cause she was black , they kept her in the background " ) . A quick flash of her panties gives an old man a heart attack , and Carole gets fired . Meanwhile , Angie tries to use his Mafia connections to put a murder contract out on his son for " disgracing the family " by dating a black woman . The Godfather refuses to do this , because the hit is " personal , not business " . However , Shorty eventually meets up with Angie , and agrees to do the contract . 
 Michael and Carole turn to crime as a means of getting by , with Carole taking the role of a prostitute . Carole flirts with a sleazy businessman and brings him to a hotel room , where Michael beats him to death with a lead pipe . The two walk out into a pinball background with the dead man 's cash . Just then , Shorty shows up and shoots Michael in the head with a gun that Angie gave him to finish the job before Ida chases him ; the bullet is seen going through Michael 's skull in slow motion . Many of the movie 's characters run around in a circle and a kaleidoscope of shocking images and horrifying events proceeds before reverting to the live action story . The " real " Michael destroys a pinball machine after it tilts and walks out onto the street , bumps into the " real " Carole , and follows her into a park . The two are seen briefly arguing before they finally take each other 's hands and begin dancing in the park . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Joseph Kaufmann as Michael 
 Beverly Hope Atkinson as Carole 
 Frank DeKova as Angie 
 Terri Haven as Ida 
 Mary Dean Lauria as Molly 
 Charles Gordone as Crazy Moe 
 Jim Bates - Snowflake 
 Jacqueline Mills as Rosalyn 
 Lillian Adams as Rosa 
 Peter Hobbs as Jerry 
 Candy Candido as an uncredited voice 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1969 , Ralph 's Spot was founded as a division of Bakshi Productions to produce commercials for Coca @-@ Cola and Max , the 2000 @-@ Year @-@ Old Mouse , a series of educational shorts paid for by Encyclopædia Britannica . However , Bakshi was uninterested in the kind of animation he was producing , and wanted to produce something personal . Bakshi soon developed Heavy Traffic , a tale of inner @-@ city street life . Steve Krantz told Bakshi that studio executives would be unwilling to fund Heavy Traffic because of its content and Bakshi 's lack of film experience . Bakshi directed 1972 's Fritz the Cat , an adaptation of Robert Crumb 's comic strip of the same name . The financial success of Fritz the Cat allowed Bakshi to produce the film he had always intended to produce , and to focus on human characters rather than anthropomorphic animals . Bakshi pitched Heavy Traffic to Samuel Z. Arkoff , who took an interest in Bakshi 's take on the " tortured underground cartoonist " , and agreed to fund the film . 
 Production began in 1972 . However , Steve Krantz had not yet paid Bakshi for his work on Fritz the Cat . Halfway through the production of Heavy Traffic , Bakshi asked Krantz outright when he would be paid , and Krantz responded that " The picture didn 't make any money , Ralph . It 's just a lot of noise . " Bakshi found Krantz 's claims to be dubious , as the producer had recently purchased a new BMW and a mansion in Beverly Hills . Because Bakshi did not have a lawyer , he sought advice from directors he had become friends with , including Martin Scorsese , Francis Ford Coppola , and Steven Spielberg , asking them how much they made on their films . Bakshi soon accused Krantz of ripping him off , which the producer denied . Bakshi began pitching his next project , Harlem Nights , a film loosely based on the Uncle Remus story books . The idea interested producer Albert S. Ruddy during a screening of The Godfather . 
 While working on Heavy Traffic , Bakshi received a call from Krantz , who questioned him about Harlem Nights . Bakshi told Krantz : " I can 't talk about that " and hung up . The next day , Krantz locked Bakshi out of the studio , reportedly tapping Bakshi 's phone because he was wary of his loyalty as an employee . After Krantz fired Bakshi , he began to seek a replacement director for Heavy Traffic , calling several directors , including Chuck Jones . Arkoff threatened to pull the film 's budget unless Krantz rehired Bakshi , who returned a week later . During the film 's production , Krantz attempted to maintain some level of control by issuing memos to Bakshi and other artists requesting various changes . John Sparey remembers being issued a memo asking Sparey to stop posting caricatures of Krantz on the middle of his door . 
 Ed Bogas and Ray Shanklin returned to write and perform the film 's score , as they had done for Bakshi 's previous feature , Fritz the Cat . Other music featured in the film included the songs " Twist and Shout , " performed by The Isley Brothers , " Take Five , " as performed by the Dave Brubeck quartet , and Chuck Berry 's " Maybellene . " " Scarborough Fair " is used as a recurring musical motif , first heard in the film 's opening credits and later reappearing during the end of the film as performed by Sérgio Mendes and Brazil ' 66 . Bogas also created several other arrangements of the song that appear throughout the film . A soundtrack album was released in 1973 . 
 = = = Directing = = = 
 Inspiration for the film came from penny arcades , where Bakshi would often spend his time playing pinball , sometimes bringing his 12 @-@ year @-@ old son Mark . Bakshi wanted to use pinball as a metaphor to examine the ways of the world . Heavy Traffic began a tradition in which Bakshi would write poems before beginning production on each of his films , starting with Street Arabs . According to Bakshi , " My background was in Brooklyn — my Jewishness , my family life , my father coming from Russia . All these things had to be somehow represented on film . " 
 Because Bakshi wanted the voices to sound organic , he experimented with improvisation , allowing his actors to ad lib during the recording sessions . According to James Bates , the voice of Snowflake , " I said , ' How about a little Wolfman Jack , Charles Nelson Reilly , Pearl Bailey and a little Truman Capote ? ' Ralph couldn 't believe it . We ad @-@ libbed a lot , and he usually got what he wanted in three or four takes . We worked hard and not for much coin , but it was a blast . " 
 As with Fritz the Cat , Bakshi and Johnnie Vita took location photographs for the film 's backgrounds . Instead of tracing the photographs onto backgrounds , as they had done in Fritz the Cat , the film uses actual photographs and live @-@ action stock footage as backgrounds for much of the film . Bakshi and Vita were also experimental in their photography : Bakshi requested that the lab technicians produce several prints for every photo , each print increasingly out of focus , giving the backgrounds a fuzzy quality . Bakshi states that " We didn 't want to risk shooting [ out of focus ] on the spot . That could have meant making some expensive mistakes . " 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 According to animator Mark Kausler , Krantz was so nervous about showing too much nudity and sexual activities that he had several versions of some sequences animated , for instance , in the " Maybellene " animation sequence . Kausler says that a sequence was animated in which the viewer sees " the key in the ignition metamorphose into a penis entering Maybelline 's vagina . " This sequence was deleted from Heavy Traffic , but the same action appeared in the film Down and Dirty Duck . Kausler also states : 
 " I covered this scene with another one of the key changing into the fat black guy , and the ignition slot turning into Maybellene . I covered a lot more cartoony foreplay scenes with a simple close @-@ up of the fat black man 's face with his hand covering his eyes . You can get a sense of how many scenes had to be altered , by how many times this close @-@ up drawing was used . It got used a lot ! At one point the original version " A " of Maybellene existed . Ralph had a print of it , but I have not seen it since I worked on it . We did versions " A , " B " , and " C , " with " C " being the <unk> and that is what got into the so @-@ called " X " version of Heavy Traffic . Another scene I can recall doing multiple versions of was the guy in the racing cap , pissing on the fat black guy 's ass . This was completely eliminated , causing a jump in the action . " 
 Edward Hopper 's famous 1942 painting Nighthawks was used as a background in one of the film 's sequences . Several animation sequences appear as rough sketchbook pages , including a dream sequence influenced by the work of Otto Messmer and a George Herriman @-@ influenced sequence set to Chuck Berry 's " Maybellene " . 
 = = Response = = 
 Although Heavy Traffic received an X rating from the Motion Picture Association of America , more theaters were willing to screen adult @-@ oriented animated features because of the success of Fritz the Cat , and Heavy Traffic was a box office success . Ralph Bakshi was the first person in the animation industry since Walt Disney to have two financially successful films back @-@ to @-@ back . The film is considered to be Bakshi 's biggest critical success . Newsweek wrote that the film contained " black humor , powerful grotesquerie and peculiar raw beauty . Episodes of violence and sexuality are both explicit and parodies of flesh @-@ and @-@ blood porn [ ... ] a celebration of urban decay . " Charles Champlin wrote in The New York Times that the film was " furious energy , uncomfortable to watch as often as it is hilarious . " The Hollywood Reporter called it " shocking , outrageous , offensive , sometimes incoherent , occasionally unintelligent . However , it is also an authentic work of movie art and Bakshi is certainly the most creative American animator since Disney . " Film website Rotten Tomatoes , which compiles reviews from a wide range of critics , gives the film a score of 89 % . Vincent Canby ranked it among his " Ten Best Films of 1973 " . The film was banned by the film censorship board in the province of Alberta , Canada when it was originally released . 
 Roger Greenspun of The New York Times wrote in his 1973 review " People who felt that his earlier feature , Fritz the Cat , merely debased a cherished original , can now judge Bakshi 's development of his own material . I think that development is as brilliant as anything in recent movies — as brilliant and , in its own improbable way , as lovely and as sad . " 
 Michael Barrier , an animation historian , described Heavy Traffic and Fritz the Cat as " not merely provocative , but highly ambitious . " Barrier described the films as an effort " to push beyond what was done in the old cartoons , even while building on their strengths . " 
 = = Home <unk> = = 
 An R @-@ rated version was released on VHS and Region 1 DVD by MGM Home Entertainment in 1999 . On July 16 , 2013 , Shout ! Factory and MGM released Heavy Traffic on Blu @-@ ray for its 40th anniversary . 
 = Twilight ( novel series ) = 
 Twilight is a series of four vampire @-@ themed fantasy romance novels by American author Stephenie Meyer . Released annually from 2005 through 2008 , the four books chart the later teen years of Isabella " Bella " Swan , a girl who moves to Forks , Washington , and falls in love with a 104 @-@ year @-@ old vampire named Edward Cullen . The series is told primarily from Bella 's point of view , with the epilogue of Eclipse and Part II of Breaking Dawn being told from the viewpoint of character Jacob Black , a werewolf . The unpublished Midnight Sun is a retelling of the first book , Twilight , from Edward Cullen 's point of view . The novella The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner , which tells the story of a newborn vampire who appeared in Eclipse , was published on June 5 , 2010 , as a hardcover book and on June 7 as a free online ebook . The Twilight Saga : The Official Illustrated Guide , a definitive encyclopedic reference with nearly 100 full color illustrations , was released in bookstores on April 12 , 2011 . 
 Since the release of the first novel , Twilight , in 2005 , the books have gained immense popularity and commercial success around the world . The series is most popular among young adults ; the four books have won multiple awards , most notably the 2008 British Book Award for " Children 's Book of the Year " for Breaking Dawn , while the series as a whole won the 2009 Kids ' Choice Award for Favorite Book . 
 As of November 2011 , the series has sold over 120 million copies worldwide with translations into at least 38 different languages around the globe . The four Twilight books have consecutively set records as the biggest selling novels of 2008 on the USA Today Best @-@ Selling Books list and have spent over 235 weeks on the New York Times Best Seller list for Children 's Series Books . 
 The books have been made into The Twilight Saga series of motion pictures by Summit Entertainment . The film adaptations of the first three books were released in 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 respectively . The fourth book is adapted into two full @-@ length films — the first film being released in November 2011 , and the second film in November 2012 . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 = = = Twilight = = = 
 Bella Swan moves from Phoenix , Arizona to live with her father in Forks , Washington to allow her mother to travel with her new husband , a minor league baseball player . After moving to Forks , Bella finds herself involuntarily drawn to a mysterious , handsome boy , Edward Cullen . She eventually learns that he is a member of a vampire family who drinks animal blood rather than human blood . Edward and Bella fall in love , while James , a sadistic vampire from another coven , is drawn to hunt down Bella . Edward and the other Cullens defend Bella . She escapes to Phoenix , Arizona , where she is tricked into confronting James , who tries to kill her . She is seriously wounded , but Edward rescues her and they return to Forks . 
 = = = New Moon = = = 
 Edward and his family leave Forks because he believes he is endangering Bella 's life . Bella goes into a depression until she develops a strong friendship with Jacob Black , who she discovers can shape @-@ shift into a wolf . Jacob and the other wolves in his tribe must protect her from Victoria , a vampire seeking to avenge the death of her mate James . Due to a misunderstanding , Edward believes Bella is dead . Edward decides to commit suicide in Volterra , Italy , but is stopped by Bella , who is accompanied by Edward 's sister , Alice . They meet with the Volturi , a powerful vampire coven , and are released only on the condition that Bella be turned into a vampire in the near future . Bella and Edward are reunited , and she and the Cullens return to Forks . 
 = = = Eclipse = = = 
 Victoria has created an army of " newborn " vampires to battle the Cullen family and murder Bella for revenge . Meanwhile , Bella is compelled to choose between her relationship with Edward and her friendship with Jacob . Edward 's vampire family and Jacob 's werewolf pack join forces to successfully destroy Victoria and her vampire army . In the end , Bella chooses Edward 's love over Jacob 's friendship and agrees to marry Edward . 
 = = = Breaking Dawn = = = 
 Bella and Edward are married , but their honeymoon is cut short when Bella discovers that she is pregnant . Her pregnancy progresses rapidly , severely weakening her . She nearly dies giving birth to her and Edward 's half @-@ vampire @-@ half @-@ human daughter , Renesmee . Edward injects Bella with his venom to save her life and turns her into a vampire . A vampire from another coven sees Renesmee and mistakes her for an " immortal child " . She informs the Volturi , as the existence of such beings violates vampire law . The Cullens gather vampire witnesses who can verify that Renesmee is not an immortal child . After an intense confrontation , the Cullens and their witnesses convince the Volturi that the child poses no danger to vampires or their secret , and they are left in peace by the Volturi . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 Bella Swan : The protagonist of the series , teenager Bella is a perpetually clumsy " danger magnet " with dark brown hair and brown eyes . She is often portrayed as having low self @-@ esteem and unable to comprehend Edward 's love for her . She has an immunity to supernatural abilities involving the mind , such as Edward 's mind @-@ reading ability . After her transformation into a vampire in the saga 's fourth installment , Bella acquires the ability to shield both herself and others from " mental harm " from other vampires . 
 Edward Cullen : Edward is a vampire who lives with a coven of like @-@ minded vampires known as the Cullen family , who feed on animals rather than humans . Over the course of the Twilight series , Edward falls in love with , marries , and then has a child with Bella . At first , Edward feels a mutual hatred toward Jacob Black because of his love for Bella , but in Breaking Dawn , he comes to see Jacob as a brother and friend . Like some vampires , Edward has a supernatural ability : mind reading . It allows him to read anyone 's thoughts within a few miles ' radius . Bella is immune to his power as a human , but learns how to lower this " shield " after her transformation to a vampire . 
 Jacob Black : A minor character in the first novel , Jacob is introduced as a member of the Quileute tribe . He resurfaces in New Moon with a larger role as Bella 's best friend as she struggles through her depression over losing Edward . Although he is in love with Bella , she initially sees him as just her best friend . He and other tribe members can shape @-@ shift into wolves . In Eclipse Bella realizes that she loves Jacob , though her feelings for him are overpowered by her love for Edward Cullen . In Breaking Dawn , Jacob finds a soul mate in Bella and Edward 's baby daughter , Renesmee , ridding him of his heartache for Bella . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The story is set primarily in the town of Forks , Washington , where Bella and her father , Charlie Swan , live . Other cities in Washington briefly appear in the series or are mentioned , such as Port Angeles , Olympia , Seattle and La Push . Some events in Twilight take place in Phoenix , Arizona , where Bella was raised . Volterra , Italy , is featured in New Moon , when Edward travels there to commit suicide and Bella rushes to save him . Jacksonville , Florida , is mentioned first in Twilight and second in Eclipse , when Edward and Bella visit Bella 's mother , who has moved there with her new husband . Seattle , Washington , is featured in Breaking Dawn when Jacob tries to escape his love for Bella , and when Bella tries to locate a man named J. Jenks . It is also the location of a series of murders committed by newborn vampires in Eclipse . In Breaking Dawn , Bella and Edward spend their honeymoon on a fictional " Isle Esme " , purportedly off the coast of Brazil . 
 = = Structure and genre = = 
 The Twilight series falls under the genre of young adult , fantasy , and romance , though Meyer categorized her first book , Twilight , as " suspense romance horror comedy " . However , she states that she considers her books as " romance more than anything else " . The series explores the unorthodox romance between human Bella and vampire Edward , as well as the love triangle between Bella , Edward , and Jacob , a werewolf . The books avoid delving into provocative sex , drugs , and harsh swearing because , according to Meyer , " I don 't think teens need to read about gratuitous sex . " 
 The books are written in first @-@ person narrative , primarily through Bella 's eyes with the epilogue of the third book and a part of the fourth book being from Jacob 's point of view . When asked about the structure of the novel , Meyer described her difficulty in pinpointing the premise of the novels to any specific their category : 
 I have a hard time with that . Because if I say to someone , ' You know , it 's about vampires , ' then immediately they have this mental image of what the book is like . And it 's so not like the other vampire books out there – Anne Rice 's and the few that I 've read . It isn 't that kind of dark and dreary and blood @-@ thirsty world . Then when you say , ' It 's set in high school , ' a lot of people immediately put it in another pool . It 's easy to pigeonhole with different descriptions . 
 The books are based on the vampire myth , but Twilight vampires differ in a number of particulars from the general vampire lore . For instance , Twilight vampires have strong piercing teeth rather than fangs ; they glitter in sunlight rather than burn ; and they can drink animal as well as human blood . Meyer comments that her vampire mythology differs from that of other authors because she wasn 't informed about the canon vampires , saying , 
 It wasn 't until I knew that Twilight would be published that I began to think about whether my vampires were too much the same or too much different from the others . Of course , I was far too invested in my characters at that point to be making changes ... so I didn 't cut out fangs and coffins and so forth as a way to distinguish my vampires ; that 's just how they came to me . 
 = = Inspiration and themes = = 
 According to the author , her books are " about life , not death " and " love , not lust " . Each book in the series was inspired by and loosely based on a different literary classic : Twilight on Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice , New Moon on Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet , Eclipse on Emily Brontë 's Wuthering Heights , and Breaking Dawn on a second Shakespeare play , A Midsummer Night 's Dream . Meyer also states that Orson Scott Card and L. M. Montgomery 's Anne of Green Gables series are a big influence on her writing . As for the Cullens , she based them on her own family . 
 Other major themes of the series include choice and free will . Meyer says that the books are centered around Bella 's choice to choose her life on her own , and the Cullens ' choices to abstain from killing rather than follow their temptations : " I really think that 's the underlying metaphor of my vampires . It doesn 't matter where you 're stuck in life or what you think you have to do ; you can always choose something else . There 's always a different path . " 
 Meyer , a Mormon , acknowledges that her faith has influenced her work . In particular , she says that her characters " tend to think more about where they came from , and where they are going , than might be typical . " Meyer also steers her work from subjects such as sex , despite the romantic nature of the novels . Meyer says that she does not consciously intend her novels to be Mormon @-@ influenced , or to promote the virtues of sexual abstinence and spiritual purity , but admits that her writing is shaped by her values , saying , " I don 't think my books are going to be really graphic or dark , because of who I am . There 's always going to be a lot of light in my stories . " 
 = = Origins and publishing history = = 
 Stephenie Meyer says that the idea for Twilight came to her in a dream on June 2 , 2003 . The dream was about a human girl , and a vampire who was in love with her but <unk> for her blood . Based on this dream , Meyer wrote the transcript of what is now chapter 13 of the book . Despite having very little writing experience , in a matter of three months she had transformed that dream into a completed novel . After writing and editing the novel , she signed a three @-@ book deal with Little , Brown and Company for $ 750 @,@ 000 , an unusually high amount for a first time author . Meyer 's literary agent , Jodi Reamer of Writers House , discovered her only because the inexperienced assistant who received Meyer 's original letter did not know that young adult books are supposed to be 40 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 words in length , not 130 @,@ 000 words . Megan Tingley , the Little , Brown editor who signed Meyer , said that halfway through the reading of the Twilight manuscript , she realized that she had a future bestseller in her hands . The book was released in 2005 . 
 Following the success of Twilight , Meyer expanded the story into a series with three more books : New Moon ( 2006 ) , Eclipse ( 2007 ) , and Breaking Dawn ( 2008 ) . In its first week after publication , the first sequel , New Moon , debuted at # 5 on the New York Times Best Seller List for Children 's Chapter Books , and in its second week rose to the # 1 position , where it remained for the next eleven weeks . In total , it spent over 50 weeks on the list . After the release of Eclipse , the first three " Twilight " books spent a combined 143 weeks on the New York Times Best Seller List . The fourth installment of the Twilight series , Breaking Dawn , was released with an initial print run of 3 @.@ 7 million copies . Over 1 @.@ 3 million copies were sold on the first day alone , setting a record in first @-@ day sales performance for the Hachette Book Group USA . Upon the completion of the fourth entry in the series , Meyer indicated that Breaking Dawn would be the final novel to be told from Bella Swan 's perspective . In 2008 and 2009 , the four books of the series claimed the top four spots on USA Today 's year @-@ end bestseller list , making Meyer the first author to ever achieve this feat . The series then won the 2009 Kids ' Choice Award for Favorite Book , where it competed against the Harry Potter series . 
 = = Other books = = 
 Meyer originally planned to write a companion book to Twilight called Midnight Sun , which would be the story of Twilight told from Edward Cullen 's point @-@ of @-@ view . She stated that Twilight was the only book that she planned to rewrite from Edward 's perspective . However , a rough draft of Midnight Sun 's first twelve chapters was leaked on the internet . Meyer has since put these twelve chapters on her website so that her fans could read them for free , but has put the project on hold indefinitely due to her feelings about the situation . She stated , 
 If I tried to write Midnight Sun now , in my current frame of mind , James would probably win and all the Cullens would die , which wouldn 't dovetail too well with the original story . In any case , I feel too sad about what has happened to continue working on Midnight Sun , and so it is on hold indefinitely . 
 Though she has no current plans to do so , Meyer has also stated that if she were to continue writing in the same universe she would write from the perspective of either Leah Clearwater or Bella and Edward 's daughter , Renesmee Cullen . 
 On March 16 , 2010 Yen Press released Twilight : The Graphic Novel , Vol . 1 , by artist Young Kim based on the first book in the series . In February 2011 , the graphic novel won the 2010 Gem Awards Best Manga of the Year . The sequel , Twilight : The Graphic Novel , Vol . 2 was released on October 11 , 2011 and followed Volume 1 in topping The New York Times Best Seller list for Hardcover Graphic Books in its first week . On March 30 , 2010 , Meyer revealed on her official website that she will be releasing a new novella in the series , The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner , which tells the story of a newborn vampire who appeared in Eclipse , on June 5 , 2010 . An electronic version of the book was made available free from her web site , as well as in bookstores . 
 On October 5 , 2010 , Little , Brown and Company announced that The Twilight Saga : The Official Illustrated Guide , a definitive encyclopedic reference for the saga including character profiles , outtakes , a conversation with Meyer , genealogical charts , maps and extensive cross @-@ references with nearly 100 full color illustrations , was to be released on April 12 , 2011 , after many publication delays since 2008 . It debuted at # 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list , where it stayed for three consecutive weeks , and at # 4 on the USA Today Best Seller list . 
 On October 6 , 2015 , Little , Brown and Company released the Twilight Tenth Anniversary / Life and Death Dual Edition , which includes a nearly @-@ 400 page reimagining of the novel with Edward and Bella gender @-@ swapped as Edythe and Beau . The reimagined novel has a more conclusive ending , seemingly precluding its continuation through the remaining three Twilight novels . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The response to Twilight has been mixed . While the books have become immensely popular , they have also generated much controversy . 
 = = = Positive reception = = = 
 Twilight has gathered acclaim for its popularity with its target readers . The Times lauded it for capturing " perfectly the teenage feeling of sexual tension and alienation . " Other reviews described Twilight as an " exquisite fantasy " , and a " gripping blend of romance and horror " . Lev Grossman of Time wrote that the books have a " pillowy quality distinctly reminiscent of Internet fan fiction " , but still praised the series , comparing it to The Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter : 
 People do not want to just read Meyer 's books ; they want to climb inside them and live there ... There 's no literary term for the quality Twilight and Harry Potter ( and The Lord of the Rings ) share , but you know it when you see it : their worlds have a freestanding internal integrity that makes you feel as if you should be able to buy real estate there . 
 Most of the reviews , however , have focused on Twilight 's popularity instead of its literary quality . The Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer called the book a " hot new teen novel " , Entertainment Weekly called Meyer " the world 's most popular vampire novelist since Anne Rice " , The New York Times described Twilight as a " literary phenomenon " , and Matt Arado of Daily Herald noted that the Twilight books have become the " hottest publishing phenomenon since a certain bespectacled wizard cast his spell on the world . " The large and diverse online fan community of the series are often noted , sometimes even being called " cult @-@ like " . Despite this , the series is often considered to have a wider appeal ; Crystal Mack of Daily Herald said , " While teenage girls are the main audience , young boys and adults of both genders have also been swept up in the phenomenon . " 
 The author and the series ' popularity are often compared with J. K. Rowling and Harry Potter . Describing the fan following of the books , the Phoenix New Times wrote , " Meyer 's fandom is reminiscent of Harry Potter mania . " The Daily Telegraph described Twilight as the " spiritual successor to Harry Potter " . Rebekah Bradford of The Post and Courier stated that the series has a " huge crossover appeal much like the Harry Potter books before them . " According to the Daily Telegraph , " Stephenie Meyer , in particular , has achieved incredible success across all the English @-@ speaking nations and Europe and many will say that her Twilight series has filled the hole left by Harry Potter . " Meyer has responded to such comparisons , saying , " It 's terribly flattering to be compared to her , but there 's never going to be another J. K. Rowling ; that 's a phenomenon that 's not gonna happen again " , however noting that " you can compare my fans to her fans more easily [ than me to her ] . I do think that we both have people who are just really really enthusiastic , and will come miles to see you and be involved , and everybody really cares about our characters . " 
 Economically , the town of Forks , Washington , the setting for the Twilight series , has improved due to tourism from fans of the books . Forks is visited by an average of 8 @,@ 000 tourists per month , and has been described as a " mecca for <unk> " . In response to plans for the aging Forks High School to be renovated , Twilight fans have teamed up with Infinite Jewelry Co. and the West Olympic Peninsula Betterment Association to collect donations in an attempt to save the brick appearance or the building altogether . 
 = = = Negative reception = = = 
 The series has garnered some notoriety both over its literary substance and over the type of relationship portrayed in the books . 
 Many have derided the series as poor writing . While comparing Stephenie Meyer to J. K. Rowling , Stephen King said , " the real difference [ between Rowling and Meyer ] is that Jo Rowling is a terrific writer , and Stephenie Meyer can 't write worth a darn . She 's not very good . " However , King understood the appeal of the series , adding , " People are attracted by the stories , by the pace and in the case of Stephenie Meyer , it 's very clear that she 's writing to a whole generation of girls and opening up kind of a safe joining of love and sex in those books . It 's exciting and it 's thrilling and it 's not particularly threatening because it 's not overtly sexual . " 
 A quote from Robin Browne ( though frequently misattributed to King or Andrew <unk> ) negatively compares the Twilight and Harry Potter book series thusly : " Harry Potter is about confronting fears , finding inner strength and doing what is right in the face of adversity … Twilight is about how important it is to have a boyfriend " . 
 Laura Miller of Salon.com wrote that " the characters , such as they are , are stripped down to a minimum , lacking the texture and idiosyncrasies of actual people " , and said that " Twilight would be a lot more persuasive as an argument that an ' amazing heart ' counts for more than appearances if it didn 't harp so incessantly on Edward 's superficial splendors . " 
 Elizabeth Hand of The Washington Post wrote , " Meyer 's prose seldom rises above the serviceable , and the plotting is leaden . " The article , featured on the Yahoo ! website Shine , also criticized the books and the author 's final word on the series was , " Good books deal with themes of longing and loneliness , sexual passion and human frailty , alienation and fear just as the Twilight books do . But they do so by engaging us with complexities of feeling and subtleties of character , expressed in language that rises above banal mediocrity . Their reward is something more than just an escape into banal mediocrity . We deserve something better to get hooked on . " 
 = = = = <unk> relationship controversy = = = = 
 The books have also been widely critiqued as promoting , normalizing , and idealizing an emotionally and physically abusive relationship . Sci @-@ fi website i09 noted that Bella and Edward 's relationship meets all fifteen criteria set by the National Domestic Violence Hotline for being in an abusive relationship . L. Lee Butler of Young Adult Library Services Association commented how he was unusually hesitant to stock the Twilight books in his library because he felt the books were " robbing [ teen girls ] of agency and normalizing stalking and abusive behavior . " Many female @-@ oriented and feminist media outlets , like Jezebel , The Frisky , and Salon.com have decried Twilight as promoting an anti @-@ woman message . Bitch magazine stated the novels " had created a new , popular genre of " abstinence porn " , concluding that , " In reality , the abstinence message — wrapped in the genre of abstinence porn — objectifies Bella in the same ways that ' real ' porn might . The Twilight books conflate Bella losing her virginity with the loss of other things , including her sense of self and her very life . Such a high @-@ stakes treatment of abstinence reinforces the idea that Bella is powerless , an object , a fact that is highlighted when we get to the sex scenes in Breaking Dawn . " Ms. declared that Twilight promotes a physically abusive relationship and an anti @-@ abortion message . However , writer Angela <unk> of Religion News Service said that contrary to popular opinion , Mormons do permit abortion when the mother 's life is in danger . Bella 's refusal to abort her fetus , along with her quick marriage and pregnancy , instead underscore the Mormon emphasis on family . 
 Various psychology experts have come out in agreement with the assessment of the relationship as abusive . Melissa Henson , Director of communication and public education for the Parents Television Council , stated : 
 To impressionable teens , domestic violence is almost romanticized . We ’ ve made great strides in recent years in clearly communicating the message that is never okay to hit a woman ... Today , the hidden message in the entertainment consumed by many impressionable teens is that if he hits you , it is out of love – which is absolutely wrong . 
 Many entertainment and media outlets have made similar comments on the abusive nature of Bella and Edward 's relationship , including Entertainment Weekly , Movieline , and <unk> 
 Meyer has dismissed such criticisms , arguing both that the books center around Bella 's choice , which she perceives as the foundation of modern feminism , and that Bella 's damsel in distress persona is due only to her humanity . Meyer also added , " Just because [ Bella ] doesn 't do kung fu and she cooks for her father doesn 't make her worthy of that criticism " . Shannon Simcox of The Daily Collegian has similarly dismissed the criticism surrounding Bella , commenting , " While Bella plays the perfect damsel in distress that gets herself into sticky situations , she is also very in control of herself . She chose to move to Forks and be in a new place ; she constantly faces a bunch of people who want to suck the life right out of her , and she is constantly pleading to become a vampire , too , so she can take care of herself and Edward . " 
 = = = Legal controversy = = = 
 In December 2010 , professional singer Matthew Smith , known as Matt Heart , sued Summit Entertainment in the case Smith v. Summit Entertainment LLC . Smith 's song " Eternal Knight " was posted on several websites accompanied by cover art which Summit claimed used its " Twilight " typeface mark . Smith won four of the seven causes of action , including his right to continue distribution of his copyrighted song , under the terms that he remove any reference to " Twilight " or the " Twilight Saga " . 
 = = = Book challenges = = = 
 The Twilight series made the number five spot on the American Library Association 's ( ALA ) Top Ten List of the Most Frequently Challenged Books of 2009 , for being " Sexually Explicit " , " Unsuited to Age Group " , and having a " Religious Viewpoint " . 
 = = Film adaptations = = 
 A screenplay for Twilight was written by Melissa Rosenberg and has been adapted into a film by Summit Entertainment . The film was directed by Catherine Hardwicke , with Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson in the leading roles of Isabella Swan and Edward Cullen , respectively . The movie was released in the United States on November 21 , 2008 . Twilight : The Complete Illustrated Movie Companion , written by Mark Cotta Vaz , was released October 28 . 
 On November 22 , 2008 , following the box office success of Twilight , Summit Entertainment confirmed a sequel , called The Twilight Saga : New Moon , based on the second book in the series , New Moon . The film was released on November 20 , 2009 . The Twilight Saga : New Moon was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on March 20 , 2010 through midnight release parties . That same day , Summit Entertainment released Twilight in Forks , a documentary about the primary setting of the Twilight series , Forks , Washington . Topics Entertainment released its own documentary about Forks and the Twilight series on March 16 , called Forks : Bitten by Twilight . 
 The third installment in the series , The Twilight Saga : Eclipse , was released on June 30 , 2010 . The fourth installment , The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 was released November 18 , 2011 , And the fifth and last installment , The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 2 was released November 16 , 2012 . 
 = = Conventions = = 
 While the Twilight series has been a visible presence in many conventions such as ComicCon , there have also been many conventions whose main focus has been on the Twilight series ( books and films ) . Some notable conventions have been <unk> and a series of " Official Twilight Conventions " that are being held by Creation Entertainment . 
 = William Henry Bury = 
 William Henry Bury ( 25 May 1859 – 24 April 1889 ) was suspected of being the notorious serial killer " Jack the Ripper " . He was hanged for the murder of his wife Ellen in 1889 , and was the last person executed in Dundee , Scotland . 
 Bury was orphaned at an early age and was educated at a charitable school in the English Midlands . After a few years in regular employment as a clerk , he fell into financial difficulty , was dismissed for theft , and became a street peddler . In 1887 , he moved to London , where he married probable prostitute Ellen Elliot . During their stormy marriage , which lasted just over a year , they faced increasing financial hardship . In January 1889 , they moved to Dundee . The following month , he strangled his wife with a rope , stabbed her dead body with a penknife , and hid the corpse in a box in their room . A few days later , he presented himself to the local police and was arrested for her murder . Tried and convicted , he was sentenced to death by hanging . Shortly before his execution , he confessed to the crime . Although Bury 's guilt was not in doubt , Dundee had a history of opposition to the death penalty and The Dundee Courier printed an editorial the day after his execution decrying the " judicial butcheries " of capital punishment . 
 Bury killed his wife shortly after the height of the London Whitechapel murders , which were attributed to the unidentified serial killer " Jack the Ripper " . Bury 's previous abode near Whitechapel and similarities between the Ripper 's crimes and Bury 's led the press and executioner James Berry to suggest that Bury was the Ripper . Bury protested his innocence in the Ripper crimes , and the police discounted him as a suspect . Later authors have built on the earlier accusations , but the idea that Bury was the Ripper is not widely accepted . 
 = = Childhood and youth = = 
 William Bury was born in Stourbridge , Worcestershire , the youngest of four children of Henry Bury and his wife Mary Jane ( née Henley ) . He was orphaned in infancy . His father , who worked for a local fishmonger called <unk> , died in a horse and cart accident in Halesowen on 10 April 1860 . While on an incline , he fell beneath the wheels of his fish cart and was killed when the horse bolted and pulled the cart over his prone body . William 's mother may have been suffering from post @-@ natal depression at the time of her husband 's death and was committed to the Worcester County Pauper and Lunatic Asylum on 7 May 1860 suffering from melancholia . She remained there until her death aged 33 on 30 March 1864 . 
 William 's eldest sibling , Elizabeth Ann , died aged seven during an epileptic fit on 7 September 1859 , which may have contributed to Mary Jane 's depression . The other two children , Joseph Henry and Mary Jane , both died before 1889 . William was raised initially in Dudley by his maternal uncle , Edward Henley , and by 1871 he was enrolled at the Blue Coat charity school in Stourbridge . 
 At the age of sixteen , he found work as a factor 's clerk in a warehouse at <unk> Fields , Wolverhampton , until the early 1880s when he left the warehouse after failing to repay a loan . He then worked for a lock manufacturer called Osborne in Lord Street , Wolverhampton , until he was dismissed for theft in either 1884 or 1885 . For the next few years , his whereabouts are not known for certain , but he appears to have lived an unsettled life in the English Midlands and Yorkshire . In 1887 , he was making a living as a hawker , selling small items such as lead pencils and key rings on the streets of Snow Hill , Birmingham . 
