 = = London = = 
 In October 1887 , Bury arrived in Bow , London , and found work selling sawdust for James Martin , who appears to have run a brothel at 80 <unk> Street , Bow . Initially , Bury lived in the stable , but later moved into the house . There , he met Ellen Elliot , who was employed by Martin as a servant and probably a prostitute . 
 Ellen was born on 24 October 1856 in Walworth , London , at the <unk> 's Arms public house run by her father , George Elliot . In adult life , she worked as a <unk> and in a jute processing factory . In 1883 , she had an illegitimate daughter , also called Ellen , who died in Poplar workhouse in December 1885 . Within a year of the death of her daughter , she began working for Martin . In March 1888 , Ellen and William left Martin 's employ and moved to a furnished room at 3 Swaton Road , Bow , where they lived together until their marriage on Easter Monday , 2 April 1888 , at Bromley Parish Church . Martin later said he had dismissed William because of unpaid debts . 
 Martin and the landlady at 3 Swaton Road , Elizabeth Haynes , described Bury as a violent drunk . On 7 April 1888 , Haynes caught Bury kneeling on his bride of five days threatening to cut her throat with a knife . Haynes subsequently evicted them , and Ellen sold one of six £ 100 shares in a railway company that she had inherited from a maiden aunt , Margaret Barren , to pay William 's debt to Martin . William was re @-@ employed by Martin , and the couple moved to 11 Blackthorn Street , close to Swaton Road . According to Martin , William was then suffering from venereal disease . In June , Ellen sold the remaining shares , and in August they moved to 3 <unk> Road , adjacent to where William stabled his horse . With the money from the shares , the couple had a week 's holiday in Wolverhampton with a drinking friend of William 's and Ellen bought new jewellery . William continued to assault his wife throughout the latter half of 1888 . By the first week of December , Ellen 's windfall was nearly spent , and William sold his horse and cart . In January the following year , he told his landlord at 3 <unk> Road that he was thinking of emigrating to Brisbane , Australia , and asked him to make two wooden crates for the journey . Instead , William and Ellen moved to Dundee in Scotland . Ellen was not keen to go and only did so after William lied that he had obtained a position in a jute factory there . 
 = = Dundee = = 
 The Burys travelled north as second @-@ class passengers on the steamer Cambria . They arrived at Dundee on the evening of 20 January 1889 , and the following morning they rented a room above a bar at 43 Union Street . The Burys stayed for only eight days before they moved on 29 January to a squat at 113 Prince 's Street , a basement flat under a shop . William had obtained the key under false pretences by telling the letting agents that he was a viewer interested in renting the property . Meanwhile , Ellen found a job as a cleaner at a local mill , but she quit after a day . William continued to drink heavily , often with a decorator called David Walker , who was re @-@ painting the public house frequented by William . 
 On Monday 4 February , William bought some rope at the local grocer 's shop , and spent the rest of the day observing cases at the Sheriff Court from the public gallery . He was later reported to have listened attentively to the proceedings . On 7 February , he attended the court sessions again . On 10 February , he visited his acquaintance , Walker , who lent him a newspaper that featured a woman 's suicide by hanging . Walker asked Bury to look up any news of Jack the Ripper , at which Bury threw down the newspaper with a fright . That evening , he walked into the Dundee Central Police Station on Bell Street and reported his wife 's suicide to Lieutenant James Parr . He said they had been drinking heavily the night before her death , and he had woken in the morning to find his wife 's body on the floor with a rope around her neck . Bury had not summoned a doctor , but had instead cut the body and concealed it in one of the packing cases brought from London . Bury told Parr that his actions were now preying on his mind , and he was afraid that he would be arrested and accused of being Jack the Ripper . 
 Parr took Bury upstairs to see Lieutenant David Lamb , the head of the detective department . Parr told Lamb , " This man has a wonderful story to tell you . " Bury retold his story to Lamb , but omitted the reference to Jack the Ripper , and added that he had stabbed his wife 's body once . Bury was searched , and a small knife , <unk> and his house key were confiscated pending inquiries . Lamb and Detective Constable Peter Campbell proceeded to the Burys ' dingy flat , where they discovered the mutilated remains of Ellen stuffed into the wooden box Bury had commissioned in London . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Lamb returned to the police station and charged William with Ellen 's murder . Ellen 's jewellery , found in William 's pockets , was confiscated . A preliminary search of the premises revealed chalk graffiti on the rear door of the flat , which read " Jack Ripper [ sic ] is at the back of this door " , and on the stairwell leading up from the rear of the property , which read " Jack Ripper is in this seller [ sic ] " . The press and the police thought they had been written by a local boy before the tragedy , but the writer was never identified . A more extensive search the following morning found blood @-@ stained clothing in the crate that had contained the body , and the remains of more clothing and some of Ellen 's personal effects burned in the fireplace . The flat was bereft of furniture , indicating that it may have been burnt on the fire , either for heat or to destroy evidence . A large penknife was found with human flesh and blood upon it , and the rope that William had bought on the morning of 4 February was found with strands of Ellen 's hair caught in the fibres . 
 Ellen 's body was examined by five physicians : police surgeon Charles Templeman , his colleague Alexander Stalker , Edinburgh surgeon Henry Littlejohn and two local doctors , David Lennox and William Kinnear . They concluded that Ellen had been strangled from behind . Her right leg was broken in two places so it could be crammed into the crate . <unk> , made by the penknife , ran downwards along her abdomen and had been made " within at most ten minutes of the time of death " according to Templeman , Stalker and Littlejohn . Lennox disagreed and thought the wounds were made later on the basis that when he examined the body the wound was not everted , but Templeman and Stalker said the wound was everted when they examined the body . Littlejohn explained that as Lennox made his examination three days after the others , the shape of the wounds could have changed , to which Lennox agreed . 
 Chief Constable Dewar sent a telegraph detailing the circumstances of the crime to the London Metropolitan Police , which was investigating the crimes attributed to Jack the Ripper . Detectives from London did not consider Bury a realistic suspect in their investigation into the Ripper murders , but Inspector Frederick Abberline did interview witnesses in Whitechapel connected to Bury , including William 's former employer James Martin and landlords Elizabeth Haynes and William Smith . According to the executioner James Berry and crime reporter Norman Hastings , Scotland Yard sent two detectives to interview Bury , but there is no surviving record of the visit in the police archive . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 On 18 March 1889 , Bury was arraigned for the murder of his wife ; he entered a plea of not guilty . The trial was seen before Lord Young in the High Court of Justiciary on 28 March . Bury 's defence team comprised solicitor David Tweedie and barrister William Hay ; the prosecution was led by advocate deputy Dugald or Dill McKechnie . The hearing lasted 13 hours . The prosecution witnesses included Ellen 's sister Margaret Corney , William 's former employer James Martin , the Burys ' London landlady Elizabeth Haynes , William 's drinking partner David Walker , Lieutenant Lamb and Drs Templeman and Littlejohn . After a break for supper , Hay presented the defence case , which was heavily dependent on Dr Lennox 's testimony that Ellen had strangled herself . At 10 : 05 p.m. , Lord Young finished his summation , and the jury of 15 men retired to consider their verdict . After 25 minutes , the jury returned with a verdict of guilty with a recommendation for mercy . Lord Young asked the jury why they recommended mercy , and one of them replied that the medical evidence was contradictory , referring to Lennox 's testimony . Dundee had a history of opposition to the death penalty , and the jury may have been trying to avoid passing a death sentence . Young told the jury to retire and reconsider their verdict until they were decided by the evidence one way or another . At 10 : 40 p.m. , they returned with a unanimous verdict of guilty . Lord Young passed the mandatory sentence for murder : death by hanging . 
 On 1 April , Bury 's solicitor , David Tweedie , petitioned the Secretary of State for Scotland , Lord Lothian , for clemency . Tweedie argued that the sentence should be commuted to life imprisonment on the grounds of the conflicting medical evidence and the jury 's initial reservations . Tweedie further argued that Bury could have inherited insanity from his mother , who had died in a lunatic asylum . A clergyman whom Bury had befriended , Edward John Gough , minister of St Paul 's Episcopalian Church in Dundee , also wrote to Lothian asking for a reprieve . The Secretary of State refused to intervene in the normal course of the law , and Bury was hanged on 24 April by executioner James Berry . The following day , The Dundee Courier printed an editorial lambasting capital punishment : 
 There are still to be found persons who profess that when one murder has taken place a second should follow . Yesterday 's proceedings amounted to nothing less than cold @-@ blooded murder ... [ which ] perpetuate judicial butcheries ... it is not pleasant to be assured that it is incumbent upon men to slay one or two of their fellow @-@ creatures occasionally for the purpose of keeping humanity human . 
 It was the last execution held in Dundee . 
 A few days before the execution , Bury confessed to Reverend Gough that he had killed Ellen . At the urging of Gough , William wrote a confession on 22 April 1889 , which he asked to be withheld until after he was dead . William claimed that he had strangled Ellen without premeditation on the night of 4 February 1889 during a drunken row over money , and that he had tried to dismember the body for disposal the next day but was too squeamish to continue . The latter part of this confession does not match the expert testimony of the physicians , who said that the incisions were made " within at most ten minutes of the time of death " rather than the next day . William stated he had stuffed Ellen 's body into the crate as part of a later plan for disposal , but instead concocted the suicide story when he realised that Ellen 's absence would be noted . 
 = = Jack the Ripper suspect = = 
 Traditionally , five murders ( known as the " canonical five " ) are attributed to the notorious serial killer " Jack the Ripper " , who terrorised Whitechapel in the East End of London between August and November 1888 . Authorities are not agreed on the exact number of the Ripper 's victims , and at least eleven Whitechapel murders between April 1888 and February 1891 were included in the same extensive police investigation . All the crimes remain unsolved . 
 Claims that Bury could have been the Ripper began to appear in newspapers shortly after Bury 's arrest . Like Bury , the Ripper had inflicted abdominal wounds on his victims immediately after their deaths , and Bury lived in Bow , near Whitechapel , from October 1887 to January 1889 , which placed him fairly near the Whitechapel murders at the appropriate time . The Dundee Advertiser of 12 February claimed that the Burys ' " neighbours were startled and alarmed at the idea that one whom in their terror they associated with the Whitechapel tragedies had been living in their midst . " The New York Times of the same day connected Bury directly to the atrocities and reported the theory that William had murdered Ellen to prevent her from revealing his guilt , a story picked up and repeated by The Dundee Courier the following day . The Courier alleged that Bury admitted to Lieutenant Parr that he was Jack the Ripper , but Parr 's version of the story says only that Bury said he was afraid he would be arrested as Jack the Ripper . Bury denied any connection , despite making a full confession to his wife 's murder . Nevertheless , the executioner James Berry promoted the idea that Bury was the Ripper . Berry did not include Bury or the Ripper in his memoirs , My Experiences as an Executioner , but Ernest A. Parr , a journalist in the Suffolk town of Newmarket , wrote to the Secretary of State for Scotland on 28 March 1908 that Berry " told me explicitly that Bury was known to have been Jack the Ripper " . 
 In the 1920s , Norman Hastings built on Berry 's hypothesis proposing Bury as the Ripper , and 100 years after the Ripper murders William Beadle and Dundee librarian Euan Macpherson published books and articles popularising Bury as a Ripper suspect . They highlighted that the canonical five Whitechapel murders ended in November 1888 , which roughly coincided with Bury 's departure from Whitechapel . There was graffiti at Bury 's Dundee flat that implied that Jack the Ripper lived there , and Macpherson supposed this was written by Bury as a form of confession . William took Ellen 's rings , and the Ripper is believed to have taken rings from victim Annie Chapman . Bury was persistently violent to his wife , threatened her with a knife , and cut open her abdomen after death in a manner not dissimilar to the Whitechapel murderer . In a conversation with her neighbours , Marjory Smith , who ran the shop above the Burys ' Prince 's Street flat in Dundee , asked them " What sort of work was this you Whitechapel folk have been about , letting Jack the Ripper kill so many people ? " Bury did not answer her , but Ellen replied " Jack the Ripper is quiet now . " She reportedly told another neighbour , " Jack the Ripper is taking a rest . " Beadle and Macpherson argued that Ellen 's comments might indicate that she had knowledge of the Ripper 's whereabouts . 
 Others contend that Bury only imitated the Ripper , citing differences between their crimes . Ellen Bury was strangled with a rope and sustained comparatively few knife wounds compared to the Ripper 's victims , whose throats were cut prior to sustaining deep abdominal slashes . Ellen Bury 's throat was not cut , and only relatively shallow cuts were made to her abdomen . The identity of the Whitechapel murderer is unknown , and over one hundred suspects , in addition to Bury , have been proposed . While some Ripper writers consider Bury a more likely culprit than many of the other suspects , other writers dismiss the theory because , " as happens all too frequently in this field , the theorizing appears to have a few disturbing leaps of logic as well as mere anecdotes used as evidence . " 
 = Slalom ( video game ) = 
 Slalom is a skiing video game in which the player races in a series of downhill slalom runs while navigating past flags and obstacles before time expires . It was developed by Rare and first released by Nintendo for the Nintendo VS . System in 1986 . It was then released for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) in North America in March 1987 and in Europe later that year . The game was developed by Tim and Chris Stamper and its music was composed by David Wise . 
 Slalom was the first NES game developed outside Japan and the Stamper brothers ' first game released under the Rare brand . Reviews from the 1980s found Slalom unrealistic , but largely appreciated its graphics and animations . In contrast , AllGame 's retrospective review called the game poorly made and rushed . Slalom was released in Rare 's 2015 Rare Replay compilation for Xbox One . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Slalom is a single @-@ player game in which players race downhill in a series of slalom races . There are 24 downhill runs total that are evenly spread across three mountains . Before the game starts , players choose their mountain based on difficulty : Snowy Hill for beginners , Steep Peak for intermediate players , and Mount Nasty for experts . The goal for each run is to reach the finish line within the allotted time . Players must dodge obstacles including trees , flags , snowmen , <unk> , and other skiers on their way downhill , or else they will tumble and lose time . With enough momentum , players can jump over these obstacles . Players must ski around flags to maintain their speed . If they ski on the wrong side of the flag , the racer will snowplow and slow down . 
 Also located on the runs are moguls ( bumps ) that , when hit , causes the racer to go airborne and slow down slightly when landing . While airborne , players can perform freestyle tricks and earn bonus points . However , if the player botches the trick , the racer may tumble and fall , losing time . At the end of each run , final scores are calculated based on the amount of time remaining on the run and points scored from completing freestyle tricks . If the player earns enough points , they may race the next level " solo " ( without other skiers onscreen ) . The points earned in qualifying runs convert to additional seconds on the solo run timer . The high scores on each of the runs are saved in memory until the console is powered off . 
 = = Development = = 
 Slalom was developed by British video game company Rare by Tim and Chris Stamper . Rare had been looking to develop games for consoles in the wake of rampant computer game piracy in the United Kingdom . They chose the NES for its nascent popularity , though the console had no Western developers , and asked Nintendo for a license . When Nintendo declined , they reverse engineered the console and made a demo , Slalom to show the company . Nintendo was astonished at their effort , and made Rare its first Western developer , beginning a long and close collaboration between Rare and Nintendo of America founder and president Minoru Arakawa . 
 Slalom was originally released in 1986 in the arcades as part of the Nintendo VS . System and was titled Vs . Slalom . This release featured an upright cabinet , a joystick , one jump button , monaural sound , and standard raster graphics . There was also an optional controller upgrade that featured two physical ski poles and shortened skis that the player could stand on and use to control the skier onscreen . The NES version was released by Nintendo in North America in March 1987 and in Europe on October 15 , 1987 . Slalom was Rare 's first video game developed as a new company . It was also the Stamper brothers ' first video game console release . 
 The game 's music was composed by Rare 's video game composer David Wise , his first NES composing job . In a December 2010 interview , Wise said that he found the NES sound board work challenging . He had to first code the <unk> values for each note by hand before converting them into subroutines with a computer . Wise recalled thinking that his first NES projects sounded like doorbells . He was humbled that others continue to remix his tracks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Slalom received preview coverage in early 1987 in the first issue of Nintendo Fun Club News – the predecessor to the company 's house organ Nintendo Power – citing the arcade conversion to the NES . It was featured in the following Summer 1987 issue with a brief overview and expert tips . French magazine Tilt appreciated the game 's graphics and sound , but thought its animation did not fare as well . On the other hand , German magazine <unk> Software Markt highly commended Slalom 's animations ( particularly its use of scrolling and perspective ) and thought its sounds were mediocre . The magazine found the game fun , though unrealistic . Power Play and <unk> similarly praised the animations . Though Gen 4 found the game unrealistic , they appreciated its depiction of speed and the gradual difficulty progression . Power Play liked the level and obstacle graphics . Gen 4 considered the graphics average for Nintendo , and disagreed internally as to whether the game was sufficiently fantastical . Power Play thought the game needed more variety and quickly became monotonous . 
 AllGame editor Brett Alan Weiss 's retrospective review was critical as he called Slalom " a rush job " that did not capture the spirit of skiing . He felt that the game was repetitive , too simple , and not fun for adults . Weiss described the graphics as blocky and insipid , the sound as repetitive and derivative . He said that even though it was an early release in the console 's lifespan , Slalom was on par with the 1979 Intellivision 's capabilities . He recommended Antarctic Adventure for the ColecoVision in its stead . UK @-@ based magazine Retro Gamer wrote that the game received little fanfare . The magazine 's Stuart Hunt wrote in December 2010 , on Rare 's 25th anniversary , that the game was " fun but quite simplistic " in its lack of race variety . He said , though , that the game showcased how the company could maximize the system resources of the NES . Slalom was included in Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 Rare titles , released on the Xbox One on August 4 , 2015 . 
 = Covent Garden = 
 Covent Garden ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is a district in London on the eastern fringes of the West End , between St. Martin 's Lane and Drury Lane . It is associated with the former fruit @-@ and @-@ vegetable market in the central square , now a popular shopping and tourist site , and with the Royal Opera House , which is also known as " Covent Garden " . The district is divided by the main thoroughfare of Long Acre , north of which is given over to independent shops centred on Neal 's Yard and Seven Dials , while the south contains the central square with its street performers and most of the elegant buildings , theatres and entertainment facilities , including the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane and the London Transport Museum . 
 The area was fields , settled in the 7th century when it became the heart of the Anglo @-@ Saxon trading town of Lundenwic , then returned to fields after Lundenwic was abandoned at the end of the 9th century . By 1201 part of it had been walled off by Westminster Abbey for use as arable land and orchards . Referred to as " the garden of the Abbey and Convent " , and later " the Covent Garden " , it was seized by Henry VIII and granted to the Earls of Bedford in 1552 . The 4th Earl commissioned Inigo Jones to build some fine houses to attract wealthy tenants . Jones designed the Italianate arcaded square along with the church of St Paul 's . The design of the square was new to London and had a significant influence on modern town planning , acting as the prototype for new estates as London grew . 
 By 1654 a small open @-@ air fruit @-@ and @-@ vegetable market had developed on the south side of the fashionable square . Gradually , both the market and the surrounding area fell into disrepute , as taverns , theatres , coffee @-@ houses and brothels opened up . By the 18th century it had become a well @-@ known red @-@ light district . An Act of Parliament was drawn up to control the area , and Charles Fowler 's neo @-@ classical building was erected in 1830 to cover and help organise the market . The market grew and further buildings were added : the Floral Hall , Charter Market , and in 1904 the Jubilee Market . By the end of the 1960s traffic congestion was causing problems , and in 1974 the market relocated to the New Covent Garden Market about three miles ( 5 km ) south @-@ west at Nine Elms . The central building re @-@ opened as a shopping centre in 1980 , and is now a tourist location containing cafes , pubs , small shops , and a craft market called the Apple Market , along with another market held in the Jubilee Hall . 
 With the postcode WC2 , Covent Garden falls within the London boroughs of Westminster and Camden , and the parliamentary constituencies of Cities of London and Westminster and Holborn and St Pancras . The area has been served by the Piccadilly line at Covent Garden tube station since 1907 ; the journey from Leicester Square , at 300 yards , is the shortest in London . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The route of the Strand on the southern boundary of what was to become Covent Garden was used during the Roman period as part of a route to Silchester , known as " Iter VII " on the Antonine Itinerary . Excavations in 2006 at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields revealed a Roman grave , suggesting the site had sacred significance . The area to the north of the Strand was long thought to have remained as unsettled fields until the 16th century , but theories by Alan Vince and Martin Biddle that there had been an Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement to the west of the old Roman town of Londinium were borne out by excavations in 1985 and 2005 . These revealed Covent Garden as the centre of a trading town called Lundenwic , developed around 600 AD , which stretched from Trafalgar Square to Aldwych . Alfred the Great gradually shifted the settlement into the old Roman town of Londinium from around 886 AD onwards , leaving no mark of the old town , and the site returned to fields . 
 Around 1200 the first mention of an abbey garden appears in a document mentioning a walled garden owned by the Benedictine monks of the Abbey of St. Peter , Westminster . A later document , dated between 1250 and 1283 , refers to " the garden of the Abbot and Convent of Westminster " . By the 13th century this had become a 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) quadrangle of mixed orchard , meadow , pasture and arable land , lying between modern @-@ day St. Martin 's Lane and Drury Lane , and Floral Street and Maiden Lane . The use of the name " Covent " — an Anglo @-@ French term for a religious community , equivalent to " monastery " or " convent " — appears in a document in 1515 , when the Abbey , which had been letting out parcels of land along the north side of the Strand for inns and market gardens , granted a lease of the walled garden , referring to it as " a garden called Covent Garden " . This is how it was recorded from then on . 
 = = = The Bedford Estate ( 1552 – 1918 ) = = = 
 After the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1540 , Henry VIII took for himself the land belonging to Westminster Abbey , including the convent garden and seven acres to the north called Long Acre ; and in 1552 his son , Edward VI , granted it to John Russell , 1st Earl of Bedford . The Russell family , who in 1694 were advanced in their peerage from Earl to Duke of Bedford , held the land from 1552 to 1918 . 
 Russell had Bedford House and garden built on part of the land , with an entrance on the Strand , the large garden stretching back along the south side of the old walled @-@ off convent garden . Apart from this , and allowing several poor @-@ quality tenements to be erected , the Russells did little with the land until the 4th Earl of Bedford , Francis Russell , an active and ambitious businessman , commissioned Inigo Jones in 1630 to design and build a church and three terraces of fine houses around a large square or piazza . The commission had been prompted by Charles I taking offence at the condition of the road and houses along Long Acre , which were the responsibility of Russell and Henry Carey , 2nd Earl of Monmouth . Russell and Carey complained that under the 1625 Proclamation concerning Buildings , which restricted building in and around London , they could not build new houses ; the King then granted Russell , for a fee of £ 2 @,@ 000 , a licence to build as many new houses on his land as he " shall thinke fitt and convenient " . The church of St Paul 's was the first building , begun in July 1631 on the western side of the square . The last house was completed in 1637 . 
 The houses initially attracted the wealthy , though when a market developed on the south side of the square around 1654 , the aristocracy moved out and coffee houses , taverns , and prostitutes moved in . The Bedford Estate was expanded in 1669 to include Bloomsbury , when Lord Russell married Lady Rachel Vaughan , one of the daughters of the 4th Earl of Southampton . 
 By the 18th century , Covent Garden had become a well @-@ known red @-@ light district , attracting notable prostitutes such as Betty Careless and Jane Douglas . Descriptions of the prostitutes and where to find them were provided by Harris 's List of Covent Garden Ladies , the " essential guide and accessory for any serious gentleman of pleasure " . In 1830 a market hall was built to provide a more permanent trading centre . In 1913 , Herbrand Russell , 11th Duke of Bedford agreed to sell the Covent Garden Estate for £ 2 million to the MP and land speculator Harry Mallaby @-@ Deeley , who sold his option in 1918 to the Beecham family for £ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Modern changes = = = 
 The Covent Garden Estate was part of Beecham Estates and Pills Limited from 1924 to 1928 , after which time it was managed by a successor company called Covent Garden Properties Company Limited , owned by the <unk> and other private investors . This new company sold some properties at Covent Garden , while becoming active in property investment in other parts of London . In 1962 the bulk of the remaining properties in the Covent Garden area , including the market , were sold to the newly established government @-@ owned Covent Garden Authority for £ 3 @,@ 925 @,@ 000 . 
 By the end of the 1960s , traffic congestion had reached such a level that the use of the square as a modern wholesale distribution market was becoming unsustainable , and significant redevelopment was planned . Following a public outcry , buildings around the square were protected in 1973 , preventing redevelopment . The following year the market moved to a new site in south @-@ west London . The square languished until its central building re @-@ opened as a shopping centre in 1980 . An action plan was drawn up by Westminster Council in 2004 in consultation with residents and businesses to improve the area while retaining its historic character . The market buildings , along with several other properties in Covent Garden , were bought by a property company in 2006 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Historically , the Bedford Estate defined the boundary of Covent Garden , with Drury Lane to the east , the Strand to the south , St. Martin 's Lane to the west , and Long Acre to the north . However , over time the area regarded as part of Covent Garden has expanded northwards past Long Acre to High Holborn , and since 1971 , with the creation of the Covent Garden Conservation Area which incorporated part of the area between St. Martin 's Lane and Charing Cross Road , Charing Cross Road has sometimes been taken as its western boundary . Long Acre is the main thoroughfare , running north @-@ east from St Martin 's Lane to Drury Lane . Shelton Street , running parallel to the north of Long Acre , marks the London borough boundary between Camden and Westminster . 
 The area to the south of Long Acre contains the Royal Opera House , the market and central square , and most of the elegant buildings , theatres and entertainment facilities , including the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , and the London Transport Museum ; while the area to the north of Long Acre is largely given over to independent retail units centred on Neal Street , Neal 's Yard and Seven Dials ; though this area also contains residential buildings such as Odhams Walk , built in 1981 on the site of the Odhams print works , and is home to 7 @,@ 000 residents . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The Covent Garden estate was originally under the control of Westminster Abbey and lay in the parish of St Margaret . During a reorganisation in 1542 it was transferred to St Martin in the Fields , and then in 1645 a new parish was created , splitting governance of the estate between the parishes of St Paul Covent Garden and St Martin , both still within the Liberty of Westminster . St Paul Covent Garden was completely surrounded by the parish of St Martin in the Fields . It was grouped into the Strand District in 1855 when it came within the area of responsibility of the Metropolitan Board of Works . 
 In 1889 the parish became part of the County of London and in 1900 it became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster . It was abolished as a civil parish in 1922 . Since 1965 Covent Garden falls within the London boroughs of Westminster and Camden , and is in the Parliamentary constituencies of Cities of London and Westminster and Holborn and St Pancras . For local council elections it falls within the St James 's ward for Westminster , and the Holborn and Covent Garden ward for Camden . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The area 's historic association with the retail and entertainment economy continues . In 1979 , Covent Garden Market reopened as a retail centre ; in 2010 , the largest Apple Store in the world opened in The Piazza . The central hall has shops , cafes and bars alongside the Apple Market stalls selling antiques , jewellery , clothing and gifts ; there are additional casual stalls in the Jubilee Hall Market on the south side of the square . Long Acre has a range of clothes shops and boutiques , and Neal Street is noted for its large number of shoe shops . London Transport Museum and the side entrance to the Royal Opera House box office and other facilities are also located on the square . During the late 1970s and 1980s the Rock Garden music venue was popular with up and coming punk rock and New Wave artists . 
 The market halls and several other buildings in Covent Garden were bought by CapCo in partnership with GE Real Estate in August 2006 for £ 421 million , on a 150 @-@ year head lease . The buildings are let to the Covent Garden Area Trust , who pay an annual peppercorn rent of one red apple and a posy of flowers for each head lease , and the Trust protects the property from being redeveloped . In March 2007 CapCo also acquired the shops located under the Royal Opera House . The complete Covent Garden Estate owned by CapCo consists of 550 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 51 @,@ 000 m2 ) , and has a market value of £ 650 million . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Royal Opera House = = = 
 The Royal Opera House , often referred to as simply " Covent Garden " , was constructed as the " Theatre Royal " in 1732 to a design by Edward Shepherd . During the first hundred years or so of its history , the theatre was primarily a playhouse , with the Letters Patent granted by Charles II giving Covent Garden and Theatre Royal , Drury Lane exclusive rights to present spoken drama in London . In 1734 , the first ballet was presented ; a year later Handel 's first season of operas began . Many of his operas and oratorios were specifically written for Covent Garden and had their premières here . It has been the home of The Royal Opera since 1945 , and the Royal Ballet since 1946 . 
 The current building is the third theatre on the site following destructive fires in 1808 and 1857 . The façade , foyer and auditorium were designed by Edward Barry , and date from 1858 , but almost every other element of the present complex dates from an extensive £ 178 million reconstruction in the 1990s . The Royal Opera House seats 2 @,@ 268 people and consists of four tiers of boxes and balconies and the amphitheatre gallery . The stage performance area is roughly 15 metres square . The main auditorium is a Grade 1 listed building . The inclusion of the adjacent old Floral Hall , previously a part of the old Covent Garden Market , created a new and extensive public gathering place . In 1779 the pavement outside the playhouse was the scene of the murder of Martha Ray , mistress of the Earl of Sandwich , by her admirer the Rev. James Hackman . 
 = = = Covent Garden square = = = 
 The central square in Covent Garden is simply called " Covent Garden " , often marketed as " Covent Garden Piazza " to distinguish it from the eponymous surrounding area . Designed and laid out in 1630 , with building work starting in 1631 , it was the first modern square in London , and was originally a flat , open space or piazza with low railings . A casual market started on the south side , and by 1830 the present market hall was built . The space is popular with street performers , who audition with the site 's owners for an allocated slot . The square was originally laid out when the 4th Earl of Bedford , Francis Russell , commissioned Inigo Jones to design and build a church and three terraces of fine houses around the site of a former walled garden belonging to Westminster Abbey . Jones 's design was informed by his knowledge of modern town planning in Europe , particularly Piazza d <unk> , in Leghorn , Tuscany , Piazza San Marco in Venice , Piazza Santissima Annunziata in Florence , and the Place des Vosges in Paris . The centrepiece of the project was the large square , the concept of which was new to London , and this had a significant influence on modern town planning as the metropolis grew , acting as the prototype for the laying @-@ out of new estates , such as the Ladbroke Estate and the Grosvenor Estate . Isaac de Caus , the French Huguenot architect , designed the individual houses under Jones 's overall design . 
 The church of St Paul 's was the first building , and was begun in July 1631 on the western side of the square . The last house was completed in 1637 . Seventeen of the houses had arcaded portico walks organised in groups of four and six either side of James Street on the north side , and three and four either side of Russell Street . These arcades , rather than the square itself , took the name Piazza ; the group from James Street to Russell Street became known as the " Great Piazza " and that to the south of Russell Street as the " Little Piazza " . None of Inigo Jones 's houses remain , though part of the north group was reconstructed in 1877 – 79 as Bedford Chambers by William Cubitt to a design by Henry Clutton . 
 = = = Covent Garden market = = = 
 The first record of a " new market in Covent Garden " is in 1654 when market traders set up stalls against the garden wall of Bedford House . The Earl of Bedford acquired a private charter from Charles II in 1670 for a fruit and vegetable market , permitting him and his heirs to hold a market every day except Sundays and Christmas Day . The original market , consisting of wooden stalls and sheds , became disorganised and disorderly , and the 6th Earl requested an Act of Parliament in 1813 to regulate it , then commissioned Charles Fowler in 1830 to design the neo @-@ classical market building that is the heart of Covent Garden today . The contractor was William Cubitt and Company . Further buildings were added — the Floral hall , Charter Market , and in 1904 the Jubilee Market for foreign flowers was built by Cubitt and Howard . 
 By the end of the 1960s , traffic congestion was causing problems for the market , which required increasingly large lorries for deliveries and distribution . Redevelopment was considered , but protests from the Covent Garden Community Association in 1973 prompted the Home Secretary , Robert Carr , to give dozens of buildings around the square listed @-@ building status , preventing redevelopment . The following year the market relocated to its new site , New Covent Garden Market , about three miles ( 5 km ) south @-@ west at Nine Elms . The central building re @-@ opened as a shopping centre in 1980 , with cafes , pubs , small shops and a craft market called the Apple Market . Another market , the Jubilee Market , is held in the Jubilee Hall on the south side of the square . The market halls and several other buildings in Covent Garden have been owned by the property company Capital & Counties Properties ( CapCo ) since 2006 . 
 = = = Theatre Royal , Drury Lane = = = 
 The current Theatre Royal on Drury Lane is the most recent of four incarnations , the first of which opened in 1663 , making it the oldest continuously used theatre in London . For much of its first two centuries , it was , along with the Royal Opera House , a patent theatre granted rights in London for the production of drama , and had a claim to be one of London 's leading theatres . The first theatre , known as " Theatre Royal , Bridges Street " , saw performances by Nell Gwyn and Charles Hart . After it was destroyed by fire in 1672 , English dramatist and theatre manager Thomas Killigrew constructed a larger theatre on the same spot , which opened in 1674 . The design is believed to have involved Christopher Wren , who may also have been involved in the similar Dorset Garden Theatre , though it is not certain Wren was involved in either building . Killigrew 's theatre lasted nearly 120 years , under leadership including Colley Cibber , David Garrick , and Richard Brinsley Sheridan . In 1791 , under Sheridan 's management , the building was demolished to make way for a larger theatre which opened in 1794 ; but that survived only 15 years , burning down in 1809 . The building that stands today opened in 1812 . It has been home to actors as diverse as Shakespearean actor Edmund Kean , child actress Clara Fisher , comedian Dan Leno , the comedy troupe Monty Python ( who recorded a concert album there ) , and musical composer and performer Ivor Novello . Since November 2008 the theatre has been owned by composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and generally stages popular musical theatre . It is a Grade I listed building . 
 = = = London Transport Museum = = = 
 The London Transport Museum is in a Victorian iron and glass building on the east side of the market square . It was designed as a dedicated flower market by William Rogers of William Cubitt and Company in 1871 , and was first occupied by the museum in 1980 . Previously the transport collection had been held at Syon Park and Clapham . The first parts of the collection were brought together at the beginning of the 20th century by the London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) when it began to preserve buses being retired from service . After the LGOC was taken over by the London Electric Railway ( LER ) , the collection was expanded to include rail vehicles . It continued to expand after the LER became part of the London Passenger Transport Board in the 1930s and as the organisation passed through various successor bodies up to TfL , London 's transport authority since 2000 . The Covent Garden building has on display many examples of buses , trams , trolleybuses and rail vehicles from 19th and 20th centuries as well as artefacts and exhibits related to the operation and marketing of passenger services and the impact that the developing transport network has had on the city and its population . 
 = = = St Paul 's Church = = = 
 St Paul 's , commonly known as the Actors ' Church , was designed by Inigo Jones as part of a commission by Francis Russell in 1631 to create " houses and buildings fitt for the <unk> of Gentlemen and men of ability " . Work on the church began that year and was completed in 1633 , at a cost of £ 4 @,@ 000 , but the church was not consecrated until 1638 . In 1645 Covent Garden was made a separate parish and the church was dedicated to St Paul . It is uncertain how much of Jones 's original building is left , as the church was damaged by fire in 1795 during restoration work by Thomas Hardwick ; it is believed that the columns are original but that the rest is mostly Georgian or Victorian reconstruction . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Covent Garden area has long been associated with both entertainment and shopping , and this continues . Covent Garden has 13 theatres , and over 60 pubs and bars , with most south of Long Acre , around the main shopping area of the old market . The Seven Dials area in the north of Covent Garden was home to the punk rock club The Roxy in 1977 , and the area remains focused on young people with its trendy mid @-@ market retail outlets . 
 = = = Street performance = = = 
 Street entertainment at Covent Garden was noted in Samuel Pepys 's diary in May 1662 , when he recorded the first mention of a Punch and Judy show in Britain . Impromptu performances of song and swimming were given by local celebrity William <unk> in the eighteenth century . Covent Garden is licensed for street entertainment , and performers audition for timetabled slots in a number of venues around the market , including the North Hall , West Piazza , and South Hall Courtyard . The courtyard space is dedicated to classical music only . There are street performances at Covent Garden Market every day of the year , except Christmas Day . Shows run throughout the day and are about 30 minutes in length . In March 2008 , the market owner , CapCo , proposed to reduce street performances to one 30 @-@ minute show each hour . 
 = = = Pubs and bars = = = 
 The Covent Garden area has over 60 pubs and bars ; several of them are listed buildings , with some also on CAMRA 's National Inventory of Historic Pub Interiors ; some , such as The Harp in Chandos Place , have received consumer awards . The Harp 's awards include London Pub of the Year in 2008 by the Society for the Preservation of Beers from the Wood , and National Pub of the Year by CAMRA in 2011 . It was at one time owned by the Charrington Brewery , when it was known as The Welsh Harp ; in 1995 the name was abbreviated to just The Harp , before Charrington sold it to Punch Taverns in 1997 . It has been owned by the landlady since 2010 . 
 The Lamb and Flag in Rose Street has a reputation as the oldest pub in the area , though records are not clear . The first mention of a pub on the site is 1772 ( when it was called the Cooper 's Arms – the name changing to Lamb & Flag in 1833 ) ; the 1958 brick exterior conceals what may be an early 18th @-@ century frame of a house replacing the original one built in 1638 . The pub acquired a reputation for staging bare @-@ knuckle prize fights during the early 19th century when it earned the nickname " Bucket of Blood " . The alleyway beside the pub was the scene of an attack on John Dryden in 1679 by thugs hired by John Wilmot , 2nd Earl of Rochester , with whom he had a long @-@ standing conflict . 
 The Salisbury in St. Martin 's Lane was built as part of a six @-@ storey block around 1899 on the site of an earlier pub that had been known under several names , including the Coach & Horses and Ben <unk> 's Head ; it is both Grade II listed , and on CAMRA 's National Inventory , due to the quality of the etched and polished glass and the carved woodwork , summed up as " good fin de siècle ensemble " . The Freemasons Arms on Long Acre is linked with the founding of the Football Association in 1896 ; however , the meetings took place at The Freemason 's Tavern on Great Queen Street , which was replaced in 1909 by the Connaught Rooms . 
 Other pubs that are Grade II listed are of minor interest , they are three 19th century rebuilds of 17th century / 18th century houses , the Nell Gwynne Tavern in Bull Inn Court , the Nag 's Head on James Street , and the White Swan on New Row ; a Victorian pub built by lessees of the Marquis of Exeter , the Old Bell on the corner of Exeter Street and Wellington Street ; and a late 18th or early 19th century pub the Angel and Crown on St. Martin 's Lane . 
 = = = Restaurants = = = 
 There are a wide range of restaurants , mainly in Covent Garden 's central area around the piazza , and in the St Martin 's Lane area bordering the West End ; some of these with international reputations . Among the restaurants are the historic theatrical eating places , the oldest of which is Rules , which was founded in 1798 , making it the oldest restaurant in London , followed by J. Sheekey , an oyster bar and fish restaurant founded in 1893 by market @-@ stall holder Josef Sheekey in Lord Salisbury 's St Martin 's Court , and The Ivy , which was founded as an unlicensed Italian cafe by Abel <unk> in 1917 . Other restaurants include Belgo Centraal on Earlham Street , part of the Belgo chain of Belgian themed restaurants ; one of Jamie Oliver 's Italian restaurants , which opened in 2007 ; Gaby 's Deli , a Jewish cafe and restaurant serving <unk> and salt beef sandwiches since 1965 , and Mon Plaisir , founded in 1943 , one of the oldest French restaurants in London . Covent Garden was home to some of London 's earliest coffee shops , such as Old Slaughter 's Coffee House , which ran from 1692 until 1843 , and a Beefsteak Club , the Sublime Society of Beef Steaks , which was co @-@ founded in 1736 by William Hogarth at the Theatre Royal ( now the Royal Opera House ) . 
 = = = Cultural connections = = = 
 Covent Garden , and especially the market , have appeared in a number of works . Eliza Doolittle , the central character in George Bernard Shaw 's play , Pygmalion , and the musical adaptation by Alan Jay Lerner , My Fair Lady , is a Covent Garden flower seller . Alfred Hitchcock 's 1972 film Frenzy about a Covent Garden fruit vendor who becomes a serial sex killer , was set in the market where his father had been a wholesale greengrocer . The daily activity of the market was the topic of a 1957 Free Cinema documentary by Lindsay Anderson , Every Day Except Christmas , which won the Grand Prix at the Venice Festival of Shorts and Documentaries . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Covent Garden is served by the Piccadilly line at Covent Garden tube station on the corner of Long Acre and James Street . The station was designed by Leslie Green and opened by Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway on 11 April 1907 , four months after services on the rest of the line began operating on 15 December 1906 . The station is one of the few stations in Central London for which platform access is only by lift or stairs . Until improvements in 2007 , due to high passenger numbers ( 16 million annually ) , entry to the station was sometimes restricted on busy days to reduce congestion on the platforms . The distance from Covent Garden to Leicester Square at less than 300 yards is London 's shortest tube journey . Stations just outside the area include the Charing Cross tube station and Charing Cross railway station , Leicester Square tube station , and Holborn tube station . While there is only one bus route in Covent Garden itself — the <unk> , which uses Catherine Street as a terminus , just to the east of Covent Garden square — there are over 30 routes which pass close by , mostly on the Strand or Kingsway . 
 = My Musical = 
 " My Musical " is a musical episode of the American comedy @-@ drama television series Scrubs . It is the 123rd episode of the show , and was originally aired as episode 6 of season 6 on January 18 , 2007 . 
 The episode follows the story of Patti Miller , ( Stephanie D 'Abruzzo ) , a patient who mysteriously starts hearing everyone 's speech as singing . It was written by Debra Fordham , who also wrote most of the lyrics . The episode 's music was composed by Fordham , Scrubs ' resident composer Jan Stevens , The Worthless Peons ' Paul Perry , Tony Award @-@ winning Broadway orchestrator Doug <unk> , and the Avenue Q writing team of Jeff Marx and Robert Lopez . The episode was directed by Will Mackenzie . 
 In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " My Musical " # 86 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes . The episode received five Emmy Award nominations , winning one of them . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the style of a traditional musical , this episode follows a two @-@ act structure – with the acts separated by a commercial break instead of an intermission . However , in the style of a traditional Scrubs episode , this is preceded by a cold open . 
 = = = Cold open = = = 
 Turk and Carla are deciding whether Carla should take parental leave from the hospital . Turk says he doesn 't mind either way , but as Carla decides she 'll take a year off , he starts celebrating . 
 Then , the scene changes to J.D. and Elliot in the park , when a woman , Patti Miller ( D 'Abruzzo ) , abruptly falls unconscious . As she returns to consciousness , she sees Elliot , J.D. , and a worried group of onlookers singing to her ( " All Right " ) . When she tries to respond , she sings too . In reality , no one is actually singing ; Ms. Miller is hallucinating . She drifts out of consciousness , and wakes up being wheeled out of an ambulance in the parking lot of Sacred Heart Hospital , with all the hospital employees singing to her , " Welcome to Sacred Heart , " led by Dr. Kelso . 
 = = = Act one = = = 
 Dr. Cox tells J.D. he believes Ms. Miller is suffering from a psychological problem ( as opposed to a neurological one ) , and tells him to run some tests and " turf her to Psych . " Turk and J.D. approach Ms. Miller for a stool sample , explaining that " Everything Comes Down to Poo . " 
 Carla has brought Isabella to the hospital , and everyone is cooing over the new baby , when Elliot comes in and announces happily that she just bought a new house . Turk exits with Isabella , and Elliot expresses concern that J.D. thinks he 's moving into the house with her . Carla has decided to take one year parental leave , and Laverne , Ted , and The Worthless Peons wonder how they can go on at the hospital without Carla 's help ( " Gonna Miss You , Carla " ) . Carla begins to realize that she does not want to separate herself from her work for so long . 
 Ms. Miller stops Dr. Cox in the hall to insist that she is not crazy , when they are interrupted by J.D. Cox breaks into a rapid @-@ fire delivery ( " The Rant Song " ) of the litany of annoying things J.D. does , with some help from Janitor . Dr. Cox tells Ms. Miller that if she can get J.D. to leave him alone , she 'll get the tests she wants . Ms. Miller yells at J.D. , and an impressed Dr. Cox agrees to schedule a CT scan . 
 Elliot and Carla worry about the difficult conversations they have to have with J.D. and Turk , respectively ( " Options " ) . In the Act One finale ( " When the Truth Comes Out " ) , all the plotlines come together . Dr. Kelso offers Carla her job back , but she worries how to tell Turk . Elliot worries how to tell J.D. he 's not moving in . And Ms. Miller goes in for her CT scan , which turns up a gigantic aneurysm in her temporal lobe . Dr. Cox breaks the news to Ms. Miller , pulling a curtain for privacy that also signals the end of the act . 
 = = = Act two = = = 
 Carla and Elliot decide to confront Turk and J.D. Carla thinks that Turk and J.D. will help each other through the respective problems , but Elliot believes that men cannot be open about their feelings . Quite the contrary , Turk and J.D. sing about their " Guy Love . " Elliot breaks the news to J.D. , who walks out of the room , refusing to talk to her . Carla tells Turk she wants to return to work . Turk responds by saying , " I always thought family was the most important thing to Puerto Ricans . " She becomes angry , singing that " For the Last Time , I 'm Dominican " . Turk tries to explain himself , and finally , agrees to support her decision . Elliot catches up with J.D. , feeling awful , and offers to let him move in . He declines , and tells her they 'll be " Friends Forever . " 
 Ms. Miller interrupts them , afraid about her upcoming surgery , and asks , " What 's Going to Happen ? " The staff , led by Dr. Cox reassure her that she will be fine ; she finally gets calm and the staff stays by her side when she 's taken to surgery ; the staff repeats she will be fine , which J.D. qualifies with " we hope , " as she goes under anesthesia . 
 When she awakes , she asks Dr. Cox if the surgery works , but Cox replies " you 're gonna have to tell us " , and they take a step back ; Ms. Miller realized that the surgery was a success , she no longer hears singing , and thanks Dr. Cox and the others . J.D. breaks the moment asking her who was the best singer in her head , much to the rest of the staff 's ( and especially Dr. Cox 's ) dismay . J.D. reflects in voiceover that in musicals everyone get what they want , but in reality , after having made a choice we may miss the way things were ; as Elliot realizes she misses her roommate , Carla realizes she wishes she spent more time with her daughter , and Ms. Miller realizes she misses the music in her head . 
 = = Production details = = 
 It had long been a dream in the Scrubs writer 's room to do a musical episode . Scrubs creator Bill Lawrence is a self @-@ confessed musical theatre " nerd , " as are many of the writers . In addition , many of the cast members have had backgrounds in musical theatre . According to Lawrence , " I knew that Donald [ Faison ] and Judy [ Reyes ] were Broadway @-@ style singers and dancers . I knew Sarah [ Chalke ] could dance , because she danced when she was young . I knew Zach [ Braff ] loved musical theater . I had actually seen Ken Jenkins in Big River on Broadway when I was a kid . Neil Flynn and John C. McGinley were the last two guys to admit that they 'd done a lot of musicals and stuff , but being actors , they had . Johnny C. knew how to do a Gilbert and Sullivan number , and Neil had a big baritone voice . " 
 Scrubs had previously dabbled in the musical genre , including a West Side Story parody in the episode " My Way or the Highway , " and a Broadway @-@ style finale in " My Philosophy . " However , Lawrence had long been unwilling to do full musical episode , because of difficulties making it " organic to the show , " and because of the amount of work that would inevitably be involved . Finally , at the end of Season 5 , with Season 6 looking like it would probably be the last season ; Lawrence told the writers that if they were ever going to do a musical episode , it should be in Season 6 . 
 Long @-@ time Scrubs writer Debra Fordham took the challenge , and contacted the show 's medical consultant , Jonathan Doris , who provided her with several case studies , one of which ( " Musical hallucinations associated with seizures originating from an intracranial aneurysm , " published in the Mayo Clinic Proceedings ) became the basis for Ms. Miller 's condition . Unlike most episodes , which were products of the entire writers ' room , " My Musical " was written almost entirely by Fordham - including most of the lyrics , even though Fordham had never written lyrics . 
 The music , however , was not written by Fordham , but rather by several composers , including Paul Perry ( a member of The Worthless Peons ) , Scrubs composer Jan Stevens , and Tony Award @-@ winner Doug <unk> , each of whom helped write and arrange several songs . But , perhaps the most notable contributors were Jeff Marx and Robert Lopez , the writers of hit Broadway musical Avenue Q. Marx and Lopez 's involvement came at the suggestion of Braff , who overheard Fordham asking producer Randall Winston if it would be possible to get actual Broadway composers to work on the episode . Fordham did have some contribution to the music , in the form of musical genre suggestions , but during the actual composition process , she and the composers were almost never in the same room . 
 D 'Abruzzo was cast independently of her starring role in Avenue Q. Fordham wrote the part of Ms. Miller with D 'Abruzzo in mind after seeing her in the off @-@ Broadway show I Love You Because , after D 'Abruzzo had left Avenue Q. In another coincidence , D 'Abruzzo had long been a fan of the show , and was overjoyed to have the chance to be on it . 
 Fordham suggested Will Mackenzie to direct the episode , because of his Broadway experience as Cornelius <unk> in Hello , Dolly ! during the show 's original Broadway run , opposite Carol Channing . Lance Macdonald , the longtime choreographer of the show , was retained once again for the musical episode . 
 The filming of the episode was , as expected , a long process . Prior to the episode , the cast underwent a full week of rehearsals , something never before done for a Scrubs episode . A group of eight core dancers were brought in for the dance numbers , while over fifty dancers were involved in the " Welcome To Sacred Heart " scene . There are some notable cameos in the episode , including episode composer Jeff Marx as a pharmacist in " Gonna Miss You , Carla ; " occasional Scrubs musical contributor Keren DeBerg as an extra in " Are You Okay ? " ; and Broadway actress Karen Ziemba ( a friend of Mackenzie 's ) as the neurologist . Further complicating matters was the fact that Judy Reyes had recently fractured her pelvis , and so had to film all her scenes sitting down , and not dancing , aside from her number with Donald Faison ( " For the Last Time , I 'm Dominican " ) , which was filmed approximately 2 months after the rest of the episode . The bald cap D 'Abruzzo wore during the end of the episode took four hours to put on , and she described it as very uncomfortable . 
 = = Musical numbers = = 
 The show features ten musical numbers , whose titles appear in the closing credits : " All Right " , " Welcome to Sacred Heart " , " Everything Comes Down to Poo " , " Gonna Miss You , Carla " , " The Rant Song " , " Options " , " When the Truth Comes Out " , " Guy Love " , " For the Last Time , I 'm Dominican " , and " Friends Forever / What 's Going to Happen " . 
 = = = " Welcome to Sacred Heart " = = = 
 " Welcome to Sacred Heart " was composed by Fordham , Marx , and Lopez Fordham considers " Welcome to Sacred Heart " to be Dr. Kelso 's song ; Kelso ( and especially Jenkins ' performance of Kelso ) being Sacred Heart 's Jerry Orbach / Robert Preston @-@ type showman , as in " Lullaby of Broadway " from 42nd Street . " Be Our Guest " from Beauty and the Beast was also cited as an influence . Filming the sequence involved over 50 extras and Busby Berkeley @-@ style top shot kaleidoscopic choreography , which was achieved with a crane @-@ mounted camera . 
 = = = " Everything Comes Down to Poo " = = = 
 " Everything Comes Down to Poo " was composed by Fordham , Marx , and Lopez . The inspiration for the song came when one of the show 's medical advisors , Jonathan Doris , shared his observation with Fordham that stool samples seemed to be asked for at hospitals no matter what was being diagnosed . The number was the latter of two music videos released by NBC on YouTube in advance of the episode 's airdate — the other video being “ Guy Love . ” The videos were deleted on YouTube , but have now reappeared on the website . 
 The song 's lyrics underwent many changes , in order to find the right level of vulgarity . The initial version was much more “ genteel , ” while later versions included references to ‘ <unk> ’ and other slang for feces ; as was the line “ It may sound gross , it may sound crass , but we need to see what comes out of your ass ” ; which was changed to “ It may sound gross , you may say shush , but we need to see what comes out of your <unk> . ” 
 = = = " Gonna Miss You , Carla " = = = 
 " Gonna Miss You , Carla " was composed by Fordham and Perry ( who sings during the song , as a member of The Worthless Peons ) . D 'Abruzzo has called this her favorite song in the episode . Carla sits throughout the song because of Reyes ' fractured pelvis . It features most of the secondary characters , including Laverne , Todd , Ted and Doug . 
 = = = " The Rant Song " = = = 
 " The Rant Song " was composed by Fordham and Perry . The song is a Gilbert and Sullivan @-@ style patter song , in order to complement Dr. Cox 's normal rapid @-@ fire rants . Bill Lawrence has mentioned " Major @-@ General 's Song " from The Pirates of Penzance as a specific influence . " We were mortified because Studio 60 did [ a ' Modern Major General ' spoof ] first . But theirs isn 't funny . " Fordham has described D 'Abruzzo 's section in this song as the episode 's " Patti LuPone moment . " Fordham had long been a LuPone fan ( which is the reason D 'Abruzzo 's character was named Patti Miller ) . 
 Janitor 's section in this song ( " It all started with a penny in the door " ) refers to an incident in Scrubs ' pilot , " My First Day , " when he became convinced J.D. had broken a door by wedging a penny in it . 
 = = = " When the Truth Comes Out " = = = 
 " When the Truth Comes Out " was composed by Fordham , Marx , and Lopez . Unlike the other songs in the episode , this song was always intended as a direct parody of a single song : " Do You Hear the People Sing ? " from Les Misérables . It also serves the same dramatic purpose as " One Day More " : it is a showstopper finale to Act One that reprises all previous songs , summarizes Act One 's events , and teases the events to come in Act Two . Carla does not march during this song , except for a few " painful steps " in this sequence , due to Reyes ' aforementioned fractured pelvis . When Carla is seen from the back , she is portrayed by a double . 
 = = = " Guy Love " = = = 
 " Guy Love " was composed by Fordham and Perry . It was a late addition to the episode , brought on because , according to Bill Lawrence , " All the modern musicals like Jekyll & Hyde have these really overwrought love songs , so we really wanted to have one between J.D. and Turk . " It was the hardest song for Fordham to write . She met with Perry for help with the lyrics , and he gave her the hook , " It 's guy love , between two guys . " The writing became easier , but she still wanted a reference to a tender moment between Turk and J.D. She emailed D 'Abruzzo , who she knew to be a big fan of the show , " and , no exaggeration , five minutes later , she sent me a list of 30 [ moments ] " , including Turk performing an appendectomy on J.D. in " My Day Off " . At first , the song was meant to be a power ballad . 
 " Guy Love " was the first of two music videos released by NBC on YouTube in advance of the episode 's air date — the other being " Everything Comes Down To Poo " . The videos have since been removed from YouTube . In addition , the night before " My Musical " aired , actors Zach Braff and Donald Faison appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and after an interview with the host , Braff grabbed a hand held microphone that was hidden in his chair and the two began singing " Guy Love " . The song also appeared in " My Road to Nowhere " , as Turk 's cell phone ring tone for Carla , and as an arranged incidental version in " My Words of Wisdom " , and was played as background music while Turk and J.D. hugged in " My Comedy Show " . The song was also used in the season 9 premiere " Our First Day of School . " 
 = = = " For the Last Time , I 'm Dominican " = = = 
 " For the Last Time , I 'm Dominican " was composed by Fordham , Perry , and Stevens . Fordham knew she wanted to write a Latin @-@ themed number for Carla , but could not decide on a style ; so she " literally was on iTunes listening to every Latin style of music she could think of , " before settling on a tango . The song also parodies " Tango : Maureen " from " Rent . " The sequence was filmed two months after principal photography , to give Judy Reyes ' pelvis enough time to heal for her to be able to tango . 
 Every question Carla asks during the first verse was an issue in a previous episode - she grew up in Chicago , she was in medicine eight years before meeting Turk , their wedding song was The Beatles ' " Eight Days a Week " , and Turk struggled with remembering her middle name . Additionally , Turk has called Carla Puerto Rican on several occasions and in " My Last Chance " she angrily responded , " For the last time , Turk , I 'm Dominican ! " 
 = = = " Friends Forever / What 's Going to Happen " = = = 
 " Friends Forever / What 's Going to Happen " was composed by Fordham , Marx and Lopez . " Friends Forever " is a parody of 1950s @-@ style musical numbers in general , and " We Go Together " from Grease in particular . However , this was not the original plan . According to Fordham , " I was really shocked when I got the demo back , because I had never envisioned a ' 50s number . I did mention ' We Go Together , ' just as an example of I wanted a cheesy , fun , happy ending kind of a thing . " 
 The song " What 's Going to Happen " resembles one of the more " serious " numbers from Rent , specifically " Life Support " and " Will I ? " . Fordham has called Ms. Miller 's solo in " What 's Going to Happen " the easiest part of the episode for her to write . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 A digital soundtrack to the episode was released on various music download websites such as the iTunes Store , featuring 11 tracks of songs from the Scrubs episode . 
 " All Right " – 0 : 43 
 " Welcome to Sacred Heart " – 2 : 06 
 " Everything Comes Down to Poo " – 2 : 10 
 " Gonna Miss You Carla " – 2 : 09 
 " The Rant Song " – 2 : 25 
 " Options " – 0 : 17 
 " When the Truth Comes Out " – 2 : 25 
 " Guy Love " – 2 : 34 
 " For the Last Time I 'm Dominican " – 1 : 56 
 Finale : " Friends Forever " / " What 's Going to Happen " – 2 : 37 
 " Welcome to Sacred Heart " ( Reprise ) – 0 : 43 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was received very well by critics and audiences alike . Many described initial misgivings that the musical concept would make the episode seem gimmicky , but these fears were , for the most part , put to rest by the fact that the episode was " logically insane " ; the singing came about organically ( through the brain aneurysm ) , and , despite the singing , the episode fit into the Scrubs continuity . Many noted that the songs fit the characters ( like Dr. Cox 's " Rant Song " ) , and that story arcs actually advanced in the episode ( Carla returning to the hospital , and J.D. and Elliot no longer living together ) . 
 On the other hand , others thought the music felt forced . Inevitably , almost all reviews , both positive and negative , compared the episode to Buffy the Vampire Slayer 's musical episode , " Once More , with Feeling " . This comparison was also made by Bill Lawrence , who credits Buffy for inspiring Scrubs ' propensity for " big " episodes ( such as this one , the multi @-@ camera " My Life in Four Cameras " , and the Wizard of Oz parody " My Way Home " ) . The singing abilities of the cast ( Chalke in particular ) came under some fire , but most critics agreed that most were competent , and that anything beyond that simply did not matter . Reyes and Faison were the only members of the cast ( besides the Broadway star D 'Abruzzo ) to receive praise for their singing abilities . In general , the final assessments were positive . The episode was called " the show 's best episode thus far this season " , " worth all the hype " , and " a heck of a lot of fun " . The episode is also the most popular download of the entire series of Scrubs in the iTunes Store . 
 The episode also received praise from those who worked on it . D 'Abruzzo described being on Scrubs as a " really great experience " , and called the crew " one of the friendliest crews I 've ever worked with " . Marx , who had previously had misgivings about working in Hollywood , loved working on the show so much he cited it as influencing his move to Los Angeles . Chalke described the episode as a unifying experience for the struggling show , mentioning that , for the first time in six years , the entire cast and crew met up to watch the episode together . 
 At the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , the episode " My Musical " was nominated for five awards in four categories . It received nominations for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Will Mackenzie ) , Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics ( " Everything Comes Down to Poo " and " Guy Love " ) , Outstanding Music Direction ( Jan Stevens ) ; while it tied for the award for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half @-@ Hour ) and Animation ( Joe Foglia , Peter J. Nusbaum , and John W. Cook II ) with Entourage . These were Scrubs ' only nominations that year . 
 = Virginia Beach , Virginia = 
 Virginia Beach is an independent city located in the U.S. state of Virginia . As of the 2010 census , the population was 437 @,@ 994 . In 2015 , the population was estimated to be 452 @,@ 745 . Although mostly suburban in character , it is the most populous city in Virginia and the 41st most populous city in the nation . 
 Located on the Atlantic Ocean at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay , Virginia Beach is included in the Hampton Roads metropolitan area . This area , known as " America 's First Region " , also includes the independent cities of Chesapeake , Hampton , Newport News , Norfolk , Portsmouth , and Suffolk , as well as other smaller cities , counties , and towns of Hampton Roads . 
 Virginia Beach is a resort city with miles of beaches and hundreds of hotels , motels , and restaurants along its oceanfront . Every year the city hosts the East Coast Surfing Championships as well as the North American Sand Soccer Championship , a beach soccer tournament . It is also home to several state parks , several long @-@ protected beach areas , three military bases , a number of large corporations , two universities , International headquarters and site of the television broadcast studios for Pat Robertson 's Christian Broadcasting Network ( CBN ) , Edgar Cayce 's Association for Research and Enlightenment , and numerous historic sites . Near the point where the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean meet , Cape Henry was the site of the first landing of the English colonists , who eventually settled in Jamestown , on April 26 , 1607 . 
 The city is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as having the longest pleasure beach in the world . It is located at the southern end of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel , the longest bridge @-@ tunnel complex in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 The <unk> were the historic indigenous people of the area now known as Tidewater in Virginia at the time of European encounter . Little is known about them but archeological evidence suggests they may have been related to the Carolina Algonquian , or Pamlico people . They would have spoken one of the Algonquian languages . These were common among the numerous tribes of the coastal area , who made up the loose Powhatan Confederacy , numbering in the tens of thousands in population . The <unk> occupied an area which is now defined as the independent cities of Norfolk , Portsmouth , Chesapeake , and Virginia Beach . 
 In 1607 , after a voyage of 144 days , three ships headed by Captain Christopher Newport , and carrying 105 men and boys , made their first landfall in the New World on the mainland , where the southern mouth of the Chesapeake Bay meets the Atlantic Ocean . They named it Cape Henry , after Henry Frederick , Prince of Wales , the eldest son of King James I of England . These English colonists of the Virginia Company of London moved on from this area , as they were under orders to seek a site further inland , which would be more sheltered from ships of competing European countries . They created their first permanent settlement on the north side of the James River at Jamestown . 
 Adam Thoroughgood ( 1604 – 1640 ) of King 's Lynn , Norfolk , England is one of the earliest Englishmen to settle in this area , which was developed as Virginia Beach . At the age of 18 , he had contracted as an indentured servant to pay for passage to the Virginia Colony in the hopes of bettering his life . He earned his freedom after several years and became a leading citizen of the area . In 1629 , he was elected to the House of Burgesses for Elizabeth Cittie [ sic ] , one of four " <unk> " ( or incorporations ) which were subdivided areas established in 1619 . 
 In 1634 , the Colony was divided into the original eight shires of Virginia , soon renamed as counties . Thoroughgood is credited with using the name of his home in England when helping name " New Norfolk County " in 1637 . The following year , New Norfolk County was split into Upper Norfolk County ( soon renamed Nansemond County ) and Lower Norfolk County . Thoroughgood resided after 1634 was along the Lynnhaven River , named for his home in England . 
 Lower Norfolk County was large when first organized , defined as from the Atlantic Ocean west past the Elizabeth River , encompassing the entire area now within the modern cities of Portsmouth , Norfolk , Chesapeake , and Virginia Beach . It attracted many entrepreneurs , including William Moseley with his family in 1648 . Belonging to the Merchant Adventurers Guild of London , he immigrated from Rotterdam of the Netherlands , where he had been in the international trade . He settled on land on the north side of the Elizabeth River ( Virginia ) , east of what developed as Norfolk . 
 Following increased settlement , in 1691 Lower Norfolk County was divided to form Norfolk and Princess Anne counties . Princess Anne , the easternmost county in South Hampton Roads , extended from Cape Henry at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay , south to what became the border of the North Carolina colony . It included all of the area fronting the Atlantic Ocean . Princess Anne County was known as a jurisdiction from 1691 to 1963 , over 250 years . 
 In the early centuries , this area was rural and developed for plantation agriculture . In the late 19th century , the small resort area of Virginia Beach developed in Princess Anne County after the 1883 arrival of rail service to the coast . The Virginia Beach Hotel was opened and operated by the Norfolk and Virginia Beach Railroad and Improvement Company at the oceanfront , near the tiny community of <unk> . The hotel was foreclosed and the railroad reorganized in 1887 . The hotel was upgraded and reopened in 1888 as the Princess Anne Hotel . 
 In 1891 , guests at the new hotel watched the wreck and rescue efforts of the United States Life @-@ Saving Service for the Norwegian bark Dictator . The ship 's figurehead , which washed up on the beach several days later , was erected as a monument to the victims and rescuers . It stood along the oceanfront for more than 50 years . In the 21st century , it inspired the pair of matching Norwegian Lady Monuments , sculpted by Ørnulf Bast and installed in Virginia Beach and Moss , Norway . 
 The resort initially depended on railroad and electric trolley service . The completion of Virginia Beach Boulevard in 1922 , which extended from Norfolk to the oceanfront , opened the route for automobiles , buses , and trucks . The passenger rail service to the oceanfront was eventually discontinued as traffic increased by vehicle . The growing resort of Virginia Beach became an incorporated town in 1906 . Over the next 45 years , Virginia Beach continued to grow in popularity as a seasonal vacation spot . The casinos were replaced by amusement parks and family @-@ oriented attractions . In 1927 The Cavalier Hotel opened and became a popular vacation spot . 
 Virginia Beach gained status as an independent city in 1952 , although ties remained between it and Princess Anne County . In 1963 , after voters in the two jurisdictions passed a supporting referendum , and with the approval of the Virginia General Assembly , the two political subdivisions were consolidated as a new , much larger independent city , retaining the better @-@ known name of the Virginia Beach resort . 
 The Alan B. Shepard Civic Center ( " The Dome " ) , a significant building in the city 's history , was constructed in 1958 , and was dedicated to the career of former Virginia Beach resident and astronaut Alan Shepard . As the area changed , the Dome was frequently used as a bingo hall . The building was razed in 1994 to make room for a municipal parking lot and potential future development . 
 Real estate , defense , and tourism are major sectors of the Virginia Beach economy . Local public and private groups have maintained a vested interest in real @-@ estate redevelopment , resulting in a number of joint public @-@ private projects , such as commercial parks . Examples of the public @-@ private development include the Virginia Beach Convention Center , the <unk> Hilton Hotel , and the Virginia Beach Town Center . The City assisted in financing the project through the use of tax increment financing : creating special tax districts and constructing associated street and infrastructure to support the developments . The Town Center opened in 2003 , with related construction continuing . The Convention Center opened in 2005 . 
 The city has begun to run out of clear land available for new construction north of the Green Line , an urban growth boundary dividing the urban northern and rural southern sections of the city . Infill and development of residential neighborhoods has placed a number of operating constraints on Naval Air Station Oceana , a major fighter jet base for the U.S. Navy . While the airbase enjoys wide support from Virginia Beach at large , the Pentagon Base Realignment and Closure commission has proposed closure of Oceana within the next decade . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Virginia Beach is located at 36 @.@ 8506 ° N 75 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 36 @.@ 8506 ; <unk> ﻿ ( Virginia Beach ) . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 497 square miles ( 1 @,@ 290 km2 ) , of which 249 square miles ( 640 km2 ) is land and 248 square miles ( 640 km2 ) ( 49 @.@ 9 % ) is water . It is the largest city in Virginia by total area and third @-@ largest city land area . The average elevation is 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) above sea level . A major portion of the city drains to the Chesapeake Bay by way of the Lynnhaven River and its tributaries . 
 The city is located at the southeastern corner of Virginia in the Hampton Roads area bordering the Atlantic Ocean . The Hampton Roads Metropolitan Statistical Area ( officially known as the Virginia Beach @-@ Norfolk @-@ Newport News , VA @-@ NC MSA ) is the 37th largest in the United States , with a total population of 1 @,@ 707 @,@ 639 . The area includes the Virginia cities of Norfolk , Virginia Beach , Chesapeake , Hampton , Newport News , Poquoson , Portsmouth , Suffolk , Williamsburg , and the counties of Gloucester , Isle of Wight , James City , Mathews , Surry , and York , as well as the North Carolina county of Currituck . While Virginia Beach is the most populated city within the MSA , it actually currently functions more as a suburb . The city of Norfolk is recognized as the central business district , while the Virginia Beach oceanside resort district and Williamsburg are primarily centers of tourism . 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 When the modern city of Virginia Beach was created in 1963 , by the consolidation of the 253 square miles ( 660 km2 ) Princess Anne County with the 2 square miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km2 ) City of Virginia Beach , the newly larger city was divided into seven boroughs : Bayside , Blackwater , Kempsville , Lynnhaven , Princess Anne , Pungo , and Virginia Beach . 
 Virginia Beach has many distinctive communities and neighborhoods within its boundaries , including : <unk> , <unk> Village , the largest sub @-@ division in Tidewater when completed , Bay Colony , Bayside , Cape Henry , Chesapeake Beach , Croatan Beach , Great Neck Point , Green Run , Kempsville , Lago Mar , London Bridge , Lynnhaven , Newtown , Oceana , Ocean Park , Pembroke Manor , Princess Anne , Pungo , Red Mill Commons , Sandbridge , Thalia , and Thoroughgood . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Virginia Beach is humid subtropical ( Köppen : Cfa ) . Winters are mild and snowfall is light . Summers are hot and humid . The " official " weather statistics are recorded at Norfolk International Airport on the extreme northwestern border of Virginia Beach . The mean annual temperature is 59 @.@ 6 ° F ( 15 @.@ 3 ° C ) , with an average annual snowfall of 5 @.@ 8 inches ( 150 mm ) at the airport to around 3 @.@ 0 inches ( 76 mm ) in the southeastern corner around Back Bay . Average annual rainfall is higher ; between 47 inches ( 1 @,@ 200 mm ) at the airport to over 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) per year at Back Bay . The wettest seasons are spring and summer , although rainfall is mostly constant year round . The highest recorded temperature to date was 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) in July 2010 , and the lowest recorded temperature was − 3 ° F ( − 19 ° C ) in January 1985 , both being recorded at Norfolk International Airport . 
 Additionally , the geographic location of the city , with respect to the principal storm tracks , is especially favorable which is why it has earned the reputation as a vacation destination . It is south of the average path of storms originating in the higher latitudes , and north of the usual tracks of hurricanes and other major tropical storms , with the exception of Hurricane Isabel in 2003 . Because of the moderating effects of the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean , Virginia Beach is the northernmost location on the east coast in which many species of plants will reliably grow . Spanish moss , for example is near the northernmost limit of its natural range at First Landing State Park , and is the most northerly location where it is widespread . Other plants like Sabal palmetto , <unk> Palm , Windmill Palm , Hardy Citrus , and Oleander are successfully grown here while they succumb to the colder winter temperatures to the north and inland to the west . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2010 Census , the racial composition of Virginia Beach was as follows : 
 White or Caucasian : 67 @.@ 7 % ( Non @-@ Hispanic White : 64 @.@ 5 % ) 
 Black or African American : 19 @.@ 6 % 
 American Indian : 0 @.@ 4 % 
 Asian : 6 @.@ 1 % ( 4 @.@ 0 % Filipino , 0 @.@ 5 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 4 % Indian , 0 @.@ 4 % Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 3 % Korean , 0 @.@ 2 % Japanese ) 
 Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander : 0 @.@ 1 % 
 Some other race : 2 @.@ 0 % 
 Two or more races : 4 @.@ 0 % 
 Hispanic or Latino ( of any race ) : 6 @.@ 6 % ( 2 @.@ 2 % Puerto Rican , 1 @.@ 9 % Mexican , 0 @.@ 3 % Dominican , 0 @.@ 2 % Panamanian , 0 @.@ 2 % Salvadoran , 0 @.@ 2 % Cuban , 0 @.@ 2 % Colombian ) 
 Source : 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 425 @,@ 257 people , 154 @,@ 455 households , and 110 @,@ 898 families residing in the city . The population density was 1 @,@ 712 @.@ 7 people per square mile ( 661 @.@ 3 / km ² ) . There were 162 @,@ 277 housing units at an average density of 653 @.@ 6 per square mile ( 252 @.@ 3 / km ² ) . 
 The racial makeup of the city was : 78 @.@ 0 % White ( 72 @.@ 5 % non @-@ Hispanic white ) , 12 @.@ 0 % African American , 0 @.@ 4 % Native American , 4 @.@ 9 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 5 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 8 % from two or more races . 4 @.@ 2 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . 
 There were 154 @,@ 455 households out of which 38 @.@ 8 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 55 @.@ 7 % were married couples living together , 12 @.@ 4 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 28 @.@ 2 % were non @-@ families . 20 @.@ 4 % of all households were made up of individuals and 5 @.@ 5 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 70 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 14 . 
 The age distribution was 27 @.@ 5 % under the age of 18 , 10 @.@ 0 % from 18 to 24 , 34 @.@ 3 % from 25 to 44 , 19 @.@ 8 % from 45 to 64 , and 8 @.@ 4 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 33 years . For every 100 females there were 98 @.@ 0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 95 @.@ 8 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 48 @,@ 705 , and the median income for a family was $ 53 @,@ 242 . Virginia Beach had the 5th highest median family income among large cities in 2003 . The per capita income for the city was $ 22 @,@ 365 . About 5 @.@ 1 % of families and 6 @.@ 5 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 8 @.@ 6 % of those under age 18 and 4 @.@ 7 % of those age 65 or over . 
 The city of Virginia Beach has a lower crime rate than the other regional cities of Hampton Roads , Newport News , Norfolk , and Portsmouth , which all exceed national average crime rates . In 1999 Virginia Beach experienced 12 murders giving the city a murder rate of 2 @.@ 7 per 100 @,@ 000 people . For 2007 , Virginia Beach had 16 murders , for a murder rate of 3 @.@ 7 per 100 @,@ 000 people . That was lower than the national average that year of 6 @.@ 9 . The city ’ s total crime index rate for 2007 was 221 @.@ 2 per 100 @,@ 000 people , lower than the national average of 320 @.@ 9 . According to the Congressional Quarterly Press ' 2008 City Crime Rankings : Crime in Metropolitan America , Virginia Beach , Virginia ranks 311th in violent crime among 385 cities containing more than 75 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 The city was also named the safest US city in 2004 . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 34 @.@ 4 % of the city 's population is affiliated with religious congregations , compared to the 50 @.@ 2 % nationwide figure . There are 146 @,@ 402 adherents and 184 different religious congregations in the city . 
 28 % Catholic Church 
 14 % Southern Baptist Convention 
 13 % United Methodist Church 
 12 % Charismatic Churches Independent 
 33 % Others 
 = = Economy = = 
 Virginia Beach is best known for its tourism but the military and agribusiness sectors contribute to the city 's economy . The city 's economy also contains a large retail component at places such as Lynnhaven Mall . Major companies headquartered in Virginia Beach include <unk> , the Christian Broadcasting Network , Operation Blessing International , and <unk> ( American headquarters ) . Other major employers include GEICO , VT and Navy Exchange Service Command . Virginia Beach was ranked at number 45 on Forbes list of best places for business and careers . 
 Tourism produces a large share of Virginia Beach 's economy . With an estimated $ 857 million spent in tourism related industries , 14 @,@ 900 jobs cater to 2 @.@ 75 million visitors . City coffers benefit as visitors provide $ 73 million in revenue . Virginia Beach opened a Convention Center in 2005 which caters to large group meetings and events . Hotels not only line the oceanfront but also cluster around Virginia Beach Town Center and other parts of the city . Restaurants and entertainment industries also directly benefit from Virginia Beach 's tourism . 
 Ecotourism has a large portion of the tourism market in Virginia Beach . There are many eco @-@ adventures companies which offer tours on the land and on the water . Coyotes , foxes and bobcats can be seen inland of Virginia Beach in False Cape State Park . There are tours available to see dolphins in their natural habitat . 
 The Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center conducts tours of the coast for bird sightings as well as whales if the season is right . They offer school field trips and overnight adventures into the various surrounding regions with a focus on education . Lessons for surfing , stand up paddling and kayaking are popular in the area . In the summer these programs may even offer dolphin sighting tours . 
 Virginia Beach has a large agribusiness sector which produces $ 80 million for the city economy . One hundred @-@ seventy @-@ two farms exist in Virginia Beach , mostly below the <unk> in the southern portion of the city . Farmers are able to sell their goods and products at the city 's Farmer 's Market . 
 Virginia Beach is home to several United States Military bases . These include the United States Navy 's NAS Oceana and Training Support Center Hampton Roads , and the Joint Expeditionary Base East located at Cape Henry . Additionally , NAB Little Creek is located mostly within the city of Virginia Beach but carries a Norfolk address . 
 NAS Oceana is the largest employer in Virginia Beach ; it was decreed by the 2005 BRAC Commission that NAS Oceana must close unless the city of Virginia Beach condemns houses in areas designated as " Accident Potential Zones . " This action has never been the position of the United States Navy ; indeed , the Navy had not recommended NAS Oceana to the BRAC Commission for potential closure . The issue of closure of NAS Oceana remains unresolved as of May , 2008 
 Both NAS Oceana and Training Support Center Hampton Roads are considered to be the largest of their respective kind in the world . Furthermore , located in nearby Norfolk is the central hub of the United States Navy 's Atlantic Fleet , Norfolk Navy Base . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The city is home to several points of interest in the historical , scientific , and visual / performing arts areas , and has become a popular tourist destination in recent years . The Virginia Museum of Contemporary Art features regularly changing exhibitions in a variety of media . Exhibitions feature painting , sculpture , photography , glass , video and other visual media from internationally acclaimed artists as well as artists of national and regional renown . MOCA was born from the annual Boardwalk Art Show , which began in 1952 and is now the museum 's largest fundraiser . By operating at a national standard , MOCA received accreditation from the American Alliance of Museums in 2010 . 
 The Virginia Aquarium & Marine Science Center ( formerly the Virginia Marine Science Museum ) is a popular aquarium near the oceanfront that features the 300 @,@ 000 @-@ gallon Norfolk Canyon Aquarium , containing sand tiger , nurse and brown sharks , as well as sting rays and other large open @-@ ocean dwellers . There is also a 70 @,@ 000 @-@ gallon sea turtle aquarium , sea turtle hatchling laboratory , hands @-@ on ocean exploration exhibits , jellyfish and octopus aquariums , and even a life @-@ size model of a humpback whale . Other features include the Owls Creek salt marsh and a nature trail . 
 The Virginia Beach Amphitheater , built in 1996 , features a wide variety of popular shows and concerts , ranging from Kenny Chesney to Taylor Swift to Coldplay to Ozzfest . The Sandler Center , a 1200 @-@ seat performing arts theatre , opened in the Virginia Beach Town Center in November , 2007 . Virginia Beach is home to many sites of historical importance and has 18 sites on the National Register of Historic Places . Such sites include the Adam Thoroughgood House ( one of the oldest surviving colonial homes in Virginia ) , the Francis Land House ( a 200 @-@ year @-@ old plantation ) , the Cape Henry Lights and nearby Cape Henry Light Station ( a second tower ) , Bayville Farm , De Witt Cottage , Ferry Farm Plantation , Dr. John Miller @-@ <unk> House , Adam Keeling House , Old Donation Church , Pembroke Manor , Pleasant Hall , Shirley Hall ( Devereaux House ) , Thomas Murray House , U.S. Coast Guard Station ( <unk> ) , Upper <unk> , <unk> House , and Wishart <unk> House , and <unk> . 
 The Edgar Cayce Hospital for Research and Enlightenment was established in Virginia Beach in 1928 with 60 beds . Cayce was a psychic from Kentucky who claimed healing abilities and made prophesies . Cayce is known as the father of the " New Age " movement of the 1960s . Cayce resided in Virginia Beach until he died on January 3 , 1945 . His followers are still active in Virginia Beach . The 67th street facility features a large private library of books on psychic matters , and is open to the public . The traditional beach @-@ architecture headquarters building features massage therapy by appointment . Atlantic University was opened by Cayce in 1930 ; it closed two years later but was re @-@ opened in 1985 . Atlantic University was originally intended for study of Cayce 's readings and research on spiritual subjects . 
 The city 's largest festival , the Neptune Festival , attracts 500 @,@ 000 visitors to the oceanfront and 350 @,@ 000 visitors to the air show at NAS Oceana . Celebrating the city 's heritage link with Norway , events are held in September in the oceanfront and Town Center areas . Every August , the American Music Festival provides festival attendees with live music performed on stages all over the oceanfront , including the beach on Fifth Street . The festival ends with the Rock ' n ' Roll Half Marathon . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Since Norfolk contains the central business district of Hampton Roads , most of the major spectator sports are located there . While the Hampton Roads area has been recently considered as a viable prospect for major @-@ league professional sports , and regional leaders have attempted to obtain Major League Baseball , NBA and NHL franchises in the recent past , no team has yet relocated to the area . Hampton Roads is the 3rd largest metropolitan area in the United States without a club in a major professional sports league , after the Las Vegas and Austin metropolitan areas . 
 The Norfolk Admirals won the AHL Calder Cup in 2012 . 
 The Virginia Destroyers , a UFL franchise , played at the Virginia Beach Sportsplex until the league 's collapse in 2012 . Two soccer teams , the Virginia Beach Piranhas , a men 's team in the USL Premier Development League , and the Hampton Roads Piranhas , a women 's team in the W @-@ League play at the Virginia Beach Sportsplex . The Virginia Beach Sportsplex contains the central training site for the U.S. women 's national field hockey team . 
 The city is also home to the East Coast Surfing Championships , an annual contest of more than 100 of the world 's top professional surfers and an estimated 400 amateur surfers . This is North America 's oldest surfing contest . 
 There are eleven golf courses open to the public in the city , as well as four country club layouts and 36 military holes at NAS Oceana 's <unk> course . Among the best @-@ known public courses are Hell 's Point Golf Club and Virginia Beach National , the latter of which hosted the Virginia Beach Open , a Nationwide Tour event from 2000 to 2006 . Also , the Kingsmill Resort hosts the Kingsmill Championship , an annual LPGA Tour tournament . 
 Virginia Beach is host to a Rock ' n ' Roll Half Marathon each year on Labor Day weekend in conjunction with the American Music Festival . It is one of the largest Half Marathons in the world . The final 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) are on the boardwalk . 
 In 2012 , Virginia Beach was one of several cities trying to lure the Sacramento Kings to play there . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 Virginia Beach is home to 210 city parks , encompassing over 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) , including neighborhood parks , community parks , district parks , and other open spaces . Each park is unique and offers something for everyone , from wide open spaces to playgrounds , picnic shelters , and <unk> . 
 Mount Trashmore Park is clearly visible from I @-@ 264 when traveling to the oceanfront . The park is 165 acres ( 67 ha ) . The hill is 60 ft ( 18 m ) high and over 800 ft ( 240 m ) long , and was created by compacting layers of solid waste and clean soil . It is the highest point in Virginia Beach . The park also features two lakes : Lake Windsor and Lake Trashmore . Lake Trashmore is stocked with fish , but is unsanitary to fish in . Residents can also take advantage of a skate park . 
 Another major park in the city is Great Neck Park , a 70 acres ( 28 ha ) park located in the Lynnhaven District . Facilities include five large group shelters , mini @-@ shelters , family picnic tables and grills , three playgrounds , horseshoe pits , volleyball courts , vending machines , walking trails , four baseball fields , as well as a gazebo located at the end of a scenic walkway overlooking the Lynnhaven River . 
 The Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge , established in 1938 , is an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 32 km2 ) fresh water refuge that borders the Atlantic Ocean on the east and Back Bay on the west . The barrier islands feature large sand dunes , maritime forests , fresh water marshes , ponds , ocean beach , and large impoundments for wintering wildfowl . It is managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 
 First Landing State Park and False Cape State Park are both located in coastal areas within the city 's corporate limits as well . Both offer camping facilities , cabins , and outdoor recreation activities in addition to nature and history tours . 
 Munden Point Park is a rural park located in the deep southern end of the city , right on The North Landing River . It is owned and maintained by the city of Virginia Beach . The park features five shelters , three baseball fields , a boat ramp , boat rentals , three playgrounds , six horseshoe pits , volleyball nets , and light hiking trails . An outdoor amphitheatre is fully equipped with electrical outlets and is available for reservations of weddings , outside classroom activities and other events . Restrooms , parking , vending machines , playgrounds , gardens , and barbecue grills are also available for use . Canoes , boat ramps , and disc golf courses may also be rented to go . 
 Additionally , the famous 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) boardwalk at the oceanfront is often packed with fascinating entertainment , outdoor cafes , concerts and people . Made of concrete , the boardwalk links forty hotels and other attractions and has a bike path . 
 Naval Aviation Monument Park was formally dedicated on May 6 , 2006 , by the Hampton Roads Squadron of the Naval Aviation Foundation Association . Planned since 1997 in partnership with the City of Virginia Beach , the park features heroic @-@ scale statuary and reliefs to tell the history of Naval Aviation . 
 Pleasure House Point is an 118 acres ( 48 hectares ) park of undeveloped land on the shore of the Lynnhaven River . Located just south of the <unk> Bridge and the Chesapeake Bay , it 's includes oyster beds , wetlands and a maritime forest . The location was the site of a planned condo development that collapsed in 2008 . It was acquired by the City of Virginia Beach with help from the Trust for Public Land and the Chesapeake Bay Foundation in 2012 . It is one of the largest undeveloped parcels of land on the Lynnhaven River and will be preserved for future generations . It is also the location of the Brock Environmental Center which provides hands @-@ on educational programs for students to learn about the Chesapeake Bay . 
 Lastly , of course , are the city 's abundant and ample indoor recreational facilities , which often include basketball and racquetball courts , weight and fitness training rooms , and olympic sized swimming pools . These centers also play host to many special programs for children , youth and adults . The Bayside facility , for example , offers classes in yoga and pilates , as well as various types and styles of dance , not to mention seasonal offerings for young children and senior citizens . 
 Virginia Beach 's extensive park system is recognized as one of the best in the United States . In its 2013 ParkScore ranking , The Trust for Public Land reported that Virginia Beach had the 8th best park system among the 50 most populous U.S. cities . ParkScore ranks city park systems by a formula that analyzes the city ’ s median park size , park acres as percent of city area , the percent of city residents within a half @-@ mile of a park , spending of park services per resident , and the number of playgrounds per 10 @,@ 000 residents . 
 = = Government = = 
 Virginia Beach was chartered as a municipal corporation by the General Assembly of Virginia on January 1 , 1963 . The city currently operates under the council – manager form of government . The city does not fall under the jurisdiction of a county government , due to state law . Rather , it functions as an independent city and operates as a political subdivision of the state . 
 The city 's legislative body consists of an eleven @-@ member city council . The city manager is appointed by the council and acts as the chief executive officer . Through his staff , he implements policies established by the council . 
 Members of the city council normally serve four @-@ year terms and are elected on a staggered basis in non @-@ partisan elections . Beginning in 2008 , general elections are held the first Tuesday in November in even @-@ numbered years . In previous years , elections were held the first Tuesday in May in even @-@ numbered years . All registered voters are eligible to vote for all council members . Three council members and the mayor serve on an at @-@ large basis . All others are elected by district ( and must live in the district they represent ) : Bayside , Beach , Centerville , Kempsville , Lynnhaven , Princess Anne , and Rose Hall . 
 The mayor is elected to a four @-@ year term through direct election . The mayor presides over city council meetings , and serves as the ceremonial head and spokesperson of the city . A vice mayor is also elected by the city council at the first meeting following a council election . The current mayor of Virginia Beach is Will <unk> , a Republican . 
 Citizens of Virginia Beach also elect five constitutional officers , and candidates for these offices are permitted to run with an affiliated political party . Three of these offices deal substantially with public safety and justice : the sheriff , commonwealth 's attorney , and the clerk of the circuit court . The two other offices are concerned with fiscal policy : the city treasurer and the commissioner of the revenue . 
 Virginia Beach is located in the Virginia 's 2nd congressional district , served by U.S. Representative Scott <unk> ( Republican ) . 
 = = Education = = 
 According to the U.S. Census , 28 @.@ 1 % of the population over twenty @-@ five ( vs. a national average of 24 % ) hold a bachelor 's degree or higher , and 90 @.@ 4 % ( vs. 80 % nationally ) have a high school diploma or equivalent . 
 The city of Virginia Beach is home to Virginia Beach City Public Schools , one of the largest school systems in the state ( based on student enrollment ) . Virginia Beach City Public Schools currently serves 69 @,@ 735 students , and includes 56 elementary schools , 14 middle schools , 12 high schools which include Landstown , Princess Anne , Green Run , Green Run Collegiate , Cox , <unk> , Salem , First Colonial , <unk> , Kempsville , Bayside , and Ocean Lakes High Schools as well as a number of secondary / post @-@ secondary specialty schools and centers such as the Advanced Technology Center ( ATC ) , which provides excellent courses for those trying to gain a place in the technology field . Ocean Lakes maintains a rigorous math and science academy ; Bayside houses a health sciences academy , with courses in medical microbiology , genetic medicine , and pathophysiology . Salem High school houses the Visual and Performing Arts Academy , preparing students for jobs in the Fine and Performing Arts . Landstown High School contains a Technology Academy , which helps prepare students for jobs in Business Marketing , Information Technology , and / or Engineering . First Colonial High School is home to the Legal Studies Academy , with courses such as Forensic Science , Intro to Law , and Legal Research and Writing , preparing students for jobs in the law field . <unk> High School has recently founded a world studies academy , and Princess Anne , the oldest high school in the city , is an International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme school . Specialized courses are offered at all these academies , even though they occasionally overlap courses offered at other specialized centers , such as Landstown and the ATC — less than 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away . 
 There are also a number of private , independent schools in the city , including Norfolk Academy , Our Lady of Mount Carmel Catholic School and Parish , The Hebrew Academy of Tidewater , Cape Henry Collegiate School , Bishop Sullivan Catholic High School ( formerly Norfolk Catholic ) , <unk> Pines School , and Virginia Beach Friends School . 
 Virginia Beach is home to two universities : Regent University , a private university founded by Christian evangelist and leader Pat Robertson , which has historically focused on graduate education but has recently established an undergraduate program as well . Atlantic University , associated with the Edgar Cayce organization , the Association for Research and Enlightenment ( ARE ) , offers M.A. degrees in <unk> Studies , with many New Age subjects thanks to its Edgar Cayce link . Old Dominion University and Norfolk State University are in nearby Norfolk and both the University of Virginia and Virginia Tech operate satellite campuses in Virginia Beach . Tidewater Community College , a major junior college , also has its largest campus located in the city . Virginia Wesleyan College , a private liberal arts college , is located on the border with Norfolk with the physical address of the school being in Norfolk , but the majority of the campus being in Virginia Beach . <unk> College of Technology main campus is located here as well . Additional institutions of higher education are located in other communities of greater Hampton Roads . 
 The Virginia Beach Public Library System provides free access to accurate and current information and materials to all individuals , and promotes reading as a critical life skill . The library supports the educational and leisure needs of Virginia Beach citizens with a system of area libraries , a Central Library , a <unk> , a virtual library , the South Rosemont Youth Library , the Wahab Public Law Library , the Municipal Reference Library and the Special Services for the Blind and Visually Handicapped . The Library has a collection of more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 items including special subject collections . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Virginian @-@ Pilot , based in Norfolk , is the daily newspaper for Virginia Beach . Other papers include Veer and the New Journal and Guide . Inside Business focuses on local business news . 
 Virginia Wesleyan College publishes its own newspaper , The Marlin Chronicle . 
 The Norfolk @-@ Virginia Beach area is served by a variety of radio stations on the FM and AM dials , with towers located around the Hampton Roads area . 
 Virginia Beach is also served by several television stations . The Norfolk @-@ Portsmouth @-@ Newport News designated market area ( DMA ) is the 42nd largest in the U.S. with 712 @,@ 790 homes ( 0 @.@ 64 % of the total U.S. ) . The major network television affiliates are WTKR @-@ TV 3 ( CBS ) , WAVY 10 ( NBC ) , WVEC @-@ TV 13 ( ABC ) , <unk> @-@ TV 21 ( Trinity Broadcasting Network ) , WGNT 27 ( CW ) , WTVZ 33 ( MyNetworkTV ) , WVBT 43 ( Fox ) , and WPXV 49 ( ION Television ) . The Public Broadcasting Service station is WHRO @-@ TV 15 . Virginia Beach residents also can receive independent station WSKY broadcasting on channel 4 from Camden County , North Carolina . Some can also receive PBS affiliate <unk> 2 ( UNC @-@ TV ) , Home Shopping Network affiliate <unk> @-@ D from Portsmouth , <unk> Network religious television station <unk> @-@ LD TV 25 from Chesapeake and RTV affiliate WGBS @-@ LD broadcasting on channel 7 from Hampton . Virginia Beach is served by Cox Cable . DirecTV and Dish Network are also popular as an alternative to cable television in Virginia Beach . In addition a large portion of the city is served by Verizon <unk> 
 Virginia Beach serves as the headquarters for the Christian Broadcasting Network , located adjacent to Regent University . CBN 's most notable program , The 700 Club originates from the Virginia Beach studios . In 2008 , Virginia Beach became the home to the Reel Dreams Film Festival . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Virginia Beach is primarily served by the Norfolk International Airport ( IATA : ORF , ICAO : KORF , FAA LID : ORF ) , which is now the region 's major commercial airport . The airport is located near Chesapeake Bay , along the city limits straddling neighboring Norfolk . Seven airlines provide nonstop services to twenty five destinations . ORF had 3 @,@ 703 @,@ 664 passengers take off or land at its facility and 68 @,@ 778 @,@ 934 pounds of cargo were processed through its facilities . Newport News / Williamsburg International Airport also provides commercial air service for the Hampton Roads area . The Chesapeake Regional Airport provides general aviation services and is located five miles ( 8 km ) outside the city limits . Virginia Beach is served by Amtrak through the Norfolk and Newport News stations , via connecting buses . The Norfolk line runs southwest toward Suffolk , Virginia , then turns northwest toward Petersburg , Richmond ( Staples Mill Road ) , and points beyond . The Newport News line runs west along the Virginia Peninsula to Williamsburg , Richmond ( via the downtown Main Street and the suburban Staples Mill Road stations ) , and points beyond . A high @-@ speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor are also under study . 
 Greyhound / Trailways provides service from a central bus terminal in adjacent Norfolk . The Greyhound station in Virginia Beach is located on <unk> Road , about a mile west of the oceanfront . Bus services to New York City via the Chinatown bus , Today 's Bus , is located on Newtown Road . 
 The city is connected to I @-@ 64 via I @-@ 264 , which runs from the oceanfront , intersects with I @-@ 64 on the east side of Norfolk , and continues through downtown Norfolk and Portsmouth until rejoining I @-@ 64 at the terminus of both roads in Chesapeake where Interstate 664 completes the loop which forms the Hampton Roads Beltway . Travelers to and from Virginia Beach can access the Hampton Roads Beltway in either direction from I @-@ 264 in Norfolk to use a choice of the two bridge @-@ tunnel facilities to cross Hampton Roads to reach the Peninsula , Williamsburg , Richmond and points north . Other major roads include Virginia Beach Boulevard ( U.S. Route 58 ) , Shore Drive ( U.S. Route 60 ) , which connects to Atlantic Avenue at the oceanfront , Northampton Blvd ( U.S. Route 13 ) , Princess Anne Road ( State Route 165 ) , Indian River Road ( former State Route 603 ) , Lynnhaven Parkway , Independence Boulevard , General Booth Boulevard , and Nimmo Parkway . Streets in the oceanfront hotel and entertainment district are arranged in a fairly regular , grid like pattern , with Atlantic Avenue parallel to the shoreline , then Pacific Avenue , and Arctic Avenue going further inland . 
 The city is also connected to Virginia 's Eastern Shore region via the Chesapeake Bay Bridge @-@ Tunnel ( CBBT ) , which is the longest bridge @-@ tunnel complex in the world and known as one of the Seven Engineering Wonders of the Modern World . The CBBT , a tolled facility carries U.S. Route 13 . 
 Transportation within the city , as well as the rest of Hampton Roads is served by a regional bus service , Hampton Roads Transit . An extension of The Tide light rail system from Norfolk to the oceanfront is currently being studied . 
 = = = = Walkability = = = = 
 A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Virginia Beach 39th most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Water and sewer services are provided by the City 's Department of Utilities . Virginia Beach receives its electricity from Dominion Virginia Power which has local sources including the Chesapeake Energy Center ( a gas power plant ) , coal @-@ fired plants in Chesapeake and Southampton County , and the Surry Nuclear Power Plant . Norfolk headquartered Virginia Natural Gas , a subsidiary of AGL Resources , distributes natural gas to the City from storage plants in James City County and Chesapeake . 
 Virginia Beach receives its water from Lake Gaston . The Virginia Tidewater area has grown faster than the local freshwater supply . The river water has always been salty , and fresh groundwater is no longer available in most areas . Currently , water for the Tidewater area is pumped from Lake Gaston , which straddles the Virginia @-@ North Carolina border along with the Blackwater and Nottoway rivers . The pipeline is 76 miles ( 122 km ) long and 60 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 mm ) in diameter . Much of its follows the former right @-@ of @-@ way of an abandoned portion of the Virginian Railway . It is capable of pumping 60 million gallons of water per day ( <unk> ) , Norfolk and Chesapeake are partners in the project . 
 The City provides wastewater services for residents and transports wastewater to the regional Hampton Roads Sanitation District treatment plants . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Virginia Beach is served by Sentara Virginia Beach General Hospital and Sentara Princess Anne Hospital . Sentara Bayside Hospital has been modified to a stand alone Emergency Department and outpatient treatment center , now known as Sentara Independence . Sentara Leigh Hospital is just across the city line in Norfolk . Beach Health clinic offers basic medical services for uninsured residents of Virginia Beach . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Mark Ruffalo , actor known for his role as Bruce Banner AKA Hulk in the Avengers series 
 Missy Elliott , rapper , singer , songwriter , producer , dancer 
 Felicia Barton , semi @-@ finalist on American Idol 
 Genesis the <unk> , artist , creative , poet , writer 
 Rudy Boesch , contestant on Survivor 
 Curtis Bush , kickboxer 
 Gabby Douglas , Olympic gymnast 
 Herman Goldner , mayor of St. Petersburg , Florida 
 Percy Harvin , NFL player 
 BJ <unk> , composer of themes for NPR shows 
 Marc Leishman , professional golfer 
 Bob McDonnell , Governor of Virginia 
 <unk> Murray , IFBB professional bodybuilder 
 Juice Newton , singer , songwriter 
 Pusha T , rapper 
 J.R. Reid , NBA player 
 Pat Robertson , television preacher 
 Scott Sizemore , MLB player 
 Chris Taylor , MLB player 
 Timbaland , rapper , singer , record producer 
 Matthew E. White , songwriter and producer 
 Pharrell Williams , rapper , singer , record producer , composer and fashion designer 
 Ryan Zimmerman , MLB player 
 Rhea <unk> , actress best known for her roll as Kim Wexler in Better Call Saul . 
 Nay Nay , rapper , songwriter 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Virginia Beach Sister Cities are : 
 Bangor , Northern Ireland , United Kingdom 
 Miyazaki , Miyazaki Prefecture , Kyūshū , Japan 
 Moss , Norway 
 San Juan del Sur , Nicaragua 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 2015 , in honor of the game 's 80th birthday , Hasbro held an online vote in order to determine which cities would make it into an updated version of the Monopoly Here and Now : The US Edition of the game . Virginia Beach , Virginia received the fourth highest number of votes in the online contest , earning it a green spot on the board . The top Boardwalk spot went to Pierre , South Dakota . 
 = Sind sparrow = 
 The Sind sparrow ( Passer pyrrhonotus ) is a passerine bird of the sparrow family Passeridae , found around the Indus valley region in South Asia . It is also known as the jungle , Sind jungle , or rufous @-@ backed sparrow . Very similar to the related house sparrow , it is smaller and has distinguishing plumage features . As in the house sparrow , the male has brighter plumage than female and young birds , including black markings and a grey crown . <unk> , the male has a chestnut stripe running down its head behind the eye , and the female has a darker head than other sparrow species do . Its main vocalisations are soft chirping calls that are extended into longer songs with other sounds interspersed by breeding males . Historically , this species was thought to be very closely related to the house sparrow , but its closest evolutionary affinities may lie elsewhere . Discovered around 1840 , this species went undetected for several decades after its discovery . 
 Within its Indus valley breeding range in Pakistan and western India , the Sind sparrow is patchily distributed in riverine and wetland habitats with thorny scrub and tall grass . During the non @-@ breeding season , some birds enter drier habitats as they disperse short distances from their breeding habitat , or migrate into western Pakistan and the extreme east of Iran . Since this species is fairly common and expanding its range , it is assessed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . The Sind sparrow is social within small groups while feeding and breeding , and during its winter dispersal . It feeds mostly on seeds and less often on insects , foraging close to the ground . Nests are made in the branches of thorny trees , and are untidy globular masses constructed from grass or other plant matter and lined with softer material . Both sexes are involved in building the nest and caring for the young , and usually raise two clutches of three to five young each breeding season . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Sind sparrow is very similar to the house sparrow , and both sexes resemble their counterparts of that species , but it is slightly smaller and males and females each have features that distinguish them as Sind sparrows . The Sind sparrow is 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long , while the common South Asian subspecies of the house sparrow , Passer domesticus indicus , is about 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . Wingspans range from 6 @.@ 2 to 7 @.@ 0 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 8 in ) , tails from 4 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) , and tarsi measure 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 75 in ) . 
 The breeding male has a short and narrow black bib and a broad chestnut eye stripe that does not meet the mantle . The male has a grey crown and nape and a rufous lower back and rump . The female has a darker and greyer crown and cheek than the female house sparrow and the shoulder is darker chestnut . The female Dead Sea sparrow of the subspecies Passer moabiticus <unk> is also similar to the female Sind sparrow , but has yellow tinges on the underparts and sometimes on parts of the head . The bill is black on the breeding male and pale brown on the non @-@ breeding male and female . With a culmen length of 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 43 – 0 @.@ 51 in ) , the Sind sparrow is slightly smaller @-@ billed than the house sparrow . 
 The Sind sparrow 's chirping <unk> call is softer , less strident , and higher pitched than that of the house sparrow , and is easily distinguished . The song of breeding males includes <unk> interspersed with grating t @-@ r @-@ r @-@ rt notes and short warbles or whistles . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Sind sparrow was first formally described by Edward Blyth , from a specimen collected by Alexander Burnes at Bahawalpur in around 1840 . Blyth 's description was published in an issue of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal which , although dated 1844 , was published only in 1845 . It was not recorded until 36 years later , despite the efforts of noted ornithologists Allan Octavian Hume in Sindh and William Thomas Blanford in eastern Iran . This was probably because of its general similarity to the house sparrow , though additionally , Blyth 's description of the species incorrectly described its rump feathers as maroon , and a description by Thomas C. Jerdon contained similar errors . Commenting on his unsuccessful search , Hume wrote that the hundreds of house sparrows he killed in pursuit of the Sind sparrow " ought to form a heavy load " on Blyth 's conscience , and that if the Sind sparrow existed " it would be only decent for it ... to put on an appearance with as little delay as possible " . Hume doubted its distinction , as did other ornithologists . The Sind sparrow was rediscovered by Scrope <unk> Doig in 1880 , in the Eastern Nara district . Ernst Hartert considered it a subspecies of the house sparrow , Passer domesticus pyrrhonotus , in his Die <unk> der <unk> Fauna , but Doig and Claud Ticehurst both found that the two species bred in the same areas without interbreeding . 
 The specific epithet of the Sind sparrow , pyrrhonotus , comes from the Greek purrhos ( " flame @-@ coloured " ) , and <unk> ( " <unk> " ) . E. C. Stuart Baker suggested the English name rufous @-@ backed sparrow , but as this name might cause confusion with other species , Ticehurst suggested the name Sind jungle @-@ sparrow , which became the accepted name for the species . This name refers to Sindh , a province now in Pakistan which makes up a large part of the Sind sparrow 's range , and the jungle habitat of the bird ( in the word 's original sense of tangled dry thicket ) . This name is shortened to jungle sparrow or Sind sparrow , of which the first was used in the IOC World Bird List , until Sind sparrow was adopted in 2009 . 
 The Sind sparrow is a member of the genus Passer , which contains the house sparrow and around twenty other species . In a 1936 review of the house sparrow 's relatives , German ornithologist Wilhelm Meise suggested that the Sind sparrow evolved from an isolated population of house sparrows , noting that the Indus valley is a centre of small bird types . British ornithologist J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith considered the Sind sparrow to be part of the " Palaearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrow " group including the house sparrow , though not one with a particularly close relationship with the house sparrow . Summer @-@ Smith suggested that these species separated 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago , during the last glacial period , when sparrows would have been isolated in ice @-@ free refugia , such as the Indus River Delta , where he thought the Sind sparrow evolved . However , studies of mitochondrial DNA indicate an earlier origin of Passer species , with speciation occurring as early as the late Miocene and early Pliocene , about 5 million years ago . Hume and Ticehurst observed a resemblance , and a possible relation , between the Sind sparrow and the Dead Sea sparrow of the Middle East and Balochistan . William Robert Ogilvie @-@ Grant and Henry Ogg Forbes saw a resemblance to the Abd al @-@ Kuri sparrow , endemic to the island of Abd al @-@ Kuri , in their 1899 description of that species , noted upon by Guy M. Kirwan in a 2008 study . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Sind sparrow has a restricted distribution , primarily occurring within the Indus valley of Pakistan , and the lower parts of the tributaries of the Indus in the Punjab region . Its distribution extends from the Indus Delta north to the Kabul River near Nowshera and the Jhelum near <unk> Noon , extending east into India as far as the Delhi area . It also breeds locally in parts of Pakistan 's western province of Balochistan , and has been recorded several times in south @-@ eastern Iran . The Sind sparrow is somewhat common in its restricted breeding range , and no threats are known to the survival of the species , so it is assessed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 During winter , it often makes short distance movements , and some birds move into parts of western Pakistan and an adjoining corner of Iran , and less commonly north @-@ western Gujarat , India . Longer movements may occur , as suggested by a possible sighting in the United Arab Emirates in November 2000 . 
 It mostly breeds in acacia and tamarisk scrub and tall grass , invariably near rivers or other wetlands . The construction and expansion of irrigation canals has increased its habitat in Sindh , and helped it extend its range into the Yamuna floodplain and parts of Rajasthan , India . It may breed around rice paddies and other fields , or human habitations , provided that there is enough cover and suitable nesting sites . In winter , it moves away from its main riverine habitat , and into drier thickets characterised by Salvadora and Capparis bushes , but never moves too far from water . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The Sind sparrow is gregarious , generally forming small groups of four to six birds while feeding . It tends to breed in loose colonies of a few pairs , and non @-@ breeding birds may gather to roost in acacias or tamarisks near water . During winter , the non @-@ breeding season , it forms larger flocks of as many as 30 birds , and joins flocks with other seed @-@ eating birds , such as house sparrows and red <unk> . The Sind sparrow feeds mainly on the seeds of grasses and other plants such as Polygonum <unk> . It may also forage for insects such as caterpillars , especially to feed nestlings . Flocks forage on flats alongside rivers , flying into nearby bushes and continuing to forage when disturbed . 
 Nesting occurs during a period of several months between April to September , the timing depending on rainfall , during which two clutches are raised by most pairs . Sind sparrows build nests in the upper branches of thorny trees or the ends of thin branches hanging over water . The nest is an untidy dome of grass and other plant matter , such as tamarisk twigs , roots , and reeds , with a diameter of about 9 to 18 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) . The nest has an entrance located higher up on the sides , is somewhat flat on top , and is lined with softer plant material and feathers . The birds may sometimes build below the nests of egrets or extend the nest of a <unk> weaver or pied myna . Both the male and female take part in nest building and incubation . Clutches typically contain three to five eggs . Scrope Doig described the eggs as being markedly smaller than the house sparrow 's , measuring 0 @.@ 7 × 0 @.@ 5 in ( 1 @.@ 3 × 1 @.@ 8 cm ) and similarly greenish or greyish with highly variable blotches , striations , and other markings . 
 = The Mummy ( 1911 film ) = 
 The Mummy is a 1911 American silent short film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film details the story of Jack Thornton , a businessman , who is in love with Professor Dix 's daughter . Jack purchases a mummy and plans to win his respect as an Egyptologist , but the mummy is reanimated in Jack 's room by a live electrical wire . The mummy takes immediate interest in Jack , but is rejected and <unk> him . Before Professor Dix can cut up the now @-@ mummified Jack , she returns and saves him . Jack explains everything and the film concludes with Professor Dix marrying the mummy . The production was one of several films of the same name produced in 1911 and was met with favorable reviews . The film is presumed to be lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The original synopsis of the film was published in the Moving Picture World as follows : " Professor Dix has won fame as a scientist and has collected many objects of Egyptian ware , centuries old , that arouse the enthusiasm of his associates . Even Jack Thornton , an active , go @-@ ahead young businessman , is interested in the professor 's home , but although he tries to pretend it is Egyptology which interests him , the professor 's fair young daughter is really the lodestone . Jack decides to win the old man 's respect by posing as an Egyptologist himself . To start his collection , he purchases a mummy at an auction sale , and takes it home expecting that later he can make a great hit with his sweetheart 's father , by presenting it to him as a gift . While the mummy is in Jack 's room , a live electric wire is by accident brought in contact with it . The body has been so perfectly mummified , that the electric current is all that is necessary to ignite the vital spark , and Jack is amazed to see dancing forth from the case which he thought contained only unattractive rags and bones , a beautiful Egyptian princess . As soon as she is released , the mummy makes violent love to Jack , and causes his sweetheart to quarrel with him ( for how can a plain businessman explain the presence in his room of a beautiful barbarian ? ) . When her love is spurned , the visitor from the distant past avenges herself by having Jack made into a mummy and placed in the case in her stead . Her heart relents , however , in time to save him from being ' cut up ' by the professor , who with the sharp knife , starts to investigate the contents of the mummy case . But all ends happily when Jack 's plain statements of the seemingly impossible facts are proved true by the professor . Jack is reunited to his sweetheart , and the professor , being a widower , also an ardent admirer of everything antique , leads the recreated Egyptian lady to the altar , in spite of the fact that there is a difference of several thousand years in their ages . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Garwood as Jack 
 Harry Benham likely as Professor Dix 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . According to Bowers the cast credits are unknown , but many Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . Though a production still shows William Russell in the film . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 The film was given the production code number 191 and had a code word of " Mum " . A catalog listed the film 's length at 995 feet . The film 's expected run @-@ time was fifteen minutes and was billed by the Thanhouser Company as having many novelties and being of a comedic nature . It was released on March 7 , 1911 and listed as a drama by the Moving Picture World . It was distributed by the Motion Picture Distributing and Sales Company . The production came during a time of renewed interest in Egyptology in which Pathé and Urban Films would release their own films titled The Mummy . This would be followed by Essanay Studios in 1912 with the release of When Soul Meets Soul and Gaumont Film Company 's The Vengeance of Egypt . The film had a unique special effect in which the bodies of the cast dissolve and take an aerial flight to Egypt at the end of the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film has had known viewings across several states , including Wisconsin , Pennsylvania , and Kansas . An advertisement for the Lyric Theater in Indiana noted the film 's debut , but unambiguously included notes for " Miss Hawthorne " and " Dot Washburn " on the bill . Both Miss Hawthorne and Dot Washburn were not credited in the film in any source and were likely other acts in part of the theater 's bill for March 7 , 1911 . 
 A review in the Moving Picture World confirmed that the novelty of a " mummy walking out of a case as an Egyptian Princess is sufficiently unusual to create interest , and this interest is increased when , after the young man has spurned her love , she forces him into the case and he becomes a mummy . " Another review more generically reflected on the production as being " exceptionally good as to photography , acting , staging " alongside other productions . Three other reviews in the The Billboard , The New York Dramatic Mirror and The Morning Telegraph were all positive with emphasis on the special effects . 
 Pantelis <unk> and Maria Wyke 's book The Ancient World in Silent Cinema provides additional nuance in noting the film 's erotic underpinnings in which the past is bridged to the present through marriage to the re @-@ animated Egyptian princess . The film has erroneously been claimed to be the earliest " Mummy " -themed film , but The Monster Book notes films including Robbing Cleopatra 's Tomb from 1899 and La <unk> du roi in 1909 as earlier examples . The film is presumed to be lost . 
 = Peter Ostrum = 
 Peter Gardner Ostrum ( / <unk> <unk> / ; ) ( born November 1957 ) is an American former child actor whose only film role was as Charlie Bucket in the 1971 motion picture Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory . 
 A native of Cleveland , Ostrum was 12 years old when selected by talent agents for Willy Wonka . Though he enjoyed the experience of shooting the film , he opted not to sign a three @-@ film contract when it was over . After eschewing a career in film and theatre , Ostrum became reluctant to speak about his one starring role . In 1990 , he began an annual tradition of speaking to schoolchildren about the film , and he became a subject of interest again when 2005 's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was released in theaters . 
 Ostrum became interested in horses when he returned from shooting Willy Wonka , and was particularly influenced by the veterinarian that tended to them . Receiving his Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine in 1984 , Ostrum now practices and lives in Lowville , New York , with his wife Loretta ( née <unk> ) , and two children : his son Leif and daughter <unk> . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 Ostrum was in the sixth grade and performing at the Cleveland Play House children 's theatre , when he was noticed by talent agents who were searching nationwide for the actor to portray Charlie Bucket in Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory . The agents took Polaroid photos of Ostrum and recorded him reading from the original novel , then returned to New York . Two months later Ostrum was called to New York for a screen test where he sang " My Country , ' Tis of Thee " , and a month after that he was contacted and given ten days to prepare to leave for filming . 
 In 2000 , Ostrum recalled that shooting Willy Wonka in Munich was " sort of like being an exchange student for five months " . Fond memories of his five months in West Germany included watching the construction of Olympiapark , Munich , for the 1972 Summer Olympics , and working with Gene Wilder and Jack Albertson . Though in his audition he had been assured that his singing would probably be cut and dubbed , it was Ostrum 's own singing voice that made it to the screen — albeit significantly cut . In a 2011 interview , Ostrum told the story of how director Mel Stuart gave him a clapperboard from the film , and then forgot he had done so ; it is Ostrum 's only souvenir from the set . After he finished shooting Willy Wonka , the then 13 @-@ year @-@ old Ostrum declined the offer of a three @-@ film contract , later recalling that " [ e ] verybody thinks that acting is such a glamorous profession , but it 's a difficult profession . " 
 = = = Lasting effect = = = 
 In his senior year , Ostrum was involved in film class and , at the interest of one of his instructors , looked back into theatre and acting . After auditioning for , but not landing , several roles ( including Equus on Broadway ) , Ostrum decided not to pursue it further . After putting his short film career behind him , Ostrum declined reporters and interviews , preferring not to speak on the subject ; " I wanted people to judge me on who I was , not what I ’ d done " . For some time , Ostrum even lied and told people that his brother , and not he , had starred in the film . It took Ostrum years after moving to Lowville before he told anybody there about his one @-@ time stardom ; even his wife Loretta did not know about his role until he warned her about it just before she met his mother . 
 In 1990 , he was invited to speak to students at Lowville Academy by teacher Carol Reed , and has since spoken to students there once a year — on the last day of school , as a special treat — about his experience in the film Willy Wonka as well as his work in veterinary medicine . About the film , the students chiefly ask about the special effects , and Ostrum describes to them " what happened to Veruca , how did Violet blow up like a blueberry , how did Charlie fly with Grandpa Joe , all those types of questions . " Ostrum has been called " the most famous man in Lowville " , where the local video rental shop has twice worn out its VHS copy of Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory . 
 In October 2000 , Ostrum and some of his co @-@ stars from the film were scheduled to record an audio commentary for a special edition DVD . 
 In the run @-@ up to the release of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory in 2005 , Ostrum garnered a spate of attention that included seeing the film in New York City with NPR as well as being included in VH1 's list of " 100 Greatest Kid Stars " ( placing 78th ) . On the new film , Ostrum quoted fellow Wonka actor Julie Dawn Cole , saying that " It 's sort of like going back to a house that you once lived in and it 's been redecorated . " Ultimately , the media attention was so pervasive that Ostrum stopped answering his phone , and requested " please , no more interviews . " 
 In January 2009 , Ostrum teamed up with Dunkin ' Donuts to hand out free rides on the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority ( MBTA ) at South Station in Boston , Massachusetts ; Ostrum 's participation connected the MBTA 's <unk> he was handing out with his portrayal of Charlie Bucket in Willy Wonka . The promotion also gave out one " golden ticket " , worth unlimited rides on MBTA and unlimited Dunkin ' Donuts coffee for 2009 . 
 In a 2010 interview , Wonka co @-@ star Denise Nickerson ( Violet Beauregarde ) revealed that Ostrum had agreed to join her and Paris <unk> ( Wonka 's Mike <unk> ) for a reunion commemorating the 40th anniversary of the film 's release in 2011 . 
 = = Veterinary career = = 
 Soon after Ostrum returned home from filming Willy Wonka , his family acquired a horse ; while the teenaged Ostrum was interested in the horse , it was the animal 's veterinarian that left a lasting impression on him . Taking a hiatus from school between high school and college , Ostrum groomed horses and worked at the Delaware Equine Center in Pennsylvania . Ostrum contemplated a return to Hollywood , and even visited California for a week to " test the waters " there . He ultimately decided to pursue a degree in veterinary medicine instead , feeling that he would forever berate himself if he didn 't . In 1984 , Peter Ostrum received his Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine . 
 As of November 2015 , Dr. Ostrum worked out of the Countryside Veterinary Clinic in Lowville , New York , where he works mainly with horses and cows . He has taken part in the video series Veterinarians on Call , funded by Pfizer , highlighting the work of large animal veterinarians . 
 = Battle of Princeton = 
 The Battle of Princeton ( January 3 , 1777 ) was a pivotal battle in which General George Washington 's revolutionary forces defeated British forces near Princeton , New Jersey . 
 On the night of January 2 , 1777 George Washington , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Continental Army , repulsed a British attack at the Battle of the Assunpink Creek in Trenton . That night , he evacuated his position , circled around General Lord Cornwallis ' army , and went to attack the British garrison at Princeton . Brigadier General Hugh Mercer of the Continental Army clashed with two regiments under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Charles Mawhood of the British Army . Mercer and his troops were overrun and Washington sent some militia under Brigadier General John Cadwalader to help him . The militia , on seeing the flight of Mercer 's men , also began to flee . Washington rode up with reinforcements and rallied the fleeing militia . He then led the attack on Mawhood 's troops , driving them back . Mawhood gave the order to retreat and most of the troops tried to flee to Cornwallis in Trenton . 
 In Princeton itself , Brigadier General John Sullivan encouraged some British troops who had taken refuge in Nassau Hall to surrender , ending the battle . After the battle , Washington moved his army to Morristown , and with their third defeat in 10 days , the British evacuated southern New Jersey . With the victory at Princeton , morale rose in the American ranks and more men began to enlist in the army . The battle ( while considered minor by British standards ) was the last major action of Washington 's winter New Jersey campaign . 
 Part of the site of the battle is now Princeton Battlefield State Park , a National Historic Landmark . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Victories at Trenton = = = 
 On the night of December 25 – 26 , 1776 General George Washington , Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Continental Army , led 2 @,@ 400 men across the Delaware River . After a nine @-@ mile march , they seized the town of Trenton on the morning of the 26th , killing or wounding over 100 Hessians and capturing 900 more . Soon after capturing the town , Washington led the army back across the Delaware into Pennsylvania . On the 29th , Washington once again led the army across the river , and established a defensive position at Trenton . On the 31st , Washington appealed to his men , whose enlistments expired at the end of the year , " Stay for just six more weeks for an extra bounty of ten dollars . " His appeal worked , and most of the men agreed to stay . Also , that day , Washington learned that Congress had voted to give him wide @-@ ranging powers for six months that are often described as dictatorial . 
 In response to the loss at Trenton , General Lord Cornwallis left New York City and reassembled a British force of more than 9 @,@ 000 at Princeton to oppose Washington . Leaving 1 @,@ 200 men under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Charles Mawhood at Princeton , Cornwallis left Princeton on January 2 in command of 8 @,@ 000 men to attack Washington 's army of 6 @,@ 000 troops . Washington sent troops to skirmish with the approaching British to delay their advance . It was almost nightfall by the time the British reached Trenton . After three failed attempts to cross the bridge over the Assunpink Creek , beyond which were the primary American defenses , Cornwallis called off the attack until the next day . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 During the night , Washington called a council of war and asked his officers whether they should stand and fight , attempt to cross the river somewhere , or take the backroads to attack Princeton . Although the idea had already occurred to Washington , he learned from Arthur St. Clair and John Cadwalader that his plan to attack Princeton was indeed possible . Two intelligence collection efforts , both of which came to fruition at the end of December 1776 , supported such a surprise attack . After consulting with his officers , they agreed that the best option was to attack Princeton . 
 Washington ordered that the excess baggage be taken to Burlington where it could be sent to Pennsylvania . The ground had frozen , making it possible to move the artillery without it sinking into the ground . By midnight , the plan was complete , with the baggage on its way to Burlington and the guns wrapped in heavy cloth to stifle noise and prevent the British from learning of the evacuation . Washington left 500 men behind with two cannon to patrol , keep the fires burning , and to work with picks and shovels to make the British think that they were digging in . Before dawn , these men were to join up with the main army . 
 By 2 : 00 AM the entire army was in motion roughly along Quaker Bridge Road through what is now Hamilton Township . The men were ordered to march with absolute silence . Along the way , a rumor was spread that they were surrounded and some frightened militiamen fled for Philadelphia . The march was difficult , as some of the route ran through thick woods and it was icy , causing horses to slip , and men to break through ice on ponds . 
 = = = Plan of attack = = = 
 As dawn came , the army approached a stream called Stony Brook . The road the army took followed Stony Brook for a mile farther until it intersected the Post Road from Trenton to Princeton . However , off to the right of this road , there was an unused road which crossed the farmland of Thomas Clark . The road was not visible from the Post Road , and ran through cleared land to a stretch from which the town could be entered at any point because the British had left it undefended . 
 However , Washington was running behind schedule as he had planned to attack and capture the British outposts before dawn and capture the garrison shortly afterward . By the time dawn broke he was still two miles from the town . Washington sent 350 men under the command of Hugh Mercer to destroy the bridge over Stony Creek in order to delay Cornwallis 's army when he found out that Washington had escaped . Shortly before 8 : 00 AM , Washington wheeled the rest of the army to the right down the unused road . First in the column went General John Sullivan 's division consisting of Arthur St. Clair 's and Isaac Sherman 's brigades . Following them were John Cadwalader 's brigade and then Daniel Hitchcock 's . 
 = = = Mawhood 's reaction = = = 
 Cornwallis had sent orders to Mawhood to bring the 17th and 55th British regiments to join his army in the morning . Mawhood had moved out from Princeton to fulfill these orders when his troops climbed the hill south of Stony Brook and sighted the main American army . Unable to figure out the size of the American army due to the wooded hills , he sent a rider to warn the 40th British Regiment which he had left in Princeton , then wheeled the 17th and 55th Regiments around and headed back to Princeton . That day , Mawhood had called off the patrol which was to reconnoiter the area from which Washington was approaching . 
 Mercer received word that Mawhood was leading his troops back across the bridge and back to Princeton . Mercer , on orders from Washington , moved his column to the right in order to hit the British before they could confront Washington 's main army . Mercer moved towards Mawhood 's rear but when he realized he would not be able to cut off Mawhood in time , he decided to join Sullivan . When Mawhood learned that Mercer was in his rear and moving to join Sullivan , Mawhood detached part of the 55th Regiment to join the 40th Regiment in the town and then moved the rest of the 55th , the 17th , fifty cavalry and two artillery pieces to attack Mercer . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Mawhood overruns Mercer = = = 
 Mawhood ordered his light troops to delay Mercer , while he brought up the other detachments . Mercer was walking through William Clark 's orchard when the British light troops appeared . The British light troops ' volley went high which gave time for Mercer to wheel his troops around into battle line . Mercer 's troops advanced , pushing back the British light troops . The Americans took up a position behind a fence at the upper end of the orchard . However , Mawhood had brought up his troops and his artillery . The American gunners opened fire first and for about ten minutes , the outnumbered American infantry exchanged fire with the British . However , many of the Americans had rifles which took longer to load than muskets . Mawhood ordered a bayonet charge and because many of the Americans had rifles , which could not be equipped with bayonets , they were overrun . Both of the Americans ' cannons were captured , and the British turned them on the fleeing troops . Mercer was surrounded by British soldiers and they shouted at him " Surrender you damn rebel ! " . Declining to ask for quarter , Mercer chose to resist instead . The British , thinking they had caught Washington , bayoneted him , and then left him for dead . Mercer 's second in command , Colonel John Haslet , was shot through the head and killed . 
 = = = Cadwalader 's arrival = = = 
 Fifty light infantry men were in pursuit of Mercer 's men when a fresh brigade of 1 @,@ 100 militiamen under the command of Cadwalader appeared . Mawhood gathered his men who were all over the battlefield and put them into battle line formation . Meanwhile , Sullivan was at a standoff with the detachment of the 55th Regiment that had come to assist the 40th Regiment , neither daring to move towards the main battle for risk of exposing its flank . Cadwalader attempted to move his men into a battle line but they had no combat experience and did not know even the most basic military maneuvers . When his men reached the top of the hill and saw Mercer 's men fleeing from the British , most of the militia turned around and ran back down the hill . 
 = = = Washington 's arrival = = = 
 As Cadwalader 's men began to flee , the American guns opened fire onto the British , who were preparing to attack , and the guns were able to hold them off for several minutes . Cadwalader was able to get one company to fire a volley but it fled immediately afterwards . At this point , Washington arrived with the Virginia Continentals and Edward Hand 's riflemen . Washington ordered the riflemen and the Virginians to take up a position on the right hand side of the hill and then Washington quickly rode over to Cadwalader 's fleeing men . Washington shouted , " Parade with us my brave fellows ! There is but a handful of the enemy and we shall have them directly ! " . Cadwalader 's men formed into battle formation at Washington 's direction . When Daniel Hitchcock 's New England Continentals arrived , Washington sent them to the right , where he had put the riflemen and the Virginians . 
 Washington , with his hat in his hand , rode forward and waved the Americans forward , while he rode ahead on his horse . At this point , Mawhood had moved his troops slightly to the left to get out of the range of the American artillery fire . Washington gave orders not to fire until he gave them the signal , and when they were thirty yards away , he turned around on his horse , facing his men and said " Halt ! " and then " Fire ! " . At this moment , the British also fired , obscuring the field in a cloud of smoke . One of Washington 's officers , John Fitzgerald , pulled his hat over his eyes to avoid seeing Washington killed , but when the smoke cleared , Washington appeared , unharmed , waving his men forward . 
 = = = British collapse = = = 
 On the right , Hitchcock 's New Englanders fired a volley and then advanced again , threatening to turn the British flank . The riflemen were slowly picking off British soldiers while the American artillery was firing grapeshot at the British lines . At this point , Hitchcock ordered his men to charge , and the British began to flee . The British attempted to save their artillery but the militia also charged , and Mawhood gave the order to retreat . The British fled towards the Post Road followed by the Americans and Washington , still angry from the <unk> call from Harlem Heights , shouted " It 's a fine fox chase my boys ! " . Some Americans had swarmed onto the Post Road in order to block to British retreat across the bridge , but Mawhood ordered a bayonet charge , and broke through the American lines , escaping across the bridge . Some of the Americans , Hand 's riflemen among them , continued to pursue the British , and Mawhood ordered his dragoons to buy them some time to retreat , however , the dragoons were pushed back . Some Americans continued to pursue the fleeing British until nightfall , killing some and taking some prisoner . After some time , Washington turned around and rode back to Princeton . 
 At the edge of town , the 55th Regiment received orders from Mawhood to fall back and join the 40th Regiment in town . The 40th had taken up a position just outside town , on the North side of a ravine . The 55th formed up to the left of the 40th . The 55th sent a platoon to flank the oncoming Americans , but it was cut to pieces . When Sullivan sent several regiments to scale the ravine , they fell back to a breastwork . After making a brief stand , the British fell back again , some leaving Princeton , and others taking up refuge in Nassau Hall . Alexander Hamilton brought three cannons up and had them blast away at the building . Then some Americans rushed the front door , broke it down , and the British put a white flag outside one of the windows . Exactly 194 British soldiers walked out of the building and laid down their arms . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After entering Princeton , the Americans began to loot the abandoned British supply wagons and the town itself . With news that Cornwallis was approaching , Washington knew he had to leave Princeton . Washington wanted to push onto New Brunswick and capture a British pay chest of 70 @,@ 000 pounds but Major Generals Henry Knox and Nathanael Greene talked him out of it . Instead , Washington moved his army to Somerset Courthouse on the night of January 3 , then marched to <unk> by January 5 , and arrived at Morristown , by sunset the next day , for winter encampment . After the battle , Cornwallis abandoned many of his posts in New Jersey , and ordered his army to retreat to New Brunswick . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 General Sir William Howe 's official casualty report for the battle stated 18 killed , 58 wounded and 200 missing . Mark Boatner says that the Americans took 194 prisoners during the battle , while the remaining 6 " missing " men may have been killed . A civilian eyewitness ( the anonymous writer of A Brief Narrative of the <unk> of the British and Hessians at Princeton in 1776 – 1777 ) wrote that 24 British soldiers were found dead on the field . George Washington claimed that the British had more than 100 killed and 300 captured . William S. Stryker follows Washington in stating that the British loss was 100 men killed , 70 wounded and 280 captured 
 George Washington reported his own army 's casualties as 6 or 7 officers and 25 to 30 enlisted men killed , giving no figures for the wounded . Richard M. Ketchum states that the Americans had " 30 enlisted men and 14 officers killed " ; Henry B. Dawson gives 10 officers and 30 enlisted men killed ; while Edward G. Lengel gives total casualties as 25 killed and 40 wounded . The Loyalist newspaper , New York Gazette and Weekly Mercury , reported on January 17 , 1777 , that the American losses at Princeton had been 400 killed and wounded . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The British viewed Trenton and Princeton as minor American victories , but with these victories , the Americans believed that they could win the war . American historians often consider the Battle of Princeton a great victory , on par with the battle of Trenton , due to the subsequent loss of control of most of New Jersey by the Crown forces . Some other historians , such as Edward Lengel consider it to be even more impressive than Trenton . A century later , British historian Sir George Otto Trevelyan would write in a study of the American Revolution , when talking about the impact of the victories at Trenton and Princeton , that " It may be doubted whether so small a number of men ever employed so short a space of time with greater and more lasting effects upon the history of the world . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Part of the battlefield is now preserved in Princeton Battlefield State Park , which was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1961 . 
 The equestrian statue of George Washington at Washington Circle in Washington , D.C. depicts him at the Battle of Princeton . Sculptor Clark Mills said in his speech at the statue 's dedication ceremony on February 22 , 1860 , " The incident selected for representation of this statue was at the battle of Princeton where Washington , after several ineffectual attempts to rally his troops , advanced so near the enemy ’ s lines that his horse refused to go further , but stood and trembled while the brave rider sat undaunted with reins in hand . But while his noble horse is represented thus terror stricken , the dauntless hero is calm and dignified , ever believing himself the instrument in the hand of Providence to work out the great problem of liberty . " 
 Eight current Army National Guard units ( 101st Eng Bn , 103rd Eng Bn , A / 1 @-@ 104th Cav , 111th Inf , 125th QM Co , 175th Inf , 181st Inf and 198th Sig Bn ) and one currently @-@ active Regular Army Artillery battalion ( 1 @-@ 5th FA ) are derived from American units that participated in the Battle of Princeton . There are only thirty current units of the U.S. Army with colonial roots . 
 A perhaps apocryphal story states that during the Battle of Princeton , Alexander Hamilton , then the commander of an artillery battery , ordered his cannons to fire upon the British soldiers taking refuge in Nassau Hall . Allegedly , one of the cannonballs was shot through the head of the portrait of King George II that hung in the chapel , which was subsequently replaced with a portrait of George Washington . 
 = Bonshō = 
 Bonshō ( Japanese : <unk> , Buddhist bells ) , also known as <unk> ( <unk> , hanging bells ) or <unk> ( <unk> , great bells ) are large bells found in Buddhist temples throughout Japan , used to summon the monks to prayer and to demarcate periods of time . Rather than containing a clapper , bonshō are struck from the outside , using either a handheld mallet or a beam suspended on ropes . 
 The bells are usually made from bronze , using a form of expendable mould casting . They are typically augmented and ornamented with a variety of bosses , raised bands and inscriptions . The earliest of these bells in Japan date to around 600 CE , although the general design is of much earlier Chinese origin and shares some of the features seen in ancient Chinese bells . The bells ' penetrating and pervasive tone carries over considerable distances , which led to their use as signals , timekeepers and alarms . In addition , the sound of the bell is thought to have supernatural properties ; it is believed , for example , that it can be heard in the underworld . The spiritual significance of bonshō means that they play an important role in Buddhist ceremonies , particularly the New Year and Bon festivals . Throughout Japanese history these bells have become associated with stories and legends , both fictional , such as the Benkei Bell of Mii @-@ dera , and historical , such as the bell of Hōkō @-@ ji . In modern times , bonshō have become symbols of world peace . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The bonshō is derived from the bianzhong ( <unk> <unk> in Japanese ) , an ancient Chinese court instrument comprising a series of tuned bells . One larger additional bell , which eventually developed into the bonshō , was used as a tuning device and a summons to listeners to attend a bianzhong recital . According to legend , the earliest bonshō may have come from China to Japan via the Korean Peninsula . The Nihon Shoki records that Ōtomo no <unk> brought three bronze bells back to Japan in 562 as spoils of war from Goguryeo . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Bonshō are cast in a single piece using two moulds , a core and a shell , in a process that is largely unchanged since the Nara period ( 710 – 794 ) . The core is constructed from a dome of stacked bricks made from hardened sand , whilst the shell is made using a <unk> board . This is a large , flat , wooden board shaped like a cross @-@ section of the bell , which is rotated around a vertical axis to shape the clay used for the mould . Inscriptions and decorations are then carved or impressed into the clay . The shell fits over the core to create a narrow gap , into which the molten bronze is poured at a temperature of over 1 @,@ 050 ° C ( 1 @,@ 920 ° F ) . The ratio of the alloy is usually around 17 : 3 copper to tin ; the exact admixture ( as well as the speed of the cooling process ) can alter the tone of the end product . After the metal has cooled and solidified , the mould is removed by breaking it , therefore a new one has to be created for each bell . The process has a high failure rate ; only around 50 per cent of castings are successful on the first attempt , without cracks or imperfections . 
 The casting is traditionally accompanied by the chanting of Buddhist sutras , which may go on for several hours . Buddhist prayer papers , sprigs of sacred mulberry and other ceremonial offerings are added to the molten bronze during the founding process . 
 There are several parts to a temple bell : 
 <unk> <unk> , the dragon @-@ shaped handle at the top of the bell , by which it is carried or hung 
 <unk> <unk> , the domed crown of the bell 
 Chichi or <unk> <unk> , bosses around the upper part of the bell that improve its resonance 
 Koma no <unk> <unk> , lower rim 
 Tsuki @-@ za <unk> , striking panel , a reinforced spot where the bell is struck . It is often decorated with a Buddhist lotus motif . 
 <unk> <unk> , decorative horizontal bands 
 Mei @-@ bun <unk> , inscription ( often giving the bell 's history ) 
 Shu @-@ <unk> <unk> , the hanging wooden beam used to strike the tsuki @-@ za 
 Some bells retain linear impressions arising from joints in the mould used ; they are not removed during <unk> but are regarded as an aspect of the bell 's overall beauty . The bell 's appearance and sound are intended to be in keeping with Japan 's wabi @-@ sabi aesthetic . 
 = = Sound = = 
 Japanese temple bells are struck externally with either a hammer or a suspended beam rather than with an internal clapper . The sound of the bell is made up of three parts . First is the <unk> , the impact of the strike . A well @-@ made bell should produce a clean , clear tone . The initial sound of the strike is immediately followed by the prolonged <unk> , the reverberation that continues to sound after the bell is struck . This is higher in pitch and is a low rumble with a sorrowful air , rich in harmonics ; it lasts for up to ten seconds . Finally comes the <unk> or decay , the resonance that is heard as the vibration of the bell dies away , which can last up to a minute . There are also continuous harmonic overtones heard throughout the tolling of the bell . These multiple tones create a complex pitch profile . 
 The low tone and deep resonance of the bell allow the sound to carry over great distances ; a large bonshō can be heard up to 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) away on a clear day . The pitch of the bell is carefully judged by its creators , and a difference of a single hertz in the fundamental frequency can require that the bell be recast from scratch . 
 = = Function and significance = = 
 Bonshō are sited in Buddhist temples , usually in a specially designated building or tower called a <unk> <unk> . They are used to mark the passage of time , and to call the monks to liturgical services . In Buddhism , the bell 's sound is considered to be calming and to induce a suitable atmosphere for meditation . Because of their shape ( with sloped shoulders and a flat base ) the bells are seen as representations of the sitting Buddha , and are accorded similar respect ; those striking the bell will first make three bows towards it , just as they would before a statue of Buddha . 
 The sonorous sound of the bell was also used to warn of impending typhoons and as a general alert . Because the ringing of a temple bell could be heard over considerable distances , it was also sometimes used for other signalling purposes ; there are records of temple bells being used for military communication from as far back as the Genpei War ( 1180 – 1185 CE ) . Smaller versions were subsequently cast for battlefield use , as the large temple bells were too heavy and unwieldy to transport . These smaller bonshō were used primarily as alarms to warn of enemy attacks ; commands were given using drums and conches . 
 As part of Japanese New Year celebrations , people queue to ring the temple bells 108 times in a ceremony known as <unk> ( <unk> , New Year bells ) ; the 108 peals of the bell are intended to purge humanity of the 108 earthly temptations . During the Buddhist Bon Festival , a special type of bonshō called an <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , great hollow bell ) is rung . This bell is hung above a well , and it is believed that the sound of the bell resonates down the well into the underworld , to summon the spirits of the dead . At the end of the festival , another bonshō , called an <unk> ( <unk> , sending @-@ back bell ) , is rung to send the spirits back and to represent the end of the summer . 
 During World War II the demand for metal for the war effort resulted in many bells being melted down for scrap . As a result , those that survived are generally regarded as important historic artifacts . More than 70 @,@ 000 bells ( approximately 90 per cent of the bonshō then in existence ) were destroyed in this way . However , rapid production of bells during the post @-@ war period meant that by 1995 the number of temple bells in Japan had returned to pre @-@ war levels . 
 In the latter half of the twentieth century , the World Peace Bell Association was set up in Japan , with the purpose of funding and casting temple bells to be placed around the world as symbols of peace . Bonshō have also been cast in response to natural disasters such as the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami ; several affected communities commissioned bells to commemorate the event . 
 Bonshō have occasionally been used as musical instruments in modern compositions . The recorded sound of temple bells was used in Mayuzumi Toshiro 's piece Olympic <unk> , used to open the 1964 Tokyo Olympic Games . A temple bell is also used in performances of Jacob <unk> 's piece Lamia , in which it is rung while placed on top of a <unk> . Modern composers for percussion have sometimes used the temple bell to replace the now common sound of the orchestral tam @-@ tam . 
 = = Notable examples = = 
 The oldest known bonshō ( indeed , the oldest bell in the world still in use ) is the <unk> bell at <unk> @-@ ji , which was cast in 698 . The largest is the bell at Chion @-@ in , which was commissioned in 1633 and weighs 74 tons . It requires a twenty @-@ five man team to sound it . 
 During the seventeenth century the bonshō was also a symbol of a temple 's leadership ; possession of the bell indicated ownership of the associated temple . As a result , bells were often stolen ; the folk hero Benkei is said to have dragged the three @-@ ton bell of Mii @-@ dera temple up Mount Hiei during one such theft . The deep scratches in the Benkei bell , which is still displayed at Mii @-@ dera , are said in the legend to be the result of Benkei 's kicking the bell all the way back to the monastery when he discovered that it would not toll for him . The Benkei bell is also associated with the legendary hero <unk> <unk> , who originally donated it to the Mii @-@ dera temple . He acquired it as a gift from the dragon deity <unk> , after saving the god from a giant centipede . 
 After the Hōkō @-@ ji temple burned down at the start of the seventeenth century , Toyotomi <unk> sponsored its reconstruction in 1610 , and commissioned a large bell as part of that process . The bell 's inscription drew the ire of Tokugawa Ieyasu , who had become shogun after wresting power from the Toyotomi clan when <unk> 's father Hideyoshi died . The inscription , " Kokka <unk> " <unk> ( " Peace and tranquility for the nation " ) , broke up the characters for the shogun 's name ( <unk> ) with the kanji character for " peace " ( <unk> ) . Tokugawa assumed Toyotomi was implying that peace would require the " dismemberment " of the Tokugawa . He used the subsequent dispute as an excuse to wage war on the Toyotomi clan , resulting in the Siege of Osaka and the eventual destruction of the Toyotomi . 
 A bronze bonshō was among the gifts presented to Commodore Matthew Perry upon his arrival in Japan . Cast by <unk> from the Suwa family of Higo Province , it is now held in the collection of the Smithsonian Institution . 
 The Noh play <unk> ( <unk> ) , one of the only Noh plays to feature a prop of any significant size , is based on a legend concerning the bell of <unk> @-@ ji . In the story a woman named <unk> , the spurned mistress of a Buddhist priest named <unk> , traps her lover inside the temple 's bell and then kills him by turning into a snake , coiling around the bell , and cooking him in it . 
 The bell of the Nishi @-@ Arai Daishi Temple in Tokyo was removed in 1943 , to be melted down as part of the Japanese war effort . The crew of the USS Pasadena found it on a scrap heap and took it with them to the US as a war trophy , donating it to the city of Pasadena ; the city council returned the bell to Tokyo in 1955 . A similar story accompanies the bell of <unk> @-@ ji , which was taken to the United States on the USS Boston after the war ; in this case , however , the Sendai authorities allowed the bell to remain in Boston as a symbol of friendship between the two cities . The Boston bell is the last WWII bonshō in the United States . 
 The Japanese Peace Bell at the headquarters of the United Nations in New York was donated by Japan in 1954 as a symbol of world peace . It was created using metal reclaimed from coins and medals provided by donors from around the globe . Similar bells representing a commitment to the cause of world peace can be found in many civic areas , including Hiroshima 's Peace Memorial Park . In 1995 , the city of Oak Ridge , Tennessee , erected a four @-@ ton peace bell – a replica of one of the Hiroshima bells – in the city centre as part of its fiftieth @-@ anniversary celebrations , and to strengthen ties with Japan . The Oak Ridge Friendship Bell is decorated with dates relating to Oak Ridge 's connection to Japan ( the uranium used in the Hiroshima atomic bomb was produced in Oak Ridge ) . In 1998 , a local citizen sued the city over the bell , claiming that it was a Buddhist symbol and violated local laws and the US Constitution . The case was ruled in favour of the City of Oak Ridge . 
 = Aqil Agha = 
 Aqil Agha al @-@ Hasi ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> , given name also spelled Aqil , <unk> , Akil or <unk> ; military title sometimes spelled Aga ) ( died 1870 ) was the strongman of northern Palestine in the mid @-@ 19th century , during Ottoman rule . He was originally a commander of Arab irregular soldiers , known as the Hawwara tribe , in the service of the Ottoman governors of Acre . His influence in the Galilee grew as he strengthened his alliances with the powerful Beni Sakhr and Anizzah tribes of Transjordan , and recruited unemployed Bedouin irregulars from Egypt into his own band of irregulars , who thenceforth became known as the Hanadi tribe . He was known by his men and Western travelers to be courageous , cunning and charismatic , all qualities that contributed to his rise as the de facto ruler of Galilee . 
 Throughout his rule , Aqil remained at least nominally in service to the Ottoman Empire , which paid him for protecting the roads of northern Palestine from Bedouin raids and for maintaining the security of this region . He also exacted his own tolls on the local population in return for ensuring their security . His friendly ties with the European governments were partially due to his protection of the local Christian and Jewish communities in Galilee , including his protection of Nazareth from the 1860 massacres that occurred in Ottoman Syria . Aqil 's relationship with the authorities was generally tense and he rebelled directly or indirectly against their local representatives . As a consequence of this frayed relationship , Aqil 's employment would frequently be terminated when his activities or influence perturbed the authorities and then reinstated when his services were needed . By the time of his death , his influence had declined significantly . He was buried in his Galilee stronghold of I 'billin . 
 While Palestine had been under the rule of the Ottoman Empire from the early 16th century , direct imperial administrative rule was challenged by a series of tribal leaders who exhibited vast influence over local affairs between the 17th and 19th centuries . With the Ottoman Empire embroiled in the Crimean War , the power vacuum created in the area in the wake of Zahir al @-@ Umar 's rule in the Galilee ( 1730 – 1775 ) , Ahmad Pasha al @-@ Jazzar 's rule ( 1776 – 1804 ) , and Muhammad Ali 's rule ( 1831 – 1840 ) , was filled by Aqil . Aqil 's demise represented an end to the last local obstacle to Ottoman centralization in Palestine . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Besides anecdotes provided in the writings of European consuls , most of the information on Aqil 's life indirectly traces back to a history of the man written by Mikha 'il Qa <unk> , a Nazareth clergyman . Aqil was born into a Bedouin family , known later as the Hanadi tribe . The actual Hanadi were an unrelated tribe that came to Palestine from Egypt during Egyptian rule in Palestine ( 1831 – 1840 ) and around 1840 joined Aqil 's Hawwara tribesmen , who also had migrated from Egypt . The name " Hanadi " translates in Arabic as " Indians " and the Hanadi irregulars were referred to as such by the inhabitants of Palestine because of their dark skin . 
 Aqil 's Hawwara tribesmen in Galilee were not related to the well @-@ known Hawwara tribe of Upper Egypt , who were noted for their " bravery , horsemanship , and equipments " according to the Palestine Exploration Fund . The Hawwara of Galilee were actually from the Ainawiyeh tribe of the Lower Egyptian desert region who had entered the service of Ahmad Pasha al @-@ Jazzar while the latter was based in Egypt in the late 18th century . They came with al @-@ Jazzar to northern Palestine when al @-@ Jazzar became the powerful Acre @-@ based Ottoman governor of Sidon after the death of the Arab strongman of Galilee , Zahir al @-@ Umar , in 1776 . Al @-@ Jazzar named the Ainawiyeh tribesmen " Hawwara " as an honor to associate them with the actual Hawwara of Upper Egypt . 
 Aqil 's father , Musa Agha al @-@ Hasi , himself a commander of Hawwara irregulars in the service of Acre 's Ottoman governors , had left Egypt for Gaza in 1814 . He was not directly related to the Ainawiyeh or Hawwara tribes , but claimed descent from the Hawwara as a matter of convenience and prestige . Musa originally hailed from the al @-@ Bara <unk> tribe of Cyrenaica ( modern @-@ day eastern Libya ) . Likewise , James Finn , the British consul in Jerusalem ( 1846 – 1863 ) , claims Aqil 's family was of Algerian or North African origin . Musa Agha resided in the Galilee around 1820 and married a Turkmen woman . Aqil was born to the couple in the Nazareth area . According to historian Adel Manna , Aqil was born in Gaza . Musa had two other sons , Ali and Salih . Musa died in Gaza in 1830 . 
 Aqil 's power base consisted of his tribesmen and alliances with other Bedouin tribes , who inhabited both sides of the Jordan River . Aqil 's brother , Salih Agha , held substantial influence in the Haifa region . Mary Rogers , the sister of the English vice consul , described in detail a banquet in Shefa- ' Amr and a gazelle hunt at the invitation of Salih Agha , while another traveler witnessed the lavish wedding between a son of Salih Agha and a daughter of Agil Agha on " the plains of I 'billin " , in about 1857 . Aqil also married off another of his daughters to a Bedouin sheikh ( chief ) in Gaza , paying the highest dowry registered at the time in Gaza : 11 @,@ 000 piasters . The governor of Hebron was reported to be a brother @-@ in @-@ law of Aqil . 
 = = Strongman of Galilee = = 
 = = = Consolidation of influence = = = 
 Like his father before him , Aqil served various masters , among whom was Ibrahim Pasha , the son of Muhammad Ali of Egypt . Aqil defected from Ibrahim Pasha 's army and joined local rebels in the 1834 peasants ' revolt against Egyptian conscription and disarmament measures , leading his Hawwara irregulars in the Galilee . At some point during the revolt , Aqil helped save the mostly Druze village of <unk> from being destroyed by Ibrahim Pasha 's troops after its inhabitants paid Aqil for protection . As the revolt was suppressed , Aqil and his men left Palestine for Transjordan , where they sought the protection of that region 's major Bedouin tribes . During his time in Transjordan he strengthened relations with these tribes . When the Ottomans regained control of Palestine in 1840 – 1841 , Aqil returned to the Lower Galilee and was commissioned as a captain of ten mounted irregulars . He recruited Egyptian irregulars from the Hanadi tribe and others who were left unemployed following the Egyptian withdrawal . Together with Aqil 's Hawwara , they became a formidable local force . In 1843 , Aqil became the chief of irregulars , known as bashi @-@ bazouk , in northern Palestine , and his command was expanded to fifty horsemen . Aqil 's irregulars became known in the area as the Hanadi , although the group 's tribal composition was mixed . 
 Aqil angered the kaimakam ( district governor ) of Acre , Muhammad Kubrisi , for his intervention in a dispute between two factions of the Catholic Church in Nazareth . One of the leaders of the Catholic factions , Sheikh Yusef Elias , had been dismissed by the church and subsequently entered Aqil 's protection . He requested Aqil 's intercession with Kubrisi , which was unsuccessful . When Sheikh Yusef decided to take matters into his own hands by raising a group of armed partisans in Nazareth , the church was compelled to restore his employment . Kubrisi believed Aqil had backed Sheikh Yusef 's actions and accused Aqil of sedition . Kubrisi recalled Aqil and his Hawwara irregulars to Acre , verbally lambasted them and dismissed them all from service . Aqil was deeply insulted by Kubrisi 's words and actions , and subsequently left for Transjordan where he sought the protection of the Beni Sakhr tribe . 
 Aqil secured a durable alliance with the Beni Sakhr , consecrated through his marriage to a woman from the tribe . From Transjordan , he and his band of irregulars raided areas on both sides of the Jordan River until he was invited back to the Galilee by Acre 's kaimakam in 1847 . The latter had sought to neutralize Aqil and his allies ' marauding activities , and thus pardoned Aqil . He was also given command of 75 bashi @-@ bazouk in Lower Galilee . Thereafter , he was commissioned with overseeing that region 's security . In particular , the successive governors of Acre entrusted him with protecting the Galilee 's trade routes and maintaining general security in the area , which he did successfully . With time , he became an unofficial mutasallim ( tax collector ) for much of northern Palestine , including the Jezreel Valley , Safad , Tiberias and Nazareth . The tax he collected was not on behalf of the authorities , but rather a tribute payment ( <unk> ) to receive his protection . While this unofficial system proved successful in guaranteeing local security , later historians criticized it as akin to a protection racket . 
 = = = Encounter with William F. Lynch = = = 
 In 1848 , Aqil assisted an expedition headed by US Navy captain William Francis Lynch to the Dead Sea , and became known in the United States and Europe through the publication of Lynch 's book that year . Vivid descriptions of Aqil by Lynch are quoted at length in the works of Finn . Lynch 's first encounter with Aqil was in the divan of Said Bey , the Ottoman kaimakam of Acre , and is recorded as follows : 
 But what especially attracted my attention was a magnificent savage enveloped in a scarlet cloth <unk> richly embroidered with gold . He was the handsomest , and I soon thought also the most graceful being I had ever seen . His complexion was of a rich mellow indescribable olive tint , and his hair a glossy black ; his teeth were regular and of the whitest ivory , and the glance of his eye was keen at times , but generally soft and lustrous . With the <unk> upon his head which he seemed to wear uneasily , he reclined , rather than sat upon the opposite side of the <unk> , while his hand played in unconscious familiarity with the hilt of his <unk> . He looked like one who would be ' Steel amid the din of arms , and wax when with the <unk> 
 In this meeting , Said Bey had attempted to dissuade Lynch of his plans to travel to the Dead Sea , with Aqil remarking that the Bedouin of the <unk> ( Jordan Valley ) would " eat them up " . Lynch 's reply was that " they would find us difficult of digestion , " but he suggested that as Aqil seemed to hold influence with these tribes , he would be prepared to pay him to make the trip a more peaceable one . 
 After the meeting ended , Lynch pursued Aqil to speak with him alone . He showed him his sword and revolver , which Aqil examined and declared to be the " Devil 's invention " . Lynch described the weaponry at the disposal of his men and asked Aqil if he thought it sufficient to make the journey to the Jordan , and Aqil replied that , " You will , if anyone can . " Lynch later secured Aqil 's accompaniment on the trip to the Dead Sea , through the intervention of an ex @-@ Sharif of Mecca , describing the latter as " our counsellor , sagacious and prudent , " and Aqil as , " the bold warrior and the admirable scout . " Aqil and his Beni Sakhr allies quashed a party of ' Adwan Bedouin tribesmen when they attempted to rob Lynch 's party . Lynch 's record of Aqil 's feat made him well known in Europe . 
 = = = Hauran rebellion , imprisonment and escape = = = 
 Aqil 's irregulars attracted the membership of local individuals and small clans . Along with his alliance with the two powerful tribes of the region , the Beni Sakhr and the Anizzah , Aqil 's autonomy in the Galilee was further strengthened , although he was nominally subordinate to the Ottoman authorities . He based himself in the Zaydani fortress of I 'billin , a mixed Muslim @-@ Christian village between Acre and Nazareth that was previously fortified by the family of Zahir al @-@ Umar . By 1852 , Aqil had ceased residing in I 'billin , instead preferring the traditional Bedouin lifestyle , dwelling in encampments and among his livestock . At this point , he ruled the area between Shefa- ' Amr to Baysan . He and his Hanadi tribesmen characteristically dressed in brown @-@ striped robes . 
 In 1852 , he was commissioned by the Ottoman authorities to prevent the spread of a Druze rebellion from Hauran to northern Palestine . He successfully satisfied this request , aided by his Bedouin allies . Among his assignments during the rebellion was the protection from Bedouin raiders of a supply route which the Ottomans used to send ammunition to their troops in Hauran . Aqil and his men accomplished the task successfully . 
 Despite his successes during the Druze revolt , the authorities , with whom he always had a tense relationship , grew wary of his strength and subsequently arrested him in a nighttime raid . He was sent to Istanbul by sea and from there he was sent to serve a prison sentence at the <unk> fortress on the Danube River . Aqil was apparently loaned some money from the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , who had accompanied him on the ship ride to Istanbul , and Aqil used those funds to purchase a fake passport . With the passport and a disguise , he and an Albanian inmate named Hasan Agha escaped <unk> in 1854 and reached Salonica . From there , Aqil departed to Anatolia and then Aleppo . Aqil resumed his Bedouin lifestyle of raiding and nomadic dwelling . 
 = = = Reinstatement and Battle of Hattin = = = 
 At the time of Aqil 's escape , the Ottomans were engaged in the Crimean War with the Russian Empire , which left a domestic security void in its provinces due to the large number of provincial troops deployed to Crimea . To restore security in the Galilee , Aqil was reassigned to his powerful post in the region in 1855 . On his return to Palestine , Aqil 's Hanadi tribesmen abandoned their conscription orders to serve with the Ottoman Army in the Crimean War and instead returned to Aqil 's service . Aqil was once again charged with protecting the routes of rural Palestine and occasionally Transjordan . He was once commissioned to collect taxes from Karak . 
 In Aqil 's absence , a garrison of Kurdish irregulars based in Damascus had been left in charge of security in the Galilee . They were commanded by Shamdin Agha , but their employment was terminated by Aqil in 1855 . Meanwhile , scores of Bedouin tribesmen from Faiyum with kinship ties to Aqil 's tribal irregulars had migrated to the Levant as a result of their suppression by Sa 'id Pasha of Egypt . Aqil welcomed their membership into his tribal band and their numbers subsequently swelled . He consecrated his relationship with the new arrivals by marrying a daughter of one of their sheikhs . In May 1856 , he defeated the Abd al @-@ Hadi clan of Arraba in a major clash that ended encroachments by the Abd al @-@ <unk> on Aqil 's territory . 
 In 1857 , the Beirut @-@ based governor of Sidon Eyalet agreed to Shamdin 's request to eliminate Aqil , who , to the consternation of the Ottoman authorities , was ruling the Galilee autonomously by that time . Shamdin , who sought vengeance against Aqil for terminating his service in Galilee , had complained to the Sidon governor that Aqil was committing treachery by collaborating with the Bedouin tribes against Ottoman authority . The Ottomans , whose dependence on Aqil had decreased with the end of the Crimean War in 1856 which had sapped Ottoman military forces from the area , found Shamdin 's request a convenient way to end Aqil 's growing autonomy . When Aqil visited Beirut to pay his respects to the governor of Sidon , he traveled with " the air of a sultan " , according to the American missionary Henry H. Jessup , bringing with him a large and heavily armed Bedouin entourage . 
 Shamdin 's forces , amounting to 600 – 700 Kurdish irregulars , massed in Tiberias . They were commanded by Shamdin 's sons Muhammad Sa 'id and Hasan Agha . Curious at this deployment , Aqil had requested an explanation from the kaimakam of Acre , but received no response . Thus Aqil concluded that the deployment was part of a conspiracy to upend his rule . In response , Aqil assembled his entire force of irregulars , amounting to some 300 – 400 men , and marched towards Shamdin 's troops . Other Arab tribes volunteered their service , but Aqil declined their participation . 
 On 30 March , the Kurdish irregulars confronted Aqil 's irregulars and Bedouin allies at the Horns of Hattin , near the village of Hattin . For the most part , both sides were armed with swords and spears and to a lesser extent , rifles , rather than the modern weaponry at the Ottoman military 's disposal . Initially , the battle was going in Shamdin 's favor and a portion of Aqil 's troops began to flee . However , Salih Agha , Aqil 's brother , led his group in a surprise attack against the Kurds . As a result , Shamdin 's forces were dealt a decisive blow and commander Hasan Agha was among the 150 fatalities of that battle . 
 Aqil 's victory entrenched his rule over Galilee and afterward he established stronger relations with the Europeans . After Aqil 's victory at Hattin , the Ottoman authorities distanced themselves from the incident in their correspondence with Aqil , but he accepted their explanations with a grain of salt . In September 1858 , Aqil was residing in Nazareth and decided not to intervene and put a stop to tribal clashes in the Jezreel Valley . 
 = = = 1860 events and protection of Christians = = = 
 Aqil had been previously courted by European powers to secure protection for their Christian and Jewish protégés . During the 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war , anti @-@ Christian animosity spread to Damascus where Christians were massacred by Druze and Muslim mobs . It appeared that the violence would spread to Acre as well , but Aqil issued direct orders to Acre 's Muslim residents not to bring harm to the city 's Christians , stating he would " chastise ... with his sword " anyone who violated the orders . Aqil also protected the Christian community of Nazareth from harm as their coreligionists elsewhere in Ottoman Syria faced massacres . Part of this protection included warnings to local Bedouin tribes to refrain from assaulting the town and warnings to its Christian and Muslim residents to prepare themselves militarily in case of attack . Aqil maintained a close friendship with <unk> <unk> , a prominent Greek Orthodox resident of the town . 
 In gratitude for protecting the Christians in Nazareth and Acre , Napoleon III of France presented Aqil a gun and the Legion of Honor medal in April 1861 aboard his French vessel docked at Haifa Bay . Edward , Prince of Wales ( later King of the United Kingdom ) personally visited Aqil two years later to show his appreciation . Aqil offered Edward four Arabian horses , but Edward politely declined . As a token of his appreciation , Edward gave Aqil a revolver . 
 His protection of the local Christians and his reputed Algerian origins drew comparisons with Abd al @-@ <unk> al @-@ Jaza 'iri , the exiled Algerian rebel who saved many Christians from harm during the 1860 riots in Damascus , and with whom Aqil developed ties . Aqil realized that European protection would strengthen his position towards the Ottoman rulers . After 1860 , he courted the French , once sending a tiger as a present to " his Emperor " through the French consul in Beirut . According to Finn , Aqil was under special " French consideration " . 
 = = = Decline of influence = = = 
 The Ottoman imperial government adopted its Tanzimat modernization reforms in 1862 and originally entrusted Aqil with enforcing the new law of the land in northern Palestine . Part of these measures were stronger efforts to suppress the Bedouin tribes and decisively end their raiding activities . Aqil was given orders to prevent them from setting up camps in the cultivated lands of Galilee and forbade the collection of <unk> tolls from the local inhabitants . Aqil resigned from his post when he was informed that as part of his new assignment he and his men were required to don Ottoman uniforms . He objected to the requirement , insisting that as Bedouin , they were not accustomed to wearing uniforms . He was replaced by one of his Hawara tribesmen , but Aqil compelled his successor to resign as well . Shortly after his resignation , the requirement of uniforms was canceled and Aqil resumed his assignment . 
 Aqil 's closeness with the Europeans disturbed the Ottomans . His relations with the kaimakam of Acre , who in 1863 was Hasan Effendi , were also deteriorating . Since his return to Palestine in 1854 , he avoided setting foot in the city , instead assigning a resident representative who engaged the kaimakam on his behalf . Hasan Effendi launched complaints to the provincial governor in Beirut , Kapuli Pasha , about the misconduct of Aqil 's men who extorted the local peasantry . For the most part , Aqil 's protection extended to those who could pay for his services or otherwise benefit his interests , including merchants , travelers , monks , pilgrims , Christians and Jews . 
 The Tanzimat proved unpopular with large segments of the population and a Bedouin revolt broke out , with Transjordanian tribes launching raids against Tiberias and its countryside in the summer of 1863 . Aqil was unable to stop the raids , and may have played a role in the revolt . In response to the raids , the Ottomans dispatched a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force of soldiers from Damascus and Acre to Tiberias backed by artillery . The presence of artillery caused the Transjordanian tribes to retreat . Aqil viewed this deployment as an attack on his jurisdiction and issued his resignation in protest , all the while hoping Kapuli Pasha would back down and reject his resignation . To that end , he had Jewish notables from Tiberias and the French consul of Beirut lobby on his behalf , but without success , as Kapuli Pasha , content to see the elimination of a local power such as Aqil , accepted his resignation . 
 After resigning , Aqil left Galilee for Tell el @-@ Hesi in the region of Gaza . Around this time , Aqil married off a daughter of his to the leading Bedouin sheikh of the area , Rabbah al @-@ <unk> . Bedouin raiding , now with the participation of the smaller tribes of Galilee , resumed not long after Aqil 's resignation and concerns by the local merchants and European consuls were voiced to Kapuli Pasha due to the incoming harvest season for cotton and grain from Galilee and Hauran . Hasan Effendi sought to stem the tide of looting by attempting to play one Bedouin tribe off of the other . Kapuli Pasha was doubtful of this policy 's effectiveness and strove to use military force instead . He personally led a contingent of troops in Galilee and ensured a peaceful harvest through the end of 1863 . However , Kapuli Pasha determined that he could not keep a large , permanent military contingent in Galilee and decided to reinstate Aqil to his former position after lobbying from the British consul of Haifa . 
 Kapuli Pasha 's successor , Kurshid Pasha , resumed the anti @-@ Bedouin operations in Galilee in 1864 and sought to establish in the eastern Galilee four heavily armed forts as a bulwark against further raiding . Aqil entered into a conflict with the governor of Nablus and member of the Abd al @-@ Hadi family , who tried to arrest Aqil . Kurshid Pasha dismissed Aqil by the end of the year . Fearing his arrest or death in light of the Ottomans ' subsequent deployment of 200 Kurdish irregulars to Tiberias and the presence of military forces from Acre and Beirut in western Galilee , Aqil fled to Salt in the Balqa area of Transjordan . 
 Aqil later moved to Egypt . Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Jaza 'iri and Isma 'il Pasha lobbied the Ottoman government on Aqil 's behalf and he was given permission to return to Galilee in 1866 . He subsequently inhabited the area of Mount Tabor . Despite his return and the reinstatement of a government salary , he was not able to restore his semi @-@ autonomous authority in the region . In late 1869 he was awarded a medal of honor from the Habsburg dynasty of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Aqil died in 1870 , although his death was erroneously recorded by R. A. Stewart Macalister to have occurred in 1867 . According to Macalister , Aqil died in the vicinity of Shefa- ' Amr . He was buried in I 'billin , his previous Galilee headquarters . As of the early 1980s , descendants of Aqil still inhabited I 'billin . 
 Aqil 's son Quwaytin succeeded him as the chief of the Hanadi tribesmen who continued to inhabit the Galilee and its vicinity . In the late 19th century , Quwaytin 's tribe had some 900 members and was based in the northern Jordan Valley . Quwaytin donned the honor cross medallions given to his father by various European governments . However , Hanadi influence and strength in the region diminished under Quwaytin and was gradually suppressed by various Ottoman actors , eventually reducing the Hanadi to an ineffectual tribe . Quwaytin 's son and successor Rida also entered into Ottoman service and held the title of <unk> like Aqil . In the early 20th century , Rida Agha held the equivalent rank of a lieutenant and served as commander of police in the Balqa Sanjak in Transjordan . 
 For nearly two decades Aqil had been a major local power in northern Palestine . He asserted to other tribal sheikhs that the land they roamed in belonged to the Arabs and that one day they would take it back from the Turkish Ottoman " conquerors " . According to Finn , Aqil may have ultimately envisioned forming an Arab confederation in the southern Levant independent of the Ottomans and backed by France . However , despite these perceived intentions , Aqil ruled under the auspices of the Ottoman authorities , was paid by them , and was at least partially dependent upon their support . His ties with France and Europe contributed to his power , but he lacked the necessary support from these countries to pursue any desire of independence that he had . Aqil 's death marked the removal of " the last obstacle to the implementation of full centralized Ottoman rule " in northern Palestine , according to historian Mahmoud <unk> . When full Ottoman centralization in the Galilee was realized , local powers permanently lost their influence over the region 's development . That power was instead passed on to wealthy businessmen from Haifa and Beirut , ultimately leaving the Sursock family of Beirut as the new " masters " of the Galilee , according to anthropologist Alexander Schölch . 
 One of the factors Schölch attributes to Aqil 's failure to secure an autonomous rule similar to that of the Arab sheikh Zahir al @-@ Umar was Aqil 's refusal to accept a sedentary life . While I 'billin frequently functioned as a headquarters of sorts for Aqil , he did not take up permanent residence there , or anywhere . Instead it served as a symbol of his authority in the Galilee . Aqil was adamantly a Bedouin and once remarked to William Lynch that it would be a " disgrace " to " till the ground like a fellah " . The nomadic , marauding lifestyle of Aqil ran counter to the modernization efforts of the Ottomans , which strongly encouraged settlement of the land and centralization . These processes were eventually embraced by the peasantry and the urban notables , but resisted by the Bedouin tribes whose traditional livelihoods were at risk . 
 Schölch asserts that Aqil contributed little to the socio @-@ economic development of Palestine , and was not a " benefactor of the peasants " . However , Aqil is described in a mostly positive light by modern @-@ day sources and in local tradition . In the Arab nationalist political atmosphere that followed the Ottoman Empire 's fall in 1917 , Aqil 's Arab identity and his struggles against the Ottomans contributed to the prevailing positive commemoration of his life . Palestinian Christians in particular remember him fondly for protecting Christians during his rule . 
 = Congregation Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom = 
 Congregation Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom ( also known as " Congregation Beth Jacob Ohev Shalom " ) ( " House of Jacob Lover of Peace " ) is an Orthodox synagogue located at 284 Rodney Street in Williamsburg , Brooklyn , New York . It is the oldest Orthodox congregation on Long Island ( including Brooklyn and Queens ) , and one of the last remaining non @-@ Hasidic Jewish institutions in Williamsburg . 
 The congregation was formed in 1869 by German Jews as an Orthodox breakaway from an existing Reform congregation . It constructed its first building on Keap Street in 1870 . In 1904 it merged with Chevra Ansche Sholom , and took the name Congregation Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom . The following year it constructed a new building at 274 – 276 South Third Street , designed by George F. Pelham . 
 The congregation 's building was expropriated and demolished to make way for the Brooklyn @-@ Queens Expressway in the 1950s . It combined with another congregation in a similar situation , and , as Congregation Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom , constructed a new building at 284 Rodney Street , just south of Broadway , in 1957 . 
 Joshua Fishman became rabbi in 1971 . With changing demographics , attendance at services , which had been 700 in the 1970s , fell to two dozen by 2010 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The congregation was founded as Beth Jacob in 1869 , by more traditional members of an existing Reform German Jewish synagogue , the Keap Street Temple . They objected to the installation and use of a pipe organ to accompany Yom Kippur services , which was forbidden by <unk> ( Jewish law ) , and seceded and created their own congregation . The new congregation was formally incorporated on October 1 of that year , and first worshiped in a house . In 1870 , Beth Jacob purchased a 23 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) by 95 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) lot at what is now 326 Keap Street ( than Tenth Street ) for $ 150 ( today $ 2 @,@ 800 ) in cash and a mortgage of $ 1 @,@ 050 ( today $ 19 @,@ 600 ) , and constructed a building there , at a cost of around $ 6 @,@ 000 ( today $ 112 @,@ 000 ) . Men and women sat separately , and the sanctuary had seating for 164 men on the main floor and 135 women in the gallery . Services were generally held only on Shabbat and the Jewish holidays . The first spiritual leader was Rabbi Dresser , and he was succeeded by Lewis Lewinski ( or <unk> ) . 
 In its early years , the congregation 's financial situation was precarious . The building was located ten blocks from where most of the congregants and potential congregants lived ( on Grand Street , near the ferry docks ) , and attendance was low . Even on the High Holy Days , the sanctuary was rarely more than half full . The synagogue employed a rabbi , <unk> , and cantor , and annual expenses often exceeded the congregation 's income ( which came primarily from the sale of seats ) . To remain solvent , the congregation borrowed money against the equity in the building : $ 2 @,@ 000 ( today $ 53 @,@ 000 ) in 1888 , and another $ 2 @,@ 000 in 1894 . 
 The congregation was also marked by public controversies and factionalism . In January 1887 , during a heated discussion at a congregational business meeting , one member addressed two others with the informal German " du " ( rather than the formal " Sie " ) , which was considered impolite . Despite attempts by then @-@ rabbi <unk> to intervene , the two men beat the first , knocked him to the ground , and " trampled upon " him . The two men were subsequently charged with " assault in the third degree " . 
 Lewinski was succeeded that year as rabbi by Hyman Rosenberg , and in October of the same year a new secretary was elected , in a close @-@ fought battle between two factions . When it was time for the former secretary to hand over the financial books , a member , Simon Freudenthal , was alleged to have grabbed them , jumped out a window , and ran away with them . When he returned , he refused to say why he took them , and insisted he would keep them . A warrant was issued for his arrest on the charge of larceny , and he was released on bail . Ten days later the synagogue president , American Civil War veteran Colonel Solomon Monday , was arrested and charged in turn with libel , for allegedly claiming that Freudenthal stole " sacred books " . Monday , in turn , had Freudenthal charged in November with stealing $ 8 ( today $ 210 ) worth of " sacred books " during " divine service " . Later that month both cases were dismissed . In early 1888 , another case was brought , and dismissed , over attempts by one faction to expel members of the other faction . 
 In December 1892 , the congregation expelled Rosenberg , charging him with eating a piece of pork , which is not kosher . To augment his salary of $ 400 ( today $ 10 @,@ 500 ) a year from Beth Jacob , Rosenberg also worked as an agent for a cigar company . While visiting a customer at a bar , he was alleged to have eaten the pork while partaking of some of the free lunch provided there . Rosenberg initially said that while he had drunk a great deal , he had not eaten anything at all , and subsequently stated that he was sure he had not eaten pork , because the bar @-@ keep had sworn in affidavit that there was none in the lunch provided that day . Rosenberg later averred consistently that if he had eaten any pork , it was inadvertently . He also alleged hypocrisy on the part of the members , stating " They are all reformed Jews in private , although orthodox Jews in public . " 
 The rabbi 's defenders strongly objected to the decision . His primary supporter , synagogue vice president Louis Jackson , who had broken the story to the press , described the congregation as a " collection of <unk> " , with the " chief jackass " being the president Louis Schwartz , who Jackson accused of eating ham himself , and of stealing from the synagogue 's charity boxes . Jackson was expelled from the congregation , and subsequently convicted of libel and fined $ 100 ( today $ 2 @,@ 600 ) for making the accusations , while Rosenberg sued the synagogue for his salary . Rosenberg died of pneumonia in April 1893 , at the age of 43 , his " health and spirits " , according to a contemporary New York Times report , " broken " by the expulsion . At the funeral , Jackson berated the congregation 's members , who , he charged , had " hounded , hunted , driven [ Rosenberg ] to a grave of misery " , and allegedly threatened to kill one of them with a stone taken from the newly dug grave . Charges were again brought against Jackson , but this time were dismissed , with the Justice stating " it looks as if it were an even thing all around . " 
 A month later , Beth Jacob hired Abraham <unk> as rabbi . The following year , the synagogue 's two @-@ story frame synagogue building at 326 Keap Street , valued at $ 2 @,@ 000 ( today $ 55 @,@ 000 ) , was struck by lighting and almost completely destroyed . The congregation decided to rebuild at the same location . 
 = = Early 20th century = = 
 Many working class German Jews moved from the Lower East Side to Williamsburg after the Williamsburg Bridge was completed in 1903 , providing access to Manhattan . In January 1904 , Beth Jacob merged with Chevra Ansche Sholom , a synagogue that had been founded the year before . The combined congregation took the name Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom . Chevra Ansche Sholom worshiped in a Masonic Temple , and had a number of assets , including two houses at 184 – 186 South Third Street valued at $ 6 @,@ 500 ( today $ 171 @,@ 000 ) , with a mortgage of $ 4 @,@ 500 ( today $ 119 @,@ 000 ) . At the time , Beth Jacob 's own building was valued at $ 6 @,@ 000 ( today $ 158 @,@ 000 ) , with a mortgage of $ 2 @,@ 000 ( today $ 53 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom exchanged the deeds for houses at 184 – 186 South Third Street for a property at 274 – 276 South Third Street in June 1905 . It hired architect George F. Pelham to draw up plans for a new building , instructing him to copy the prominent Congregation Shaaray <unk> building on Manhattan 's West 82nd Street , designed by Arnold Brunner , and known as the " West End Synagogue " . Features of the new design included seating for almost 1 @,@ 000 in the main sanctuary , a Talmud Torah for Hebrew language instruction in the basement , electric lighting , and steam heating . Construction was expected to cost $ 75 @,@ 000 ( today $ 1 @,@ 980 @,@ 000 ) . Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom erected the building at 274 – 276 South Third Street , and sold Beth Jacob 's building at 326 Keap Street to the North Side <unk> , a new congregation . 
 Ground was broken in June 1905 , the cornerstone was laid in September , and the new building was dedicated by then @-@ rabbi Dr. H. Veld on September 9 , 1906 , in time for High Holy Day services to be held there that year . The actual cost of construction was around $ 60 @,@ 000 ( today $ 1 @,@ 580 @,@ 000 ) , of which $ 35 @,@ 000 ( today $ 920 @,@ 000 ) was raised through sale of seats and donations , and the rest via a mortgage . The improved premises attracted many new members . 
 In February 1907 , the congregation created a four @-@ room Talmud Torah . In September of that year Samuel Rabinowitz was hired as rabbi for a three @-@ year term , renewed in 1910 for another three years . A " junior congregation " was created from the members of the Talmud Torah . They elected , as their first " pupil rabbi " , Harry Halpern , who later served for five decades as rabbi of the East Midwood Jewish Center . 
 Rabinowitz resigned in indignation in May 1912 , stating the trustees did not live up to the terms of his contract , after Herman Heisman , chairman of the synagogue 's board of trustees , hired an assistant rabbi , whose services Rabinowitz objected to . Rabinowitz purchased for $ 50 @,@ 000 ( today $ 1 @,@ 230 @,@ 000 ) a church building at South 5th Street and Marcy Avenue , and started his own synagogue there . His first Saturday services had an attendance of 1 @,@ 200 , a third of whom were his former congregants , and he stated that " his flock " would soon join him . 
 Rabinowitz was succeeded as rabbi of Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom in December 1912 by Wolf Gold . Born in Szczecin , Poland ( then Stettin , Germany ) in 1889 , he was the descendant of at least eight generations of rabbis , and received his own rabbinic ordination in 1906 , at age 17 . He emigrated to the United States the following year , and served as rabbi of congregations in Chicago , Illinois and Scranton , Pennsylvania before coming to Williamsburg . 
 A strong proponent of Religious Zionism , Gold helped found in New York the first branch of Mizrahi ( the Religious Zionists of America ) in the United States in 1914 ( he would subsequently assist in the founding of many of its other branches in North America ) . That year , the congregation purchased for the growing Talmud Torah the First United Presbyterian Church building at South 1st and Rodney Streets , at a cost of $ 20 @,@ 050 ( today $ 474 @,@ 000 ) . Many classrooms were added in the lower auditorium , and the building was dedicated as the " Talmud Torah of Williamsburg " in December . 
 In 1917 , Gold was one of the founders of Yeshiva Torah <unk> , and was its first president . He would serve at Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom until 1919 , moving to a pulpit in San Francisco . That year the congregation had 155 member families . Gold would emigrate to Palestine in 1935 , and was one of the signatories of the Israeli Declaration of Independence . 
 Gold was succeeded as rabbi by Solomon Golobowsky . The congregation had decided by 1918 that the Talmud Torah should become independent : during Golobowsky 's tenure , in 1921 , it demolished the church building housing the school , and built in its place a new building , with 18 classrooms and an auditorium . The school was incorporated as the " Hebrew School of Williamsburg " , and title to the building and property was transferred from the synagogue to it in July of that year . The school in turn assumed a mortgage of $ 15 @,@ 000 ( today $ 200 @,@ 000 ) and additional debts of around $ 10 @,@ 700 ( today $ 140 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Isaac Bunin succeeded Golobowsky as rabbi in December 1926 . Born in <unk> , <unk> ( near Mogilev , Belarus ) in 1882 , he had emigrated to the United States in 1923 . While practicing as a rabbi in Russia , he issued a <unk> in 1908 that permitted Jews to shoot — on the Sabbath — anarchist communists who terrorized local Jewish communities , and extorted " contributions " from them . Before coming to Beth Jacob Anshe Sholom he served as rabbi in Trenton , New Jersey , where he was instrumental in the creation of the re @-@ established Dr. Theodor Herzl 's Zion Hebrew School ( opened October 1926 ) . 
 = = Post World War II = = 
 Following World War II and the Holocaust , large numbers of Hasidic and <unk> Jewish refugees immigrated to Williamsburg . The congregation initially had poor relations with these groups , but these later improved with some segments of the Hasidic community . The synagogue celebrated Bunin 's Silver Jubilee as rabbi in March , 1951 . His work <unk> Yitzhak was published in 1953 . 
 The old Jewish area of Williamsburg east of Broadway was strongly impacted by the construction of the Brooklyn @-@ Queens Expressway in the 1950s . The congregation 's building was expropriated and demolished . It joined with another large Ashkenazi synagogue in the same situation , and in 1957 the merged congregations constructed the current building at the edge of the " Jewish Triangle " , just west of Broadway . In 1965 , Chaim A. Pincus was the rabbi . 
 Joshua Fishman , described by George <unk> as " a renowned scholar and orator , " became the rabbi of the congregation in 1971 . He also served from 1982 as head of Torah <unk> – National Society for Hebrew Day Schools . At the time Fishman became rabbi , as many as 700 people would attend Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom 's services . 
 One of the members in the 1990s and 2000s was Marty Needleman . He was project director for Brooklyn Legal Services , which provided legal services to low @-@ income Brooklyn residents , and was a member of the executive committees of both the synagogue and of Los <unk> , a Williamsburg community @-@ based housing group . Another notable congregant is Steve Cohn , the Democratic District Leader and lawyer whose father was involved with the synagogue , and who had his Bar Mitzvah there . 
 Samuel Heilman wrote in 1996 that Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom was one of four Williamsburg institutions that served to " anchor the community around them " , and " in effect geographically engulf and cancel " the ability of prominent local churches to " dominate the neighborhood " . By the mid @-@ 1990s , however , the synagogue attracted only 300 to 400 generally elderly Ashkenazi men and women for High Holy Day services , most of whom lived in " public high rise projects " , and Fishman doubted that Williamsburg 's only remaining Orthodox Nusach Ashkenaz synagogue still holding regular services would survive . By 2010 , Shabbat attendance was around two dozen worshipers , and weekday attendance half that . 
 As of 2010 , Beth Jacob Ohev Sholom was the oldest Orthodox congregation on Long Island ( including Brooklyn and Queens ) , and , according to Brooklyn Eagle journalist <unk> <unk> , " one of the few remnants of the non @-@ Hasidic Jewish community that thrived in Williamsburg until the 1960s " . No Conservative or Reform synagogues presently exist in the neighborhood , Rabbi Fishman retired in 2014 . The president is Martin S. <unk> . 
 = = External Links = = 
 Official Website 
 = Avogadro constant = 
 In chemistry and physics , the Avogadro constant ( named after the scientist Amedeo Avogadro ) is the number of constituent particles , usually atoms or molecules , that are contained in the amount of substance given by one mole . Thus , it is the proportionality factor that relates the molar mass of a compound to the mass of a sample . Avogadro 's constant , often designated with the symbol NA or L , has the value 6 @.@ <unk> ( 74 ) × 1023 mol − 1 in the International System of Units ( SI ) . 
 Previous definitions of chemical quantity involved Avogadro 's number , a historical term closely related to the Avogadro constant , but defined differently : Avogadro 's number was initially defined by Jean Baptiste Perrin as the number of atoms in one gram @-@ molecule of atomic hydrogen , meaning one gram of hydrogen . This number is also known as Loschmidt constant in German literature . The constant was later redefined as the number of atoms in 12 grams of the isotope carbon @-@ 12 ( 12C ) , and still later generalized to relate amounts of a substance to their molecular weight . For instance , to a first approximation , 1 gram of hydrogen element ( H ) , having the atomic ( mass ) number 1 , has 6 @.@ 022 × 1023 hydrogen atoms . Similarly , 12 grams of 12C , with the mass number 12 ( atomic number 6 ) , has the same number of carbon atoms , 6 @.@ 022 × 1023 . Avogadro 's number is a dimensionless quantity , and has the same numerical value of the Avogadro constant given in base units . In contrast , the Avogadro constant has the dimension of reciprocal amount of substance . 
 Revisions in the base set of SI units necessitated redefinitions of the concepts of chemical quantity . Avogadro 's number , and its definition , was deprecated in favor of the Avogadro constant and its definition . Changes in the SI units are proposed to fix the value of the constant to exactly 6.02214X × 1023 when it is expressed in the unit mol − 1 , in which an " X " at the end of a number means one or more final digits yet to be agreed upon . 
 = = History = = 
 The Avogadro constant is named after the early 19th @-@ century Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro , who , in 1811 , first proposed that the volume of a gas ( at a given pressure and temperature ) is proportional to the number of atoms or molecules regardless of the nature of the gas . The French physicist Jean Perrin in 1909 proposed naming the constant in honor of Avogadro . Perrin won the 1926 Nobel Prize in Physics , largely for his work in determining the Avogadro constant by several different methods . 
 The value of the Avogadro constant was first indicated by Johann Josef Loschmidt , who in 1865 estimated the average diameter of the molecules in air by a method that is equivalent to calculating the number of particles in a given volume of gas . This latter value , the number density <formula> of particles in an ideal gas , is now called the Loschmidt constant in his honor , and is related to the Avogadro constant , NA , by 
 <formula> 
 where p0 is the pressure , R is the gas constant and T0 is the absolute temperature . The connection with Loschmidt is the root of the symbol L sometimes used for the Avogadro constant , and German @-@ language literature may refer to both constants by the same name , distinguished only by the units of measurement . 
 Accurate determinations of Avogadro 's number require the measurement of a single quantity on both the atomic and macroscopic scales using the same unit of measurement . This became possible for the first time when American physicist Robert Millikan measured the charge on an electron in 1910 . The electric charge per mole of electrons is a constant called the Faraday constant and had been known since 1834 when Michael Faraday published his works on electrolysis . By dividing the charge on a mole of electrons by the charge on a single electron the value of Avogadro 's number is obtained . Since 1910 , newer calculations have more accurately determined the values for the Faraday constant and the elementary charge . ( See below ) 
 Perrin originally proposed the name Avogadro 's number ( N ) to refer to the number of molecules in one gram @-@ molecule of oxygen ( exactly <unk> of oxygen , according to the definitions of the period ) , and this term is still widely used , especially in introductory works . The change in name to Avogadro constant ( NA ) came with the introduction of the mole as a base unit in the International System of Units ( SI ) in 1971 , which recognized amount of substance as an independent dimension of measurement . With this recognition , the Avogadro constant was no longer a pure number , but had a unit of measurement , the reciprocal mole ( mol − 1 ) . 
 While it is rare to use units of amount of substance other than the mole , the Avogadro constant can also be expressed in units such as the pound mole ( lb @-@ mol ) and the ounce mole ( oz @-@ mol ) . 
 NA 
 = 2 @.@ <unk> ( 12 ) × 1026 ( lb @-@ mol ) − 1 = 
 1 @.@ <unk> ( 77 ) × 1025 ( oz @-@ mol ) − 1 
 = = General role in science = = 
 Avogadro 's constant is a scaling factor between macroscopic and microscopic ( atomic scale ) observations of nature . As such , it provides the relation between other physical constants and properties . For example , based on 2014 CODATA values , it establishes the following relationship between the gas constant R and the Boltzmann constant kB , 
 <formula> 
 and the Faraday constant F and the elementary charge e , 
 <formula> 
 The Avogadro constant also enters into the definition of the unified atomic mass unit , u , 
 <formula> 
 where Mu is the molar mass constant . 
 = = Measurement = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The earliest accurate method to measure the value of the Avogadro constant was based on <unk> . The principle is to measure the Faraday constant , F , which is the electric charge carried by one mole of electrons , and to divide by the elementary charge , e , to obtain the Avogadro constant . 
 <formula> 
 The classic experiment is that of Bower and Davis at NIST , and relies on dissolving silver metal away from the anode of an electrolysis cell , while passing a constant electric current I for a known time t . If m is the mass of silver lost from the anode and Ar the atomic weight of silver , then the Faraday constant is given by : 
 <formula> 
 The NIST scientists devised a method to compensate for silver lost from the anode by mechanical causes , and conducted an isotope analysis of the silver used to determine its atomic weight . Their value for the conventional Faraday constant is F90 = <unk> @.@ 39 ( 13 ) C / mol , which corresponds to a value for the Avogadro constant of 6 @.@ <unk> ( 78 ) × 1023 mol − 1 : both values have a relative standard uncertainty of 1 @.@ 3 × 10 − 6 . 
 = = = Electron mass measurement = = = 
 The Committee on Data for Science and Technology ( CODATA ) publishes values for physical constants for international use . It determines the Avogadro constant from the ratio of the molar mass of the electron Ar ( e ) Mu to the rest mass of the electron me : 
 <formula> 
 The relative atomic mass of the electron , Ar ( e ) , is a directly @-@ measured quantity , and the molar mass constant , Mu , is a defined constant in the SI . The electron rest mass , however , is calculated from other measured constants : 
 <formula> 
 As may be observed in the table below , the main limiting factor in the precision of the Avogadro constant is the uncertainty in the value of the Planck constant , as all the other constants that contribute to the calculation are known more precisely . 
 = = = X @-@ ray crystal density ( <unk> ) methods = = = 
 A modern method to determine the Avogadro constant is the use of X @-@ ray crystallography . Silicon single crystals may be produced today in commercial facilities with extremely high purity and with few lattice defects . This method defines the Avogadro constant as the ratio of the molar volume , Vm , to the atomic volume <unk> : 
 <formula> , where <formula> and n is the number of atoms per unit cell of volume <unk> . 
 The unit cell of silicon has a cubic packing arrangement of 8 atoms , and the unit cell volume may be measured by determining a single unit cell parameter , the length of one of the sides of the cube , a . 
 In practice , measurements are carried out on a distance known as <unk> ( Si ) , which is the distance between the planes denoted by the Miller indices { 220 } , and is equal to a / √ 8 . The 2006 CODATA value for <unk> ( Si ) is 192 @.@ <unk> ( 50 ) pm , a relative uncertainty of 2 @.@ 8 × 10 − 8 , corresponding to a unit cell volume of 1 @.@ <unk> ( 13 ) × 10 − 28 m3 . 
 The isotope proportional composition of the sample used must be measured and taken into account . Silicon occurs in three stable isotopes ( 28Si , <unk> , <unk> ) , and the natural variation in their proportions is greater than other uncertainties in the measurements . The atomic weight Ar for the sample crystal can be calculated , as the relative atomic masses of the three nuclides are known with great accuracy . This , together with the measured density ρ of the sample , allows the molar volume Vm to be determined : 
 <formula> 
 where Mu is the molar mass constant . The 2006 CODATA value for the molar volume of silicon is 12 @.@ 058 8349 ( 11 ) <unk> − 1 , with a relative standard uncertainty of 9 @.@ 1 × 10 − 8 . 
 As of the 2006 CODATA recommended values , the relative uncertainty in determinations of the Avogadro constant by the X @-@ ray crystal density method is 1 @.@ 2 × 10 − 7 , about two and a half times higher than that of the electron mass method . 
 = = = = International Avogadro Coordination = = = = 
 The International Avogadro Coordination ( IAC ) , often simply called the " Avogadro project " , is a collaboration begun in the early 1990s between various national metrology institutes to measure the Avogadro constant by the X @-@ ray crystal density method to a relative uncertainty of 2 × 10 − 8 or less . The project is part of the efforts to redefine the kilogram in terms of a universal physical constant , rather than the International Prototype Kilogram , and complements the measurements of the Planck constant using watt balances . Under the current definitions of the International System of Units ( SI ) , a measurement of the Avogadro constant is an indirect measurement of the Planck constant : 
 <formula> 
 The measurements use highly polished spheres of silicon with a mass of one kilogram . Spheres are used to simplify the measurement of the size ( and hence the density ) and to minimize the effect of the oxide coating that inevitably forms on the surface . The first measurements used spheres of silicon with natural isotopic composition , and had a relative uncertainty of 3 @.@ 1 × 10 − 7 . These first results were also inconsistent with values of the Planck constant derived from watt balance measurements , although the source of the discrepancy is now believed to be known . 
 The main residual uncertainty in the early measurements was in the measurement of the isotopic composition of the silicon to calculate the atomic weight so , in 2007 , a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ kg single crystal of isotopically @-@ enriched silicon ( 99 @.@ 94 % 28Si ) was grown , and two one @-@ kilogram spheres cut from it . Diameter measurements on the spheres are repeatable to within 0 @.@ 3 nm , and the uncertainty in the mass is 3 µg . Full results from these determinations were expected in late 2010 . Their paper , published in January 2011 , summarized the result of the International Avogadro Coordination and presented a measurement of the Avogadro constant to be 6 @.@ <unk> ( 18 ) × 1023 mol − 1 . 
 = Brougham Castle = 
 Brougham Castle is a medieval building about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ east of Penrith , Cumbria , England . The castle was founded by Robert de Vieuxpont in the early 13th century . The site , near the confluence of the rivers Eamont and Lowther , had been chosen by the Romans for a Roman fort called <unk> . The castle is scheduled as an Ancient Monument , along with the fort , as " Brougham Roman fort and Brougham Castle " . 
 In its earliest form , the castle consisted of a stone keep , with an enclosure protected by an earthen bank and a wooden palisade . When the castle was built , Robert de Vieuxpont was one of only a few lords loyal to the king in the region . The <unk> were a powerful land @-@ owning family in North West England and also owned the castles of Appleby and Brough . In 1264 Robert de Vieuxpont 's grandson , also named Robert , was declared a traitor and his property was confiscated by Henry III . Brougham Castle and the other estates were eventually returned to the Vieuxpont family , and stayed in their possession until 1269 when the estates passed to the Clifford family through marriage . 
 With the outbreak of the Anglo @-@ Scottish Wars in 1296 , Brougham became an important military base for Robert Clifford , 1st Baron de Clifford . He began refortifying the castle : the wooden outer defences were replaced with stronger , more impressive stone walls , and the large stone gatehouse was added . The importance of Brougham and Roger Clifford was such that in 1300 he hosted Edward I at the castle . The second Roger Clifford was executed as a traitor in 1322 , and the family estates passed into the possession of Edward II , although they were returned once Edward III became king . The region was often at risk from the Scots , and in 1388 the castle was captured and sacked . 
 Following this , the Cliffords began spending more time at their other castles , particularly Skipton Castle in Yorkshire . Brougham descended through several generations of Cliffords , intermittently serving as a residence . However , by 1592 it was in a state of disrepair as George Clifford was spending more time in southern England due to his role as Queen 's Champion . The castle was briefly restored in the early 17th century to such an extent that James I was entertained there in 1617 . In 1643 , Lady Anne Clifford inherited the estates , including the castles of Brougham , Appleby and Brough , and set about restoring them . Brougham Castle was kept in good condition for a short time after Lady Anne 's death in 1676 ; however , the Earl of Thanet , who had inherited the Clifford estates , sold the furnishings in 1714 . The empty shell was left to decay as it was too costly to maintain . As a ruin , Brougham Castle inspired a painting by J. M. W. Turner and was mentioned at the start of William Wordsworth 's poem The Prelude , and was the subject of Wordsworth 's Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle upon the Restoration of Lord Clifford , the Shepherd , to the Estates and Honours of his Ancestors . The castle was left to the Ministry of Works in the 1930s and is today maintained by its successor , English Heritage . 
 = = Background = = 
 The site of Brougham Castle has been fortified since the Romans erected the fort of <unk> at the intersection of three Roman roads . With the rivers Eamont and Lowther flowing nearby and meeting to the west , the site had natural defences and the area was fertile and easy to cultivate . A civilian settlement grew around the fort . When Angles arrived in the area they named the place Brougham , meaning " the village by the fort " . Between the end of Roman rule in the early 5th century and the Norman Conquest in the late 11th century , Cumbria was a turbulent area . Although the site was a defendable position , there is no evidence that Brougham was refortified during this time . In 1092 , William II ( also known as William Rufus ) captured Cumbria south of the Solway Firth and established a new border far north of Brougham . The site at Brougham remained unfortified . Carlisle Castle secured the border , and castles at Appleby and Brough , both south east of Brougham , protected the line of communication from Carlisle to Yorkshire . In 1203 , the barony of Westmorland – containing Appleby , Brough , and Brougham – was granted to Robert de Vieuxpont by King John . A favourite of John 's , Vieuxpont was one of only a few lords loyal to him in northern England , whose inhabitants became so discontented with the king 's rule that they eventually rebelled . Around 1214 , Vieuxpont asserted control over more land , including half the manor of Brougham . It was in this atmosphere of unrest that Brougham Castle was founded . 
 = = Under the <unk> = = 
 Vieuxpont was one of only a few supporters of the king in northern England and he most likely began construction of Brougham Castle as soon as he acquired the land . At this stage , the castle would have been enclosed by an earthen bank surmounted by a timber palisade . The first three storeys of the stone keep date from this period . It was entered through the first floor via a forebuilding . To the east of this was a stone structure which was probably a hall . Building in stone was an expensive and time @-@ consuming process . No records tell us how much Brougham cost to construct , but there are records for other stone construction . For example , the late @-@ 12th @-@ century stone keep at Peveril Castle in Derbyshire would have cost around £ 200 , although something on a much larger scale , such as the vast Château Gaillard cost an estimated £ 15 @,@ 000 to £ 20 @,@ 000 and took several years to complete . 
 In 1216 , when a Scottish army invaded the Eden valley and Alan of Galloway occupied Westmorland , Brougham Castle played no part in the county 's defence , probably because it was unfinished . Construction would have been suspended until Alan retreated in 1217 . Vieuxpont received control over the king 's revenues from Cumberland , and these helped fund the construction of the castle . Brougham Castle was constructed in the northern part of the old Roman fort , and stone from the ruins was probably used to help build the castle . When Robert de Vieuxpont died in 1228 , his only son – John – was a minor , so his property was taken into the care a warden . 
 John de Vieuxpont died in 1241 , before he came of age . The new heir , John 's son Robert , was not old enough to inherit , so the family 's lands remained in wardship . During this time , the estates to fell into disrepair , and this probably included Brougham Castle . When Robert de Vieuxpont came of age in around 1257 he inherited considerable debts . He was one of the northern lords that revolted in support of Simon de Montfort in the Second Barons ' War ( 1264 – 1267 ) . By June 1264 , Vieuxpont was dead ; as he was considered a traitor , his property was confiscated by King Henry III . In 1266 , the king pardoned Vieuxpont posthumously , and his two daughters inherited the family estates . The guardians of the two girls , who at the time were too young to marry , divided the Vieuxpont lands with the expectation that they would come into their possession through marriage . Isabel Vieuxpont was given in marriage to Roger Clifford , the son of her guardian , and with her the shrievalty of Westmorland and the castles of Brougham and Appleby transferred to the Cliffords . 
 = = The Clifford family = = 
 By 1269 , Roger Clifford had married Isabel Vieuxpont and possession of Brougham Castle – as well as her other property – descended through the Clifford family . In 1283 , Roger predeceased his wife , who died in 1292 . At 18 , their son Robert was not old enough to take possession of his lands . During his three @-@ year minority , his estates suffered from neglect and poaching . When the Anglo @-@ Scottish wars began in 1296 , Robert Clifford played a prominent role in the conflict . As the furthest north of his castles , Brougham became Clifford 's most important base and he spent a lot of time there . It was during this period that Clifford undertook an extensive building programme . The timber palisade surrounding the site was replaced with a stone curtain wall . A four @-@ storey stone residential tower , called the Tower of League , was built in the castle 's south @-@ west corner . A fourth storey was added to the keep , and a double gatehouse attached to its northern side . The construction of a new stone hall to the south of the keep may indicate that during the war there was a larger garrison present than in peacetime , or it may have been built in anticipation of a royal visit . In July 1300 , Edward I – himself a renowned castle builder – visited Brougham with a large household of followers and the Prince of Wales . Although it is not certain whether the king stayed at the castle , historians believe it to have been likely . In 1309 , Robert Clifford was granted a licence to crenellate Brougham Castle ; this has been taken as an indication that by this point the rebuilding was complete . Licences to crenellate granted permission for a person to fortify a site . They were also proof of a relationship with or favour from the monarch , who was the one responsible for granting permission . 
 Edward I died in 1307 , and his successor , Edward II was distracted from war with Scotland by internal quarrels , enabling the Scottish to roam further south through England . In 1310 or 1311 , Robert Clifford was given Skipton Castle ; it was farther from the border than Brougham and at a time when Scottish raids were ravaging Westmorland , Clifford chose to spend more time and effort building at Skipton . Clifford was killed at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 , which ended the English counter @-@ offensive into Scotland . At the time of Robert 's death his son , Roger de Clifford , 2nd Baron de Clifford , was only 14 and not old enough to inherit . Therefore , the Clifford estates experienced another period of control through guardians , suffering from Scottish raids to such an extent that in 1317 the king granted Roger £ 200 towards the maintenance of his castles . Bartholomew de Badlesmere , 1st Baron Badlesmere was responsible for the upkeep of Brougham Castle and some other Clifford properties including Appleby Castle . Between 1316 and 1318 he spent £ 363 on the garrisons at Brougham and Appleby , though was supported by the king who gave £ 1 @,@ 270 towards their upkeep . Funds to pay the garrison were not easily gathered from the Clifford estates , and they were accused of poaching and pillaging . In 1320 , Roger Clifford was given his inheritance but probably spent more time at Skipton . He was executed as a traitor in 1322 after his capture at the Battle of Boroughbridge . Brougham Castle was amongst the Clifford lands confiscated and given to Andrew de Harcla for supporting the king against the uprising . However , by 1323 Harcla too had been executed for treason and the castle came into the possession of Edward II . In May 1323 , a truce was signed between the Scots and English resulting in a reduction in garrison strength throughout northern England . 
 When Edward III replaced Edward II on the throne , Robert Clifford , Roger 's younger brother , was granted most of the lands that had been confiscated . By 1333 , Robert had united under his control all the estates which had belonged to the Vieuxpont family . Hostilities between England and Scotland resumed in 1332 when Edward Balliol invaded to seize the Scottish throne for himself . He was expelled from Scotland in December 1333 . On entering Westmorland , Balliol sought refuge with the Clifford family , staying at the castles of Appleby , Brougham , Brough , and Pendragon . Robert Clifford was not heavily involved in the renewed conflict , although he did take part in battles in 1332 , 1337 , and 1342 . When the value of his property was assessed on his death in 1344 the estates of Brougham were suffering from the war , with indications that Brougham Castle was in a state of disrepair having endured the 1340s without funds for maintenance . Two minorities followed until Roger Clifford , 5th Baron Clifford , came of age in 1354 . Another truce between Scotland and England was signed in 1357 , this time lasting until 1384 . Although Roger Clifford spent much time at Appleby – which was Westmorland 's county town – he was responsible for rebuilding the domestic buildings at Brougham Castle , including the hall . He was ordered by the king to maintain a force of 40 men @-@ at @-@ arms and 50 mounted archers near the west end of the Scottish border region , and some were likely stationed at Brougham . The need for extra accommodation a possible reason why Clifford began rebuilding . In August 1388 , the Scottish launched an attack into England , with one force advancing east – and were eventually confronted at the Battle of Otterburn in Northumberland – and another raiding the west , reaching as far as Brough , 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the south @-@ east . During this time Brougham Castle was briefly captured by Scottish forces . 
 Roger Clifford died at Skipton Castle in 1389 , and the Clifford family began to lose interest in Westmorland . The Cliffords preferred their properties in Yorkshire to their dilapidated castles in Westmorland , which had been ravaged by wars with Scotland . Brougham Castle is not known to have been in use as a residence again until 1421 , when a man was accused of forging coins in the castle . Although little is known about Brougham during this period , historians believe it likely that repairs were undertaken , and a rivalry emerged between the Clifford family and the House of Neville that would later have consequences for Brougham . The familial enmity meant that the Earl of Salisbury , a Neville , used his position as lord of Penrith to antagonise the Cliffords ; it is likely that Brougham Castle was kept garrisoned due to its proximity to Penrith . In the Wars of the Roses ( 1455 – 1485 ) , the two families were on opposing sides , the Cliffords supporting the House of Lancaster and the Nevilles supporting the House of York . When the Yorkist Edward IV usurped the throne in 1461 the lands of John Clifford , 9th Baron de Clifford were confiscated . In 1471 , Edward IV granted Sir William Parr Brougham Castle and other properties which had belonged to the Cliffords . A year later Henry Clifford , John 's son and heir , was pardoned and when the Lancastrian Henry Tudor overthrew the Yorkists and took the throne as Henry VII , Henry Clifford appealed for the return of the Clifford estates . This was granted in November 1485 . 
 Henry Clifford lived until 1523 . Under him and his son – also called Henry , who later became Earl of Cumberland – the castle was intermittently in use as a residence for the family . After Brough Castle was destroyed in a fire in 1521 it is likely that Brougham became the new administrative centre and focus of the local lordship . As Earl of Cumberland Henry controlled Penrith and Carlisle , although he was an unpopular landlord . When the north of England rose up in the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536 , Henry was one of those targeted by the rebels . He confronted the rebel leaders at Kirkby Stephen in February 1537 , and after his defeat he retreated to Brougham Castle . After the Pilgrimage of Grace was suppressed , there were reforms of regional government in the north west . One of the results was that the title of Earl of Cumberland no longer gave Clifford <unk> of Penrith and Carlisle , with Brougham Castle once again becoming the Clifford 's northern @-@ most castle . 
 Henry died in 1542 and his son , Henry Clifford , 2nd Earl of Cumberland , inherited the family estates . During the Rising of the North , in which Catholic magnates rebelled against Elizabeth I , Henry remained loyal to the Tudor dynasty despite the Cliffords being a Catholic family . He dismantled Appleby Castle to prevent it from being used against royal forces , and at the same time put Brougham at the service of the Elizabethan government , although there was no fighting at the castle . Under the second and third earls , Henry and George , the castle was still used as a residence , with the third earl being born at Brougham Castle . However , it was under George that the building began to decay and by 1592 it was deserted . George Clifford spent much time either in southern England in his role as Queen 's Champion or at Skipton . An inventory of the castle 's contents in 1595 demonstrates that the structure was a neglected , <unk> furnished place , and what little furniture there was old and in disrepair . 
 = = The Clifford <unk> = = 
 When George Clifford died in 1605 , his wife Margaret became dowager countess and began repairing Brougham Castle , which became her favoured residence . Margaret contended with claims to the ownership of the family estates from her brother @-@ in @-@ law Francis Clifford , 4th Earl of Cumberland , but held onto Brougham Castle . Her daughter , Lady Anne Clifford continued the restoration of the castle and other Clifford properties . The only one of Margaret 's three children to survive childhood , Anne inherited the Clifford estates after her mother died in 1616 . The inheritance was not without incident . The Earl of Cumberland again asserted his claim to the Clifford estates , however the privy council found in favour of Anne . The solution was only temporary , and in April 1617 the king decided that the Earl of Cumberland was the rightful heir , and the Clifford estates passed to Francis Clifford . Later the same year , James I visited Scotland and on his return journey he stayed at the castles of Carlisle , Brougham , and Appleby , where expensive banquets were given in his honour . It is estimated that the festivities cost around £ 1 @,@ 200 . After this , Brougham was almost forgotten by its owner and neglected . 
 Francis Clifford died in 1641 , and the death of his son Henry Clifford , 5th Earl of Cumberland in 1643 left the line without a direct male heir . At this point , the Clifford estates reverted to Lady Anne . The English Civil War broke out in 1641 . Brougham was one of several castles in the generally Royalist Cumberland and Westmorland that were garrisoned by Cavalier forces . Sir John Lowther , the garrison commander , stated that he took control of Brougham Castle not because it was strategically important , but to deny the Parliamentarians of its use . Whilst under Royalist control , Lady Anne donated the income from her estates to the upkeep of her castles . In June 1648 , Appleby endured a four @-@ day siege before capitulating to the Parliamentarians , but lightly manned Brougham Castle succumbed easily to Colonel John Lambert . Although many castles in Cumberland and Westmorland were dismantled so they could not be used again , Brougham was spared this fate , most likely because it was not strategically important . In 1650 , Lady Anne Clifford began repaired Appleby and Brougham . Repairs were mostly complete by 1653 , but continued for several years afterwards , the work costing an estimated £ 40 @,@ 000 . By this time Brougham Castle was no longer a serious fortification and had become Anne 's country house . She laid out a garden on the site of the old Roman fort , which led to the discovery of such Roman artefacts as coins and three altars . A 10 @.@ 5 feet ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) stone wall was built around the garden , enclosing an area from the gatehouse to the south end of the Roman fort . 
 = = Picturesque ruin = = 
 Lady Anne Clifford died at Brougham Castle in 1676 and her grandson , Nicholas Tufton , 3rd Earl of Thanet , inherited the Clifford estates . He died in 1679 , and over the next five years possession passed through his three younger brothers . Under the youngest , Thomas Tufton , 6th Earl of Thanet , Brougham Castle suffered particular neglect . In 1714 , he decided that Appleby Castle was a sufficient residence and sold the contents of Brougham Castle for £ 570 . Only the Tower of League was left untouched , but in 1723 its contents were also sold , for £ 40 By the 1750s , the castle 's only practical use was as a ready source of building material for the village of Brougham , which prospered due to investment from the Earl of Thanet . In 1794 , a record of the dilapidated state of the castle noted that " much of the interior walls have lately been removed , also , for the purposes of building houses for the adjoining <unk> " . 
 During the late 18th century , the Lake District became a popular visitor attraction and the sensibilities of Romanticism glamorised such historic ruins as Brougham Castle . In his poem The Prelude , William Wordsworth recounted exploring the ruins of Brougham as an adolescent with his sister . Brougham also provided inspiration another of Wordsworth 's poems , the Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle upon the Restoration of Lord Clifford , the Shepherd , to the Estates and Honours of his Ancestors . The fallen castle attracted sightseers and antiquarians such as William Gilpin and Richard Warner . In his diary , Journey to the Lake District from Cambridge 1779 , William Wilberforce described Brougham Castle as a " very fine ruin " . The painter J. M. W. Turner visited Brougham in 1809 and 1831 , and on the first occasion produced a sketch which would be the starting point of a later watercolour . To avoid the castle decaying further , Charles Tufton , 10th Earl of Thanet , spent £ 41 repairing the structure in 1830 , and his successor Henry Tufton , 11th Earl of Thanet , undertook further repairs in the late 1840s , costing £ 421 . 
 Henry Tufton died in 1849 , and castle ownership fell to <unk> . Maintenance was too expensive for the family , and by 1859 cattle were being kept in its gatehouse , and visitors complained that parts of the romantic ruin had become inaccessible . Without sufficient funds , the castle quickly fell into marked decay . 
 In 1915 , the Ancient Monuments Board declared Brougham Castle a monument " whose preservation was regarded as being of national importance " . With the introduction of bus services in the area , the castle experienced renewed interest from the public , and in the late 1920s around 2 @,@ 000 people visited annually . In 1927 , the 2nd Baron Hothfield granted guardianship of Brougham Castle to the Office of Works , although he retained ownership . The organisation repaired the castle at the cost of £ 5 @,@ 925 . In the 1930s an additional £ 1 @,@ 050 was spent removing the masonry added in the 1840s . 
 Brougham Castle survives essentially as it was when the main repairs were finished in the 1930s . The castle is a Scheduled Monument , meaning it is a " nationally important " historic building and archaeological site which has been given protection against unauthorised change . Until 1984 , when a survey of the standing structure was conducted , little archaeological investigation had taken place at Brougham Castle . The survey was part of a monograph on the castle detailing its history and the phasing of the structure . Brougham is one of only a few castles in Cumbria to have undergone extensive archaeological investigation . Today , the castle is open to the public , and a museum is run by English Heritage , the successor of the Office of Works . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The path to Brougham Castle leads from east to west . To the south , or the left of someone approaching the castle , are the earthworks of the Roman fort and the location of the 17th @-@ century garden . The ground is terraced , and to the north the land slopes down towards the River Eamont . A moat runs alongside the east , south , and west faces of the castle , its width varying between 10 and 15 metres ( 33 and 49 ft ) and lying up to 3 @.@ 4 metres ( 11 ft ) deep . Although the moat is now dry it is likely that it used to be filled with water . The castle is an irregular polygon , measuring about 68 metres ( 223 ft ) along the west side , 72 metres ( 236 ft ) along the south , 48 metres ( 157 ft ) wide in the east , and 54 metres ( 177 ft ) on the north side . 
 Brougham Castle is entered through a three @-@ storey double @-@ gatehouse . Originally the coat of arms of Roger Clifford and his wife was carved above the entrance to the gatehouse but in the 19th century this was replaced by the current inscription , " Thys Made Roger " , by Henry Tufton , 11th Earl of Thanet . The inscription was originally above the entrance of the great hall built by Roger Clifford , 5th Baron Clifford . Erected on the slope inclining down to the river , the gatehouse was constructed in the early 14th century by Robert de Clifford , 1st Baron de Clifford . The complex has three components : the inner and outer gatehouses and a courtyard in between . The inner gatehouse survives to a height of 12 @.@ 5 metres ( 41 ft ) in the east . The ground @-@ floor passage through the building is vaulted and there was a portcullis at the east end . A postern gate was hidden behind a buttress in the north side of the gatehouse and would have provided a discrete means of leaving the castle . The floors above the passageway each consisted of a single large room and were connected to the keep , allowing people to move between the two without having to go outside . In the 17th century Lady Anne Clifford converted the top floor into her bedroom . Like the inner gatehouse , the outer section had a square plan , and the upper floors would each have been occupied by a single room . The building survives to a height of 14 @.@ 5 metres ( 48 ft ) in the east . Below the outer gatehouse was a dungeon , and at ground floor level on the north side the guardroom . The large rooms in both gatehouses would have been used as residences . Although the very top of the gatehouse no longer survives , it would have been crested by machicolations . 
 <unk> to the gatehouse is the 13th @-@ century keep . A keep contained the main domestic accommodation in a castle , usually high @-@ status , and also provided the last place of refuge if the surrounding enclosure fell during an assault . Brougham 's keep has a square plan and is between 19 and 20 metres ( 62 and 66 ft ) high , although originally would have stood taller . Access to each floor was granted by a spiral staircase in the north @-@ east corner , with each floor consisting of a single large room . The garderobe was located in the north @-@ west corner . It had long been assumed that the keep was built in the last quarter of the 12th century due to its simple design ; the square design , use of narrow buttresses at each corner , and entrance through a forebuilding are consistent with other keeps built in the late 12th century . By the 13th century , Brougham 's keep would have been old fashioned compared to the polygonal structures introduced in the 13th century . However , historian Henry Summerson who assessed the historic documents for the castle concluded that construction could not have begun earlier than the first quarter of the 13th century . The wooden floors no longer survive , and the use of the rooms in the keep is mostly conjectural , however it is likely that the ground floor would have served as a storage room , with the first floor being used as a hall and accommodation for the guards , and the second floor providing rooms for the lord . A final fourth storey was added in early 14th century . The keep would have been entered at first floor level , through the east side where it was abutted by a forebuilding . Despite the keep 's importance to the castle structure , little survives of the building today . 
 South east of the keep was the hall , built by Roger Clifford in the late 14th century as a replacement for an earlier hall . It provided space for the castle 's garrison , swelled by the Anglo @-@ Scottish Wars , and was a location for the lord to eat with his soldiers . The hall had large windows which may have detracted from the building 's defensive capability , although it has been postulated that casements bore large wooden shutters . The kitchen , which served the entire castle , was set in the south @-@ east corner of the fortification . Along the south wall were arranged more lodgings , a well , and a chapel , the latter another addition by Roger Clifford . In the south @-@ west corner of the castle was the Tower of League , built around 1300 by Roger Clifford . It included further rooms for accommodation , but notably would also have allowed defenders to fire on an enemy emerging from the gatehouse . Four storeys tall and with a single room at each level , the presence of a garderobe and fireplace on each floor suggests that the tower was reserved for high @-@ status visitors . The tower 's square plan is typical of such structures built in northern England at this time , as seen at castles such as Warkworth and Egremont , although it contrasts with rounded towers preferred in the south . 
 = 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné = 
 The 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné was the sixty @-@ fifth running of the Critérium du Dauphiné cycling stage race ; a race , organised by the Amaury Sport Organisation , rated as a World Tour event on the UCI calendar , the highest classification such an event can have . The race consisted of eight stages , beginning in Champéry on 2 June – the first such start for the race in Switzerland – and concluding in Risoul on 9 June , and was the sixteenth race of the 2013 UCI World Tour season . The Dauphiné was viewed as a great preparation for July 's Tour de France and a number of the contenders for the general classification of the Tour participated in the Dauphiné . It featured mountainous stages as well as an individual time trial similar in length to the Tour . 
 The race was won by Great Britain 's Chris Froome of Team Sky – the third successive year that the squad had won the race , after Bradley Wiggins ' victories in 2011 and 2012 . Froome took the overall lead of the race after winning the fifth stage , and maintained his advantage to the end of the race to win his fourth stage race of the 2013 season . Ultimately , Froome won the general classification by 58 seconds over runner @-@ up and team @-@ mate Richie Porte , a domestique for Froome in the mountainous stages on the route . The podium was completed by Daniel Moreno of Team Katusha , who finished 74 seconds in arrears of Porte , and two minutes 12 seconds behind Froome . 
 In the race 's other classifications , Garmin – Sharp 's Rohan Dennis was the winner of the white jersey for the young rider classification as he was the highest placed rider born in 1988 or later , finishing in eighth place overall . Despite not winning any stages during the race , Gianni Meersman of Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step won the green jersey , for the winner of the points classification – gained at intermediate sprints and stage finishes – while the red and white polka @-@ dotted jersey for the King of the Mountains classification went to Argos – Shimano rider Thomas Damuseau . The teams classification was comfortably won by Team Sky for the second year in a row ; they were over twelve minutes clear of the next best team , Saxo – Tinkoff . 
 = = Teams = = 
 As the Critérium du Dauphiné was a UCI World Tour event , all UCI ProTeams were invited automatically and obligated to send a squad . Originally , eighteen ProTeams were invited to the race , with four other squads given wildcard places . Team Katusha were not originally invited to the race , but when they later regained their ProTour status after an appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport , the race organisers announced their inclusion , bringing the total number of teams competing to twenty @-@ three . 
 During May 's Giro d 'Italia , Sylvain Georges tested positive for the vasodilator <unk> , after the seventh stage ; his positive test was the second by a rider from the Ag2r – La Mondiale squad in the space of a year , after Steve <unk> tested positive for the glycoprotein hormone erythropoietin ( EPO ) in an out @-@ of @-@ competition test in September 2012 . Since the team was a member of the Mouvement pour un <unk> <unk> union , a second positive test meant that , according to the union 's regulations , they had to stop racing for eight days . The team voluntarily withdrew from the Dauphiné , avoiding a financial penalty which could have been incurred by the team for failing to compete in a World Tour event , against UCI regulations . As a result the peloton was reduced to the following twenty @-@ two teams . 
 Among the 176 @-@ rider starting peloton was only one previous winner of the race : Alejandro Valverde , the winner of the race in 2008 and 2009 , led the Movistar Team . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The route for the race was announced on 15 April 2013 . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 2 June 2013 — Champéry ( Switzerland ) to Champéry ( Switzerland ) , 121 km ( 75 @.@ 2 mi ) 
 Despite starting and finishing in the village of Champéry – the first occasion that the race had started in Switzerland in its history – most of the opening stage of the 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné was just over the Franco @-@ Swiss border in the Haute @-@ Savoie department , where the previous year 's race had finished . After a slight descent from the start , the race 's first climb commenced after just 3 @.@ 3 km ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) of racing , with the first @-@ category Côte de Morgins , a 9 @.@ 2 km ( 5 @.@ 7 mi ) -long , 6 % climb . After a long and steady descent , another first @-@ category climb of the Col du Corbier – which featured in the 2012 Dauphiné @-@ ending stage – was <unk> , a 7 @.@ 6 km ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) test at an average of 7 @.@ 5 % . On the return loop to Champéry , after passing through the intermediate sprint at La Chapelle @-@ d <unk> , the Côte de Morgins was climbed from the other side ( this time as a second @-@ category climb ) , before a third @-@ category climb – the Côte de Champéry – just a kilometre from the finish . This 121 km ( 75 @.@ 2 mi ) parcours , especially the closing kilometres , was expected to see sprinters being dropped from the peloton , resulting in a select group of riders at the finish . 
 The day 's breakaway was initiated at the front of the day 's opening climb , the Côte de Morgins , with the initial move being made by Team Europcar rider David Veilleux . Veilleux was later joined by Euskaltel – Euskadi 's Ricardo García , Argos – Shimano rider Thomas Damuseau and Jean @-@ Marc <unk> of Bretagne – Séché Environnement , and the quartet built up a maximum lead on the road of around ten minutes . Behind them , Tony Martin ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) set off in pursuit of the four leaders , but was not able to reach the lead group at any point . Veilleux attacked on the Col du Corbier , and managed to break away by 40 seconds from García and Damuseau – <unk> had been dropped earlier on the climb – in 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the top of the climb . Veilleux remained well clear into the closing stages , and eventually came across the line to take the biggest win of his career – his first win at World Tour level – by almost two minutes . In doing so , Veilleux claimed the race lead in the general , points and mountains classifications . The remaining members of the breakaway were caught , and this allowed Martin 's team @-@ mate Gianni Meersman to take second , ahead of Blanco Pro Cycling 's Tom @-@ Jelte Slagter , who was the best @-@ placed young rider . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 3 June 2013 — Châtel to Oyonnax , 191 km ( 118 @.@ 7 mi ) 
 Although categorised as a flat stage by the race organisers , the second half of the 191 km ( 118 @.@ 7 mi ) parcours was set to test whether the sprinters could with remain with the peloton all the way to the finish in Oyonnax . Five of the day 's six categorised climbs came in a 60 km ( 37 @.@ 3 mi ) portion of the route , with the last of these – the second @-@ category Col du Sentier – coming with just 11 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining of the stage . The Col du Sentier was the day 's steepest climb , with an average gradient of 7 @.@ 6 % , and was one of two second @-@ category ascents , along with the 5 @.@ 6 km ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) -long Côte de Communal ( 6 @.@ 3 % ) around 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) prior . The descent into Oyonnax was fast , before a gradual rise to the finish . 
 Four separate riders attempted to make solo breakaways early in the stage , but it was not until the 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) point that a group was able to separate from the peloton . For the second day running , Argos – Shimano rider Thomas Damuseau was in the breakaway , with the main aim of taking the mountains classification lead away from overall leader David Veilleux of Team Europcar . Joining Damuseau in the group initially were Bretagne – Séché Environnement 's Arnaud Gérard and Cofidis rider Rudy Molard , while a fourth rider , José Mendes ( NetApp – Endura ) , was able to bridge up to the group from the peloton . With three @-@ quarters of the group being within two minutes of Veilleux after the opening stage , the peloton were unwilling to give the group too much distance on the road , and the gap peaked at no more than five minutes , just after halfway . 
 Veilleux 's team maintained the pace in the peloton , pulling the group back as Damuseau led the leaders over the top of the first four climbs , but the quartet held a lead of less than a minute at the foot of the Côte du <unk> . Molard attacked his companions , and pulled the advantage out to just over a minute , while the others were brought back by the peloton , now being led by Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step . Molard 's resistance lasted until the bottom of the final climb , the Col du Sentier , when the peloton sped by . His team @-@ mate Rein Taaramäe attacked on the climb itself , remaining clear to around 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) from the finish of the stage . Cannondale had led the chase , and also led the field into the final kilometre for their sprinter Elia Viviani , and after navigating the hairpin bend with 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) left , Viviani was the strongest in the sprint and took his first win of 2013 ahead of Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Gianni Meersman , who finished second for the second day running . Veilleux finished within the peloton to maintain his race lead by 1 ' 56 " over Meersman . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 4 June 2013 — Ambérieu @-@ en @-@ Bugey to Tarare , 167 km ( 103 @.@ 8 mi ) 
 The third stage of the race was split into two distinctive sections ; the first portion of the 167 km ( 103 @.@ 8 mi ) -long stage from the start town of Ambérieu @-@ en @-@ Bugey was predominantly flat as the race headed towards the feeding zone in the commune of <unk> . From there , the route moved uphill towards the first of the day 's two categorised climbs . The Col des <unk> was a long , but rolling climb of 3 % over 10 @.@ 5 km ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) , with a steady descent towards the intermediate sprint point , coming 25 km ( 15 @.@ 5 mi ) before the finish , in the commune of <unk> . The route descended a little further , before the Col des Sauvages , a third @-@ category climb at an average gradient over 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) of 5 @.@ 5 % . The summit of the climb came 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) before the finish into Tarare ; the finish was technical , with two tight left @-@ hand turns in the final kilometre . 
 Four riders broke clear of the main field almost immediately after the race rolled out of Ambérieu @-@ en @-@ Bugey , with <unk> Beppu ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) being joined in the breakaway by Garmin – Sharp rider Jacob <unk> , Sander <unk> of Lotto – Belisol and Vacansoleil – DCM 's Juan Antonio Flecha . The quartet pulled clear to a maximum advantage of around seven minutes early in the stage . This was steadily brought down by the team @-@ mates of the race leader David Veilleux ( Team Europcar ) and the Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step team for their sprinter Gianni Meersman . FDJ also aided with the chase for Nacer Bouhanni , and the peloton was within a minute of the leaders at the intermediate sprint in <unk> . <unk> was the last member of the group to be caught , just as he commenced the Col des Sauvages . After several solo attacks were pulled back by Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step , it set up the final sprint in Tarare . With a lead @-@ out from team @-@ mate Geraint Thomas , Edvald Boasson Hagen finished strongest to take the stage win – the third Dauphiné win of his career – ahead of Orica – GreenEDGE 's Michael Matthews and Meersman . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 5 June 2013 — Villars @-@ les @-@ Dombes to Parc des Oiseaux , 32 @.@ 5 km ( 20 @.@ 2 mi ) , individual time trial ( ITT ) 
 The race 's only individual time trial of an extensive length was held as an out @-@ and @-@ back loop around Villars @-@ les @-@ Dombes in the Ain department . The parcours of the 32 @.@ 5 km ( 20 @.@ 2 mi ) -long stage was almost entirely flat . The stage finished at the Parc des Oiseaux , one of the largest ornithological parks in Europe . Race organisers had expected the quickest times for the course to be around forty minutes . Several of the general classification leaders regarded the time trial as a test for an individual time trial of similar length due to be held in July , at the Tour de France . As is customary in time trial stages , cyclists set off in reverse order from where they were ranked in the general classification at the end of the previous stage . Thus , Larry Warbasse of the BMC Racing Team , who was in 172nd place of the 176 starters , trailing overall leader David Veilleux by thirty @-@ five minutes and fourteen seconds , was the first rider to set off on the stage . 
 Warbasse recorded a time of 42 ' 43 " for the course , but his stay at the top was almost immediately beaten by Orica – GreenEDGE 's Mitchell Docker . Docker had started two minutes behind Warbasse – riders had started the stage at one @-@ minute intervals – and nearly caught him towards the end , having already passed his team @-@ mate Yannick <unk> on the course . NetApp – Endura rider Alexander Wetterhall was the next rider to record the fastest time , setting a benchmark of 40 ' 19 " ; Jack Bauer was the first rider to break the expected fastest time , recording a sub @-@ 40 minute time for the parcours , as the Garmin – Sharp rider went top with 39 ' 33 " . Eloy Teruel went five seconds quicker than Bauer for the Movistar Team to assume top spot for a short time , before Czech national champion Jan Bárta , a team @-@ mate of Wetterhall at NetApp – Endura , completed the course over a minute quicker in a time of 38 ' 30 " . 
 Teruel 's team @-@ mate Jonathan Castroviejo almost recorded the first time below 38 minutes , falling a couple of seconds shy with a time of 38 ' 02 " , but was still almost half a minute clear of the best time to that point , set by Bárta . His time was to be beaten by only three riders , the first of which was the eventual stage @-@ winning time recorded by the world champion Tony Martin , riding for the Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step team . Martin was comfortably quickest at each of the two intermediate time @-@ checks along the route , and crossed the line over a minute clear of Castroviejo ; he had recorded a time of 36 ' 54 " . Martin 's winning time allowed him to claim his sixth individual time trial victory of 2013 . Garmin – Sharp rider Rohan Dennis recorded the second @-@ fastest time for the course at 37 ' 41 " , and by doing so , became the new leader of the Dauphiné by five seconds , from Team Sky 's Chris Froome – the best of the general classification contenders , and one of four Team Sky riders in the top six – as Veilleux lost more than three minutes on the course . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 6 June 2013 — <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Aix to Valmorel , 139 km ( 86 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 The fifth stage was the first to be categorised as a mountain stage , with a summit finish at the ski resort of Valmorel , just outside Les <unk> . After an opening loop around the start town of <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Aix , the Côte de <unk> was the first of four categorised climbs on the day 's route . The climb of 4 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) averaged 6 @.@ 6 % over the ascent , and from there the race progressed to the Massif des <unk> . After a period of undulating terrain , the short , sharp fourth @-@ category Col du <unk> was next on the route , at 6 % over just under 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of climbing . After the descent down to Saint @-@ Pierre @-@ d <unk> , the 139 km ( 86 @.@ 4 mi ) parcours headed towards Valmorel via Albertville , the intermediate sprint point at La <unk> and the fourth @-@ category Côte de la Croix . The final climb , an hors catégorie ascent , averaged 7 % over 12 @.@ 7 km ( 7 @.@ 9 mi ) , which was somewhat ameliorated by several hairpin bends towards the finish , which provided any attacking rider with a perfect kick towards the finish . 
 An attack @-@ laden opening to the stage allowed a breakaway of fifteen riders to be formed after around 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) of racing , with mountains classification leader Thomas Damuseau being among the group , to maintain his lead in those standings ; the best @-@ placed general classification rider among the group was Francesco <unk> ( Astana ) , who trailed overnight leader Rohan Dennis of Garmin – Sharp by just under three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . The lead gap went over five minutes at one point during the stage , but was around half that as the leaders approached the final climb of the day . Tim Wellens ( Lotto – Belisol ) and Orica – GreenEDGE 's Daniel <unk> set the pace at the foot of the climb , before Wellens attacked on his own . RadioShack – Leopard 's Matthew Busche was able to bridge back up to Wellens , before dropping him . 
 Behind , Team Sky were leading the main group up the Montée de Valmorel , with the pace dislodging numerous riders . Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) attempted to chase down Busche , but was brought back with less than 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining . After losing time in the previous day 's time trial , Alberto Contador of Saxo – Tinkoff attacked the group , but was chased down by Team Sky 's Chris Froome ; Froome and Contador were able to catch Busche in the closing stages , with Froome kicking on to take the stage victory and the race leader 's yellow and blue jersey , as Dennis had been dropped in the final 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the stage . Dennis ultimately fell to third in the general classification , as Froome 's team @-@ mate Richie Porte was also able to move ahead by two seconds , but he maintained his lead in the young rider classification . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 7 June 2013 — La <unk> to Grenoble , 143 km ( 88 @.@ 9 mi ) 
 The sixth stage was relatively short at 143 km ( 88 @.@ 9 mi ) long . After a near @-@ flat opening 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) , which included the day 's intermediate sprint at Albertville , the race moved towards the hills , with four categorised climbs within a 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) period . The first was the shallowest of the quartet , with the fourth @-@ category Côte d <unk> averaging 5 @.@ 3 % over 2 @.@ 2 km ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) , before the first @-@ category Col du <unk> − a narrow climb averaging 7 @.@ 3 % over 7 @.@ 1 km ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) . After a speedy descent , the riders climbed once again , with the second @-@ category Col des <unk> averaging over 8 % . Another short , sharp climb of the Col des <unk> finished the categorised climbing for the day . 
 After points classification leader Gianni Meersman extended his lead at the intermediate sprint for Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step , the stage 's breakaway took over an hour to form on the road . A three @-@ rider move built up an advantage of over two minutes , after which Team Europcar took up station on the front of the peloton to get a rider clear . The rider in question was Thomas Voeckler , who managed to catch the original breakaway , and passed them on the road . Voeckler was later joined by seven other riders as they were ascending the Col du <unk> . The best placed rider of the octet was FDJ rider Alexandre Geniez , who trailed the overnight leader of the general classification , Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , by 3 ' 41 " ; despite this , Froome 's squad kept the gap in check , with the difference not going over three minutes . 
 BMC Racing Team also helped with the chase of the leaders , and managed to halve the gap by the time the race reached the 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) to go point . The lead group then splintered , as the Movistar Team 's José Herrada attacked on his own . The Astana pairing of Egor Silin and Kevin Seeldraeyers were next to follow Herrada , with Voeckler and Geniez eventually rejoining , and Tim Wellens ( Lotto – Belisol ) , Mikel Nieve of Euskaltel – Euskadi and Vacansoleil – DCM 's Thomas De Gendt losing contact . Geniez later dropped back , which allowed for a slight lull in the chase , allowing the leaders to increase the gap from just over a minute to a minute @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half . The gap remained at around a minute as the race entered Grenoble , which enabled the breakaway to battle it out for the honours . After several half @-@ hearted moves , Voeckler was the only rider to launch a sizable move ; he ultimately won the stage , ahead of Herrada , Seeldraeyers and Silin . Team Sky sprinter Edvald Boasson Hagen won the bunch sprint , 46 seconds later , as team @-@ mate Froome kept the race lead . 
 = = = Stage 7 = = = 
 8 June 2013 — Le Pont @-@ de @-@ <unk> to <unk> , 187 @.@ 5 km ( 116 @.@ 5 mi ) 
 The queen stage of the 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné , the penultimate stage steadily rose out of the start town in Le Pont @-@ de @-@ <unk> towards the first of the day 's five categorised climbs . The first test , a climb to Alpe d 'Huez , was seen as a dress rehearsal for the Tour de France , to be held in July , with the 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) , 8 @.@ 6 % average hors catégorie climb featuring twice on that race 's eighteenth stage . From there , it was a short descent to the second climb , the second @-@ category Col de <unk> , which averaged almost 7 % over 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of climbing . An immediate long descent followed , before the first @-@ category Col d <unk> , which averaged 6 @.@ 1 % over its 10 @.@ 5 km ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) duration . The riders enjoyed a respite from the climbs for around an hour across the <unk> , passing through the intermediate sprint at Corps . The final portion of the 187 @.@ 5 km ( 116 @.@ 5 mi ) parcours saw the riders climb the Col du Noyer , with portions at 11 % , before a descent and a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) , 5 @.@ 7 % kick up to the finish at <unk> . 
 A group of twenty @-@ two riders ( from seventeen teams ) formed the day 's breakaway , and were around three minutes clear by the time they reached the foot of the climb to Alpe d 'Huez . The gap rose to around four minutes by the summit of the climb – led over the top by Vacansoleil – DCM 's Thomas De Gendt – which allowed Kevin Seeldraeyers ( Astana ) to become the virtual leader of the general classification . The breakaway began to splinter on the Col d <unk> , as the advantage over the main field continued to rise , to over five minutes . Alexey Lutsenko led over the climb for Astana , ahead of the mountains classification leader Thomas Damuseau of Argos – Shimano and Seeldraeyers . Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Sylvain Chavanel and Cannondale rider Alessandro De Marchi moved clear ahead of the Col du Noyer , and managed to pull around a minute @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half clear of the rest of the breakaway by the foot of the climb . 
 De Marchi dropped Chavanel on the climb , but by this time , the lead group had moved within a minute of catching him ; they eventually did so with around 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) left to cover on the stage . Saxo – Tinkoff and Team Sky were prominent at the front of the leading group , setting the pace high enough to reduce the group to around a dozen riders . Euskaltel – Euskadi rider Samuel Sánchez attacked near the top of the climb , with another Astana rider , Jakob Fuglsang . The two riders worked well together and managed to build a gap of about twenty seconds prior to the final climb , remaining clear until the finish . Sánchez out @-@ sprinted Fuglsang at the end for his first win of the year ; a win he later dedicated to his former team @-@ mate Víctor <unk> , who had died in a training accident in September 2012 . Richie Porte finished third for Team Sky , having been aided by his team @-@ mate and overall leader , Chris Froome . 
 = = = Stage 8 = = = 
 9 June 2013 — Sisteron to Risoul , 155 @.@ 5 km ( 96 @.@ 6 mi ) 
 The final stage of the 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné was a categorised medium @-@ mountain stage 155 @.@ 5 km ( 96 @.@ 6 mi ) in length . Having rolled out of the start town of Sisteron , the parcours headed towards <unk> via some rolling terrain , and after a descent , set up for the first of three categorised climbs : the Côte de la <unk> , averaging around 5 % for its 5 @.@ 4 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) length . Having passed through the feed zone at Le <unk> @-@ <unk> , the road steadily rose towards the foot of the second climb , the first @-@ category Col de Vars . A climb of irregular gradient , it averaged 6 @.@ 9 % for 10 @.@ 4 km ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) of climbing , albeit with a short downhill section in the middle . From the summit , the route descended towards <unk> and ultimately , the start of the final climb to Risoul , a steady almost @-@ 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) climb , maxing at around 9 % , but averaging 6 @.@ 7 % for its duration . The climb had previously featured in the 2010 edition of the race , where Nicolas Vogondy soloed to victory . 
 For the second day running , a large breakaway group formed for the primary break of the day . A total of 24 riders , including members of 17 of the race 's 22 teams , were part of the group at its largest . The group included mountains classification leader Thomas Damuseau ( Argos – Shimano ) , who set about securing an unassailable advantage in the standings . He led over the top of the Côte de la <unk> , as the peloton allowed them an advantage of around three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . Points classification leader Gianni Meersman of Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step was also among the group , and he took maximum points at the intermediate sprint at <unk> to extend his advantage , but not enough to mathematically secure the jersey . On the Col de Vars , Lotto – Belisol rider Tim Wellens and Cannondale 's Alessandro De Marchi attacked , and were later joined by Travis Meyer of Orica – GreenEDGE ; Meyer was able to distance his companions for a period , before De Marchi , Wellens , BMC Racing Team rider Manuel Quinziato and Team Katusha 's Alberto Losada were able to rejoin him . 
 This quintet held an advantage of approaching three minutes , as they headed towards the final climb in the treacherous conditions that had been prominent throughout the stage . Wellens attacked at the foot of the climb , and managed to acquire a gap over around 30 seconds halfway up , but had been tiring quickly . This fatigue allowed De Marchi to rejoin him , and ultimately pass him on the road . Team Sky , leading the peloton in protection of the overall leader Chris Froome , were setting a fast pace in the group , and the pace forced Michael Rogers ( Saxo – Tinkoff ) to be distanced , putting his third place overall under threat . Froome and team @-@ mate Richie Porte soon gained ground off the front of the peloton , further securing the duo 's one @-@ two finish in the overall standings . They set off in chase of De Marchi , but he ultimately prevailed for his first professional victory , finishing 24 seconds clear of the nearest rider . Froome finished second , ahead of Garmin – Sharp 's Andrew Talansky , who caught Froome and passed Porte in the closing metres ; Froome thus secured the overall lead , missed out on the points title by two points to Meersman Rogers faded to sixth overall , which handed Daniel Moreno ( Team Katusha ) the final place on the podium . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , the leader received a yellow jersey with a blue bar . This classification was considered the most important of the 2013 Critérium du Dauphiné , and the winner of the classification was considered the winner of the race . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top 10 in a stage . For all stages , the win earned 15 points , second place earned 12 points , third 10 , fourth 8 , fifth 6 , and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 10th . Points towards the classification could also be achieved at each of the intermediate sprints ; these points were given to the top three riders through the line with 5 points for first , 3 for second , and 1 point for third . 
 There was also a mountains classification , the leadership of which was marked by a red and white polka @-@ dot jersey . In the mountains classification , points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists . Each climb was categorised as either hors , first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorised climbs . Hors catégorie climbs awarded the most points , with 20 points on offer for the first rider across the summit ; the first ten riders were able to accrue points towards the mountains classification , compared with the first eight on first @-@ category passes and the first six riders on second @-@ category climbs . Fewer points were on offer for the smaller hills , marked as third @-@ category or fourth @-@ category . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1988 were eligible to be ranked in the classification . There was also a classification for teams , in which the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added together ; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest total time . 
 = Upsilon Andromedae = 
 Upsilon Andromedae ( abbreviated υ Andromedae , υ And ) is a binary star located approximately 44 light @-@ years from Earth in the constellation of Andromeda . The system consists of an F @-@ type main @-@ sequence star ( designated υ Andromedae A , also named <unk> ) and a smaller red dwarf ( υ Andromedae B ) . 
 As of 2010 , four extrasolar planets ( designated Upsilon Andromedae b , c , d and e ; the first three named Saffar , Samh and Majriti , respectively ) are believed to orbit υ Andromedae A. All four are likely to be jovian planets that are comparable in size to Jupiter . This was both the first multiple @-@ planet system to be discovered around a main @-@ sequence star , and the first multiple @-@ planet system known in a multiple star system . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 Upsilon Andromedae is the system 's Bayer designation . Under the rules for naming objects in binary star systems the two components are designated A and B. Under the same rules , the first planet discovered orbiting υ Andromedae A should be designated υ Andromedae Ab . Though this more formal form is occasionally used to avoid confusion with the secondary star υ Andromedae B , it is more commonly referred to as υ Andromedae b . The other planets discovered were designated υ Andromedae c , d and e , in order of their discovery . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning names were <unk> for υ Andromedae A and Saffar , Samh and Majriti for three of its planets ( b , c , and d , respectively ) . 
 The winning names were those submitted by the Vega Astronomy Club of Morocco . The star is named after the settlement in northern Morocco and UNESCO World Heritage Site now known as the medina ( old town ) of Tétouan . The planets honour the 10th and 11th Century astronomers Ibn al @-@ Saffar , Ibn al @-@ Samh and Maslama al @-@ Majriti of Muslim Spain . 
 In Chinese , <unk> ( Tiān Dà <unk> <unk> ) , meaning Heaven 's Great General , refers to an asterism consisting of υ Andromedae , γ Andromedae , φ Persei , 51 Andromedae , 49 Andromedae , χ Andromedae , τ Andromedae , 56 Andromedae , β Trianguli , γ Trianguli and δ Trianguli . Consequently , υ Andromedae itself is known as <unk> ( Tiān Dà <unk> <unk> <unk> , English : the Sixth Star of Heaven 's Great General . ) . 
 = = Stellar system = = 
 = = = Distance and visibility = = = 
 Upsilon Andromedae is located fairly close to the Solar System : the parallax of Upsilon Andromedae A was measured by the Hipparcos astrometry satellite as 74 @.@ 12 milliarcseconds , corresponding to a distance of 13 @.@ 49 parsecs ( 44 light years ) . Upsilon Andromedae A has an apparent magnitude of + 4 @.@ 09 , making it visible to the naked eye even under moderately light @-@ polluted skies , about 10 degrees east of the Andromeda Galaxy . The dimmer star Upsilon Andromedae B is only visible with a telescope . 
 = = = System components = = = 
 Upsilon Andromedae A is a yellow @-@ white dwarf of spectral type F8V , similar to the Sun , but younger , more massive , and more luminous . According to its entry in the Geneva – Copenhagen survey , the star is around 3 @.@ 1 billion years old , and has a similar proportion of iron relative to hydrogen to the Sun . At around 1 @.@ 3 solar masses , it will have a shorter lifetime than the Sun . The amount of ultraviolet radiation received by any planets in the star 's habitable zone would be similar to the ultraviolet flux the Earth receives from the Sun . 
 Upsilon Andromedae A was ranked 21st in the list of top 100 target stars for NASA 's cancelled Terrestrial Planet Finder mission . 
 Upsilon Andromedae B is a red dwarf of spectral type M4.5V located at a projected separation of 750 AU from the primary star . The true separation between the two stars is unknown because the displacement along the line of sight between us and the Upsilon Andromedae stars is unknown , so this value is a minimum separation . Based upon its motion through space , this is a common proper motion companion to the primary . It was discovered in 2002 in data collected as part of the Two Micron All Sky Survey . The star is less massive and far less luminous than the Sun . 
 The Washington Double Star Catalog lists two optical components ; however , these do not share the system 's proper motion and only appear close to Upsilon Andromedae because they happen to lie near the same line of sight . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 The star rotates at an inclination of 58 + 9 
 − 7 degrees relative to Earth . 
 The innermost planet of the Upsilon Andromedae system was discovered in 1996 and announced in January 1997 , together with the planet of Tau Boötis and the innermost planet of 55 Cancri . The discovery was made by Geoffrey Marcy and R. Paul Butler , both astronomers at San Francisco State University . The planet , designated Upsilon Andromedae b , was discovered by measuring changes in the star 's radial velocity induced by the planet 's gravity . Because of its closeness to the parent star , it induced a large wobble which was detected relatively easily . The planet appears to be responsible for enhanced activity in the chromosphere of its star . 
