 Even when this planet was taken into account , there still remained significant residuals in the radial velocity measurements , and it was suggested there might be a second planet in orbit . In 1999 , astronomers at both San Francisco State University and the Harvard @-@ Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics independently concluded that a three @-@ planet model best fit the data . The two outer planets were designated Upsilon Andromedae c and Upsilon Andromedae d in order of increasing distance from the star . Both of these planets are in more eccentric orbits than any of the planets in the Solar System ( including Pluto ) . Upsilon Andromedae d resides in the system 's habitable zone . 
 The system is not coplanar , with each other or with the stellar rotation . The mutual inclination between c and d is 30 degrees . In 2001 , preliminary astrometric measurements suggested the orbit of the outermost planet is inclined at 155 @.@ 5 ° to the plane of the sky . However , subsequent investigation of the data reduction techniques used suggests that the Hipparcos measurements are not precise enough to adequately characterize the orbits of substellar companions . Astrometry of the innermost planet , meanwhile , constrained its inclination to 30 @-@ 90 degrees . Full publication is expected in 2008 . The orbit of Upsilon Andromedae c gradually oscillates between circular and eccentric states every 6 @,@ 700 years . The existence of further planets too small or distant to detect has not been ruled out , though the presence of Jupiter @-@ mass planets as close as 5 AU from Upsilon Andromedae A would make the system unstable . 
 Some simulations show that the eccentricity of the system 's planets may have arisen from a close encounter between the outer planet and a fourth planet , with the result that the fourth planet was ejected from the system or destroyed . If so , the rogue planet would have had to eject immediately ; it is unclear how likely this situation might be . Other models are possible . However , a fourth planet ( Upsilon Andromedae e ) was discovered in 2010 . This planet is in a 3 : 1 resonance with Upsilon Andromedae d . 
 Upsilon Andromedae does not appear to have a circumstellar dust disk similar to the Kuiper belt in the Solar System . This may be the result of perturbations from the companion star removing material from the outer regions of the Upsilon Andromedae A system . 
 = Theoktistos = 
 Theoktistos ( Greek : <unk> ; died November 20 , 855 ) was a leading Byzantine official during the second quarter of the 9th century and the de facto head of the regency for the underage Michael III from 842 until his dismissal and murder in 855 . A eunuch , he assisted in the ascent of Michael II to the throne in 822 , and was rewarded with the titles of patrikios and later magistros . He held the high posts of chartoularios tou kanikleiou and logothetēs tou dromou under Michael and his son Theophilos . After Theophilos ' death in 842 , Theoktistos became member of the regency council , but soon managed to sideline the other members and establish himself as the virtual ruler of the Empire . Noted for his administrative and political competence , Theoktistos played a major role in ending the Byzantine Iconoclasm , and fostered the ongoing renaissance in education within the Empire . He also continued the persecution of the Paulicians , but had mixed success in the wars against the Arabs . When Michael III came of age in 855 , his uncle Bardas persuaded him to throw off the tutelage of Theoktistos and his mother , the Empress Theodora , and on 20 November 855 , Theoktistos was assassinated by Bardas and his followers . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nothing is known of Theoktistos ' early life . He is called a eunuch in Theophanes Continuatus and al @-@ Tabari and is generally accepted as such by modern scholars , although an accusation by his rival Bardas of wanting to marry Empress Theodora or one of her daughters appears incompatible with this . By 820 he held an unspecified position at the court of Emperor Leo V the Armenian ( ruled 813 – 822 ) , possibly as a member of the imperial guard . Theoktistos played a major role in the plot to assassinate Leo , and was rewarded by the new emperor , Michael II the Amorian ( r . 822 – 829 ) , with the rank of patrikios , and the confidential court post of chartoularios tou kanikleiou ( " secretary of the ink @-@ pot " ) . Under Michael 's son and successor , Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) , he apparently continued to be a trusted advisor , as he rose to the rank of magistros , and was appointed logothetēs tou dromou , effectively the Empire 's foreign minister . A further mark of imperial confidence was Theophilos appointing Theoktistos as a member of the regency council for his two @-@ year @-@ old son Michael III shortly before his death in January 842 , alongside the empress @-@ dowager Theodora , and the magistros Manuel the Armenian . 
 = = Regency = = 
 Following Theophilos ' death , the regency council took over the conduct of affairs of state . Theodora 's brothers Bardas and Petronas and her relative Sergios Niketiates also played an important role in the early days of the regency . 
 The regency moved quickly to end Byzantine Iconoclasm , which had dominated Byzantine religious and political life for over a century with deleterious effects . In early 843 , an assembly of selected officials and clerics convened in the house of Theoktistos . The synod repudiated iconoclasm , re @-@ affirmed the decisions of the 787 Second Council of Nicaea , and deposed the pro @-@ iconoclast patriarch John the Grammarian . In his stead was elected <unk> I , who had been imprisoned by Theophilos for his iconophile beliefs . This event is commemorated as the " Triumph of Orthodoxy " by the Eastern Orthodox Church ever since . Theoktistos played a major role in these events . He is credited by almost all sources — Theophanes Continuatus , Genesios , John Skylitzes , and Zonaras — as a driving force behind the restoration of the icons , and particularly behind the deposition of John the Grammarian . He is commemorated as a saint by the Orthodox Church on 20 October . 
 A week after that , Theoktistos and Sergios Niketiates were sent on a campaign to recover Crete , which had been conquered in the 820s by Andalusian exiles . The expedition at first went well , as the Byzantine army landed and took control over most of the island , confining the Andalusians to their capital , Chandax . At this juncture , Theoktistos heard a rumour that in his absence , Theodora intended to raise her brother Bardas to the imperial throne . He hastily abandoned the army under Niketiates and returned to Constantinople , only to find the rumours false . Once in Constantinople , news arrived of an invasion of Asia Minor by Umar al @-@ Aqta , emir of Malatya . Theoktistos was sent at the head of an army to confront him , but the resulting Battle of Mauropotamos ended in a Byzantine defeat . At the same time , the expeditionary corps left in Crete was defeated and almost annihilated by the Andalusians , who killed Niketiates . 
 Despite his personal involvement in these military disasters , Theoktistos was able to use them to sideline his competitors : Bardas was blamed for the desertions that plagued the Byzantines at Mauropotamos and exiled from Constantinople , while the magistros Manuel was slandered and forced to retire . With Niketiates dead , Theoktistos was now the undisputed head of the regency , a position described by the Byzantine chroniclers , like Symeon Logothetes and Georgios Monachos , as " <unk> of the Augusta " . 
 Theoktistos continued the persecution of the Paulicians , which had been initiated by Theodora in 843 . Many fled to Arab territory , where with Umar al @-@ Aqta 's aid they established a state of their own at Tephrike under their leader Karbeas . Theoktistos concluded a truce with the Abbasid Caliphate and arranged an exchange of prisoners that took place on 16 September 845 . Nevertheless , in the same year , the execution of the surviving Byzantine prisoners from the Arab Sack of Amorium in 842 took place in the Abbasid capital , Samarra . After 845 , the Arab raids in the east died down for a few years after a winter raid launched by Ahmad al @-@ Bahili , the Abbasid emir of Tarsus , was defeated by the strategos of Cappadocia . They did not recommence until 851 , when the new emir of Tarsus , Ali al @-@ Armani , launched summer raids for three successive years , albeit with little apparent impact . The Byzantines responded with a naval expedition in 853 that sacked the port of Damietta in Egypt , while in the next year a Byzantine army invaded Arab lands in Cilicia and sacked Anazarbus . Around 20 @,@ 000 prisoners were taken , some of whom were executed on Theoktistos ' orders after they refused to convert to Christianity , probably as a gesture of retaliation for the Caliphate 's execution of the prisoners of Amorium in 845 . 
 To the north , the Bulgar frontier remained quiet , except for a Bulgar raid that was defeated , leading to the renewal of the 30 @-@ year peace treaty of 815 , which was later reconfirmed by the new Bulgar khan Boris ( r . 852 – 889 ) . Byzantium thus enjoyed a period of peace except in the West , where the Byzantine government proved unable to halt the ongoing Muslim conquest of Sicily . Modica fell in 845 , but although Constantinople used the relative quiet in the East to send reinforcements to the island , these were heavily defeated at Butera , where the Byzantines lost about 10 @,@ 000 men . In the wake of this disaster , <unk> in 846 and then Ragusa in 848 fell to the Muslims , while an attempt by the Byzantine fleet to land troops near Palermo in winter 847 / 848 failed . Over the next few years , the Muslims raided the Byzantine territories on the eastern half of the island unopposed , capturing several minor fortresses and securing ransom and prisoners from others . 
 Only fragmentary evidence survives concerning Theoktistos ' domestic policies . The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium credits him with " continuing the sound fiscal policies of Theophilos " , leading to the accumulation of considerable monetary reserves in the imperial treasury , to the amount of 19 @,@ 000 pounds of gold and 30 @,@ 000 pounds of silver by 856 . He also promoted the career of Constantine @-@ Cyril , whom he first met ca . 842 , helping him to acquire a good education and later to find a post as chartophylax in the patriarchal library , after Constantine rejected an offer of becoming a provincial strategos . Theoktistos ' sponsorship of men like Constantine and Leo the Mathematician contributed to the revival of secular learning in Byzantium . Theoktistos was also engaged in building activity , erecting new structures in the <unk> near the Great Palace of Constantinople , installing a new iron door in the Chalke Gate , as well as sponsoring unspecified buildings in the Thracian suburbs of Constantinople , notably Selymbria . 
 = = Downfall and death = = 
 In 855 , Michael III turned fifteen and thus came nominally of age . His mother and Theoktistos both underestimated the young emperor 's desire to free himself from their custodianship , and antagonized him further when they arranged a bride show and selected Eudokia <unk> as his bride , disregarding Michael 's attachment to his mistress , Eudokia Ingerina . Theodora 's brother Bardas was able to use Michael 's resentment for the high @-@ handed manner in which he was treated and began to turn him against the regency . With Michael 's backing , Bardas was allowed to return to the capital , and on 20 November 855 , Theoktistos was murdered . Theodora was compelled to retire to a monastery a few months later , bringing the regency officially to an end . 
 = Roman Dmowski = 
 Roman Stanisław Dmowski [ <unk> staˈɲiswaf <unk> ] ( 9 August 1864 – 2 January 1939 ) was a Polish politician , statesman , and co @-@ founder and chief ideologue of the right @-@ wing National Democracy ( " ND " : in Polish , " Endecja " ) political movement . He saw the aggressive Germanization of Polish territories controlled by the German Empire as the major threat to Polish culture and therefore advocated a degree of accommodation with another power that had partitioned Poland , the Russian Empire . He favored the re @-@ establishment of Polish independence by nonviolent means , and supported policies favorable to the Polish middle class . During World War I , in Paris , through his Polish National Committee he was a prominent spokesman , to the Allies , for Polish aspirations . He was a principal figure instrumental in the postwar restoration of Poland 's independent existence . 
 Dmowski never wielded official political power , except for a brief period in 1923 as minister of foreign affairs . Nevertheless , he was one of the most influential Polish ideologues and politicians of his time . A controversial personality all his life and since , Dmowski believed that only a Polish @-@ speaking Roman Catholic could be a good Pole ; his thinking marginalized other minorities , and he was vocally anti @-@ semitic . In 1926 he attempted to emulate Italian fascism . He remains the prototype of Polish right @-@ wing nationalism and has been called " the father of Polish nationalism . " Throughout most of his life , he was the chief opponent of the Polish military and political leader Józef Piłsudski and of the latter 's vision of Poland as a multinational federation . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dmowski was born on 9 August 1864 in Warsaw 's <unk> district , in Congress Poland ( Vistula Land ) , then part of the Russian Empire . His father was a road construction worker and later an entrepreneur . Dmowski attended schools in Warsaw , studying biology and zoology at Warsaw University , from which he graduated in 1891 . As a student he became active in the Polish Youth Association " Zet " ( Związek <unk> Polskiej " Zet " ) , where he was active in opposing socialist activists . He also organized a student street demonstration on the 100th anniversary of the Polish Constitution of 3 May 1791 . For this he was imprisoned by the Russian Tsarist authorities for five months in the Warsaw Citadel . Since 1890 he was also developing as a writer and publicist , publishing political and literary critique in Głos , where he became close friends with Jan Ludwik <unk> , who would be his mentor . 
 In April 1893 Dmowski co @-@ founded the National League ( Liga Narodowa ) , and became its first leader . In November that year he was sentenced to exile from the Vistula Land . Dmowski went to Jelgava , and soon afterward in early 1895 to Lemberg , Austria @-@ Hungary ( modern Lviv , Ukraine ; known as Lwów to the Poles ) , where together with <unk> he began to publish a new magazine , Przegląd <unk> ( All @-@ Polish Review ) . In 1897 , he co @-@ founded the National @-@ Democratic Party ( Stronnictwo <unk> @-@ <unk> or " Endecja " ) . The Endecja was to serve as a political party , a lobby group and an underground organization that would unite Poles who espoused Dmowski 's views into a disciplined and committed political group . In 1899 , Dmowski founded the Society for National Education as an ancillary group . From 1898 to 1900 , he resided in both France and Britain , and travelled to Brazil . In 1901 he took up residence in Kraków , then part of the Austrian partition of Poland . In 1903 he published a book , Myśli nowoczesnego Polaka ( Thoughts of a Modern Pole ) , one of the first if not the first nationalist manifesto in European history . 
 Dmowski opposed revolutionary means of fighting , preferring political struggle , and aimed for independence through increased autonomy . After the outbreak of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Dmowski met with Colonel Akashi <unk> , the Japanese military attache in Sweden and spy @-@ master for Japanese intelligence activities , in Kraków in March 1904 . Although reluctant to collaborate with the Japanese , Dmowski agreed to Akashi 's proposal that Polish soldiers in Manchuria might be encouraged to defect to the Imperial Japanese Army . He travelled to Tokyo to work out the details , and at the same time made a successful effort to prevent the Japanese from aiding a rival Polish political activist , Józef Piłsudski , who wanted assistance for a planned insurrection in Poland , an aspiration which Dmowski felt would be doomed to failure . 
 In 1905 , Dmowski moved to Warsaw , back in the Russian partition of Poland , where he continued to play a growing role in the Endecja faction . During the Russian Revolution of 1905 , Dmowski favoured co @-@ operation with the Imperial Russian authorities and welcomed Nicholas II 's October Manifesto of 1905 as a stepping stone on the road towards renewed Polish autonomy . During the revolt in Łódź in June 1905 , the Endeks , acting under Dmowski 's orders , opposed the uprising led by Piłsudski 's Polish Socialist Party ( PPS ) . During the course of the " June Days , " as the Łódź uprising is known , a miniature civil war raged between Endecja and the PPS . 
 As a result of the elections to the First Duma ( legislative assembly in the late Russian Empire ) , which were boycotted by the PPS , the National Democrats won 34 of the 55 seats allotted to Poland . Dmowski himself was elected a deputy to the Second and Third Dumas ( beginning on 27 February 1907 ) and was president of the Polish caucus within it . He was seen as a conservative , and despite being a Polish caucus leader , he often had more influence on the Russian than the Polish deputies . 
 Over time , Dmowski became more receptive to Russian overtures , particularly <unk> , warming up to the idea that Poland and Russia may have a common future , particularly due to Germany being their common enemy . In light of what he regarded as Russian cultural inferiority , Dmowski felt that a strong Russia was more acceptable than a strong Germany . In Dmowski 's view , the Russian policy of Russification would not succeed in subjugating the Poles , while the Germans would be far more successful with their Germanisation policies . He explained those views in his book <unk> , <unk> i <unk> Polska ( Germany , Russia and the Polish Cause ) , published in 1908 . 
 This was not a universally popular attitude , and in 1909 Dmowski resigned his deputy mandate to focus on an internal political struggle within Endecja . He lost the election to the Fourth Duma in 1912 to a socialist politician , Eugeniusz Jagiełło from the Polish Socialist Party – Left , who won with the support of the Jewish vote . Dmowski viewed this as a personal insult ; in exchange he organized a successful boycott of Jewish businesses throughout much of Poland . 
 = = World War I = = 
 In 1914 Dmowski praised the Grand Duke Nicholas 's Manifesto to the Polish Nation of 14 August , which vaguely assured the Tsar 's Polish subjects that there would be greater autonomy for " Congress Poland " after the war , and that the Austrian provinces of East and West Galicia , together with the Pomerania province of Prussia , would be annexed to the Kingdom of Poland when the German Empire and Austria @-@ Hungary were defeated . However , subsequent attempts on the part of Dmowski to have the Russians make firmer commitments along the lines of the Grand Duke Nicholas 's manifesto were met with elusive answers . Nonetheless , Dmowski 's pro @-@ Russian and anti @-@ German propaganda succeeded in frustrating Piłsudski 's plans of causing an anti @-@ Russian uprising , and bolstered his position as an important Polish political figure on the international scene , especially with the Triple Entente . In November he became one of the active members of the Polish National Committee . 
 In 1915 , Dmowski , increasingly convinced of Russia 's impending defeat , decided that to support the cause of Polish independence he should go abroad to campaign on behalf of Poland in the capitals of the western Allies . During his lobbying efforts , his friends included such opinion makers as the British journalist Wickham Steed . In particular , Dmowski was very successful in France , where he made a very favorable impression on public opinion . He gave a series of lecture at Cambridge University , which impressed the local faculty enough that he was given a honorary doctorate . In August 1917 , in Paris , he created a new Polish National Committee aimed at rebuilding a Polish state . That year he also published , at his own expense , Problems of Central and Eastern Europe , that he soon distributed among numerous English speaking diplomats . He was a vocal critic of Austro @-@ Hungary , and campaigned for the creation of a number of Slavic states ( including for the Czechs , Hungarians and Romanians ) in its place . Within the Polish political community , he opposed those who supported allying themselves with Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary , including supporters of a vague German proposal for a Regency Kingdom of Poland , with undefined borders , that Germany promised to create after World War I ( while in secret , actually planning to strip it of up to 30 @,@ 000 square kilometers for German colonization after the removal of its Polish population ) . In 1917 Dmowski laid out a plan for the borders of a re @-@ created Polish state ; it would include Greater Poland , Pomerania with Gdańsk , Upper Silesia , south strip of East Prussia and Cieszyn Silesia . 
 In September that year , Dmowski 's National Committee was recognized by the French as the legitimate government of Poland . The British and the Americans were less enthusiastic about Dmowski 's National Committee , but likewise recognized it as Poland 's government a year later . However , the Americans refused to provide backing for what they regarded as Dmowski 's excessive territorial claims ( Dmowski 's Line ) . The American President Woodrow Wilson reported , " I saw Mr. Dmowski and Mr. Paderewski in Washington , and I asked them to define Poland for me , as they understood it , and they presented me with a map in which they claimed a large part of the earth . " 
 In part , Wilson 's objections stemmed from dislike of Dmowski personally . One British diplomat stated , " He was a clever man , and clever men are distrusted ; he was logical in his political theories and we hate logic ; and he was persistent with a tenacity which was calculated to drive everybody mad . " Another area of objection to Dmowski was with his antisemitic remarks , as in a speech he delivered at a dinner organized by the writer G. K. Chesterton , that began with the words , " My religion came from Jesus Christ , who was murdered by the Jews . " When British Prime Minister David Lloyd George criticized Dmowski and the Committee , Dmowski saw this as a result of Lloyd George 's representation of Jewish interests . He refused to admit a single Polish Jew to the National Committee , despite support for such a proposal from Paderewski . A number of American and British Jewish organizations campaigned during the war against their governments recognizing the National Committee . Another leading critic of Dmowski was the historian Sir Lewis Namier , a Jew who served as the British Foreign Office 's resident expert on Poland during the war , and who claimed to be personally offended by antisemitic remarks made by Dmowski . Namier fought hard against British recognition of Dmowski and " his chauvinist gang " . In turn , Dmowski 's experiences at that time convinced him of the existence of an international " Judeo @-@ Masonic conspiracy , unfriendly towards Poland and <unk> hostile to his [ Endecja ] party . " 
 = = After World War I = = 
 At the end of the World War , two governments claimed to be the legitimate governments of Poland : Dmowski 's in Paris and Piłsudski 's in Warsaw . To put an end to the rival claims of Piłsudski and Dmowski , the composer Ignacy Jan Paderewski met with both men and persuaded them to reluctantly join forces . Both men had something that the other needed . Piłsudski was in possession of Poland after the war , but as the Pole who had fought with the Austrians for the Central Powers against the Russians , he was distrusted by the Allies . Piłsudski 's newly reborn Polish Army , formed from his Polish Legions , needed arms from the Allies , something that Dmowski was much better suited to persuade the Allies to deliver upon . Beyond that , the French were planning to send the Blue Army of General Józef Haller — loyal to Dmowski – back to Poland . The fear was that if Piłsudski and Dmowski did not put aside their differences , a civil war might break out between their partisans . Paderewski was successful in working out a compromise in which Dmowski and himself were to represent Poland at the Paris Peace Conference while Piłsudski was to serve as provisional president of Poland . Not all of Dmowski 's supporters accepted this compromise , and on 5 January 1919 , Dmowski 's partisans ( led by Marian <unk> @-@ Żegota and Eustachy Sapieha ) attempted a failed coup against Piłsudski . 
 As a Polish delegate at the Paris Peace Conference and a signatory of the Versailles Treaty , Dmowski exerted a substantial influence on the Treaty 's favorable decisions regarding Poland . On 29 January 1919 , Dmowski met with the Allies ' Supreme War Council for the first time ; his five @-@ hour presentation there , delivered in English and French , was described as brilliant . At the meeting , Dmowski stated that he had little interest in laying claim to areas of Ukraine and Lithuania that were formerly part of Poland , but no longer had a Polish majority . At the same time Dmowski strongly pressed for the return of Polish territories with Polish @-@ speaking majorities taken by Prussia from Poland in 1790s . Dmowski himself admitted that from a purely historical point of view , the Polish claims to Silesia were not entirely strong , but he claimed it for Poland on economic grounds , especially the coal fields . Moreover , Dmowski claimed that German statistics had lied about the number of ethnic Poles living in eastern Germany and that , " these Poles were some of the most educated and highly cultured in the nation , with a strong sense of nationality and men of progressive ideas " . In addition , Dmowski , with the strong backing of the French , wanted to send the " Blue Army " to Poland via Danzig , Germany ( modern Gdańsk , Poland ) ; it was the intention of both Dmowski and the French that the Blue Army create a territorial fait accompli . This proposal created much opposition from the Germans , the British and the Americans , and finally the Blue Army was sent to Poland in April 1919 via land . Piłsudski was opposed to needlessly annoying the Allies , and it has been suggested that he did not care much about the Danzig issue . 
 In regard to Lithuania , Dmowski didn 't view Lithuanians as having a strong national identity , and viewed their social organization as tribal . Those areas of Lithuania that had either Polish majorities or minorities were claimed by Dmowski on the grounds of self @-@ determination . In the areas with Polish minorities , the Poles would act as a civilizing influence ; only the northern part of Lithuania , which had a solid Lithuanian majority , was Dmowski willing to concede to the Lithuanians . His initial plans for Lithuania involved giving it an autonomy within a Polish state . This caused Dmowski to have very acrimonious disputes with the Lithuanian delegation at Paris . With regard to the former Austrian province of East Galicia , Dmowski claimed that the local Ukrainians were quite incapable of ruling themselves and also required the civilizing influence of Polish leadership . In addition , Dmowski wished to acquire the oil fields of Galicia . His support for that was however more lackluster than that for other regions , and he opposed Piłsudski 's proposal of an alliance or federation with Ukrainians . From the Allied powers only the French supported Polish claims to <unk> wholeheartedly . In the end , it was the actual fighting on the ground in Galicia , and not the decisions of the diplomats in Paris , that decided that the region would be part of Poland . The French did not back Dmowski 's aspirations in the Cieszyn Silesia region , and instead supported the claims of Czechoslovakia . Dmowski since a long time praised Czechs as model for national restoration in face of Germanization , and despite his dispute with Czech political leaders , his opinion of the Czech people as a whole remained positive 
 Forever a political opponent of Piłsudski , Dmowski favored what he called a " national state , " a state in which the citizens would speak Polish and be of the Roman Catholic faith . If Piłsudski 's vision of Poland was based on the historical multiethnic state that had existed under the Jagiellonian dynasty , which he hoped to recreate with a multinational federation ( Międzymorze federation ) , Dmowski 's vision was the earlier Polish kingdom ruled by the Piast dynasty , ethnically and religiously homogeneous . Piłsudski believed in a wide definition of Polish citizenship in which peoples of different languages , cultures and faiths were to be united by a common loyalty to the reborn Polish state . Dmowski regarded Piłsudski 's views as dangerous nonsense , and felt that the presence of large number of ethnic minorities would undermine the security of Polish state . At the Paris Peace Conference , he argued strenuously against the Minority Rights Treaty forced on Poland by the Allies . 
 Dmowski himself was disappointed with the Treaty of Versailles , partly because he was strongly opposed to the Minority Rights Treaty imposed on Poland and partly because he wanted the German @-@ Polish border to be somewhat farther to the west than what the Versailles had allowed . Both of these disappointments Dmowski blamed on what he claimed was the " international Jewish conspiracy " . Throughout his life , Dmowski maintained that the British Prime Minister David Lloyd George had been bribed by a syndicate of German @-@ Jewish financiers to give Poland what Dmowski considered to be an unfavorable frontier with Germany . His relations with Lloyd George were very poor . Dmowski found Lloyd George to be arrogant , unscrupulous and a consistent advocate of ruling against Polish claims to the West and the East . Dmowski was very offended by Lloyd George 's ignorance of Polish affairs and in particular was enraged by his lack of knowledge about river traffic on the Vistula . Dmowski called Lloyd George " the agent of the Jews " . Lloyd George in turn claimed in 1939 that " Poland had deserved its fate " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Dmowski was a deputy to the 1919 Legislative Sejm , but he attended only a single session , seeing the Sejm as too chaotic for him to exert much influence ; he also spent much of that year either in Paris or recuperating from a lung infection , in Algeria . He reorganized endecja into a new party , Popular National Union ( Związek <unk> @-@ Narodowy ) . During the Polish @-@ Soviet War he was a member of the Council of National Defense and a vocal critic of Piłsudski 's policies . In the aftermath of the war , Polish eastern borders were similar , if somewhat smaller , from what became known as the Dmowski 's Line . 
 When the time came to write a Polish constitution in the early 1920s , the National Democrats insisted upon a weak presidency and strong legislative branch . Dmowski was convinced that Piłsudski would become president and saw a weak executive mandate as the best way of crippling his rival . The constitution of 1921 did indeed outline a government with a weak executive branch . When Gabriel Narutowicz , a friend of Piłsudski , was elected President by the Sejm in 1922 , he was seen by many among endecja as having been elected with the support of the parties representing the national minorities , with the notable backing of the Polish Jewish politician Yitzhak Gruenbaum . After Narutowicz 's election , the National Democrats started a major campaign of vilification of the " Jewish president " elected by " foreigners " . Subsequently , a fanatical National Democratic supporter , painter <unk> <unk> assassinated Narutowicz . 
 He was a Minister of Foreign Affairs from October to December 1923 in the government of Wincenty Witos . That year he received the Order of Polonia Restituta from the government of Władysław Sikorski . 
 In 1926 , in the aftermath of Piłsudski 's May coup d 'état , Dmowski founded the Camp of Great Poland ( Obóz <unk> Polski ) , though he would find himself more of an ideologue than a leader , as he was displaced by new , younger politicians . In 1928 he founded the National Party ( Stronnictwo Narodowe ) . He kept publishing newspaper articles , brochures and books . With declining health , he mostly retired from politics by 1930 . In 1934 , a section of the youth wing of the Endecja found Dmowski insufficiently hardline for their taste and broke away to found the more radical National Radical Camp ( known by its Polish acronym as the ONR ) . His last major campaign was a series of political attacks on the alleged " Judeo @-@ Masonic " associates of President Ignacy Mościcki . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 1937 Dmowski , previously leaning towards ancestor worship , returned to the Catholic Church . Weakening in health , Dmowski moved to the village of Drozdowo near Łomża , where he died on 2 January 1939 . 
 Dmowski was buried at the <unk> Cemetery in Warsaw in the family grave . His funeral was widely attended , with at least 100 @,@ 000 attendees ; the Piłsudski 's legacy <unk> government snubbed him without any official representative attending . 
 = = Political outlook = = 
 = = = Theorist of nationalism = = = 
 From his early student years , Dmowski was opposed to socialism and suspicious of federalism ; he desired Polish independence and a strong Polish state , and saw socialism and conciliatory federalist policies as prioritizing an international idea over the national one . Over the years he became an influential European nationalist thinker . 
 Dmowski had a scientist 's background and thus and preferred logic and reason over emotion and passion . He once told famous pianist Ignacy Jan Paderewski that music was " mere noise " . Dmowski felt very strongly that Poles should abandon what he considered to be foolish romantic nationalism and useless gestures of defiance and should instead work hard at becoming businessmen and scientists . Dmowski was very much influenced by Social Darwinist theories , then popular in the Western world , and saw life as a merciless struggle between " strong " nations who dominated and " weak " nations who were dominated . 
 In his 1902 book Myśli nowoczesnego Polaka ( Thoughts of a Modern Pole ) , Dmowski denounced all forms of Polish Romantic nationalism and traditional Polish values . He sharply criticized the idea of Poland as a spiritual concept and as a cultural idea . Instead Dmowski argued that Poland was merely a physical entity that needed to be brought into existence through pragmatic bargaining and negotiating , not via what Dmowski considered to be pointless revolts – doomed to failure before they even began – against the partitioning powers . For Dmowski , what the Poles needed was a " healthy national egoism " that would not be guided by what Dmowski regarded as the unrealistic political principles of Christianity . In the same book , Dmowski blamed the fall of the old Commonwealth on its tradition of tolerance . While at first critical of Christianity , Dmowski viewed some sects of Christianity as beneficial to certain nations , through not necessarily Poland . Later in 1927 he revised this earlier view and renounced his criticism of Catholicism , seeing it as an essential part of the Polish identity . Dmowski saw all minorities as weakening agents within the nation that needed to be purged . 
 In the prewar years , the history of Poland was contested terrain as different ideological forces pulled Polish nationalists in opposite directions , represented by Dmowski and Piłsudski . Throughout his career , Dmowski deeply disliked Piłsudski and much of what he stood for . Dmowski came from an impoverished urban background and had little fondness for Poland 's traditional elitist social structure . Instead , Dmowski favored a modernizing program and felt Poles should stop looking back nostalgically at the old Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , which Dmowski held in deep contempt and should instead embrace the " modern world " . In particular , Dmowski despised the old Commonwealth for its multi @-@ national structure and religious tolerance . He saw the ethnic minorities in Poland as a direct threat to the cultural identity , integrity and ethnic cohesion of Poland , directly in competition with the Polish petit bourgeoisie with which he identified . Dmowski argued that good citizens should only have one allegiance to the nation , and there is no middle ground . In his ideal Poland there would be no ethnic minorities , they would either be polonized or forced to emigrate . The success of his nationalistic ideas , also adopted and propagated by nationalists in other countries ( such as Lithuania and Ukraine ) contributed to the disappearance of the tolerant , multicultural Polish @-@ Lithuanian identity . 
 Dmowski admired Italian fascism . In the summer of 1926 Dmowski wrote a series of article admiring Mussolini and the Italian fascist model , and helped organize the Camp of Great Poland ( OWP ) , a broad anti @-@ Sanacja front modeled on Italian fascism that was known for its anti @-@ Jewish rhetoric and violence . Later he nonetheless tried to ensure that <unk> would not blindly imitate the Italian or German models . 
 = = = Anti @-@ semitism and anti @-@ Germanism = = = 
 Dmowski often communicated his belief in a " international Jewish conspiracy " aimed against Poland . In his essay " <unk> wobec wojny " ( Jews on the War ) written about World War One , Dmowski claimed that Zionism was only a cloak to disguise the Jewish ambition to rule the world . Dmowski asserted that once a Jewish state was established in Palestine , this would serve as a nucleus for the Jewish take @-@ over of the world . In the same essay , Dmowski accused the Jews of being Poland 's most dangerous enemy and of working hand in hand with the Germans to dismember Poland again . Dmowski believed that the 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Polish Jews were far too numerous to be absorbed , and assimilated into the Polish Catholic culture . 
 Dmowski had advocated emigration of the entire Jewish population of Poland as the solution to what he regarded as Poland 's " Jewish problem " , and over time came to argue for increasing harsh measures against the Jewish minority , though he never explicitly suggested killing Jews . He opposed physical violence , arguing for the boycotts of Jewish businesses instead , later supplemented with their separation in the cultural area ( through polices such as <unk> <unk> ) . Dmowski made anti @-@ Semitism a central element in Endecja 's radical nationalist outlook . Endecja 's crusade against Jewish cultural values gained mounting intensity in antisemitism of the 1930s , but there were no major pogroms or violent attacks on the Jews in Poland until the German Nazis occupied Poland and made it their mission in 1939 – 44 . 
 For Dmowski , one of Poland 's principal problems was that not enough Polish @-@ speaking Catholics were middle @-@ class , while too many ethnic Germans and Jews were . To remedy this perceived problem , he envisioned a policy of confiscating the wealth of Jews and ethnic Germans and redistributing it to Polish Catholics . Dmowski was never able to have this program passed into law by the Sejm , but the National Democrats did frequently organize " Buy Polish " boycott campaigns against German and Jewish shops . The first of Dmowski 's antisemitic boycotts occurred in 1912 when he attempted to organize a total boycott of Jewish businesses in Warsaw as " punishment " for the defeat of some Endecja candidates in the elections for the Duma , which Dmowski blamed on Warsaw 's Jewish population . Throughout his life , Dmowski associated Jews with Germans as Poland 's principal enemies ; the origins of this identification stemmed from Dmowski 's deep anger over the forcible " Germanization " policies carried out by the German government against its Polish minority during the Imperial period , and over the fact that most Jews living in the disputed German / Polish territories had chosen to assimilate into German culture , not Polish culture . In Dmowski 's opinion Jewish community was not attracted to the cause of Polish independence and was likely to ally itself with potential enemies of Polish state if it would benefit their status . 
 Dmowski was also a vocal opponent of the free masonry as well as of feminism . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Dmowski 's life and work has been subject to numerous academic articles and books . Andrzej Walicki in 1999 noted that main sources on Dmowski are Andrzej <unk> 's Roman Dmowski ( 1971 ) , Roman Wapiński 's Roman Dmowski ( 1988 ) and Krzysztof <unk> 's Roman Dmowski ( 1996 ) . 
 Suppressed during the era of communist Poland , after the fall of communism in Poland , Dmowski 's legacy has begun to be more widely recognized . A bridge in Wrocław was named after him in 1992 . In November 2006 statue of Roman Dmowski was unveiled in Warsaw ; it had led to a series of protests from organizations which see Dmowski as fascist and opponent of tolerance ; due to similar protests plans to raise statues or memorials elsewhere have commonly been delayed . 
 For his achievement for the independence of Poland and expansion of Polish national consciousness , he was honoured on 8 January 1999 by the Polish Sejm with special legislation . The document honours him also for founding Polish school of political realism and responsibility , shaping Polish ( especially the Western ) borders and " emphasizing the firm connection between Catholicism and <unk> for the survival of the Nation and the rebuilding of the State " . 
 Dmowski was awarded several state awards – the Grand Cross of the Order of Polonia Restituta ( 1923 ) , Order of the Star of Romania and Order of Oranje @-@ Nassau . He received the honoris causa doctorate from the Cambridge University ( 1916 ) and the University of Poznań ( 1923 ) . He refused other awards . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Myśli nowoczesnego Polaka ( Thoughts of a Modern Pole ) , 1902 . 
 <unk> , <unk> a <unk> <unk> ( Germany , Russia and the Polish Cause ) , 1908 . French translation published under the title : La question polonaise ( Paris 1909 ) . 
 <unk> <unk> i jego <unk> ( <unk> of Jews and its Sources ) , 1909 . 
 Upadek <unk> <unk> w Polsce ( The Decline of Conservative Thought in Poland ) , 1914 . 
 <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> ( Polish Politics and the Rebuilding of the State ) , 1925 . 
 Zagadnienie <unk> ( On Government ) , 1927 . 
 <unk> , <unk> i <unk> ( The Church , Nation and State ) , 1927 . 
 Świat <unk> i Polska ( The World after War and Poland ) , 1931 . 
 <unk> ( The Coup ) , 1934 . 
 = = = In Polish = = = 
 <unk> , Andrzej ( 1989 ) . O <unk> <unk> . Warszawa : Biblioteka " <unk> " . ISBN 83 @-@ 7006 @-@ 014 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , Andrzej Krzysztof ; Małgorzata <unk> ( 1998 ) . <unk> i <unk> Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej 1919 – 1939 . Słownik <unk> . Tom I , A @-@ D. Warszawa : Wydawnictwo Sejmowe . ISBN 83 @-@ <unk> @-@ 392 @-@ 5 . 
 Wapiński , Roman ( 1989 ) . Roman Dmowski . Lublin : Wydawnictwo <unk> . ISBN 83 @-@ 222 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Ignacy Chrzanowski ; Władysław Konopczyński ( 1946 ) . " Stefan Batory " . Polski Słownik <unk> ( in Polish ) V. 
 = Cyclone Clare = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Clare was a moderately strong cyclone that struck Western Australia in January 2006 . The storm formed as an area of low pressure in the Arafura Sea , and moved westward . After receiving the name Clare on 7 January , the system ultimately peaked at Category 3 intensity on the Australian tropical cyclone scale . It moved ashore on the coast of Pilbara and proceeded inland , dissipating on 10 January . Clare produced winds of 142 km / h ( 88 mph ) at Karratha and triggered widespread torrential rainfall that led to flooding . Following its usage , the name Clare was retired by the Bureau of Meteorology , and will never be used again for a tropical cyclone in the area . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On 4 January 2006 , a weak area of low pressure was situated in the Arafura Sea . It moved westward , and by 6 January , it was located in the Timor Sea . That same day , both the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) identified the system as a tropical disturbance . On 7 January , the low began to show signs of strengthening . Continuing to organise , the BoM designated it as Tropical Cyclone Clare shortly thereafter . At the time , it was centred approximately 265 mi ( 426 km ) to the north of Broome and moving west @-@ southwestward . The JTWC classified the cyclone , locally designated 05S , as a tropical storm at 1800 UTC . 
 By early on 8 January , the storm had begun to steadily gain power . Later that day , Clare achieved severe tropical cyclone status while located around 170 mi ( 270 km ) north of Port Hedland . Tracking southwestward , the storm continued to mature . On 9 January , the JTWC estimated the storm to have peaked in intensity with maximum sustained 1 @-@ minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 980 millibars . However , the BoM reported the storm to have been somewhat more intense , with sustained 10 @-@ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 964 millibars . This made Clare a Category 3 on the Australian tropical cyclone scale . 
 Clare maintained roughly the same intensity as its track became more southerly . At 1600 UTC on 9 January the storm made landfall at Pilbara to the west of Dampier . Heading ashore , the storm began to quickly deteriorate , and both the JTWC and the BoM declared it dissipated on 10 January as it continued southward . Throughout the storm 's course , the JTWC 's intensity estimates were below that of the BoM . Also , it is reported that the cyclone 's presentation on satellite was not representative of its actual intensity . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In advance of the storm 's landfall , officials issued a " red alert " for several locations . Offshore , oil rigs were shut down and ports were closed . At least 2 @,@ 000 residents were evacuated from their homes in potentially susceptible areas of the Karratha region . In areas between Broome and Port Hedland , people were urged to tidy debris and organise disaster supplies to prepare for the storm . 
 Upon moving ashore , the storm produced winds of 131 km / h ( 81 mph ) at Legendre Island and a gust of 142 km / h ( 88 mph ) at Karratha . Heavy precipitation — often exceeding 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) — was recorded along the central Pilbara coast . Rainfall at Wickham totaled 215 mm ( 8 @.@ 5 in ) , with 212 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) at Karratha and more moderate amounts elsewhere . Since storm surge from the cyclone peaked during low tide , it was not severe and caused no known damage . 
 Clare produced extensive flooding that forced the closure of numerous roads , including part of the North West Coastal Highway . It also triggered torrential rains and flooding in southern areas of the country , including Gascoyne and the South @-@ West Land Division . There , 224 mm ( 8 @.@ 8 in ) of rain fell in 24 hours . Additionally , the Greenough River surpassed its banks ; a sandbagging effort prevented the resultant floods from inundating the town of Walkaway . The storm cut off power and left tens of thousands of residents without telephone service . Property damage was generally minor , and no casualties or significant injuries from the storm were reported . The name Clare was retired following its usage in 2006 . 
 = Competition ( The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man ) = 
 " Competition " the fifth episode of the animated television series The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , which is based on the comic book character Spider @-@ Man , created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . In it , Spider @-@ Man must face the Sandman , a former petty thug who now can manipulate his sand body at will . 
 " Competition " was written by Kevin Hopps and directed by Troy Adomitis . Hopps and <unk> each had their respective roles previously in " Interactions . " Victor Cook , a developer , producer , and supervising director for The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , was thrilled to use Sandman because he felt he was " a perfect character for animation . " " Competition " aired on March 29 , 2008 , on the Kids WB ! block for The CW . The episode received warm reviews from television critics - IGN wrote that the fight scenes were the greatest of the series at the time . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Peter , as Spider @-@ Man , effectively defeats two common thugs - Flint Marko and Alex O 'Hirn - and puts them in prison . While discussing their outrage towards Spider @-@ Man , their bail is paid and they go into a limousine outside . Inside the limousine , Hammerhead tells them he has big plans for them , taking them to a secret base . 
 The next day , Peter practices his web slinging in his bedroom , when Aunt May walks in . He stops and she suggests he takes their neighbor Mary Jane Watson to the upcoming Fall Formal . Peter cringes at the idea and heads off to school . There , it is announced football practices will be held that day and Harry wants to try out . Peter passes on joining him as he feels it will reveal his abilities . When he hears Flash Thompson planning on specifically going after Harry during tryouts , he decides to keep him safe and try out anyway . They each do good at tryout - Harry impresses the coach and the other player , while Peter does the same using his extra abilities . 
 Meanwhile , Norman Osborn arrives at the warehouse to supervise an experiment on Marko . <unk> Marko will be given subdermal silicon transplants giving him a hardened untraceable silicon armor . Dr. Octavius says that the experiment has too many flaws but Osborn commands him to go with it anyway . The experiment malfunctions and the silicon violently mutates him . His body evaporates into sand and Octavius , terrified , thinks he has just killed him . Suddenly , Marko reshapes himself , still made of sand , and viciously thrashes against the walls for them to let him out . Hammerhead and Osborn take him outside in their limousine , where Marko is able to reform himself in his old appearance . When they tell him he will work for " the Big Man , " but he decides to go alone and leaves . Hammerhead is fine with that as it means they will now have a distraction for Spider @-@ Man . 
 Now codenamed " Sandman , " Marko robs a bank and Spider @-@ Man arrives immediately . He is overpowered by Marko 's new powers and finds himself out of web fluid . After defeating Spider @-@ Man , Sandman escapes through a sewer drain , after accidentally mentioning the " Big Man 's " name . The next day , Peter goes to tryouts again , doing well once more and being invited for the last day of tryouts along with Harry . Harry is upset that he outshined him and invites the other players to hang out at a soda shop . Meanwhile , Peter goes on the city bus and sits next to Gwen , whom he apologizes to for ignoring her lately and she accepts . She also hints that he should take her to the fall formal , but he does not get the clue and tells her he is going to ask Betty Brant , J. Jonah Jameson 's secretary at the Daily Bugle . 
 After departing from the bus , Peter goes off as Spider @-@ Man to an armored truck , which Sandman is robbing . In their struggle , the truck goes out of control and lands in a construction site . When Spider @-@ Man tries to web him up , it proves to be ineffective as Sandman can slip through them ; the villain then starts to attack Spider @-@ Man with girders . Meanwhile , at the soda shop , Harry tries to impress the jocks , catching Kenny 's girlfriend Glory 's attention . Kenny plays a prank on Harry , which enrages Glory and she asks Harry to take her home . Back on the construction site , Spider @-@ Man gets out from the pile of girders and gets the head on Sandman . He lures him up to the roof and encasing him in cement from the nearby cement maker . 
 That night , Harry comes home to tell his father that he 's tried out for the football team , but he is unimpressed . Harry walks off , darkly remarking that he will " show them tomorrow . " At final tryouts the next day , Harry makes the team , and Peter purposely does terrible so he doesn 't outshine his friend . Gwen then cheers him up with ice cream . 
 = = Production = = 
 Hopps and <unk> had written and directed the episode " Interactions , " respectively , which featured the introduction of the villain Electro . The crew were very excited about working with Sandman . Victor Cook , supervising producer and story editor of the series , thinks that he was " designed for animation . " Hopps " love [ s ] the ordinary @-@ ness [ sic ] of the motivation for [ him ] " and finds that he is " just basically a crook who suddenly finds himself with super powers . " John DiMaggio provided his voice for the character . 
 Thomas F. Wilson , known for playing the character Biff Tannen in the Back to the Future films , began his recurring role as policeman Stan Carter . In the comic books , Stan Carter was a vicious serial killer by the name of Sin @-@ Eater . Due to the show being for youth @-@ oriented audiences , it is highly unlikely the series will make him the murdering alter @-@ ego . 
 " Competitions " originally aired on March 23 , 2008 , on the Kids WB ! block for The CW . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is referent to economics - the title scheme was used for the arc the episode fell inside and was pitched by Greg Weisman , story editor and producer for The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man . It also refers to the episode 's theme of people competing for glory . Several scenes from the episode were taken directly from the film Spider @-@ Man 3 . Spider @-@ Man does a leg @-@ sweep on Sandman in the same manner as in the film . Flint Marko 's transformation into the Sandman was also based executed in the same manner as it was in the film 's version of his transformation . A main focus in the episode features Peter and Harry trying out for high school football . The origin of this incarnation of sandman shares similarities to his ultimate counterpart version while sharing similarities to the comics and the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Competition " was well received by television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 6 . ( " Great " ) Goldman enjoyed Sandman 's nonchalant behavior , favoring using his newfound powers for money over getting his revenge on Spider @-@ Man . He wrote that the episode " delivered some of the best fight scenes yet , " including the Spider @-@ Man punching Sandman only to discover he is made of sand , which he called his favorite fight scene in the entire episode . On Peter 's personal life being portrayed , Goldman wrote that he " had to deal with the age old superhero conflict regarding whether he could use his powers to help himself in everyday ways – not just whether it was ' right ' but whether it might give him away . " 
 = Pablo Ibáñez = 
 Pablo Ibáñez <unk> ( born 3 August 1981 ) , sometimes known as just Pablo , is a Spanish former footballer who played as a centre back . 
 Pablo was born in <unk> . He began his football career in the youth teams of his local professional club , Albacete , with whom he earned promotion from the Segunda División to La Liga in 2003 . A year later , he signed for Atlético Madrid where he made nearly 200 appearances over six seasons . His career with Atlético was marred by controversy when one of the 2006 presidential candidates for their city rivals Real Madrid claimed that a deal was in place for Real to sign Pablo should he win the election . Although he re @-@ established himself in the Atlético team , contributing to a fourth @-@ place finish in 2008 , he played increasingly rarely towards the end of his time with the club , and in 2010 he moved to England . He spent a season with Premier League club West Bromwich Albion and two with Football League Championship ( second @-@ tier ) club Birmingham City . 
 At international level , Pablo was capped 10 times for Spain 's under @-@ 21 team before making his first appearance for the senior national team in 2004 . He went on to earn 23 caps and represented his country at the 2006 World Cup . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Pablo was born in <unk> , in the Province of Albacete in Castile @-@ La Mancha , the son of a member of the <unk> Nacional . He grew up in Leganés , in the greater Madrid area , where his father was stationed , and played football as a midfielder or occasional forward for a team in the district of El <unk> . His parents had connections with the Albacete <unk> club , and at the age of 14 , Pablo began his football career in that club 's youth teams where he was converted to play in central defence . He worked his way through the junior teams , but instead of moving up into Albacete 's B team , he was sent on loan to <unk> , who were then playing in the Tercera División ( fourth tier ) . On returning to his owning club , he played the 2001 – 02 season for Albacete B , also in the Tercera . He was a regular starter , and helped the team reach the promotion play @-@ offs but without success . 
 = = = Albacete = = = 
 After seeing Pablo work with the first @-@ team squad during pre @-@ season training , coach César Ferrando was quoted as saying he would pick Pablo and ten others for the coming campaign . He was as good as his word : Pablo made his Segunda División debut in a 1 – 1 draw away to Terrassa on 31 August 2002 , and went on to start 38 of Albacete 's 42 matches as they finished the season in third place and were promoted to La Liga . After only a few second @-@ tier matches , he had made sufficient impact to attract interest from clubs both domestic and foreign and receive a call @-@ up to the Spanish under @-@ 21 team for a friendly match against Bulgaria . 
 In the January 2003 transfer window , Albacete attempted to arrange his transfer to Celta Vigo , but the deal foundered on Albacete 's need for a significant part of the fee to be paid in cash . A few weeks later , sports agent Alejandro Camaño bought half the rights to the player , thus enabling the club to pay the wages and complete the season successfully . 
 Although a training @-@ ground injury put his top @-@ flight debut in some doubt , he was passed fit to start for Albacete on the opening day of the 2003 – 04 La Liga season . El País ' match reporter described the " promising " Pablo as one of Albacete 's mainstays , despite inadequate marking by him and defensive partner Gustavo <unk> taking much of the blame for the opening goal as Osasuna won 2 – 0 . He missed only one league game during the season as Albacete finished 14th . 
 During the season it became increasingly clear that the player would be joining a bigger club . Amid reported interest from a list of clubs including Manchester City , Arsenal , Leeds United , Roma , Internazionale , reportedly willing to pay around € 3 million for the player and then loan him back to Albacete for a season , and Deportivo La Coruña , who agreed terms with the club but were unable to agree with Camaño , Pablo signed a four @-@ year contract with Atlético Madrid for a fee of € 3.5m plus add @-@ ons . He was reunited with Ferrando , who had recently been appointed coach of Atlético . 
 = = = Atlético Madrid = = = 
 Partnering Colombian international and fellow newcomer Luis <unk> Perea in central defence , Pablo contributed to Atlético achieving the third best defensive record in the 2004 – 05 La Liga season ; only Barcelona and Real Madrid conceded fewer goals . The team finished in a mid @-@ table 11th position because they did not score enough , as illustrated by Pablo 's three goals making him their third best league scorer . His performances earned him selection for the senior national team , in a friendly against England in November , and reported interest from major clubs . Both he and Perea were given a pay rise and a contract extension until 2009 . In 2005 – 06 , Pablo was a fixture for both club and country . He and Perea repeated their efforts of the previous season as Atlético finished in 10th place with the fourth best defensive record , and he partnered Carles Puyol at the 2006 World Cup . 
 Pablo became embroiled in the 2006 Real Madrid presidential elections . José Antonio Camacho , the chosen coach of presidential candidate Juan Palacios , announced that the club would bring in José Antonio Reyes , Joaquín and Pablo to strengthen the team if he won the election , and that the deal for Pablo was already done . Palacios lost the election , so Pablo had to remain with Atlético . His agent spoke out in his defence , confirming that Pablo had not asked to leave Atlético , and the Palacios faction were taking advantage of a contractual clause allowing him to leave if an offer of € 15m were received ( the club claimed the figure was only a basis for negotiation ) . He also disingenuously suggested that joining the hated rival was no different from joining a big club abroad . Atlético coach Javier Aguirre made it clear they still wanted and needed " the best centre @-@ back in Spain " , and the player apologised to the fans , insisting he wanted to stay at Atlético and admitting he had made a mistake in accepting Real 's offer . 
 He kept his place , but in November , an injury sustained against Mallorca was diagnosed as a bruised kidney and fractured vertebrae , which kept him out for some weeks , during which time Zé Castro forced his way into consideration as a starter . In January 2007 , Pablo marked his 100th game for the club with a rare goal to earn a draw with Racing Santander , and completed the season with 24 league games . He helped the club qualify for the 2007 – 08 UEFA Cup via the Intertoto Cup , and retained a regular spot in the starting eleven as Atlético finished fourth in the league and qualified for the Champions League , but mistakes in the Madrid derby in January 2008 led to both Real 's goals and rekindled the fans ' hostility . 
 Although the recruitment of Tomáš <unk> and Johnny Heitinga pushed Pablo down the pecking order , he finished the 2008 – 09 season with 21 league appearances . An offer from Real Zaragoza of less than € 5m was rejected by the club as insufficient , but despite the arrival of Juanito adding to the defensive competition , Pablo said he was happy to see out the remaining year of his contract . In that final season , he played rarely . He took part in the early rounds of the Copa del Rey and in the group stage of the Champions League as Atlético finished third in their group and dropped into the Europa League , but made his last appearance for the club , as a late substitute , on 20 December 2009 . 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 Despite renewed interest from Camacho , then coach of Osasuna , Pablo moved to England , where he signed a three @-@ year deal with West Bromwich Albion , newly returned to the Premier League , to begin on 1 July 2010 when his contract with Atlético expired . He made his debut on the opening day of the season , partnering Gabriel <unk> in central defence as Albion lost 6 – 0 at Chelsea , and scored his first goal ten days later , in a 2 – 0 win at League One ( third @-@ tier ) club Leyton Orient in the League Cup . He was used sporadically , making only ten Premier League appearances , of which just two came in 2011 . Teammate Jonas Olsson suggested that it took at least a season to accustom oneself to English football , especially for someone who spoke little English when he first arrived . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 Pablo signed a two @-@ year contract with Championship ( second @-@ tier ) club Birmingham City in August 2011 , at the end of the summer transfer window . The fee was undisclosed . He made his debut for the club in a 3 – 1 home defeat to Braga in the group stage of the Europa League . Away to Club Brugge in the same competition , he was knocked unconscious in a clash of heads with Joseph <unk> for which he received lengthy treatment ; in the tenth minute of the resultant stoppage time , Chris Wood scored a winning goal for Birmingham . Pablo had replaced the injured Curtis Davies in the starting eleven , but the concussion sustained at Brugge gave Davies time to regain fitness and his undisputed starting place alongside Steven Caldwell in central defence . After Caldwell 's season ended early through injury , Pablo returned to the team for the last few games , including the play @-@ off semi @-@ final defeat , and finished the 62 @-@ game season with 17 starts , of which only 7 came in the league . 
 Davies and Caldwell began the 2012 – 13 season as first choice until an ankle injury sustained by Davies during a League Cup match at Coventry City gave Pablo an early opportunity to impress . He kept his place after Davies returned to fitness , but chipped a bone in his foot in the defeat to Barnsley and was expected to be out for a month . Further injuries , the return to fitness of Caldwell , and the emergence of young left @-@ back Mitch Hancox , which allowed Paul Robinson to partner Davies in the centre , meant that Pablo played only twice more , and he was released at the end of his contract . 
 = = International career = = 
 After only a few Segunda División matches , Pablo received his first call @-@ up to the Spanish under @-@ 21 team , for a friendly match against Bulgaria on 19 November 2002 . Despite the media 's assumption that he would be among the substitutes , he played the whole match as Spain won 7 – 1 . He was a regular selection over the next 12 months , and finished his under @-@ 21 career with ten caps . His last appearances came as Spain were eliminated by Sweden in the qualification play @-@ offs for the 2004 European Under @-@ 21 Championships . 
 His first call @-@ up to the senior national squad came in October 2004 , for World Cup qualifiers against Belgium and Lithuania , as a replacement for Juanito who dropped out of the original selection because of injury . Carlos Marchena and Carles Puyol were the centre @-@ back pairing in possession , and Pablo remained on the bench for both games . He made his international debut on 17 November 2004 in a friendly against England in Madrid . He entered the game as a half @-@ time substitute for Marchena , with Spain leading 1 – 0 ; with 20 minutes left , he appeared to foul Alan Smith in the act of shooting , but no penalty was awarded , and Spain had no difficulty retaining their lead . Pablo replaced Iván <unk> , who had previously been a regular selection , in the squad for Spain 's next match , a World Cup qualifier at home to San Marino in February 2005 , but did not play . 
 In his next match , a friendly against China in March , he appeared to score with a first @-@ half header but the " goal " was ruled out because Fernando Torres was offside . A few days later , he made his first competitive international appearance in the goalless World Cup qualifier away to Serbia & Montenegro , playing alongside Puyol in the first half and Juanito in the second . 
 During the World Cup qualification process , Pablo established himself alongside Puyol as first choice for Spain . Despite his own goal in the last warmup game , against Croatia , he and Puyol played in the first two group games at the finals , two victories which ensured qualification for the quarter @-@ finals , and were rested for the third , against Saudi Arabia . Against France in the last eight , Spain took the lead via David Villa 's penalty after Pablo was the victim of Lilian Thuram 's " clumsy challenge from behind " . France equalised in the first half , then took the lead with only a few minutes left ; with Spain pushing for an equaliser , Zinedine Zidane scored a stoppage @-@ time third . It was the first time that Pablo had played in a losing Spain eleven . 
 He retained his place for the remainder of 2006 , but thereafter played less frequently , appearing in only four of Spain 's twelve Euro 2008 qualifiers . Named in the 31 @-@ man provisional squad for the competition finals , he failed to make the cut . His last international appearance came as a substitute in a 1 – 0 friendly win against France in February 2008 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Pablo is tall ( 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) ) , good in the air , and as a younger player was noted for his pace . Albacete teammate Miquel <unk> suggested that those key attributes made him " the worst thing that could happen to a forward " . His coach at both Albacete and Atlético , César Ferrando , said he had all the qualities needed for his position , which included anticipation and the intelligence to keep things simple . Again according to Ferrando , Pablo rarely fouled , because " he doesn 't need to . He has a whole arsenal of defensive resources . " A 2006 World Cup profile suggested he was " much happier on the ball than first impressions may suggest " , and could look " ungainly " . A scout 's assessment of his running style as " ugly " reportedly discouraged Real Madrid from pursuing an early interest in him . 
 In later years , he used his experience : in 2012 , the Birmingham Mail suggested that , in contrast to the " more aggressive and animated " Steven Caldwell , " Pablo tends to be subtle in his positioning and tackling , he likes to read the game rather than go head @-@ to @-@ head in a gladiatorial battle " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pablo married <unk> in Albacete Cathedral in 2007 . As of December 2010 , the couple had one son , Adrián , and one daughter , Paula . 
 In 2008 , the Provincial Government of Albacete presented Pablo , Santi Denia , and Andrés Iniesta with the Medalla de Oro de Honor y <unk> ( Gold Medal of Honour and Gratitude ) , not only for their footballing prowess , as the only three natives of the province to play for the senior national team , but also in recognition of personal qualities that made them an example for the youth of the region . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Albacete 
 Segunda División promotion : 2002 – 03 
 Atlético Madrid 
 Copa del Rey : runner @-@ up 2009 – 10 
 = Mischief Makers = 
 Mischief Makers is a 1997 side @-@ scrolling platform video game developed by Treasure and published by Enix and Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 . The player assumes the role of Marina , a robotic maid who journeys to rescue her creator from the emperor of Planet Clancer . The gameplay revolves around grabbing , shaking , and throwing objects . There are five worlds and 52 levels , and the game is displayed in " 2 1 ⁄ 2D " . 
 The game was the first 2D side @-@ scrolling game for the Nintendo 64 , and Treasure 's first release for a Nintendo console . The company began Mischief Makers 's development in mid @-@ 1995 with little knowledge of the console 's features . The 12 @-@ person team wanted to make a novel gameplay mechanic , and implementing the resultant " catching " technique became their most difficult task . The game appeared at the 1997 Electronic Entertainment Expo and was first released in Japan on June 27 , 1997 , and later in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Australia . 
 The game received " mixed or average reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Critics praised Mischief Makers 's inventiveness , personality , and boss fights , but criticized its brevity , low difficulty , low replay value , sound , and harsh introductory learning curve . Retrospective reviewers disagreed with the originally poor reception , and multiple reviewers noted Marina 's signature " Shake , shake ! " sound bite as a highlight . Video game journalists cited Mischief Makers as ripe for reissue either through the Nintendo eShop or in a sequel or franchise reboot . In 2009 , GamesRadar called it " possibly the most underrated and widely ignored game on the N64 " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mischief Makers is the first single @-@ player 2D side @-@ scrolling platform game on the Nintendo 64 console . Its gameplay combines platform game mechanics with aspects from the action and puzzle genres . The characters and backgrounds are modeled in pre @-@ rendered 3D similar to Donkey Kong Country 's " Advanced Computer Modeling " . This style , with 3D backgrounds behind 2D gameplay , is known as " 2 1 ⁄ 2D " . Compared to previous Treasure run and gun games , Mischief Makers 's gameplay is more exploratory in nature . 
 The player @-@ character , a robotic maid named Marina , journeys to save her kidnapped creator . The story takes place on Planet Clancer , a world on the cusp of civil war due to the actions of its Emperor and his Imperial forces . The Emperor brainwashes <unk> to kidnap the visiting robotics genius Professor Theo . Theo 's creation , the player @-@ character Ultra @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> G Marina <unk> , pursues the professor and grabs , throws , and shakes the obstacles in her way , such as enemies , floating " <unk> " platforms , warp stars , and missiles . Indeed , almost all game objects can be grabbed , which lends towards the shake @-@ based combat system . Marina can shake " grabbed " objects to throw them as projectiles or to find loot . Objects sometimes change functions when shaken , such as items that become homing missiles and guns with multi @-@ directional shots . Some drop red , blue , and green gems , which restore player health . The health gauge in the corner of the screen shows the amount of damage Marina can take . The player can store up to two additional stock lives . Yellow gems hidden in each level extend the final cutscene 's length . Marina can run , jump , and boost ( via jetpack ) in the eight cardinal and ordinal directions . She can also slide , hover , and roll . 
 The game has five worlds with roughly twelve levels apiece . Some levels are action @-@ only while others include puzzles . The player 's goal is to reach a warp star at each level 's end . En route , Marina shakes enemies , breaks blocks , uses weapons , and rides " bikes " and objects along wire path mazes . Each world has both final and mid @-@ level bosses . The levels and boss fights use scaling and screen rotation special effects to vary the gameplay . 
 Almost all things on Planet Clancer — including people , buildings , and pets — either wear or are inscribed with identical " sad " faces with " red , glowing eyes " . A Clancer named Teran substitutes for Marina in several brief areas and uses non @-@ shake mechanics like punching , kicking , and double jumping . A character named Calina , a petulant Clancer who imitates Marina , recurs throughout the game as a comedic device . 
 = = Development = = 
 Treasure began to develop Mischief Makers in mid 1995 . At the time , they knew little about the Nintendo 64 's final technical specifications , graphics implementation , and development kit , but were nevertheless interested in the console and its improved " pixel quality " . Historically , Treasure developed games exclusively for Sega consoles , which made Mischief Makers their first release for a Nintendo console . Bringing Mischief Makers to the Nintendo 64 was a hardware @-@ based decision : the Nintendo 64 's cartridges were more expensive than CD @-@ ROMs , but they loaded data instantly and were thus more conducive for action games such as Mischief Makers . However , Treasure CEO Masato <unk> said that development for the Nintendo 64 had a harsher learning curve than even the Sega Saturn . Other than the special attention required to build a single boss in 3D , the team did not use features specific to the Nintendo 64 hardware . 
 Treasure 's founders had come from Konami , where they worked on Nintendo Entertainment System games such as Castlevania and Contra . They found their development environment restrictive and left to try riskier concepts and to singularly focus on making " great games " . In the three years between Treasure 's founding and Mischief Makers 's development , the company released highly regarded games such as Gunstar Heroes — known as " one of the definitive 16 @-@ bit action games " — and Dynamite <unk> . An average of 12 people worked on Mischief Makers , with up to 15 at times . Though the team was different in composition from that of previous Treasure titles , it included the lead programmer and character designer from Gunstar Heroes . Treasure 's CEO said that the company liked to expand into new genres , though they primarily work in genres where the staff had experience . The company sought to depart from the Gunstar Heroes shoot ' em up design , and chose to build Mischief Makers around an original " catching " gameplay mechanic , which became the hardest aspect to implement . While foreign ( non @-@ Japanese ) aesthetics were popular with other Japanese developers , Treasure 's CEO felt the company 's games did not look " particularly foreign " and could appeal to Japanese audiences . 
 The game was Treasure 's first to be published by Enix . The publisher sought out Treasure for their reputation in the action game genre , and had approached Treasure several times before the Nintendo 64 project surfaced . Upon choosing to make the game for the Nintendo 64 , Treasure thought it would be a " good idea " to work with Enix . And similar to how Treasure ended its historic loyalty to the Sega Genesis by developing Mischief Makers for Nintendo , Enix had just recently ended its historic loyalty to Nintendo by signing Dragon Quest VII of their Dragon Quest franchise to Sony . Neither Square or Enix built a " special relationship " with Nintendo specific for Mischief Makers 's release , though Nintendo later served as the game 's publisher for Western markets . When their English localization of the Japanese game finished ahead of schedule , the North American release date was advanced two weeks accordingly . 
 Mischief Makers was demonstrated at the 1997 Electronic Entertainment Expo and later released in Japan on June 27 , 1997 , the United States on October 1 , and the United Kingdom and Australia on January 15 , 1998 . Its Japanese title is Yuke @-@ Yuke Trouble Makers , or Go @-@ Go Trouble Makers . Near the time of the game 's Japanese launch , Treasure announced that they would continue to develop for the Nintendo 64 with the Japan @-@ only <unk> <unk> <unk> , which was released in September and later introduced to North America as Bangai @-@ O. 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mischief Makers received " mixed or average reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic , and a " Gold Hall of Fame " score of 32 / 40 from Japanese magazine Famitsu . Critics praised the game 's inventiveness , personality , " variety " , and boss fights , and criticized its brevity , low difficulty , low replay value , sound , and harsh introductory learning curve . Retrospective reviewers disagreed with the game 's originally poor reception , and multiple reviewers noted Marina 's signature " Shake , shake ! " sound bite as a highlight . Electronic Gaming Monthly awarded the game their silver award . 
 IGN 's Matt Casamassina said that the game compensated for its average graphics with excellent level design and gameplay challenges . He added that the game 's puzzles require thought , unlike those in other action / platform games , and that the game 's objectives were not clear until after the first few levels . Casamassina praised the game 's transparency effects , anti @-@ aliasing , mipmapping , and scaling rotations . IGN described anticipation for the game as " tremendous " , particularly among the game 's market of " younger gamers and 2D fans " . Nintendo Power thought that the game was the best side @-@ scroller since Super Mario World . Next Generation wrote that " only diehard 2D platform fans " would be interested and did not feel that the game lived up to standards set by Mario 64 . In contrast , GameFan said that Mischief Makers did for 2D what Mario 64 did for 3D , and suggested that Sega should be influenced by the game . GamesRadar retrospectively called Mischief Makers " pure , unadulterated awesome " and " 2D brilliance " . The website summarized the game to be about " grabbing sad @-@ faced aliens , shaking them until gems come out , and then hurling them at other sad @-@ faced aliens . " Zachary Miller of Nintendo World Report asserted the game may be the console 's most bizarre and surreal , but Gamasutra 's John Harris said that the game 's premise is " only strange to people who have never heard of anime " . GameFan described the game as " obviously deeply Japanese " , where " old school gameplay and 64 @-@ bit visuals finally meet " . 
 Hirokazu <unk> of Famitsu commended Mischief Makers 's gameplay , which balanced its poor character design . Other Famitsu reviewers admired Treasure 's signature robot designs and were puzzled by the company 's choice to use buttons instead of the 3D analog stick . Nintendo Life 's Jamie O 'Neill praised the game 's characters and disliked the controls . He compared the Calina character to the role of Shadow Mario in Super Mario Sunshine . O 'Neill wrote that the intricate controls were " the antithesis of a friendly , approachable , and intuitive platformer " because the game used every button on the controller ( including the directional pad ) , though he felt that players who persevered through the difficult controls would find them " inventive and unique " . He added that the complex controls allowed for experimentation that led to new and fun gameplay , and though the throwing enemies mechanic seemed to follow from Gunstar Heroes , the <unk> platforming was unintuitive . John Harris of Gamasutra wrote that the game borrowed other elements from Gunstar Heroes , as the games were similar in protagonists , collectible gems , and bosses . As the game took time to learn and understand , O 'Neill left the reader to decide whether the game was " ultimately convoluted or bordering on sophistication and genius " . 
 Nintendo Life 's O 'Neill thought the five world bosses were among Treasure 's best ( in particular , the transforming " Cerberus Alpha " boss ) , but found the mid @-@ level bosses uninteresting . Peter Bartholow of GameSpot and Electronic Gaming Monthly 's reviewers felt similarly . Sushi @-@ X of Electronic Gaming Monthly added that the technique of looking for a boss 's weak spot was similar to Metroid . Famitsu reviewers praised how the game encouraged players to experiment with the basic " grab , throw , and shake " gameplay . They also appreciated the cadence of Mischief Makers 's short levels . O 'Neill ( Nintendo Life ) thought the game had great variety in gameplay mechanics ( from maze puzzles to outrunning lava ) , graphics ( from bosses that scale back the screen to levels with screen rotation ) , and audio ( from upbeat quirk to scary ) , and added that he was surprised to hear critics speak against the " unique , varied , and dramatic " sound . Scott McCall of AllGame too appreciated the sound , from the voice to the " almost indescribable " music . Gamasutra 's John Harris noted its " tremendous variety " in gameplay — from a Track & Field remake to outrunning a missile barrage — as rare for 2D platformers , and commented that " it is obvious that Treasure poured their hearts into this game . " 
 Peter Bartholow of GameSpot summarized Mischief Makers as " a good game that will leave players wanting more " . He liked the bosses , which made the player use all available skills , but felt they were short @-@ lived and easily solved in the context of a short game with tutorials as one fifth of its levels . He did not consider the ending extension a suitable reward for returning to the levels , and predicted that most players would not finish the game more than once . Game Informer echoed Bartholow 's comments about the game 's brevity , and named the game 's seven @-@ event <unk> as a highlight . Sushi @-@ X of Electronic Gaming Monthly wrote that the game felt incomplete and lamented that " a decent player can finish the game in under three hours " , though Next Generation said the game was " certainly long enough " . The game 's frequent reuse of a small selection of tiles , objects , sound effects , soundtracks , and bland backgrounds ( compared to the " impressive " boss battle animations and effects ) led GameSpot 's Bartholow to suggest that Mischief Makers was limited by its cartridge space . He concluded that the " decent " game would be " truly excellent ... on another medium " . Zachary Miller of Nintendo World Report reported that the graphics did not age well into 2010 . Electronic Gaming Monthly wrote that the game is " definitely a sleeper hit " . As Hardcore Gamer 's Ryan Cartmel put it , the game went " largely unnoticed " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Video game journalists from outlets such as GamesRadar and Nintendo World Report cited Mischief Makers as ripe for reissue either through the Nintendo eShop or in a sequel or franchise reboot . Retro Gamer placed the " masterpiece of mayhem " 80th on their list of " essential " Nintendo 64 games for its " unbridled quality " . In 2009 , GamesRadar called it " possibly the most underrated and widely ignored game on the N64 " . The website wrote that Mischief Makers was received poorly because players wanted 3D instead of 2D gameplay from Nintendo 64 games . Gamasutra 's John Harris added that those who gave it a " bum rap " missed a " surprisingly clever " game . UGO remembered the game as innovative , though imperfect , and asked to see Marina reinterpreted and resurrected in a new game . 
 = City of Washington – Washington & Jefferson College relations = 
 The relationship between the City of Washington , Pennsylvania , and Washington & Jefferson College spans over two centuries , dating to the founding of both the city and the college in the 1780s . The relationship between the town and college were strong enough that the citizens of Washington offered a $ 50 @,@ 000 donation in 1869 to the college in a successful attempt to lure the Washington & Jefferson College trustees to select Washington over nearby Canonsburg as the consolidated location of the college . However , the relationship was strained through the latter half of the 20th century , as the college pursued an expansion policy that clashed with the residential neighborhood . The college 's frustrations grew after preservationists unsuccessfully attempted to pass laws prohibiting the college from demolishing certain buildings that were listed on the East Washington Historic District . Relations were so bad that residents and college officials engaged in a shouting match at a meeting . Local preservationists also unsuccessfully tried to block the demolition of Hays Hall , which had been condemned . 
 In the 1990s , the City of Washington made several unsuccessful attempts to challenge the college 's tax @-@ exempt status . In 1993 , Washington appealed the Washington County Board of Assessment 's determination that the college was tax @-@ exempt . That case went to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court , which ruled in favor of the college . In response , the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed a new law clarifying that colleges were tax @-@ exempt . Separately , the City of Washington passed an ordinance that levied a municipal " service fee " against the College students , which was ruled to be illegal and was struck down . In the late 1990s , the college and town tried to mend fences through the Blueprint for Collaboration , a plan with detailed goals and benchmarks for the future to help the College and the city work together on economic development , environmental protection , and historic preservation . 
 = = Early relations = = 
 The history of both the City of Washington and Washington & Jefferson College date to the 1780s , when Western Pennsylvania was part of the American frontier . In the early years , a number of prominent residents worked to secure the future of the college , including the leader of the Whiskey Rebellion , David Bradford , who served as an early trustee and helped build McMillan Hall , and Matthew Brown , who was the first Principal of Washington Academy and First Presbyterian Church of Washington . The first portion of the modern campus was donated to the college by William Hoge , who was the son of David Hoge , the founder of Washington . In 1869 , citizens of Washington offered a $ 50 @,@ 000 donation to the college in a successful attempt to lure the trustees to select Washington over nearby Canonsburg as the consolidated location of the college . 
 = = Conflicts over expansion into East Washington = = 
 The college 's 1968 campus master plan called for the expansion of the campus eastward towards Wade Avenue in East Washington Borough , a plan that placed them in conflict with the residents of that area . For the next 30 years , the college maintained a policy of purchasing any homes in that area as they became available . In 1984 , the Washington County History and Landmarks Foundation was able to get the East Washington Historic District , a collection of 120 Victorian homes in that area , added to the National Register of Historic Places . The college opposed the designation but did not object in time to prevent it . According to President Howard J. Burnett , the district " was structured to prevent expansion of the college . " In the 1990s , the hard feelings between some residents and the College came to a head , with residents trying to have the Borough enact anti @-@ demolition laws to block expansion and a meeting of the Washington County History and Landmarks Foundation deteriorated into a shouting match between residents and college officials . Burnett maintained that the expansion was beneficial to the community and that the opposition came from a small and non @-@ representative group on Wade Avenue . He also questioned the historic value of many of the designated homes , pointing out that many of them were in very poor shape and others were vacant . As of 1995 , the college owned about 30 properties listed in the historic district . In the end , efforts to block the demolition of these buildings , including several which were part of the historic district , were unsuccessful . Notably , one 140 @-@ year @-@ old farm house at 137 South Wade Street , which the college had acquired in 1977 after being vacant for several years , was moved to a new location outside of town . 
 = = Safety and construction conflicts = = 
 During the planning stages of the <unk> Campus Center in 1991 , the college asked the City of Washington to close South Lincoln Street between East Maiden and East Chestnut Street and reroute the traffic through College Street , which would have been made into a two @-@ way street . The college was concerned about the increasing frequency of accidents between pedestrians and automobiles on that street , pointing to a recent incident involving an injured maintenance worker and the fact that there had been 6 other similar accidents in the previous 15 years . The new campus center would only increase pedestrian traffic on that street . The proposal was defeated by the City Council 5 @-@ 0 . 
 = = Legal challenges to the college 's tax @-@ exempt status = = 
 In 1993 , the Washington County Board of Assessment ruled that the 87 properties owned by the college were exempt from property and real estate taxes . After an appeal to the Board of Assessment Appeals to reverse their earlier decision was denied , the city appealed the Washington County Court of Common Pleas . On August 5 , 1994 , Judge Thomas J. Terputac reversed the board 's decision , ruling in Order No. 93 @-@ <unk> that the college did not qualify for tax @-@ exempt status . According to the trial court , Washington & Jefferson College was not a " purely public charity " , failing four of five criteria in the Hospital Utilization Project case . Specifically , Judge Terputac opined that the college had been founded as a purely public charity , but had morphed into an " enterprise of big business . " The college appealed to the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court , which overturned Judge Terputac 's decision on September 15 , 1995 , in a decision written by Judge James R. Kelley . According to that court , Washington & Jefferson College did satisfy the requirements to be considered a " purely public charity . " Judges Bernard L. McGinley , Doris A. Smith @-@ <unk> , and Dan Pellegrini dissented . The City of Washington appealed that decision to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court , which affirmed the lower court 's decision on November 20 , 1997 , in a decision written by Justice John P. Flaherty . According to the court , the lower court was correct in concluding that the college did in fact satisfy the five requirements for an entity to be considered a " purely public charity , " a standard that was set out in the Hospital Utilization Project case : " 1 ) advance a charitable purpose ; 2 ) donate or render gratuitously a substantial portion of its services ; 3 ) benefit a substantial and indefinite class of persons who are legitimate subjects of charity ; 4 ) relieve the government of some of its burden ; and 5 ) operate entirely free from private profit motive . " The court said that " the record demonstrates that W & J fulfills all of these requirements . " Most persuasive was the fact that the college 's benefits were open to all and that those served were members of a charitable class . The dissent by Justice Russell M. Nigro did not state that he thought that the college should not be tax @-@ exempt , only that the rest of the court had " so broadly construed its requirements that any private college or university can satisfy the test and obtain tax @-@ exempt status . " 
 = = = Legislative response = = = 
 In response to these legal challenges over Washington & Jefferson College 's tax @-@ exempt status , the Pennsylvania General Assembly unanimously passed House Bill 55 of 1997 , the Institutions of Purely Public Charity Act . The legislation was passed days before the court 's decision , when it was yet unclear how the court would rule in that case . Both the court decision and the legislation preserved the tax @-@ exemption for colleges , maintaining the status quo . The bill provided uniform standards for determining the tax @-@ exempt eligibility for all nonprofits , especially private colleges . The bill clarified the law and has had a long @-@ term impact on other nonprofits besides private colleges , including hospitals , nursing homes , and public universities . Brian C. Mitchell , President of the Council of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania ( CICU ) , was instrumental in getting the bill enacted . In 1998 , he was named President of Washington & Jefferson College . His experiences at president of the CICU were cited in his election announcement . 
 In 2009 , when Pittsburgh Mayor Luke Ravenstahl proposed a 1 % tax on college tuition for students at Pittsburgh colleges , this case was used to argue against the constitutionality of that proposal . 
 = = Attempts to levy a " service fee " on college students = = 
 In 1995 , the City of Washington passed Ordinance 1460 , which established a " service fee " for municipal services that was targeted at Washington & Jefferson College students . The college appealed this ordinance to the Courts of Common Pleas of Washington County , arguing that " the ordinance is an illegal tax ordinance , not authorized by statute . " In an opinion written by Judge David L. Gilmore , the court ruled that the " service fee " was actually a " tax masquerading as a fee " and that the label was " given to it merely to avoid the problem presented by enacting such a tax . " The court noted that there was no legal basis for calling this ordinance a tax rather than a service fee , since the city admitted that it was facing budgetary shortfalls and had passed the ordinance in search of new revenue . According to the judge , the " ordinance attempts to raise additional revenue thereby creating a tax , " which was not authorized by any statute . This case has been cited by legal counsel for local governments , cautioning against enacting similar provisions . 
 = = Towards improved relations = = 
 After Brian C. Mitchell was installed as W & J President in 1998 , he was surprised at the poor state of the college 's relations with the city of Washington . During a courtesy visit to local officials early in his tenure , Mitchell was berated by the officials for 45 minutes , blaming the college " for everything that had gone wrong in the last 50 years . ” With input from several other colleges and the Knight Collaborative , a national initiative designed to develop strategies for partnership between colleges and local community revitalization efforts , the college and the city developed the Blueprint for Collaboration , a plan with detailed goals and benchmarks for the future to help the College and the city work together on economic development , environmental protection , and historic preservation . The plan included provisions for the college to offer more academic opportunities for the community and to explore moving its bookstore into the downtown area , develop student housing in the downtown area , and to expand student use of the downtown eating , shopping , and visiting destinations . The City of Washington began a downtown revitalization project featuring new sidewalks , landscaping , and fiber @-@ optic cables . The plan also called for an " investors roundtable , " comprising federal and state officials , the banking community , commercial interests , and potential investors . 
 = = = Conflict over Strawberry Alley = = = 
 In April 2008 , the location of the Swanson Science Center had to be shifted several feet towards Maiden Street after three members of the Washington City Council voted to reject an offer from the College to purchase Strawberry Alley , which runs through the campus . The College had offered $ 102 @,@ 500 for the alleyway , which had an appraised value of $ 2 @,@ 500 . Following the vote , the Mayor of Washington indicated that one of the three nay votes had reneged on an agreement between the college and the council to accept the offer . Instead of accepting the offer , the City Council wanted to levy a $ 100 annual municipal services fee on each student , a proposal that was nearly identical to the service fee that was ruled illegal in 1995 . The fee proposal never came to a vote , and in March 2010 , the City Council voted unanimously to vacate Strawberry Alley , allowing the College to assume ownership of it for free . 
 = Traum durch die Dämmerung = 
 " Traum durch die Dämmerung " ( " Dream in the Twilight " , literally " Dream through the twilight " ) , is both a German poem by Otto Julius Bierbaum and a Lied ( art song ) by Richard Strauss , his Op. 29 / 1 . The opening line is " <unk> Wiesen im Dämmergrau " ( " Broad meadows in grey dusk " ) . It is the first of three songs by Strauss based on love poems by Bierbaum , composed and published in Munich in 1895 , and dedicated to Eugen Gura . The works were scored for medium voice and piano , and published by Universal Edition as 3 Lieder mit <unk> ( 3 songs with piano accompaniment ) , later with English versions and orchestral arrangements . 
 = = Poem = = 
 " Traum durch die Dämmerung " first appeared in Berlin in 1892 in a collection known as <unk> Gedichte ( " Experienced Poems " ) by Bierbaum that was published by Verlag von Wilhelm <unk> ( " Wilhelm <unk> 's Publishing House ) . Bierbaum dedicated the 217 page collection , with Traum durch die Dämmerung on page 130 , to Detlev von <unk> as he expressed in the personal foreword . A second edition of the collection appeared one year later . 
 In his anthology <unk> des <unk> ( Poetry of Art Nouveau ) Jost <unk> noted that the title is paradigmatic for the literature of the Jugendstil . The theme is a man going to meet a beloved woman , as in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's 1771 poem " Willkommen und Abschied " ( Welcome and Farewell ) . In Bierbaum 's poem , he speaks in the first person . 
 " Traum durch die Dämmerung " is in two stanzas , each comprising five lines . The first line , literally : " Wide meadows in twilight grey " , was translated by Richard Stokes as " Broad meadows in grey dusk " . The first line rhymes with lines 3 and 4 , in both stanzas on " dark " vowels , <unk> and Land , with line 4 repeating line 1 . Line 2 rhymes with line 5 on a light vowel , <unk> and Licht . The term Dämmergrau , a combination of Dämmerung ( twilight ) and <unk> ( grey ) , repeated four times ( in lines 1 and 4 ) contrasts with the final word Licht ( light ) . The third line of the poem describes the walk to meet the woman in first person , after detailing meadows , twilight , the sun and the stars : Nun geh ich zu der <unk> Frau ( Now I go to the most beautiful woman ) . The subject notes that he is not in a rush : Ich gehe nicht schnell ( I do not go fast ) . She is not described , but their relationship imagined as a <unk> , <unk> Band ( soft , velvety band ) , drawing him to der Liebe Land ( the love land ) , reaching a state of <unk> <unk> Licht ( mild blue light ) . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Strauss composed " Traum durch die Dämmerung " , along with the other two of Op. 29 , in the summer of 1895 , the year after he married Pauline de <unk> , and settled in Munich , the town of his birth . 
 Working as assistant conductor at the Munich court opera , he looked for a librettist for a possible opera project and contacted Bierbaum . While no opera came to pass , Strauss liked his poems and set several of them to music , among them the three songs of Op. 29 which he all wrote on 7 June . Traum durch die Dämmerung was followed by <unk> Herzen ( " Longing Hearts " or " Beating Hearts " ) and <unk> ( Nighttime Walk ) . 
 Strauss reportedly completed " Traum durch die Dämmerung " in the only 20 minutes his wife gave him before an errand . He scored the three songs , which all contemplate walking , for medium voice and piano , and dedicated them to Eugen Gura , a leading baritone of the court opera in Munich . 
 The songs were first published in Munich by Joseph <unk> . They were then published by Universal Edition . " Traum durch die Dämmerung " appeared also in English in a translation by John <unk> and <unk> <unk> , in transpositions for low and high voice , and with an orchestral arrangement by Robert <unk> . Strauss quoted the music , as several other early works , in the fifth section of his tone poem Ein Heldenleben ( A Hero 's Life ) , Op. 40 , completed in 1898 , which is usually considered autobiographical in tone . 
 = = Music = = 
 A typical performance takes around three minutes . In the version for medium voice , the music of " Traum durch die Dämmerung " begins in F @-@ sharp major . It is in 2 / 4 time and marked " <unk> <unk> " ( very calm ) . The two stanzas are through @-@ composed , with two slight changes to the text : Strauss added the word " hin " to the third line and changed the order of the adjectives in the last line . The song is completed by a modified repeat of the last three lines , this time in Bierbaum 's word order . 
 The even time picks up the slow steps . The general marking for volume is pp ( very soft ) , repeated several times , changed by a crescendo marking only twice , both times growing to pp again . The accompaniment follows a similar pattern almost throughout the song : in one measure , the bass in the pianists left hand moves in dotted eighth notes , while the right hand regularly alternates triplet sixteenths and eighths , resulting in a subtle shift of accents , which has been described as a " trance @-@ like mood " . The voice enters after two identical measures , also moving in dotted eighth notes . The first motif is a three note stepwise descent ( A sharp , G sharp , F sharp ) . It is immediately repeated on the word " Dämmergrau " . The text is mostly rendered simply , with only one note on each syllable . When the view changes in line 3 from observation of nature to the destination , the key shifts abruptly to B @-@ flat major , and the word " <unk> " ( most beautiful ) is accented by a long high note . This climax of the first stanza is prepared by a crescendo , but again a sudden pianissimo . With the beginning of the second stanza , the key returns to F @-@ sharp major , the melody is not identical but similar to the first stanza ; the first motif appears one step higher , from B to G sharp , on " Dämmergrau " , repeated on " Liebe Land " . The line reaches a climax on " <unk> " ( blue ) . The text of the last three lines is repeated as a shortened version of a stanza , with the first motif in its second form this time on " gehe nicht schnell " and " <unk> nicht " , with this emphasis on " not fast " marked " immer <unk> ( aber nicht <unk> ) " , which translates as " calmer and calmer ( but no dragging ) " . The voice ends with a rising line , ending openly on C sharp , while the triplet movement stops , and the piano slowly repeats the final chord , marked ppp . 
 = = Versions by other composers = = 
 The poem " Traum durch die Dämmerung " inspired several other composers . Max Reger set the text to music as No. 3 of his Six Songs for Medium Voice , Op. 35 , in 1899 . Wolfgang Jordan inserted a setting to conclude <unk> . <unk> Lieder für 1 <unk> mit Pianoforte ( Dreams . Eight songs for voice with piano ) , published in Berlin in 1899 by <unk> . " Traum durch die Dämmerung " was composed by Alfred von Sponer as the second of Drei Lieder für 1 <unk> <unk> mit <unk> ( Three songs for medium voice and piano accompaniment ) , Op. 12 , published in Leipzig in 1899 by <unk> @-@ Biedermann . Vítězslav Novák included a composition of the text in <unk> , Op. 46 No. 2 , published in 1912 . Lutz Landwehr von <unk> set it for baritone and piano as Op. 1 / 2 in 1979 . 
 = The Big Goodbye = 
 " The Big Goodbye " is the 12th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . The episode first aired in broadcast syndication on January 11 , 1988 . This was the second writing credit of the series for Tracy Tormé following the episode " Haven " . Rob Bowman planned to direct the episode , but he was switched to " Datalore " due to delays in its production . With Bowman working on another episode , Joseph L. Scanlan became the director . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet crew of the Federation starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the crew are sent to open diplomatic ties with the Jaradan . While taking a break from preparations , a computer malfunction traps Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) , Lt. Cmdr. Data ( Brent Spiner ) , and Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) in a 1940s @-@ style gangster holodeck program with Captain Picard playing the role of detective Dixon Hill . 
 " The Big Goodbye " is the first episode to significantly feature the holodeck . Tormé credited Gene Roddenberry with the idea for the detective novel , with Tormé employing the film noir style using references to The Maltese Falcon ( 1941 ) . Lawrence Tierney , who previously appeared in film noir movies in the 1940s , guest stars as Cyrus Redblock . The Dixon Hill setting reappeared in two later episodes in the series and in the film , Star Trek : First Contact ( 1996 ) . 
 11 @.@ 5 million viewers watched " The Big Goodbye " ; critical reception was mixed . One reviewer found it too similar to The Original Series episode , " A Piece of the Action " . Other reviewers complained about the holodeck , but praised Tierney 's performance . The episode won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Costumes for a Series and is the only Star Trek episode to ever win the Peabody Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise heads to <unk> IV to open negotiations with the Jaradan , an insect @-@ like race that is unusually strict in matters of protocol . After practicing the complex greeting the Jaradan require to open negotiations , Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) decides to relax with a Dixon Hill story in the holodeck . Playing Detective Hill in the <unk> , Picard takes up the case of Jessica Bradley ( Carolyn Allport ) , who believes Cyrus Redblock ( Lawrence Tierney ) is trying to kill her . Picard decides to continue the program later and leaves the holodeck to affirm their estimated arrival at <unk> IV . He invites Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) and visiting historian Dr. Whalen ( David <unk> ) to join him in the holodeck . While Crusher is still preparing , Picard and Whalen are ready to enter the holodeck when Lt. Cdr . Data ( Brent Spiner ) arrives , having overheard Picard 's invitation . Entering the holodeck , the three discover Jessica has been murdered in Picard 's absence . As Picard explains that he saw Jessica at his office the day before , Lt. McNary ( Gary Armagnac ) brings Picard into the police station for questioning as a suspect in her murder . Meanwhile , the Enterprise is scanned from a distance by the Jaradan , causing a power surge in the holodeck external controls . Dr. Crusher later enters the holodeck , first experiencing a momentary glitch with the holodeck doors , and joins her friends at the police station . 
 The Jaradan demand their greeting earlier than the agreed time and are insulted at having to talk to anyone other than the Captain . The crew try to communicate with Picard in the holodeck but find it impossible ; the Jaradan signal has affected the holodeck 's functions , preventing the doors from opening or allowing communication with the crew inside . Lt. Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) and Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) attempt to repair the holodeck systems , while inside the holodeck , the group returns to Dixon 's office . Mr. Leech ( Harvey Jason ) appears having waited for Picard , demanding he turn over an object he believes Jessica gave him . When Picard fails to understand , Leech shoots Dr. Whalen with a gun , and the crew discovers that the safety protocols have been disabled as Whalen is severely wounded . As Dr. Crusher cares for his wound , Picard and Data discover the holodeck is malfunctioning and they are unable to exit the program . Mr. Leech is joined by Redblock and continues to demand the object . Lt. McNary arrives and becomes involved in the standoff . Picard tries to explain the nature of the holodeck , but Redblock refuses to believe him . 
 Outside , Wesley finds the glitch , however he cannot simply turn off the system for fear of losing everyone inside . Instead , Wesley resets the simulation , briefly placing Picard and the others in the middle of a snowstorm before finding themselves back in Dixon 's office . With the reset successfully clearing the malfunction , the exit doors finally appear . Despite Picard 's warnings , Redblock and Leech exit the holodeck , but dissipate as they move beyond the range of its <unk> . As they leave the holodeck , Picard thanks McNary for his assistance , who now suspects that his world is artificial and asks whether Picard 's departure is " the big goodbye " , to which Picard replies that he simply doesn 't know . Picard reaches the bridge in time to give the proper greeting to the Jaradan . The Jaradan accept the greeting , heralding the start of successful negotiations . 
 = = Production = = 
 The initial idea for Picard 's detective based holodeck program came from series creator Gene Roddenberry and other writing staff . Tracy Tormé received credit for writing the episode . Tormé said he added film noir elements , including references to The Maltese Falcon ( 1941 ) . Redblock and Leech represent the characters played by Sydney Greenstreet and Peter Lorre . The production staff attempted to create the same layout of the detective office from the film . Dixon Hill was originally named Dixon Steele in reference to In a Lonely Place ( 1950 ) , a film noir starring Humphrey Bogart . However , the name was changed due to similarities with the name of the title character in the American television series , Remington Steele . Tormé expanded the <unk> a great deal , but because of budgetary restraints , they are only heard in the episode . After the episode " Haven " , " The Big Goodbye " is the second writing credit of the series for Tormé . Rob Bowman was originally scheduled to direct the episode , but following problems with " Datalore " , the filming order was switched , so Joe Scanlan directed " The Big Goodbye " instead . 
 Scanlan and Tormé recommended filming the holodeck sequences in black and white , but Rick Berman and Bob Justman disagreed with the idea . " The Big Goodbye " was the first episode based on the holodeck in the Star Trek franchise . The holodeck would appear later in the season in " 11001001 " , as well as a number of other episodes in various series , and would eventually become a regular feature . Because of the differences between the Dixon Hill scenes and those set on the Enterprise , Scanlan treated the diverse settings as if he was filming two unconnected episodes . 
 Tierney was well known for playing villains in 1940s film noirs , including Dillinger ( 1945 ) and The Devil Thumbs a Ride ( 1947 ) . After his performance in Star Trek : The Next Generation , Tierney gained new fame playing Joe Cabot in Quentin Tarantino 's film , Reservoir Dogs ( 1992 ) . Wheaton later recalled he felt intimidated by Tierney during filming , as he was 15 and Tierney had a reputation for having a character similar to the tough guys he typically played . Tierney returned to Star Trek in 1997 to play an alien Regent in the Deep Space Nine episode , " Business as Usual " . Wheaton said that after 12 previous episodes in the series at the time , he and the cast and crew preferred " The Big Goodbye " as it allowed them to play a period piece . The Dixon Hill <unk> reappeared in the second series episode " Manhunt " , the fourth season episode " Clues " and the film Star Trek : First Contact ( 1996 ) . The Dixon Hill characters are also featured in the licensed novel , A Hard Rain . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 The episode first aired on January 11 , 1988 , receiving Nielsen ratings of 11 @.@ 5 million . It was the first new episode broadcast since the previous November , when 10 @.@ 3 million viewers watched " Haven " . " The Big Goodbye " received more viewers than the following episode " Datalore " , which also had only 10 @.@ 3 million viewers . In recognition of its " new standard of quality for first @-@ run syndication " , the episode was honored with a Peabody Award in 1987 . " The Big Goodbye " was also nominated for two Emmy Awards in the categories of Outstanding Cinematography for a Series and Outstanding Costumes for a Series , with costume designer William Ware Theiss winning the award in the latter category . 
 After its initial release , a review in TV Guide criticised the episode for its similarity to The Original Series episode " A Piece of the Action " , which featured a planet based on 1930s gangland Chicago . Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido of Tor.com praised the " stellar guest casting " and said that Tierney " own [ ed ] the episode " . He compared the episode to The Maltese Falcon , and said that the episode featured " charming performances " by the entire cast . DeCandido gave the episode a score of seven out of ten . Cast member Wil Wheaton called the episode a " fantastic collaborative effort , from Tracy Torme 's script , to Joseph Scanlan 's direction , to Ed Brown 's cinematography , to every actor 's performance . There 's a reason ' The Big Goodbye ' is the only Star Trek episode to win a Peabody . " He gave the episode an A grade . 
 Writing for Den of Geek , James Hunt said that the risk of disintegration on the holodeck was " insane " and was rectified in later episodes . He thought that the episode stood out from the others in the first season due to the prototype holodeck story . " The holodeck will break again and again over the years , but rarely in a way any more interesting than this . Not that The Big Goodbye was particularly interesting , but it has the rare fortune of being first , " Hunt wrote . 
 Michelle Erica Green of TrekNation praised the dialogue but felt the episode did not " hold up to a lot of logical analysis " . However , she also said it was a " fun " episode that " set the stage " for holodeck episodes featuring the sentient Professor Moriarty hologram in " Elementary , Dear Data " and " Ship in a Bottle " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen observed " a certain flatness " in parts of the episode and considered it " very silly " for the characters to slowly disintegrate after leaving the holodeck . Although he said the holodeck in " The Big Goodbye " was similar to " an Xbox that periodically eats your cat " , he gave the episode an overall grade of B- . 
 " The Big Goodbye " was released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on August 26 , 1992 . The episode was released on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set in March 2002 . The season one Blu @-@ ray set was released on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Statute of Monopolies = 
 The Statute of Monopolies was an Act of the Parliament of England notable as the first statutory expression of English patent law . Patents evolved from letters patent , issued by the monarch to grant monopolies over particular industries to skilled individuals with new techniques . Originally intended to strengthen England 's economy by making it self @-@ sufficient and promoting new industries , the system gradually became seen as a way to raise money ( through charging patent @-@ holders ) without having to incur the public unpopularity of a tax . Elizabeth I particularly was a great abuser of the system , issuing patents for common commodities such as starch and salt . Unrest eventually persuaded her to turn the administration of patents over to the common law courts , but her successor , James I , was even more abusive . Despite a committee established to investigate grievances and excesses , Parliament made several efforts to further curtail the monarch 's power . The result was the Statute of Monopolies , passed on 25 May 1624 . 
 The statute repealed some past and future patents and monopolies but preserved exceptions : one of these was for patents for novel inventions . Seen as a key moment in the evolution of patent law , the statute has also been described as " one of the landmarks in the transition of [ England 's ] economy from the feudal to the capitalist " . Even with the statute in force , it took over a century for a comprehensive legal doctrine around patents to come into existence , and James I 's successor Charles I regularly abused the patents system by ensuring that all cases relating to his actions were heard in conciliar courts , which he controlled . The English Civil War and the resulting English Restoration finally curtailed this system of abuse . The statute is still the basis for Australian law , and until the United Kingdom began following the European Patent Convention in 1977 , was also a strong pillar of the United Kingdom 's intellectual property law . 
 = = Background = = 
 Historically , English patent law was based on custom and the common law , not on statute . It began as the Crown granted patents as a form of economic protection to ensure high industrial production . As gifts from the crown , there was no judicial review , oversight or consideration , and no actual law developed around patents . This practice came from the guilds , groups who were controlled by the Crown and held monopolies over particular industries . By the 14th century the economy of England was lagging behind that of other European nations , with the guilds too small to control industrial production successfully . To remedy this , Edward II began encouraging foreign workmen and inventors to settle in England , offering " letters of protection " that protected them from guild policy on the condition that they train English apprentices and pass on their knowledge . The first recorded letter of protection was given in 1331 . The letters did not grant a full monopoly ; rather they acted as an extended passport , allowing foreign workers to travel to England and practice their trade . An exceptional example ( considered the first full patent in England ) was issued to John of <unk> on 3 April 1449 , granting him a monopoly . Overseas , the practice of granting full industrial patents and monopolies became common in Italian states by the 1420s . 
 Over the next century , the granting of full industrial patents became a more common practice in England ; the next record is a letter from 1537 to Thomas Cromwell , Henry VIII 's private secretary , from Antonio <unk> , a Venetian silk @-@ merchant . <unk> had persuaded a group of Venetian silk @-@ makers to practice in England , and wanted the king to grant him letters patent protecting their monopoly to grow silk for 15 or 20 years . This was granted , and Henry 's son Edward VI followed up with a grant of letters patent to Henry Smyth , who hoped to introduce foreign <unk> techniques into England . This process continued after Elizabeth I came to the throne , with formal procedures set out in 1561 to issue letters patent to any new industry , allowing monopolies . The granting of these patents was highly popular with the monarch , both before and after the statute of Monopolies , because of the potential for raising revenue . A patentee was expected to pay heavily for the patent , and unlike a tax raise ( another method of raising Crown money ) any public unrest as a result of the patent was normally directed at the patentee , not the monarch . 
 Over time , this became more and more problematic ; instead of temporary monopolies on specific , imported industries , long @-@ term monopolies came about over more common commodities , including salt and starch . These " odious monopolies " led to a showdown between the Crown and Parliament , in which it was agreed in 1601 to turn the power to administer patents over to the common law courts ; at the same time , Elizabeth revoked a number of the more restrictive and damaging monopolies . Even given a string of judicial decisions criticising and overruling such monopolies , James I , Elizabeth I 's successor , continued using patents to create monopolies . Despite the Committee of Grievances , a body chaired by Sir Edward Coke that abolished a large number of monopolies , a wave of protest occurred at the expansion of the system . On 27 March 1621 , James suggested the House of Commons draw up a list of the three most objectionable patents , and he would " give Life to it , without alteration " , but by this time a statute was already being prepared by Coke . After passing on 12 May 1621 it was thrown out by the House of Lords , but a statute of Monopolies was finally passed by Parliament on 25 May 1624 . 
 = = Act = = 
 = = = Sections 1 – 5 = = = 
 Section 1 said that : 
 all Monopolies , and all Commissions , Grants , Licences , Charters and Letters Patents heretofore made or granted , or hereafter to be made or granted , to any Person or Persons , Bodies Politick or Corporate whatsoever , of or for the sole Buying , Selling , Making , Working or Using of any Thing within this Realm , or the Dominion of Wales ... or of any other Monopolies , or of Power , Liberty or Faculty , to dispense with any others , or to give Licence or Toleration to do , use or exercise any Thing against the Tenor or <unk> of any Law or Statute ... and all Proclamations , <unk> , <unk> , Warrants of Assistants , and all other Matters and Things whatsoever , any way tending to the Instituting , <unk> , Strengthening , Furthering or <unk> of the same or any of them ... are altogether contrary to the Laws of this Realm , and so are and shall be utterly void and of none Effect , and in no wise to be put in Use or Execution . 
 Crucially , this rendered all past , present and future patents and monopolies null and void . Patents were normally divided into three categories ; patents for a particular invention , patents exempting a patent @-@ holder from legislation , and patents for a particular trade or industry . Section 1 , however , for the first time discussed a new category of patents ; those " of Power , Liberty or Faculty " . These patents were normally used in relation to penal laws , to " farm out " the business of administering to criminals and dispensing justice to private companies and individuals . The statute , in a break from previous law , emphasised that this power lay only within Parliament . Section 2 provided that all future patents granted should be determined by the common law , and not otherwise , while Section 3 emphasised that companies and individuals now or in the future in possession of patents should not be allowed to exercise them . Sections 4 and 5 provided that if anyone was interfered with 40 days after the Statute of Monopolies was passed due to a patent or monopoly , any goods seized or persons imprisoned would be returned to their owners and released respectively . 
 = = = Sections 6 – 9 = = = 
 The most important part of the statute is Section 6 , which lays out the exceptions to the rules preventing any kind of monopoly or patent . It stated that the previous provisions : 
 shall not extend to any letters patents ( b ) and grants of privilege for the term of fourteen years or under , hereafter to be made , of the sole working or making of any manner of new manufactures within this realm ( c ) to the true and first inventor ( d ) and inventors of such manufactures , which others at the time of making such letters patents and grants shall not use ( e ) , so as also they be not contrary to the law nor mischievous to the state by raising prices of commodities at home , or hurt of trade , or generally inconvenient ( f ) : the same fourteen years to be <unk> from the date of the first letters patents or grant of such privilege hereafter to be made , but that the same shall be of such force as they should be if this act had never been made , and of none other ( g ) . 
 Essentially , this established a wide area in which patents could be granted , on the condition that monopolies lasted no longer than 14 years . These patents would apply to any new " manner " of " manufacture " , with " manufacture " referring both to the creation of an object , and the design for that object . Section 7 provided that the Act did not prejudice or overrule any previous statutory measures , while Section 8 provided that the restoration to Parliament of the power to administer penal law did not in any way infringe upon the right of the king , Court of King 's Bench , Court of Common Pleas or other criminal courts to order someone 's imprisonment . Section 9 provided that the rejection of letters patent and licenses did not extend to corporations over towns , such as the City of London Corporation . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The statute is worded " strongly and broadly " , and other than the exceptions mainly repeated the existing common law . The statute has long been considered a key moment in patent law ; Chris Dent , writing in the Melbourne University Law Review , identifies it as " a significant marker in the history of patents " with continuing importance , although it is neither the start nor end of patent law . Despite the statute , the courts did not develop a comprehensive and coherent legal doctrine for patent law for more than a century after the statute came into force . Not only is it highly important within patent law , it also played a large role in economics ; G. A. Bloxam , writing in the Journal of Industrial Economics , identifies the passage of the Statute of Monopolies as " one of the landmarks in the transition of [ England 's ] economy from the feudal to the capitalist " . 
 As well as being significant in relation to patent law , Whig historians have also identified it as the first infringement upon the monarch 's Royal Prerogative , and one of the first occasions in which the self @-@ confident House of Commons overruled the king , eventually leading to the English Civil War . Chris R. Kyle , writing in the Journal of Legal History , notes that this is not the case ; not only did the Statute of Monopolies only restate the previous common law , leading to no infringement upon the Royal Prerogative , James I was in the later stages of the bill supportive of its principles . James I was not opposed to the motion ; during the 1621 session of Parliament , he voided several monopolies ( included those for silver thread and inns ) , and both James and the Privy Council were active during the passage of the bill to ensure it was supported . 
 The statute required extensive judicial action to make it work , particularly on the interpretation of Section 6 . Sir Edward Coke , in his Institutes of the Lawes of England , wrote that 
 [ N ] ew manufacture must have seven properties . First , it must be for twenty @-@ one years or under . Secondly , it must be granted to the first and true inventor . Thirdly , it must be of such manufactures , which any other at the making of such letters patent did not use ... Fourthly , the privilege must not be contrary to law ... Fifthly , nor mischievous to the state , by raising the prices of commodities at home . In every such new manufacture that deserves a privilege , there must be <unk> necessitas et <unk> <unk> . Sixthly , nor to the hurt of trade ... <unk> , nor generally inconvenient . 
 The subject was also discussed in <unk> 's Case , where it was decided that an inventive improvement to an existing industry or invention was not a new " material " , and could not be patented ; such an improvement was described as " to put but a new button to an old coat " . Hasting 's Case confirmed that a patent would not be issued , even for a new " material " , that was extremely close to an old one , something originally laid down in Matthey 's Case . The statute did not stop the monarch issuing such patents in return for money ; after James I 's death , Charles I continued issuing them and avoided having to obey the law by having any cases heard in the conciliar courts , such as the Star Chamber . In response to this abuse and others , the Star Chamber was abolished by the Habeas Corpus Act 1640 . After the English Restoration , these activities largely ceased because of the dominant power of Parliament and the Bill of Rights 1689 , which completely abolished the king 's ability to disobey or alter statute . 
 The Statute of Monopolies dominated patent law for centuries ; it was received into the laws of many common law jurisdictions and still forms the basis for the modern patent laws of those countries : for example , the patent law of Australia is dominated by the Patents Act 1990 , which states that one test for if something is <unk> is if it relates to " a manner of manufacture within the meaning of section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies " . 
 In England and Wales , some sections of the statute are still technically in force , although the Statute Law Revision Act 1863 , Patents , Designs and Trade Marks Act 1883 , Statute Law Revision Act 1948 , Administration of Justice Act 1965 and Statute Law ( Repeals ) Act 1969 repealed most of the legislation . In practice however , with the Patents Act 1977 ( which brought the United Kingdom into line with the European Patent Convention ) , the statute has been implicitly repealed within England and Wales . 
 = The Fight ( The Office ) = 
 " The Fight " is the sixth episode of the second season of the television series The Office , and the show 's twelfth episode overall . It was written by Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg and directed by Ken Kwapis . It originally aired on November 1 , 2005 on NBC . " The Fight " guest starred Lance Krall , who played the part of Dwight 's sensei , Ira . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , after being embarrassed by Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) superior fighting skills , engages in a karate match with Dwight during lunch . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) flirting with Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) goes too far . 
 " The Fight " was known as " Karate " and " The Dojo " by members of the cast and crew due to many of the scenes featuring the titular fight . Several of the cast members of the show , recurring and starring , had martial arts experience . The episode contained several cultural references , with many referring to popular fighting @-@ related movies and television shows . " The Fight " received largely positive reviews from critics . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 9 in the 18 – 49 demographic and was viewed by 7 @.@ 9 million viewers . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) has one task : sign routine documents . Unfortunately , it 's a month where three separate sets of paperwork are due at the same time , so Michael <unk> ignores his workload . To procrastinate , Michael makes Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) update emergency contact information of the staff . When Michael gets Ryan 's cell phone number , he constantly prank calls Ryan with crude impersonations of Michael Jackson , Mike Tyson , and Saddam Hussein . 
 Talk of Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) karate experience gets Michael 's competitive juices flowing , leading to a lunchtime match between the two at Dwight 's dojo . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) accidentally goes too far when <unk> around with Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , and she abruptly shuts him down when their co @-@ workers take notice . 
 After a pathetic showing by both combatants , Michael emerges victorious over Dwight , which leads to Dwight changing his emergency contact from " Michael Scott " to " The Hospital " . At the end of the day , Michael promotes Dwight from his lowly " Assistant to the Regional Manager " position to his dream position : " Assistant Regional Manager " ( although the " promotion " is little more than a title change only ) . However , this was done most likely to ensure that Dwight will still idolize him despite the hard feelings over their lunchtime battle . The rest of the staff , fed up with Michael 's inability to accomplish even the simplest task , are forced to forge his signature on all the documents and get home . 
 On the way out , Jim gives Pam the bag of chips he owed her from earlier . Pam quietly takes them and stares in a forgiving manner after Jim leaves . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Fight " was written by Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg , while Ken Kwapis served as the episode 's director . The episode was the first entry of the series to be written by Stupnitsky and Eisenberg ; it was also Kwapis ' fifth episode directed . The episode guest starred comedian and actor Lance Krall , who portrayed Dwight 's sensei , Ira . B.J. Novak , who portrays Ryan Howard in the series , noted that when the episode was being filmed , the majority of the cast and crew called it " ' Karate ' , or ' The Dojo ' , since the most memorable scenes involve a karate fight . " Novak explained that the episode centered on the effects of procrastination " carried to the nth degree " . However , he noted that it was more memorable as " the episode in which Steve Carell and Rainn Wilson jump @-@ kick each other in public to try to prove a point . " 
 Several of the cast members had experience in martial arts prior to the filming of the episode . Rainn Wilson used to study karate and is a certified yellow belt . Krall is a black belt in Taekwondo and was nationally ranked . One of the girls who played one of Dwight 's classmates was actually a black belt , but was forced to wear a white belt ; ultimately , she was unhappy about having to hide her ability . Eventually , she vented her frustration by " practically knock [ ing ] Rainn over when she kicked the pad he was holding " , which was included in the episode . During the filming of the episode , the protective piece of headgear that Wilson wore actually cut him . 
 During the filming of many scenes in the episode , the cast and crew member kept breaking character and laughing . Jenna Fischer recalls that she had to film the scene where Ryan reveals that he is working on emergency contacts " about 20 times " . In addition , Fischer noted that her and John Krasinski kept laughing " about a million times " during the kitchen confrontation between Michael and Dwight . During the dojo scenes , cinematographer Randall Einhorn and Krall " lost it " when Michael pinned down Dwight and began to spit on him . In fact , shots of Krall ( and several of the cast ) laughing made it into the closing scene of the episode . 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include brief shots of Dwight at the dojo and Michael and Dwight preparing to fight , Jim asking Dwight whom he could take on in a fight , Dwight discusses the result of the fight , Stanley confronting Michael about signing the forms , Michael saying that " no one ever lost their job for missing deadlines " , and Michael delivering Pam the emergency contact information . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the game of " phone tag " , Michael impersonates Michael Jackson , Tito Jackson , Mike Tyson , and Saddam Hussein . In addition , several songs are alluded to . Michael sings " I don 't want to work / I just want to bang on this mug all day " to the tune of Bang the Drum All Day by Todd Rundgren . Jim alludes to the Jets , one of the rival street gangs in the musical West Side Story , by quoting the noted lyrics " When you 're a Jet , you 're a Jet all the way " , as well as snapping his fingers in the same way as the gang members . Several popular quotes are misused in the episode : Michael consistently misuses the phrase " Catch @-@ 22 " , and Dwight mistakes the phrase " tit for tat " as " tit for tit " . 
 Several noted films are referenced in the episode . After grabbing Dwight in a sleeper hold , Michael nonsensically shouts out Bedtime for Bonzo , a 1951 movie starring Ronald Reagan . Michael notes that Dwight cried at the end of Armageddon , a 1998 science fiction action movie starring Bruce Willis . Michael 's line " You talkin ' to me ? " is a line performed by Robert De Niro in the movie Taxi Driver . Michael mis @-@ attributes it to Al Pacino in Raging Bull . The Karate Kid franchise is referenced two separate times . Michael notes that Dwight is the " Hilary Swank version " , a reference to The Next Karate Kid , the fourth movie in the Karate Kid series , starring Swank as the first female student of sensei Miyagi . Kevin later tells Dwight to " sweep the leg " , a quote from the original movie . The episode also contains several television references . Jim mocks Pam by doubting her status as an Ultimate Fighter ; The Ultimate Fighter is a reality television series in the form of a martial arts competition . Michael turns the insult " queer " into a reference to Queer Eye for the Straight Guy , a make @-@ over reality television program featuring five openly gay men dispensing fashion and style advise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Fight " originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 1 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 9 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . An encore presentation of the episode , on April 25 , 2006 , received 3 @.@ 0 rating / 8 % share and retained 91 % of its lead in " My Name is Earl " viewership . The encore presentation was viewed by over 6 @.@ 1 million viewers . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " , and wrote that he enjoyed the way the important elements of the episode go " unspoken : Jim composes an apology email but doesn ’ t send it ; the way the spectators are blocked during the main event at the dojo , there ’ s practically an entire office standing between Krasinski and Jenna Fischer . " Adams also enjoyed the way the episode wrote Pam 's reaction , noting " is she generally uncomfortable , is she afraid of what Meredith might assume , or is she afraid of her own feelings ? " 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely positive . " Miss Alli " from Television Without Pity have the episode a positive review and rated it an A – . Francis Rizzo III from DVD Talk called the episode " classic " , and praised the performance of Rainn Wilson as Dwight . He noted that the episode , along with several others , " wouldn 't be nearly as entertaining " without his character . TV Fanatic reviewed several quotes from " The Fight " , and rated Michael 's " Would I rather be feared or loved ? " soliloquy and Michael 's confession that Dwight cried at the end of Armageddon 5 out of 5 . In 2006 , Jenna Fischer said that the episode 's cold opening , featuring Jim moving Dwight 's desk into the bathroom , was her favorite prank on the show . 
 = Fossils of the Burgess Shale = 
 The fossils of the Burgess Shale , like the Burgess Shale itself , formed around 505 million years ago in the Mid Cambrian period . They were discovered in Canada in 1886 , and Charles Doolittle Walcott collected over 60 @,@ 000 specimens in a series of field trips up from 1909 to 1924 . After a period of neglect from the 1930s to the early 1960s , new excavations and re @-@ examinations of Walcott 's collection continue to discover new species , and statistical analysis suggests discoveries will continue for the foreseeable future . Stephen Jay Gould 's book Wonderful Life describes the history of discovery up to the early 1980s , although his analysis of the implications for evolution is largely superseded . 
 The fossil beds are in a series of shale layers , averaging 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) and totalling about 160 metres ( 520 ft ) in thickness . These layers were deposited against the face of a high undersea limestone cliff . All these features were later raised up 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 000 ft ) above current sea level during the creation of the Rocky Mountains . 
 These fossils have been preserved in a distinctive style known as Burgess shale type preservation , which preserves fairly tough tissues such as cuticle as thin films , and soft tissues as solid shapes , quickly enough that decay has not destroyed them . Moderately soft tissues , such as muscles , are lost . Scientists are still unsure about the processes that created these fossils . While there is little doubt that the animals were buried under catastrophic flows of sediment , it is uncertain whether they were transported by the flows from other locations , or lived in the area where they were buried , or were a mixture of local and transported specimens . This issue is closely related to whether conditions around the burial sites were anoxic or had a moderate supply of oxygen . <unk> conditions are generally thought the most favourable for fossilization , but imply that the animals could not have lived where they were buried . 
 In the 1970s and early 1980s the Burgess fossils were largely regarded as evidence that the familiar phyla of animals appeared very rapidly in the Early Cambrian , in what is often called the Cambrian explosion . This view was already known to Charles Darwin , who regarded it as one of the greatest difficulties for the theory of evolution he presented in The Origin of Species in 1859 . However , from the early 1980s the cladistics method of analysing " evolutionary family trees " has persuaded most researchers that many of the Burgess Shale 's " weird wonders " , such as Opabinia and Hallucigenia , were evolutionary " aunts and cousins " of present @-@ day types of animal rather than a rapid proliferation of separate phyla , some of which were short @-@ lived . Nevertheless , there is still debate , sometimes vigorous , about the relationships between some groups of animals . 
 = = Discovery , collection , and re @-@ examinations = = 
 The first Burgess Shale fossils were found on Mount Stephen in Canada 's Rocky Mountains by a construction worker , whose reports of them reached Richard McConnell of the Geological Survey of Canada . McConnell found trilobite beds there in 1886 , and some unusual fossils that he reported to his superior . These were misdiagnosed as headless shrimps with unjointed appendages , and were named Anomalocaris because of their unusual appendages – but turned out to be pieces of a puzzle that took 90 years to solve . 
 Similar fossils were reported in 1902 from nearby Mount Field , another part of the Stephen formation . These may have been why Charles Doolittle Walcott visited Mount Field in 1909 . While taking photographs there Walcott found a slab of fossils that he described as " Phyllopod crustaceans " . From late August to early September 1909 , his team , including his family , collected fossils there , and in 1910 Walcott opened a quarry that he and his colleagues re @-@ visited in 1911 , 1912 , 1913 , 1917 and 1924 , bringing back over 60 @,@ 000 specimens in total . Walcott was Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution from 1907 to his death in 1927 , and this kept him so busy that he was still trying to make time for analyzing his finds two years before his death . Although he drew attention to the exceptional detail of the specimens , which were the first known fossils of soft @-@ bodied animals from the Cambrian period , he also had other research interests : the Early Paleozoic stratigraphy of the Canadian Rockies , which took up the great majority of his time there ; and Precambrian fossils of algae and bacteria , to which he assigned as much importance as to the fossils of animals . He managed to publish four " preliminary " papers on the fossil animals in 1911 and 1912 , and further articles in 1918 , 1919 and 1920 . Four years after Walcott 's death his associate Charles <unk> produced a package of additional descriptions from Walcott 's notes . Walcott 's classifications of most of the fossils are now rejected , but were supported at the time , and he accepted a change for one of the few where his conclusion was disputed . Many of the later comments were made with the benefits of hindsight , and of techniques and concepts unknown in Walcott 's time . 
 Although in 1931 Percy Raymond opened and briefly excavated another quarry about 20 metres ( 66 ft ) above Walcott 's " Phyllopod bed " , there was very little interest in the Burgess Shale fossils from the 1930s to the early 1960s , and most of those collected by Walcott were stored on high shelving in back rooms at the Smithsonian Institution . Between 1962 and the mid @-@ 1970s Alberto <unk> re @-@ examined some of Walcott 's collection and suggested some new interpretations . Beginning in the early 1970s Harry Whittington , his associates David Bruton and Christopher Hughes , and his graduate students Derek Briggs and Simon Conway Morris began a thorough re @-@ examination of Walcott 's collection . Although they assigned groups of fossils to each member of the team , they all decided for themselves which fossils to investigate and in what order . Their publications and Stephen Jay Goulds ' popularization of their work in his book Wonderful Life aroused enduring scientific interest and some public interest in the Cambrian explosion , the apparently rapid appearance of moderately complex bilaterian animals in the Early Cambrian . 
 The continuing search for Burgess Shale fossils since the mid @-@ 1970s has led to the description in the 1980s of an arthropod <unk> and in 2007 of Orthrozanclus , which looked like a slug with a small shell at the front , chain mail over the back and long , curved spines round the edges . Recent digs have discovered species yet to be formally described and named . They have also unearthed more and sometimes better fossils of animals that were discovered earlier , for example Odontogriphus was for many years known from just one poorly preserved specimen , but the discovery of a further 189 formed the basis for a detailed description and analysis in 2006 . Re @-@ examination of Walcott 's collection also continues , and has led to the reconstruction of the large marine animal <unk> in 2009 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Burgess Shale is a series of sediment deposits spread over a vertical distance of hundreds of metres , extending laterally for at least 50 kilometres ( 30 mi ) . The deposits were originally laid down on the floor of a shallow sea ; during the Late Cretaceous Laramide orogeny , mountain @-@ building processes squeezed the sediments upwards to their current position at around 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 000 ft ) elevation in the Rocky Mountains . 
 The rocks containing the fossils are on the border between two partially overlapping bands of rock that run along the western face of the Canadian Rockies . On the eastern side of this border is the Cathedral Formation , a platform of limestone formed by algae . The western surface of the Cathedral Formation is steep and consists of the resistant rock dolomite , which was originally part of the limestone platform , but between the Mid Silurian and Late Devonian was transformed by hydrothermal flows of brine at up to 200 ° C ( 400 ° F ) , which replaced much of the limestone 's calcium with magnesium . A layer of shale lies partly on top of and partly to the west of the Cathedral Formation . This shale layer used to be called the " thin " Stephen Formation where it lies above the Cathedral Formation and the " thick " Stephen Formation where it lies to the west ; but the " thick " Stephen Formation is now generally known as the Burgess Formation . 
 The shale is made of alternating fine @-@ grained layers of siliceous mudstone ( compressed , hardened mud originally made of ground @-@ up silicate rock ) and <unk> originally animal shells . The <unk> layers contain relatively unremarkable shells and occasional non @-@ biomineralized fossils ( such as <unk> tubes ) . The soft @-@ bodied organisms for which the Burgess Shale is famous are fossilized in the mudstone layers , which are between 2 and 170 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 079 and 6 @.@ 693 in ) thick , averaging 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) , and have well @-@ defined bases . Opinions vary about how the mudstone layers were produced : perhaps by mudslides from the top of the " Cathedral " limestone platform , when its edge collapsed occasionally ; or possibly by storms that created back @-@ currents that abruptly washed large volumes of mud off the platform . Each mudstone layer is the result of one such catastrophe . The Greater Phyllopod Bed , a 7 metres ( 23 ft ) thick sequence consisting of Walcott 's famous " Phyllopod Bed " plus the 5 metres ( 16 ft ) below that , contains at least 36 layers , deposited over 10 to 100 thousand years , during which the environment was essentially stable . 
 = = Fossil Preservation = = 
 The processes responsible for the exceptional preservational quality of the Burgess Shale fossils are far from clear . The interpretation of what is preserved depends partly on two issues that are interlinked : whether the animals were buried where they lived , or washed long distances by sediment flows ; and whether the water at the burial sites was anoxic or provided enough oxygen to sustain animals . The traditional view is that soft bodies and organs could only be preserved in anoxic conditions , otherwise oxygen @-@ breathing bacteria would have made decomposition too rapid for fossilization . This would imply that the sea @-@ floor organisms could not have lived there . However , in 2006 Caron and Jackson concluded that the sea @-@ floor animals were buried where they lived . One of their main reasons was that many fossils represented partially decayed soft @-@ bodied animals such as polychaetes , which had already died shortly before the burial event , and would have been fragmented if they had been transported any significant distance by a storm of swirling sediment . Other evidence for burial where the animals had lived includes the presence of tubes and burrows , and of assemblies of animals preserved while they fed – such as a group of carnivorous priapulids clustered round a freshly moulted arthropod whose new cuticle would not yet have hardened . Fossilized swimming organisms were also buried immediately below where they lived . 
 Fossil tracks are rare and no burrows under the sea @-@ floor have so far been found in the Burgess Shale . These absences have been used to support the idea that the water near the sea @-@ floor was anoxic . However it is possible that the water just above the sea @-@ floor was oxygenated while the water in the sediment below it was anoxic , and also possible that there simply were no deep @-@ burrowing animals in the Burgess Shale . Some fossils , such as Marrella , are almost always the right way up , which suggests they were not transported far if at all . Others , such as Wiwaxia , are often at odd angles , and some fossils of animals with shelly or toughened components very rarely contain remains of soft tissues . This suggests that the distances over which corpses were transported may have varied between genera , although most were buried where they had lived . 
 Fossils known as <unk> and <unk> may represent members of microbial mat communities . <unk> appears on about a third of the slabs Caron and Jackson studied , and in some cases presents the wrinkled " elephant skin " texture typical of fossilized microbial mats . If such mats were present , they may have provided food for grazing animals and possibly helped to preserve soft bodies and organs , by creating oxygen @-@ free zones under the mats and thus inhibiting the bacteria that cause decomposition . 
 The Burgess Shale animals were probably killed by changes in their environment either immediately preceding or during the mud @-@ slides that buried them . Proposed killing mechanisms include : changes in salinity ; poisoning by chemicals such as hydrogen sulfide or methane ; changes in the availability of oxygen ; and changing consistency of the sea floor . The death event was not necessarily related to the burial , and there may have been multiple death events between burial events ; but only organisms killed immediately before a burial event would stand any chance of being fossilised , instead of rotting or being eaten . 
 Burgess shale type preservation is defined as the fossilization of non @-@ biomineralized organisms as flattened carbonaceous films in marine shales . When the animals started to decompose , their tissues collapsed under the weight of the sediment that buried them . The typical flattened fossils are outlines of tougher parts such as cuticles and jaws , which resisted decomposition for long enough to be fossilized . Soft elements , such as muscles and gut contents , were sometimes squeezed out of the decomposing organism to produce dark stains on the fossils . Organisms that lack tougher structures , such as flatworms , nemerteans and shell @-@ less molluscs , were not preserved by this process . Very soft but chemically active tissues may be preserved by different processes . For instance during decomposition , bacteria modify the chemically unusual mid @-@ gut glands of some organisms into the durable mineral phosphate . This change happens extremely quickly , before the corpse is compressed , and leaves a three @-@ dimensional mold of the tissues . Gills can also be preserved in something close to their original three @-@ dimensional shape by this process . Both preservation mechanisms can appear in the same fossil . In Burgess @-@ like shales , organisms and parts that are only quite soft , such as muscles , are generally lost , while those that are extremely soft and those that are fairly tough are preserved . The preservation of different body parts in different ways may sometimes help palaeontologists , by suggesting whether a body part was fairly tough like an arthropod limb ( preserved as flat film ) or very soft and chemically active , like a part of the gut ( preserved as a solid piece of mineral ) . These differences may also help to identify fossils , by excluding from consideration organisms whose body parts do not match the combination of types of preservation found in a particular fossil bed . 
 It has often been suggested that this type of preservation was possible only when sediments were not disturbed by burrowing animals or the anchors of plants . However a similar type of preservation has been found in fossils from the Late <unk> period , about 850 to 750 million years ago , but in no known fossils between the end of that epoch and the start of the Cambrian . This suggests that such bioturbation has little to do with the appearance and disappearance of Burgess Shale type preservation . Such preservation may depend on the presence of clay @-@ like minerals that inhibit decomposition , and ocean chemistry may only have favoured the production of such minerals for limited periods of time . If so , it is impossible to be sure when the animals known as " Burgess Shale fauna " first appeared or when they became extinct . A few fossils of animals similar to those found in the Burgess Shale have been found in rocks from the Silurian , Ordovician and Early Devonian periods , in other words up to 100 million years after the Burgess Shale . 
 = = Faunal composition = = 
 As of 2008 only two in @-@ depth studies of the mix of fossils in any part of the Burgess Shale had been published , by Simon Conway Morris in 1986 and by Caron and Jackson in 2008 . Caron and Jackson commented that Conway Morris had to rely on a set of specimens that may not have been representative , since their excavators discarded specimens they found uninteresting ; and for which the exact level in the rock sequence had not been recorded , making chronological analyses impossible . Both studies noted that the set of species in Walcott 's Phyllopod Bed ( Conway Morris , 1986 ) and its expanded version the Greater Phyllopod Bed ( Caron and Jackson , 2008 ) was different from those found in other parts of the Burgess Shale ; and Conway Morris commented that faunas at most other Burgess Shale sites resembled those of the Raymond Quarry , which is above and therefore more recent than the Greater Phyllopod Bed ( abbreviated " GPB " ) . 
 Conway Morris found that the shelly fossils in Walcott 's Phyllopod Bed were about as abundant as in other shelly fossil deposits , but accounted for only 14 % of the Phyllopod Bed fossils . Assuming that , as in modern marine ecosystems , about 70 % of the species that lived in the Early Cambrian seas are unsuitable for fossilization , he estimated that the shelly fossils probably represent about 2 % of the animals that were alive at the time . Since these shelly fossils are found in other parts of North America and , in many cases , over a much wider range , the Burgess Shale fossils , including the soft @-@ bodied ones , probably show how much diversity could be expected at other sites if Burgess Shale type preservation were found there . 
 Caron and Jackson found that about 25 % of the 172 known species were abundant and widespread throughout the time range of the GPB , while the majority of species were rare , and occurred in a small area for a short period of time . In most layers the five most abundant species accounted for 50 % to 75 % of individual animals . The species that had wide ranges in time and space may have been generalists , while the rest were specialists in particular types of environment . Alternatively some wide @-@ ranging species may have been opportunists that were quick to recolonize the area after each burial event . The 6 species that appeared in all layers were very probably generalists . 
 In each burial event layer the commonest species generally has several times as many individuals as the second most common , and accounts for 15 % to 30 % of individual fossil animals . The more common a species is in one layer , the greater the number of other layers it appears in . These " recurrent " species account for 88 % of the individual specimens , but only 27 % of the number of species . This suggests that the majority of species were in existence for much shorter periods than the " recurrent " ones . Species that cover shorter periods of time occur mainly in the higher , younger layers . The GPB shows an overall trend of increasing diversity as time progresses . 
 In almost all layers arthropods are the most abundant and diverse group of fossils in the GPB , followed by sponges . 69 @.@ 2 % of GPB individuals and 63 @.@ 9 % of species lived on the surface of the sea bed ; within this group , mobile deposit feeders that extracted food particles from the sediment accounted for 38 @.@ 2 % of the total number of individuals and 16 @.@ 8 % of the total species ; the smallest sub @-@ group was mobile hunters and scavengers ; and the rest were sessile suspension feeders . Animals that lived in the sediment made up 12 @.@ 7 % of the species and 7 @.@ 4 % of the individuals ; the largest sub @-@ group was mobile hunters and scavengers . Bottom @-@ dwelling animals capable of swimming comprised 12 @.@ 7 % of species and 7 @.@ 4 % of individuals . Organisms that spent their whole life swimming were very rare , accounting for only 1 @.@ 5 % of individuals and 8 @.@ 3 % of species . 
 These patterns – a few common species and many rare ones ; the dominance of arthropods and sponges ; and the percentage frequencies of different life @-@ styles – seem to apply to all of the Burgess Shale . However the identity of the dominant species differs between sites . For example , Marrella splendens is often credited as the commonest animal in the Burgess Shale , because of its abundance among the specimens collected by Walcott , but is only the third @-@ most abundant organism in the Greater Phyllopod Bed , and very rare at other localities . 
 The overall community and ecology is very similar to that of other Cambrian localities , suggesting a global pool of species that repopulated localities after calamitous burial events occurred . 
 Caron and Jackson used computer software to simulate the numbers of species that would be found if smaller numbers of specimens were included , and found that the number of species " discovered " kept increasing as the number of specimens increased , rather than reaching a plateau . This suggests that Burgess Shale probably still contains as @-@ yet undiscovered species , although probably very rare ones . Some recently discovered species , known in 2008 only by nicknames like " woolly bear " and " Siamese lantern " are familiar to the collecting teams , but have yet to be formally described and named . The team also nicknamed another discovery as " <unk> " , and in 2010 this animal was described and formally named <unk> . 
 = = Notable fossils = = 
 = = = Soft @-@ bodied fossils = = = 
 Caron and Jackson 's survey covered 172 species found in the Greater Phyllopod Bed . The list below concentrates on recent discoveries and on species that have been central to major scientific debates . 
 Marrella was the first Burgess Shale fossil that Whittington re @-@ examined , and gave the first indication that surprises were on the way . Although clearly an arthropod that walked on the sea @-@ floor , Marella was very different from the known marine arthropod groups ( trilobites , crustaceans and chelicerates ) in the structure of its legs and gills , and above all in the number and positions of the appendages on its head , which are the main feature used to classify arthropods . A fossil of Marrella from the Burgess Shale has also provided the earliest clear evidence of molting . 
 Whittington 's first presentation about Opabinia made the audience laugh . The reconstruction showed a soft @-@ bodied animal with a slim , segmented body ; a pair of flap @-@ like appendages on each segment with gills above the flaps ; five stalked eyes ; a backward @-@ facing mouth under the head ; and a long , flexible , hose @-@ like proboscis that extended from under the front of the head and ended in a " claw " fringed with spines . Whittington concluded that it did not fit into any phylum known in the mid @-@ 1970s . Opabinia was one of the main reasons why Stephen Jay Gould in his book Wonderful Life considered that Early Cambrian life was much more diverse and " experimental " than any later set of animals , and that the Cambrian explosion was a truly dramatic event , possibly driven by unusual evolutionary mechanisms . He regarded Opabinia as so important to understanding this phenomenon that he originally wanted call his book Homage to Opabinia . However subsequent research has concluded that Opabinia is closely related to the arthropods and possibly even closer to ancestors of the arthropods . 
 The discovery of Anomalocaris ( " abnormal shrimp " ) was a comedy of errors . The name was initially given to a fossil that looked like the rear end of a shrimp @-@ like crustacean . Walcott classified a ring @-@ like fossil he called Peytoia as a kind of jellyfish , and another poorly preserved fossil he called Laggania as a <unk> ( sea cucumber ) . After many plot twists , Derek Briggs started dissecting another ill @-@ defined fossil in very thin slices and found a pair of Anomalocaris @-@ like structures on one end of a specimen of Laggania , which also had a specimen of Peytoia attached just behind those of Anomalocaris . After dissecting more specimens and finding similar configurations , Briggs and Whittington concluded that the whole assemblage represented a single animal , which was named Anomalocaris because that was the earliest name assigned to any of its parts . This animal 's body was fragile and usually disintegrated before it could be fossilized . But the complete animal had tough grasping appendages ( Anomalocaris ) , a tough , ring @-@ like mouth with teeth on the inner edge ( Peytoia ) and a long , segmented body ( Laggania ) with flaps on the sides that enabled it to swim with a Mexican wave motion , and perhaps to turn quickly by putting the flaps on one side into reverse . This monster was over 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) long when other animals were only a few inches at most . <unk> suggested in 1999 that the animal was capable of taking heavily armored trilobites apart , possibly by grabbing one end of their prey in their jaws while using their appendages to quickly rock the other end of the animal back and forth , causing the prey 's exoskeleton to rupture and allowing the predator to access its innards . In 2009 <unk> found that anomalocarid mouthparts showed little wear , which suggests they did not come into regular contact with mineralised trilobite shells . Computer modeling of the Anomalocaris mouthparts suggests they were in fact better suited to sucking on smaller , soft @-@ bodied organisms . Although Whittington and Briggs concluded that Anomalocaris did not fit into any known phylum , research since the 1990s has concluded that it was closely related to Opabinia and to the ancestors of arthropods . In 2009 a fossil named Schinderhannes bartelsi , an apparent relative of Anomalocaris , was found in the Early Devonian period , about 100 million years later than the Burgess Shale . Conway Morris gave Hallucigenia its name because in his reconstruction it looked bizarre – a worm @-@ like animal that walked on long , rigid spines and had a row of tentacles along its back . Science fiction author Greg Bear says the <unk> in his The Way stories were scaled @-@ up versions of this reconstruction . However , in the late 1980s Lars <unk> literally turned it over , so that the tentacles , which he found were paired , became legs and the spines were defensive equipment on its back . <unk> classified it as one of the <unk> , a phylum of " worms with legs " that is considered closely related to arthropods . Another current view is that Hallucigenia was an armored lobopod , in other words more closely related to arthropods than the onychophorans are , but less closely related to arthropods than Opabinia or Anomalocaris are . 
 Most fossils of Wiwaxia are just a jumble of armor plates and spines , but after examining dozens of them Conway Morris reconstructed them as slug @-@ like animals covered in rows of overlapping armor plates , with two rows of longer spines projecting upwards . Since 1990 there has been an intense debate about whether Wiwaxia was more closely related to molluscs or to polychaete annelids . Supporters of a close relationship with molluscs maintained that a pair of bars , running across the mouth and armed with backward @-@ pointing teeth , were a rudimentary form of the radula , the toothed tongue that molluscs use to scrape up food and convey it back to the throat . Nicholas Butterfield , the one academic who has so far published articles placing Wiwaxia closer to polychaetes , stated that Wiwaxia ′ s two @-@ row feeding apparatus could not have performed the sophisticated functions of the multi @-@ row , conveyor @-@ belt radula , suggesting instead that Wiwaxia ′ s apparatus was like the side @-@ by @-@ side pair of toothed bars found in some polychaetes . Later he found some fragmentary fossils , 5 to 10 million years before the Burgess Shale , that he regarded as a much more convincing early radula . Butterfield has also described Wiwaxia ′ s armor plates and spines as similar in internal structure to the chetae ( " hairs " ) of polychaetes . Supporters of the link with molluscs have stated that Wiwaxia shows no signs of segmentation , appendages in front of the mouth , or " legs — – all of which are typical polychaete features . One writer adopted a neutral position , saying he saw no strong grounds for classifying Wiwaxia as a proto @-@ annelid or a proto @-@ mollusc , although he thought the objections against classification as a proto @-@ annelid were the stronger . 
 For many years Odontogriphus ( " toothed riddle " ) was known from only one specimen , an almost featureless oval smear on a slab , with hints of tiny conical teeth . However , 189 new finds in the years immediately preceding 2006 made a detailed description possible . It had a pair of slightly V @-@ shaped tooth @-@ rows just ahead of the mouth , very like Wiwaxia ′ s . This pitched Odontogriphus into the middle of the debate about whether Wiwaxia was closer to the mollusc or the annelid lineage , resulting in a frank exchange of views . 
 Orthrozanclus <unk> ( " Dawn scythe with bristling hair " ) was discovered in 2006 and formally described in 2007 . This animal had a soft , unarmored underside , but the upward @-@ facing surfaces were armored by : a small shell , near the front end ; three zones of armor plates , which fitted close to the body and one of which ran all the way round the animal ; 16 to 20 long , upwards @-@ curving spines on each side of the body . The arrangement of Orthrozanclus ′ armor plates is very similar to that of its Burgess Shale contemporary Wiwaxia . Its shell is very similar to one of the two Burgess Shale shell types labelled <unk> ; the forward shell of halkieriids , most fossils of which are dated to the Early Cambrian ; and those of other Early Cambrian fossils such as <unk> and <unk> . These similarities suggest that Orthrozanclus was an intermediate form between Wiwaxia and the <unk> and that all three of these taxa formed a clade , in other words a group that consists of a common ancestor and all of its descendants . So Orthrozanclus was also drawn into the complex debate about whether Wiwaxia is more closely related to molluscs or to polychaete worms . 
 For many years only one fossil <unk> was known , poorly preserved and without a counterpart . This fossil was a puzzle , as its head looked rather like that of an arthropod but its body , with what seemed to be fins along its back and belly , looked rather like of a chordate 's . In 2010 Smith and Caron described another 91 specimens , some very good , and reconstructed it as a cephalopod , and the earliest one as of 2010 . Unlike later cephalopods it had only two arms , and its eyes seem mounted on stalks . But it had a soft funnel , similar to the ones used for propulsion by modern cephalopods . 
 <unk> has always been classified as a polychaete worm . Recent microscopic examination has indicated that the surfaces of the many bristles on its " legs " were diffraction gratings that made the animal iridescent . 
 Fossils of chordates , the phylum to which humans belong , are very rare in Cambrian sediments . Conway Morris classified the Burgess Shale fossil <unk> as a chordate because it had a rudimentary notochord , the rod of cartilage that evolved into the backbone of vertebrates . Doubts have been raised about this , because most of the important features are not quite like those of chordates : it has repeated blocks of muscle along its sides but they are not chevron @-@ shaped ; there is no clear evidence of anything like gills ; and its throat appears to be in the upper part of its body rather than the lower . It also has " tentacles " on the front of its head , unlike living chordates . At best it may be a stem group chordate , in other words an evolutionary " aunt " of living chordates . <unk> , also found in the Burgess Shale but even rarer , may be a chordate , if the repeated chevron @-@ shaped structures along its sides represent muscle blocks . While <unk> was celebrated in the mid @-@ 1970s as the earliest known chordate , three jawless fish have since been found among the Chengjiang fossils , which are about 17 million years older than the Burgess Shale . 
 = = = Trace fossils = = = 
 Although trace fossils are rare in the Burgess Shale , arthropod trackways have been recovered . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Analysis of the Burgess Shale fossils has been important to the interpretation of the Precambrian and Cambrian fossil records , and thus to scientific understanding of the nature of early evolution . English geologist and palaeontologist William Buckland ( 1784 – 1856 ) realised that a dramatic change in the fossil record occurred around the start of the Cambrian period , 542 million years ago . The earliest Cambrian trilobite fossils are about 530 million years old , but were already both diverse and widespread , suggesting that the group had a long , hidden history . The earliest fossils widely accepted as echinoderms appeared at about the same time Because Darwin 's contemporaries had insufficient information to establish relative dates of Cambrian rocks , they had the impression that animals appeared instantaneously . Charles Darwin regarded the solitary existence of Cambrian trilobites and total absence of other intermediate fossils as the " gravest " problem to his theory of natural selection , and he devoted an entire chapter of The Origin of Species on the matter . He speculated that the phenomenon , now known as the Cambrian explosion , was a product of gaps in the sequence of fossil @-@ bearing rocks and in contemporary knowledge of those rocks . 
 While some geological evidence was presented to suggest that earlier fossils did exist , for a long time this evidence was widely rejected . Fossils from the Ediacaran period , immediately preceding the Cambrian , were first found in 1868 , but scientists at that time assumed there was no Precambrian life and therefore dismissed them as products of physical processes . Between 1883 and 1909 Walcott discovered other Precambrian fossils , which were accepted at the time . However , in 1931 Albert Charles Seward dismissed all claims to have found Precambrian fossils . In 1946 , Reg Sprigg noticed " <unk> " in rocks from Australia 's Ediacara Hills . However , while these are now recognized as coming from the Ediacaran period , they were thought at the time to have been formed in the Cambrian . From 1872 onwards small shelly fossils , none more than a few millimeters in size , were found in very Early Cambrian rocks , and later also found in rocks dating to the end of the preceding Ediacaran period , but scientists only started in the 1960s to recognize that these were left by a wide range of animals , some of which are now recognized as molluscs . 
 Darwin 's view – that gaps in the fossil record accounted for the apparently sudden appearance of diverse life forms – still had scientific support over a century later . In the early 1970s Wyatt Durham and Martin Glaessner both argued that the animal kingdom had a long Proterozoic history that was hidden by the lack of fossils . However , Preston Cloud held a different view about the origins of complex life , writing in 1948 and 1968 that the evolution of animals in the Early Cambrian was " explosive " . This " explosive " view was supported by the hypothesis of punctuated equilibrium , which Eldredge and Gould developed in the early 1970s — which views evolution as long intervals of near @-@ stasis " punctuated " by short periods of rapid change . 
 The fossils of the Burgess Shale were hidden in store rooms until the 1960s . When Whittington and his colleagues first began to publish their Burgess finds in the early 1970s , the fossils became central to the debate about how quickly animals arose , and were interpreted as evidence that all the living bilaterian phyla had appeared in the Early Cambrian , along with many other phyla that had become extinct by the end of the Cambrian . 
 However , at this time , cladistics , which appeared in the 1950s , was starting to change scientists ' approach to biological classification . Unlike previous methods , cladistics attempts to consider all the characteristics of an organism , rather than those subjectively chosen as most important . As a result , it gives less significance to unique or bizarre characteristics than to those that are shared , since only the latter can demonstrate relationships . Cladistics also emphasises the concept of a monophyletic group , in other words one that consists only of a common ancestor and all its descendants – for example it regards the traditional term " reptile " as useless , since mammals and birds are descendants of different groups of " reptiles " , but are not considered " reptiles " . The concepts of crown groups and stem groups , first presented in English in 1979 , are consequences of this approach . A crown group is a monophyletic group of living organisms , and a stem group is a non @-@ monophyletic set of organisms that do not have all the shared features of the crown group but have enough to distinguish them clearly from close relatives of other crown groups – in very simple terms , they are " evolutionary aunts " of the organisms in the crown group . <unk> are crown groups , and the fact that some of their characteristics are considered defining features is simply a consequence of the fact that their ancestors survived while closely related lineages became extinct . 
 Briggs and Whittington started experimenting with cladistics in 1980 to 1981 and the results , while full of uncertainties , convinced them that cladistics offered reasonable prospects of making sense of the Burgess Shale animals . Other fossil beds discovered since 1980 – some rather small and others rivalling the Burgess Shale – have also produced similar collections of fossils , and show that the types of animals they represent lived in seas all over the world . It appears that most of the major animal lineages had arisen before the time of the Burgess Shale , and before that of the Chengjiang and Sirius Passet lagerstätten about 15 million years earlier , in which very similar fossils are found , and that the Cambrian explosion was complete by then . In the 1990s it was suggested that some Ediacaran fossils from 555 to 542 million years ago , just before the start of the Cambrian , may have been primitive bilaterians , and one , Kimberella , may have been a primitive mollusc . By 1996 , with new fossil discoveries filling in some of the gaps in the " family tree " , some Burgess Shale " weird wonders " such as <unk> and Opabinia were seen as stem members of a total group that included arthropods and some other living phyla . 
 = Death Has a Shadow = 
 " Death Has a Shadow " is the pilot episode of the animated series Family Guy . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States after Super Bowl XXXIII on January 31 , 1999 . The episode is based on series creator Seth MacFarlane 's original pitch to Fox , The Life of Larry , and is a remake of the original Family Guy pilot . In the episode , Peter loses his job after drinking too much at a stag party and falls asleep at work . He signs up for welfare to keep his wife Lois from finding out , but gets much more money than he expected . Lois finds out and Peter decides to dump it from a blimp at the Super Bowl . He is arrested and must await his family 's rescue . 
 The basis for Family Guy was MacFarlane 's thesis film The Life of Larry , created in 1995 while he was a student at the Rhode Island School of Design . A sequel was conceived in 1996 called Larry & Steve , which aired in 1997 as a segment of Cartoon Network 's World Premiere Toons . Both shorts caught the attention of Fox , who contacted MacFarlane in 1999 to develop a series called Family Guy based on the films . A hand @-@ drawn pilot was created by MacFarlane with a budget of $ 50 @,@ 000 , which led to the series being accepted for production . It was rated TV @-@ PG @-@ L ( TV @-@ 14 @-@ L on Adult Swim ) . 
 Critical responses to the episode were mostly positive . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 22 @.@ 01 million homes during its original airing in the United States . " Death Has a Shadow " was written by Seth MacFarlane and directed by Peter Shin , and featured a guest performance from Pat Summerall as well as various recurring guest voices from the series . In the tenth season episode " Back to the Pilot " , which premiered on November 13 , 2011 , Brian and Stewie go back in time to " Death Has a Shadow " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Lois prepares dinner , Stewie puts the final touches on his mind @-@ control device , only for it to be taken away from him by Lois , who won 't allow ' toys ' at the table . Later , Peter asks Lois for permission to attend an upcoming stag party . After he promises he won 't drink , Lois lets him go . Unfortunately , Peter forgets his promise to Lois and plays such drinking games as " Drink the beer " . He goes to work the next day with a hangover , and falls asleep on the job as a safety inspector in a toy factory . Peter misses dangerous objects such as a butcher knife , a surge protector , a gasoline can , razor blades , a porcupine , a toaster with forks inside and a plug in water . The company receives bad press after releasing unsafe toy products , and Peter is promptly fired by Mr. Weed . 
 At dinner , Peter breaks the news to his children , but decides to keep it from Lois . He tries different jobs , such as cereal mascot and sneeze guard , but fails miserably . Brian pressures him to tell her the truth , but all he manages to do is to tell Lois how fat she is . Brian insists that Peter must look out for his family 's welfare . With the word " welfare " in his mind , Peter soon applies for a government assistance at a welfare office . But a processing error creates a weekly check for $ 150 @,@ 000 . Telling Lois he received a big raise , Peter spends his money on many foolish and extravagant things , such as renting the Statue of David , treating Meg to cosmetic surgery and even going so far as to surround his house with a moat to protect them from the Black Knight . 
 Unfortunately , Lois is given the welfare check by the mail lady and storms at Peter for lying to her . Peter decides to return the money to the taxpayers by dumping it from a blimp during Super Bowl XXXIII while Brian accompanies him . After the commotion they cause , they are immediately shot down . 
 Eventually , Lois receives the bad news and goes to court , still angry at Peter for lying to her in the first place . After Peter apologizes for lying to Lois and accepting the money instead of reporting the welfare error , the judge sentences him to 24 months in prison . Lois , Brian , Chris and Meg exclaim , " Oh no ! " , but the Kool Aid Man bursts through the courthouse wall and exclaims , " Oh yeah ! " Lois tries to explain he 's not that bad and she loves him , and insists that , no matter what , she will always stand by her husband . The judge agrees , and sends her to jail with him . Stewie , being a baby , must have his parents by his side , regardless of his burning hate for them , especially Lois . He then whips out his mind control device and forces the judge into letting his father go free and get his job back . 
 Peter states that he has learned his lesson and will never do it again . Instead he is going to try for such things as a minority scholarship , a sexual harassment suit , and a disability claim . 
 = = Background = = 
 MacFarlane initially conceived Family Guy in 1995 while studying animation under the Rhode Island School of Design ( RISD ) . During college , he created his thesis film entitled The Life of Larry , which was later submitted by his professor at RISD to Hanna @-@ Barbera , which led to MacFarlane being hired by the company . In 1996 , MacFarlane created a sequel to The Life of Larry entitled Larry and Steve , which featured a middle @-@ aged character named Larry and an intellectual dog , Steve . The short was broadcast in 1997 as one of Cartoon Network 's World Premiere Toons . 
 In 1997 , while writing for Carol , MacFarlane planned to develop the Larry shorts into a short film series for MADtv ; however , the project was abandoned because the show did not possess a large enough budget to make any kind of animation . As development continued , the genre gradually shifted to a prime @-@ time series , while the characters of Larry and Steve formed the basis for Peter and Brian , respectively . During the year , a Hanna @-@ Barbera development executive introduced MacFarlane to alternative comedians Mike Darnell and Leslie Collins in an attempt to get Hanna @-@ Barbera back into the prime @-@ time business . The executives were unimpressed ; a year later , MacFarlane contacted Collins at Fox ; she arranged a meeting with him and the company executives to create a series based on the characters entitled Family Guy . 
 Fox proposed MacFarlane complete a 15 @-@ minute short , and gave him a budget of $ 50 @,@ 000 . After the pilot aired , the series was greenlighted . Premises were drawn from several 1980s Saturday morning cartoons MacFarlane had watched as a child , such as The Fonz and the Happy Days Gang and Rubik , the Amazing Cube . 
 = = Production = = 
 Production of the pilot for Family Guy began in 1998 , and took six months to create and produce . Recalling the experience in an interview with The New York Times , MacFarlane stated , 
 I spent about six months with no sleep and no life , just drawing like crazy in my kitchen and doing this pilot . 
 Upon completion of the pilot , the series went on the air . " Death Has a Shadow " was the first episode of Family Guy to be aired . It was written by creator MacFarlane , and was the first episode to be directed by Peter Shin . The episode guest starred Lori Alan as Diane Simmons , Carlos Alazraqui as Mr. Weed , Mike Henry as Cleveland Brown , Billy West , Fred Tatasciore , Joey Slotnick , Phil LaMarr , Wally Wingert , and fellow cartoonist Butch Hartman as various characters . The episode aired after Super Bowl XXXIII on January 31 , 1999 . 
 For " Death Has a Shadow " , several changes were made from the original pilot pitch . For the series , Lois was a redhead , as opposed to the original pilot , where she was a blonde . In the original pilot , Lois discovered that Peter lost his job , and by the end of the episode , he fails to get a new one nor does he apply for welfare . The idea for Peter to apply for welfare and unintentionally become wealthy was suggested by executive producer David Zuckerman , who suggested the idea in order to add a larger amount of plot to the episode . Several sequences and gags were integrated into the episode from creator MacFarlane 's 1995 thesis film The Life of Larry , including the sequence where the Griffin family sees Philadelphia , and a brief cutaway where Peter farts for the first time at the age of 30 . 
 MacFarlane was cast as four of the show 's main characters : Peter Griffin , Brian Griffin , Stewie Griffin , and Glenn Quagmire . MacFarlane chose to voice these characters himself , believing it would be easier to portray the voices he already envisioned than for someone else to attempt it . MacFarlane drew inspiration for the voice of Peter from a security guard he overheard talking while attending the Rhode Island School of Design . Stewie 's voice was based on the voice of English actor Rex Harrison , especially his performance in the 1964 musical My Fair Lady . MacFarlane uses his regular speaking voice when playing Brian . The voice of Quagmire was inspired by fast @-@ speaking radio advertising spokesmen from the 1950s . MacFarlane also provides voices for various other recurring and one @-@ time characters , including news anchor Tom Tucker and Lois ' father Carter Pewterschmidt . 
 Alex Borstein was cast as Lois Griffin , Tricia Takanawa , Loretta Brown , and Lois ' mother Barbara Pewterschmidt . Borstein was asked to provide a voice for the original pilot while she was working on MADtv . She had not met MacFarlane or seen any of his artwork and said it was " really sight unseen " . At the time , Borstein performed in a stage show in Los Angeles , in which she played a redheaded mother whose voice she had based on one of her cousins . The voice was originally slower , but when MacFarlane heard it , he replied " Make it a little less [ ... ] annoying ... and speed it up , or every episode will last four hours " . Seth Green was chosen to play Chris Griffin and Neil Goldman . Green stated that he did an impression of the " Buffalo Bill " character from the thriller film The Silence of the Lambs during his audition . His main inspiration for Chris ' voice came from envisioning how " Buffalo Bill " would sound if he were speaking through a public address system at a McDonald 's . Lacey Chabert was cast as Meg Griffin . Chabert voiced Meg Griffin for the first production season ( 15 episodes ) , but due to a contractual agreement was never credited . Chabert left the series because of time conflicts with schoolwork and her role on Party of Five , and was replaced by Mila Kunis . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the final scenes of the episode , the Griffin family is seen watching a television program called TV 's Bloopers , a reference to the 1984 ABC and NBC television series TV 's Bloopers and Practical Jokes . 
 Towards the end of the courtroom scene , the Kool @-@ Aid Man is seen breaking through a wall , which later became a running gag in the series involving a certain character or breaking through a wall and Peter 's job as a Mascot is a parody of the Cocoa Puffs commercial . 
 During Peter 's recount of his job search to Brian , the talent show flashback mirrors the setting from The Sound of Music and makes a reference to the characters of the film , the von Trapp family . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . In a 2008 review , Ahsan Haque of IGN rated the episode an 8 @.@ 9 / 10 , praising the integration of humor into the episode 's storyline . Haque noted that the episode was " a very strong start to this long running classic series , and revisiting it serves as a reminder that unlike many other television shows , there are very few awkward moments , and much of the show 's brilliance is immediately apparent . " In 2009 , the site singled out " Death Has a Shadow " as a " strong start [ to Family Guy ] " . 
 Robin Pierson of The TV Critic gave the episode a mixed review , rating the episode a 67 / 100 , calling it one of the most densely packed pilots on television . He mentioned that it was entertaining but said that there were many jokes that followed the quality does not win out over quantity saying . He compared Peter to Homer Simpson and he compared the show to The Simpsons and King of the Hill . He criticized the amount of unfunny jokes while he praised the surreal moments . At the end of his review he stated that Family Guy was a different kind of animated comedy which set out to do jokes that other cartoons couldn ’ t do , also mentioning that the show had promise to become really funny . 
 A more negative review came from <unk> 's Ken Tucker , who called the animation clunky , which he said made Hanna @-@ Barbera 's animation look like state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art . Tucker also said in his review that he hoped that smart people would use the Family Guy half @-@ hour to turn off the television set and start a debate over the air strikes in Kosovo . He also called the show " The Simpsons as conceived by a singularly sophomoric mind that lacks any reference point beyond other TV shows " . Even before it aired the pilot had received some criticism from the Parents Television Council , a watchdog ; the creator of this website L. Brent Bozell III wrote that he initially speculated that Family Guy would be " pushing the envelope " . 
 = A Cure for Pokeritis = 
 A Cure for Pokeritis is a 1912 short silent film starring John Bunny and Flora Finch . After Bunny 's death , a re @-@ release was announced with the alternative title A Sure Cure for Pokeritis . This domestic comedy depicts a woman who stops her husband 's gambling habit by having her cousin stage a fake police raid on the weekly poker game . It was one of many similar shorts produced by Vitagraph Studios , whose popularity made Bunny and Finch early film stars . Although its style of humor is dated , it has been recognized as a historically important representative of its period and genre . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Upon returning home from an evening spent losing at poker , George Brown swears off gambling forever . However , his friend Bigelow convinces him to secretly continue attending the weekly poker game and to tell his wife Mary that he has been admitted to the Sons of the Morning , a fraternal lodge , to explain his absences . When George talks in his sleep , she becomes suspicious and has her cousin Freddie Dewdrop follow him , allowing her to learn the truth . Together with the wives of the other poker players , she enacts a plan to end the gambling . Freddie and the members of his Bible study group dress up as police officers and raid the game . The gamblers ' wives then arrive , and the police leave the men to be scolded , purportedly in place of being arrested . As the film ends , the Browns reconcile . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The intended names of the characters played by John Bunny and Flora Finch are not entirely clear . In the film itself , the letter written to gather the wives together identifies the two main characters as Mary and George Brown . However , Vitagraph 's in @-@ house publication included cast lists for all of the studio 's films . There , the main characters are referred to as Mr. and Mrs. Bunny Sharpe , and " Mr. Brown " is given as the name of one of the minor characters . 
 John Bunny as Mr. Bunny Sharpe / George Brown 
 Flora Finch as Mrs. Bunny Sharpe / Mary Brown 
 Charles Eldridge as Bunny 's friend Bigelow 
 Harold Wilson as another friend 
 Rose Tapley as Bigelow 's wife 
 Leah Baird as another friend 's wife 
 Harry T. Morey as Freddie Dewdrop 
 Tom Powers as Freddie 's chum 
 James Morrison as Freddie 's chum 
 William R. Dunn as Mr. Brown 
 Arthur Rosson as the costumer 
 = = Production = = 
 A Cure for Pokeritis was one of many Vitagraph Studios one @-@ reel or shorter comedies starring Bunny and Finch in a domestic setting , known popularly as <unk> or <unk> . The number of these shorts originally produced is unknown because Vitagraph 's films were generally not archived . Estimates vary considerably ; totals in excess of 150 , 200 , or 260 have been proposed . Most are now lost . 
 The film was an early example of efforts to move beyond theater blocking conventions . During the police raid , depth was demonstrated by having action take place in both the foreground and the background , and by allowing actors to move between them . This cinematography technique improved the realism and pacing of the scene . 
 = = Music = = 
 Theaters projected silent films with a variety of musical accompaniment . Depending on the film and the venue , accompanying music might have been the performance of a live pianist or orchestra , recorded music , or absent entirely . Some films were distributed with cue sheets indicating when music was to be played , or anthologies of specific songs to use as accompaniment . Especially between 1910 and 1912 , these selections were often popular music , chosen because the song 's title or lyrics related to the film in some way , in contrast to later efforts to provide music with appropriate texture . Beginning in 1910 , Vitagraph provided lists of this nature for all of their films . 
 Vitagraph 's recommended music for A Cure for Pokeritis began with " I 'm Glad I 'm Married " and " I 've Got My Eyes on You " . The studio suggested either " I Don 't Believe You " or " I 'm an Honorary Member of the Patsy Club " be played as George presented his purported lodge membership . His sleep @-@ talking was to be accompanied by " If You Talk in Your Sleep , Don 't Mention My Name " , followed by " Back to the Factory , Mary " as Freddie investigates . " Whoops , My Dear " was to score the police raid , and " Don 't Take Me Home " would play as the film ended . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The <unk> , as a genre , were representative of the cinema of the period , and were very successful , making Bunny the first American comic film star and Finch the first female star comedian . A Cure for Pokeritis , released February 23 , 1912 , was individually well @-@ received , including in showings outside the United States . The Thames Star , a New Zealand newspaper , described the film as " <unk> funny " . After John Bunny 's death , interest in his films led Vitagraph in 1917 to announce the re @-@ release of this film ( retitled A Sure Cure for Pokeritis ) , along with many of his other works , as " Favorite Film Features " . However , the comedy style of A Cure for Pokeritis has not aged well , especially in contrast to Mack Sennett 's slapstick films and the works of later comedians such as Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton . According to film scholars Donald McCaffrey and Christopher Jacobs , modern viewers " will hardly get a flicker of a smile " from the film , despite the skill of its actors . 
 The film 's themes and its relationship to later works have been the subject of critical analysis . A Cure for Pokeritis may be the first depiction of poker in film , and provides insight into the public 's perception of the game at the time as a male @-@ dominated societal ill . This attitude , and a scene similar to the film 's plot , is also present in Cassius Marcellus Coolidge 's painting Sitting up with a Sick Friend , part of the Dogs Playing Poker series commissioned in 1903 . A Cure for Pokeritis has been compared to sitcoms of both the 1940s and the end of the 20th century . Film historian Wes Gehring of Ball State University considers George to be a forerunner of the modern antihero archetype and compares the Browns to Laurel and Hardy . Other authors have examined the film 's gender issues . Gerald Mast wrote that the comedic aspects overlaid a conflict between masculinity and moralist or feminist values . Brunel University lecturer Geoff King viewed the male lead 's efforts to escape from an " imprisoning " wife to be a recurring theme in silent comedy , and film reviewer Peter Nash found the " fastidious and effeminate " Freddie an example of a contemporary gay stock character . 
 In 2011 , this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being a " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " representative of the <unk> films . 
 = = Home media = = 
 A Cure for Pokeritis is in the public domain and so is widely available , including online . In 1998 , Kino International included it in Slapstick Encyclopedia , an eight @-@ volume VHS collection of silent films that was re @-@ released in 2002 as a five @-@ disc DVD collection by Image Entertainment . 
 = Cane toad = 
 The cane toad ( Rhinella marina ) , also known as the giant neotropical toad or marine toad , is a large , terrestrial true toad which is native to South and mainland Middle America , but has been introduced to various islands throughout Oceania and the Caribbean , as well as northern Australia . It is a member of the genus Rhinella , but was formerly in the genus Bufo , which includes many different true toad species found throughout Central and South America . The cane toad is a prolific breeder ; females lay single @-@ clump spawns with thousands of eggs . Its reproductive success is partly because of opportunistic feeding : it has a diet , unusual among anurans , of both dead and living matter . Adults average 10 – 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) in length ; the largest recorded specimen had a <unk> @-@ vent length of 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) . 
 The cane toad is an old species . A fossil toad ( specimen <unk> <unk> ) from the La Venta fauna of the late Miocene of Colombia is indistinguishable from modern cane toads from northern South America . It was discovered in a floodplain deposit , which suggests the R. marina habitat preferences have always been for open areas . 
 The cane toad has poison glands , and the tadpoles are highly toxic to most animals if ingested . Because of its voracious appetite , the cane toad has been introduced to many regions of the Pacific and the Caribbean islands as a method of agricultural pest control . The species derives its common name from its use against the cane beetle ( <unk> <unk> ) . The cane toad is now considered a pest and an invasive species in many of its introduced regions ; of particular concern is its toxic skin , which kills many animals , both wild and domesticated . Cane toads are particularly dangerous to dogs . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Originally , the cane toads were used to eradicate pests from sugarcane , giving rise to their common name . The cane toad has many other common names , including " giant toad " and " marine toad " ; the former refers to its size and the latter to the binomial name , R. marina . It was one of many species described by Linnaeus in his 18th @-@ century work Systema Naturae ( 1758 ) . Linnaeus based the specific epithet marina on an illustration by Dutch zoologist Albertus Seba , who mistakenly believed the cane toad to inhabit both terrestrial and marine environments . Other common names include " giant neotropical toad " , " Dominican toad " , " giant marine toad " , and " South American cane toad " . In Trinidadian English , they are commonly called <unk> , the French word for toad . 
 The genus Rhinella is considered to constitute a distinct genus of its own , thus changing the scientific name of the cane toad . In this case , the specific name marinus ( masculine ) changes to marina ( feminine ) to conform with the rules of gender agreement as set out by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature , changing the binomial name from Bufo marinus to Rhinella marina ; the binomial Rhinella marinus was subsequently introduced as a synonym through misspelling by <unk> , Robertson , Sites , and Noonan ( 2008 ) . Though controversial ( with many traditional herpetologists still using Bufo marinus ) the binomial Rhinella marina is gaining in acceptance with such bodies as the IUCN , Encyclopaedia of Life , Amphibian Species of the World and increasing numbers of scientific publications adopting its usage . 
 In Australia , the adults may be confused with large native frogs from the genera <unk> , Cyclorana , and <unk> . These species can be distinguished from the cane toad by the absence of large parotoid glands behind their eyes and the lack of a ridge between the nostril and the eye . Cane toads have been confused with the giant burrowing frog ( Heleioporus <unk> ) , because both are large and warty in appearance ; however , the latter can be readily distinguished from the former by its vertical pupils and its silver @-@ grey ( as opposed to gold ) irises . Juvenile cane toads may be confused with species of the <unk> genus , but their adult colleagues can be distinguished by the lack of bright colouring on the groin and thighs . 
 In the United States , the cane toad closely resembles many <unk> species . In particular , it could be confused with the southern toad ( Bufo terrestris ) , which can be distinguished by the presence of two bulbs in front of the parotoid glands . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cane toad is very large ; the females are significantly longer than males , reaching an average length of 10 – 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) , with a maximum of 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) . Larger toads tend to be found in areas of lower population density . They have a life expectancy of 10 to 15 years in the wild , and can live considerably longer in captivity , with one specimen reportedly surviving for 35 years . 
 The skin of the cane toad is dry and warty . It has distinct ridges above the eyes , which run down the snout . Individual cane toads can be grey , yellowish , red @-@ brown , or olive @-@ brown , with varying patterns . A large parotoid gland lies behind each eye . The ventral surface is cream @-@ coloured and may have blotches in shades of black or brown . The pupils are horizontal and the irises golden . The toes have a fleshy webbing at their base , and the fingers are free of webbing . 
 Typically , juvenile cane toads have smooth , dark skin , although some specimens have a red wash . Juveniles lack the adults ' large parotoid glands , so they are usually less poisonous . The tadpoles are small and uniformly black , and are bottom @-@ dwellers , tending to form schools . Tadpoles range from 10 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) in length . 
 = = Ecology , behavior , and life history = = 
 The common name " marine toad " and the scientific name Rhinella marina suggest a link to marine life , but the adult cane toad is entirely terrestrial , only venturing to fresh water to breed . However , laboratory experiments suggest that tadpoles can tolerate salt concentrations equivalent to 15 % of seawater ( ~ 5 @.@ 4 ‰ ) , and recent field observations found living tadpoles and toadlets at salinities of 27 @.@ 5 ‰ on Coiba Island , Panama . The cane toad inhabits open grassland and woodland , and has displayed a " distinct preference " for areas modified by humans , such as gardens and drainage ditches . In their native habitats , the toads can be found in subtropical forests , although dense foliage tends to limit their dispersal . 
 The cane toad begins life as an egg , which is laid as part of long strings of jelly in water . A female lays 8 @,@ 000 – 25 @,@ 000 eggs at once and the strings can stretch up to 20 m ( 66 ft ) in length . The black eggs are covered by a membrane and their diameter is about 1 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 067 – 0 @.@ 079 in ) . The rate at which an egg grows into a tadpole increases with temperature . Tadpoles typically hatch within 48 hours , but the period can vary from 14 hours to almost a week . This process usually involves thousands of tadpoles — which are small , black , and have short tails — forming into groups . Between 12 and 60 days are needed for the tadpoles to develop into juveniles , with four weeks being typical . Similarly to their adult counterparts , eggs and tadpoles are toxic to many animals . 
 When they emerge , toadlets typically are about 10 – 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 43 in ) in length , and grow rapidly . While the rate of growth varies by region , time of year , and gender , an average initial growth rate of 0 @.@ 647 mm ( 0 @.@ <unk> in ) per day is seen , followed by an average rate of 0 @.@ 373 mm ( 0 @.@ <unk> in ) per day . Growth typically slows once the toads reach sexual maturity . This rapid growth is important for their survival ; in the period between metamorphosis and <unk> , the young toads lose the toxicity that protected them as eggs and tadpoles , but have yet to fully develop the parotoid glands that produce bufotoxin . Because they lack this key defence , only an estimated 0 @.@ 5 % of cane toads reach adulthood . 
 As with rates of growth , the point at which the toads become sexually mature varies across different regions . In New Guinea , sexual maturity is reached by female toads with a snout – vent length between 70 and 80 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 and 3 @.@ 1 in ) , while toads in Panama achieve maturity when they are between 90 and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 and 3 @.@ 9 in ) in length . In tropical regions , such as their native habitats , breeding occurs throughout the year , but in subtropical areas , breeding occurs only during warmer periods that coincide with the onset of the wet season . 
 The cane toad is estimated to have a critical thermal maximum of 40 – 42 ° C ( 104 – 108 ° F ) and a minimum of around 10 – 15 ° C ( 50 – 59 ° F ) . The ranges can change due to adaptation to the local environment . The cane toad has a high tolerance to water loss ; some can withstand a 52 @.@ 6 % loss of body water , allowing them to survive outside tropical environments . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Most frogs identify prey by movement , and vision appears to be the primary method by which the cane toad detects prey ; however , the cane toad can also locate food using its sense of smell . They eat a wide range of material ; in addition to the normal prey of small rodents , reptiles , other amphibians , birds , and even bats and a range of invertebrates , they also eat plants , dog food , and household refuse . 
 = = = Defenses = = = 
 The skin of the adult cane toad is toxic , as well as the enlarged parotoid glands behind the eyes , and other glands across their backs . When the toads are threatened , their glands secrete a milky @-@ white fluid known as bufotoxin . Components of bufotoxin are toxic to many animals ; even human deaths have been recorded due to the consumption of cane toads . 
 <unk> , one of the chemicals excreted by the cane toad , is classified as a class @-@ 1 drug under Australian law , alongside heroin and cannabis . The effects of bufotenin are thought to be similar to those of mild poisoning ; the stimulation , which includes mild hallucinations , lasts for less than an hour . As the cane toad excretes bufotenin in small amounts , and other toxins in relatively large quantities , toad licking could result in serious illness or death . 
 In addition to releasing toxin , the cane toad is capable of inflating its lungs , puffing up , and lifting its body off the ground to appear taller and larger to a potential predator . 
 Poisonous sausages containing toad meat are being trialled in the Kimberley ( Western Australia ) to try to protect native animals from cane toads ' deadly impact . The Western Australian Department of Environment and Conservation has been working with the University of Sydney to develop baits to train native animals not to eat the toads . By blending bits of toad with a nausea @-@ inducing chemical , the baits train the animals to stay away from the amphibians . Researcher David Pearson says trials run in laboratories and in remote parts of the Kimberley region of WA are looking promising , although the baits will not solve the cane toad problem altogether . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Many species prey on the cane toad and its tadpoles in its native habitat , including the broad @-@ snouted caiman ( Caiman latirostris ) , the banded cat @-@ eyed snake ( <unk> annulata ) , eels ( family <unk> ) , various species of killifish , the rock <unk> ( <unk> rupestris ) , some species of catfish ( order <unk> ) , some species of ibis ( subfamily <unk> ) , and Paraponera clavata ( bullet ants ) . Predators outside the cane toad 's native range include the whistling kite ( <unk> <unk> ) , the <unk> ( <unk> chrysogaster ) , the black rat ( Rattus rattus ) and the water monitor ( Varanus <unk> ) . The tawny frogmouth ( Podargus strigoides ) and the Papuan frogmouth ( Podargus papuensis ) have been reported as feeding on cane toads ; some Australian crows ( Corvus spp . ) have also learned strategies allowing them to feed on cane toads , such as using their beak to flip toads onto their back . <unk> of the Didelphis genus likely can eat cane toads with impunity . Meat ants are unaffected by the cane toads ' toxins , and therefore are able to kill them . The cane toad 's normal response to attack is to stand still and let their toxin kill the attacker , which allows the ants to attack and eat the toad . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The cane toad is native to the Americas , and its range stretches from the Rio Grande Valley in South Texas to the central Amazon and southeastern Peru . This area encompasses both tropical and semiarid environments . The density of the cane toad is significantly lower within its native distribution than in places where it has been introduced . In South America , the density was recorded to be 20 adults per 100 m ( 109 yd ) of shoreline , 1 to 2 % of the density in Australia . 
 = = Introductions = = 
 The cane toad has been introduced to many regions of the world — particularly the Pacific — for the biological control of agricultural pests . These introductions have generally been well documented , and the cane toad may be one of the most studied of any introduced species . 
 Before the early 1840s , the cane toad had been introduced into Martinique and Barbados , from French Guiana and Guyana . An introduction to Jamaica was made in 1844 in an attempt to reduce the rat population . Despite its failure to control the rodents , the cane toad was introduced to Puerto Rico in the early 20th century in the hope that it would counter a beetle infestation ravaging the sugarcane plantations . The Puerto Rican scheme was successful and halted the economic damage caused by the beetles , prompting scientists in the 1930s to promote it as an ideal solution to agricultural pests . 
 As a result , many countries in the Pacific region emulated the lead of Puerto Rico and introduced the toad in the 1930s . There are introduced populations in Australia , Florida , Papua New Guinea , the Philippines , the Ogasawara , Ishigaki Island and the Daitō Islands of Japan , most Caribbean islands , Fiji and many other Pacific islands , including Hawaii . Since then , the cane toad has become a pest in many host countries , and poses a serious threat to native animals . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Following the apparent success of the cane toad in eating the beetles threatening the sugarcane plantations of Puerto Rico , and the fruitful introductions into Hawaii and the Philippines , a strong push was made for the cane toad to be released in Australia to negate the pests ravaging the Queensland cane fields . As a result , 102 toads were collected from Hawaii and brought to Australia . After an initial release in August 1935 , the Commonwealth Department of Health decided to ban future introductions until a study was conducted into the feeding habits of the toad . The study was completed in 1936 and the ban lifted , when large @-@ scale releases were undertaken ; by March 1937 , 62 @,@ 000 toadlets had been released into the wild . The toads became firmly established in Queensland , increasing exponentially in number and extending their range into the Northern Territory and New South Wales . Recently , the toads have made their way into Western Australia and one has even been found on the far western coast in Broome . 
 However , the toad was generally unsuccessful in reducing the targeted grey @-@ backed beetles , in part because the cane fields provided insufficient shelter for the predators during the day , in part because the beetles live at the tops of sugar cane – and cane toads are not good climbers . Since its original introduction , the cane toad has had a particularly marked effect on Australian biodiversity . The population of a number of native predatory reptiles has declined , such as the varanid lizards Varanus mertensi , V. <unk> , and V. panoptes , the land snakes <unk> australis and Acanthophis antarcticus , and the crocodile species Crocodylus johnstoni ; in contrast , the population of the agamid lizard <unk> <unk> — known to be a prey item of V. panoptes — has increased . 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 The cane toad was introduced to various Caribbean islands to counter a number of pests infesting local crops . While it was able to establish itself on some islands , such as Barbados , Jamaica , and Puerto Rico , other introductions , such as in Cuba before 1900 and in 1946 , and on the islands of Dominica and Grand Cayman , were unsuccessful . 
 The earliest recorded introductions were to Barbados and Martinique . The Barbados introductions were focused on the biological control of pests damaging the sugarcane crops , and while the toads became abundant , they have done even less to control the pests than in Australia . The toad was introduced to Martinique from French Guiana before 1944 and became established . Today , they reduce the mosquito and mole cricket populations . A third introduction to the region occurred in 1884 , when toads appeared in Jamaica , reportedly imported from Barbados to help control the rodent population . While they had no significant effect on the rats , they nevertheless became well established . Other introductions include the release on Antigua — possibly before 1916 , although this initial population may have died out by 1934 and been reintroduced at a later date — and Montserrat , which had an introduction before 1879 that led to the establishment of a solid population , which was apparently sufficient to survive the Soufrière Hills volcano eruption in 1995 . 
 In 1920 , the cane toad was introduced into Puerto Rico to control the populations of white @-@ grub ( <unk> spp . ) , a sugarcane pest . Before this , the pests were manually collected by humans , so the introduction of the toad eliminated labor costs . A second group of toads was imported in 1923 , and by 1932 , the cane toad was well established . The population of white @-@ grubs dramatically decreased , and this was attributed to the cane toad at the annual meeting of the International Sugar Cane Technologists in Puerto Rico . However , there may have been other factors . The six @-@ year period after 1931 — when the cane toad was most prolific , and the white @-@ grub saw dramatic decline — saw the highest @-@ ever rainfall for Puerto Rico . Nevertheless , the cane toad was assumed to have controlled the white @-@ grub ; this view was reinforced by a Nature article titled " Toads save sugar crop " , and this led to large @-@ scale introductions throughout many parts of the Pacific . 
 The cane toad has been spotted in Carriacou and Dominica , the latter appearance occurring in spite of the failure of the earlier introductions . On September 8 , 2013 , the cane toad was also discovered on the island of New Providence in the Bahamas . 
 = = = The Philippines = = = 
 The cane toad was first introduced deliberately into the Philippines in 1930 as a biological control agent of pests in sugarcane plantations . This was done after the success of the experimental introductions into Puerto Rico . It subsequently became the most ubiquitous amphibian in the islands . It still retains the common name of <unk> or <unk> in the Visayan languages , a corruption of ' American frog ' , referring to its origins . It is also commonly known as " bullfrog " in Philippine English . 
 = = = Fiji = = = 
 The cane toad was introduced into Fiji to combat insects that infested sugarcane plantations . The introduction of the cane toad to the region was first suggested in 1933 , following the successes in Puerto Rico and Hawaii . After considering the possible side effects , the national government of Fiji decided to release the toad in 1953 , and 67 specimens were subsequently imported from Hawaii . Once the toads were established , a 1963 study concluded , as the toad 's diet included both harmful and beneficial invertebrates , it was considered " economically neutral " . Today , the cane toad can be found on all major islands in Fiji , although they tend to be smaller than their counterparts in other regions . 
 = = = New Guinea = = = 
 The cane toad was introduced into New Guinea to control the hawk moth larvae eating sweet potato crops . The first release occurred in 1937 using toads imported from Hawaii , with a second release the same year using specimens from the Australian mainland . Evidence suggests a third release in 1938 , consisting of toads being used for human pregnancy tests — many species of toad were found to be effective for this task , and were employed for about 20 years after the discovery was announced in 1948 . Initial reports argued the toads were effective in reducing the levels of cutworms and sweet potato yields were thought to be improving . As a result , these first releases were followed by further distributions across much of the region , although their effectiveness on other crops , such as cabbages , has been questioned ; when the toads were released at Wau , the cabbages provided insufficient shelter and the toads rapidly left the immediate area for the superior shelter offered by the forest . A similar situation had previously arisen in the Australian cane fields , but this experience was either unknown or ignored in New Guinea . The cane toad has since become abundant in rural and urban areas . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The cane toad naturally exists in South Texas , but attempts ( both deliberate and accidental ) have been made to introduce the species to other parts of the country . These include introductions to Florida and to the islands of Hawaii , as well as largely unsuccessful introductions to Louisiana . 
 Initial releases into Florida failed . Attempted introductions before 1936 and 1944 , intended to control sugarcane pests , were unsuccessful as the toads failed to proliferate . Later attempts failed in the same way . However , the toad gained a foothold in the state after an accidental release by an importer at Miami International Airport in 1957 , and deliberate releases by animal dealers in 1963 and 1964 established the toad in other parts of Florida . Today , the cane toad is well established in the state , from the Keys to north of Tampa , and they are gradually extending further northward . In Florida , the toad is a regarded as a threat to native species and pets ; so much so , the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission recommends residents kill them . 
 Around 150 cane toads were introduced to Oahu in Hawaii in 1932 , and the population swelled to 105 @,@ 517 after 17 months . The toads were sent to the other islands , and more than 100 @,@ 000 toads were distributed by July 1934 ; eventually over 600 @,@ 000 were transported . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Other than the previously mentioned use as a biological control for pests , the cane toad has been employed in a number of commercial and noncommercial applications . Traditionally , within the toad 's natural range in South America , the <unk> @-@ <unk> would " milk " the toads for their toxin , which was then employed as an arrow poison . The toxins may have been used as an entheogen by the Olmec people . The toad has been hunted as a food source in parts of Peru , and eaten after the careful removal of the skin and parotoid glands . When properly prepared , the meat of the toad is considered healthy and as a source of omega @-@ 3 fatty acids . More recently , the toad 's toxins have been used in a number of new ways : bufotenin has been used in Japan as an aphrodisiac and a hair restorer , and in cardiac surgery in China to lower the heart rates of patients . New research has suggested that the cane toad 's poison may have some applications in treating prostate cancer . 
 Other modern applications of the cane toad include pregnancy testing , as pets , laboratory research , and the production of leather goods . Pregnancy testing was conducted in the mid @-@ 20th century by injecting urine from a woman into a male toad 's lymph sacs , and if spermatozoa appeared in the toad 's urine , the patient was deemed to be pregnant . The tests using toads were faster than those employing mammals ; the toads were easier to raise , and , although the initial 1948 discovery employed Bufo <unk> for the tests , it soon became clear that a variety of anuran species were suitable , including the cane toad . As a result , toads were employed in this task for around 20 years . As a laboratory animal , the cane toad is regarded as ideal ; they are plentiful , and easy and inexpensive to maintain and handle . The use of the cane toad in experiments started in the 1950s , and by the end of the 1960s , large numbers were being collected and exported to high schools and universities . Since then , a number of Australian states have introduced or tightened importation regulations . Even dead toads have value . Cane toad skin has been made into leather and novelty items ; stuffed cane toads , posed and accessorised , have found a home in the tourist market , and attempts have been made to produce fertiliser from their bodies . 
 = = Invasive species = = 
 Cane toads pose a serious threat to native species when introduced to a new ecosystem . Classified as an invasive species in over 20 countries , there are multiple reports of the cane toad moving into a new area to be followed by a decline in the biodiversity in that region . The most documented region of the cane toad 's invasion and subsequent effect on native species is Australia , where multiple surveys and observations of the toad 's conquest have been completed . The best way to illustrate this effect is through the plight of the northern quoll , as well as Mertens ' water monitor , a large lizard native to South and Southeast Asia . 
 Two sites were chosen to study the effects of cane toads on the northern quoll , one of which was at Mary River ranger station , which is located in the southern region of Kakadu National Park . The other site was located at the north end of the park . In addition to these two sites , there was a third site located at the East Alligator ranger station , and this site was used as a control site , where the cane toads would not interact with the northern quoll population . Monitoring of the quoll population began at the Mary River ranger station using radio tracking in 2002 , months before the first cane toads arrived at the site . After the arrival of the cane toads , the population of northern quolls in the Mary River site plummeted between October and December 2002 , and by March 2003 , the northern quoll appeared to be extinct in this section of the park , as there were no northern quolls caught in the trapping trips in the following two months . In contrast , the population of northern quolls in the control site at the East Alligator ranger station remained relatively constant , not showing any symptoms of declining . The evidence from the Kakadu National Park is compelling not only because of the timing of the population of northern quolls plummeting just months after the arrival of the cane toad , but also because in the Mary River region 31 % of mortalities within the quoll population were attributed to lethal toxic ingestion , as there were no signs of disease , parasite infestation , or any other obvious changes at the site that could have caused such a rapid decline . The most obvious piece of evidence which supports the hypothesis that the invasion of the cane toads caused the local extinction of the northern quoll is that the closely monitored population of the control group , in the absence of cane toads , showed no signs of decline . 
 In the case of the Mertens ' water monitor , more commonly known as Merten 's water monitor , there was only one region that was monitored , but over the course of 18 months . This region is located 70 kilometers south of Darwin , at the Manton Dam Recreation Area . Within the Manton Dam Recreation Area , there were 14 sites set up to survey the population of water monitors , measuring abundance and site occupancy at each one . Seven surveys were conducted , each of which ran for four weeks and included 16 site visits , where each site was sampled twice per day for two consecutive days throughout the 4 weeks . Each site visit occurred between 7 : 30 -10 : 30 AM , and 4 : <unk> 7 : 00 PM , when Varanus mertensi can be viewed sunbathing on the shore or wrapped around a tree branch close to shore . The whole project lasted from December 2004 to May 2006 , and unveiled a total of 194 sightings of Varanus mertensi in 1568 site visits . Of the seven surveys , abundance was highest during the second survey , which took place in February 2005 , two months into the project . Following this measurement , the abundance declined in the next 4 surveys , before declining sharply after the second to last survey in February 2006 . In the final survey taken in May 2006 , there were only two Varanus mertensi observed . Cane toads were first recorded in the region of study during the second survey during February 2005 , also when the water monitor abundance was at its highest over the course of the study . Numbers of the cane toad population stayed low for the next year after introduction , and then skyrocketed to its peak in the last survey during May 2006 . When you compare the two populations side by side one can see clearly that the onset of the cane toads had an immediate negative impact on the Varanus mertensi , as their population began to drop in February 2005 , which was when the first cane toads entered the Manton Dam Recreation Area . At the end of the study , some scattered population of water monitors remained in the upper sites of the Manton Dam , which suggests that local extinctions occurred at certain shoreline sites within Manton Dam , but a complete extinction of the population did not occur . 
 = Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within = 
 Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within is a 2001 American CGI animated science fiction film directed by Hironobu Sakaguchi , creator of the Final Fantasy series of role @-@ playing video games . It was the first photorealistic computer @-@ animated feature film and remains the most expensive video game @-@ inspired film of all time . It features the voices of Ming @-@ Na Wen , Alec Baldwin , Donald Sutherland , James Woods , Ving Rhames , Peri Gilpin and Steve Buscemi . 
 The Spirits Within follows scientists Aki Ross and Doctor Sid in their efforts to free a post @-@ apocalyptic Earth from a mysterious and deadly alien race known as the Phantoms , which has driven the remnants of humanity into " barrier cities " . Aki and Sid must fight against General Hein , who wishes to use more violent means to end the conflict . 
 Square Pictures rendered the film using some of the most advanced processing capabilities available for film animation at the time . A render farm consisting of 960 workstations was tasked with rendering each of the film 's 141 @,@ 964 frames . It took a staff of 200 and about four years to complete The Spirits Within . Square intended to make the character of Aki Ross into the world 's first photorealistic computer @-@ animated actress , with plans for appearances in multiple films in different roles . 
 The Spirits Within debuted to mixed critical reception , but was widely praised for the realism of the computer @-@ animated characters . Due to rising costs , the film greatly exceeded its original budget towards the end of production , reaching a final cost of $ 137 million , of which it recovered only $ 85 million at the box office . The film has been called a box office bomb and is blamed for the demise of Square Pictures . It was the first animated feature for Columbia since Care Bears Movie II : A New Generation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2065 , Earth is infested by alien life forms known as Phantoms . By physical contact Phantoms consume the Gaia spirit of living beings , killing them instantly , though a minor contact may only result in an infection . The surviving humans live in " barrier cities " , areas protected by an energy shield that prevents Phantoms from entering , and are engaged in an ongoing struggle to free the planet . After being infected by a Phantom during one of her experiments , Aki Ross ( Ming @-@ Na ) and her mentor , Doctor Sid ( Donald Sutherland ) , uncover a means of defeating the Phantoms by gathering eight spirit signatures that , when joined , can negate the Phantoms . Aki is searching for the sixth spirit in the ruins of New York City when she is cornered by Phantoms but is rescued by Gray Edwards ( Alec Baldwin ) and his squad " Deep Eyes " , consisting of Ryan Whittaker ( Ving Rhames ) , Neil Fleming ( Steve Buscemi ) and Jane Proudfoot ( Peri Gilpin ) . It is revealed that Gray was once romantically involved with Aki . 
 Upon returning to her barrier city , Aki joins Sid and appears before the leadership council along with General Hein ( James Woods ) , who is determined to use the powerful Zeus space cannon to destroy the Phantoms . Aki is concerned the cannon will damage Earth 's Gaia ( a spirit representing its ecosystem ) and delays the use of it by revealing that she has been infected and the collected spirit signatures are keeping her infection stable , convincing the council that there may be another way to defeat the Phantoms . However , this revelation leads Hein to incorrectly conclude that she is being controlled by the Phantoms . Aki and the Deep Eyes squad succeed in finding the seventh spirit as Aki 's infection begins to worsen and she slips into unconsciousness . Her dream reveals to her that the Phantoms are the spirits of dead aliens brought to Earth on a fragment of their destroyed planet . Sid uses the seventh spirit to bring Aki 's infection back under control , reviving her . 
 To scare the council into giving him clearance to fire the Zeus cannon , Hein lowers part of the barrier shield protecting the city . Though Hein intended that only a few Phantoms enter , his plan goes awry and legions of Phantoms invade the entire city . Aki , Sid and the Deep Eyes attempt to reach Aki 's spaceship , their means of escape , but Ryan , Neil and Jane are killed by Phantoms . Hein escapes and boards the Zeus space @-@ station where he finally receives authorisation to fire the cannon . 
 Sid finds the eighth spirit at the crater site of the alien asteroid 's impact on Earth . He lowers a shielded vehicle , with Aki and Gray aboard , into the crater to locate the final spirit . Just before they can reach it , Hein fires the Zeus cannon into the crater , not only destroying the eighth spirit but also revealing the Phantom Gaia . Aki has a vision of the Phantom home planet , where she is able to receive the eighth spirit from the alien particles in herself . When Aki awakens , she and Gray combine it with the other seven . Hein continues to fire the Zeus cannon despite overheating warnings and unintentionally destroys the cannon and himself . Gray sacrifices himself as a medium needed to physically transmit the completed spirit into the alien Gaia . The Earth 's Gaia is returned to normal as the Phantoms ascend into space , finally at peace . Aki is pulled from the crater holding Gray 's body , and is seen looking into the newly liberated world . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ming @-@ Na as Aki Ross 
 Donald Sutherland as Doctor Sid 
 Alec Baldwin as Gray Edwards 
 Ving Rhames as Ryan Whittaker 
 Steve Buscemi as Neil Fleming 
 Peri Gilpin as Jane Proudfoot 
 James Woods as General Hein 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Aki Ross 's voice actor , Ming @-@ Na Wen , was selected for a perceived fit between her personality and Aki 's . Ming @-@ Na , who found the role via her publicist , said she felt like she had given birth with her voice to the character . She gradually accustomed herself to the difficulty of working without the presence and spontaneity of real actors , and commented that the voice @-@ acting work did not take much time , as she would just go into the studio " once or twice a month for about four months " with no need for make @-@ up and costuming sessions . The workload was so light it did not interfere with her acting commitments in the television series ER . 
 Square accumulated four SGI Origin 2000 series servers , four <unk> systems , and 167 Octane workstations for the film 's production . The basic film was rendered at a custom render farm created by Square in Hawaii . It housed 960 Pentium III @-@ 933 MHz workstations . Character movements were filmed using motion capture technology . Animator Matthew Hackett stated that while motion capture was effective for many of the scenes , in others animators still had to add movements manually . Hand and facial movements were all done manually . Some of General Hein 's facial features and poses were based on Hackett . As animators did not want to use any actual photographs in the film , all backgrounds were done using matte paintings . 1 @,@ 327 scenes in total needed to be filmed to animate the digital characters . The film consists of 141 @,@ 964 frames , with each frame taking an average of 90 minutes to render . By the end of production Square had a total of 15 terabytes of artwork for the film . It is estimated that over the film 's four @-@ year production , approximately 200 people put in a combined 120 years of work on it . 
 From early on , it had been decided that The Spirits Within would be filmed entirely in English . The original script , written by Sakaguchi , was titled Gaia . The screenplay was written by Al Reinert and Jeff Vintar . The film was co @-@ directed by <unk> Sakakibara , with Jun Aida and Chris Lee both serving as producers . Lee compared the The Spirits Within , the first full @-@ length photorealistic animated film , to Walt Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , the first full @-@ length cel animated film . In order to keep the film in line with Hironobu Sakaguchi 's vision as director , several script rewrites took place , most in the initial stages of production . Sakaguchi stated he was pleased with the film 's final cut , saying he would not have changed anything if given the chance . The film had high cost overruns towards the end of filming . New funds had to be sourced to cover the increasing production costs while maintaining staff salaries . The film 's final cost of $ 137 million , which included about $ 30 million spent on marketing by the film 's distributor Columbia Pictures , escalated from an original budget rumored to be around $ 70 million . $ 45 million alone was spent on the construction of Square 's studio in Hawaii . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Director Sakaguchi named the main character after his mother , Aki , who died in an accident several years prior to the production of the film . Her death led Sakaguchi to reflect on what happened to the spirit after death , and these thoughts resurfaced while he was planning the film , eventually taking the form of the Gaia hypothesis . He later explained that the theme he wanted to convey was " more of a complex idea of life and death and spirit " , believing that the best way to portray this would be to set the film on Earth . By comparison , Final Fantasy video games are set in fictional worlds . Dan Mayers from Sight & Sound stated the film followed the same theme typically found in Final Fantasy video games : " A party of heroes averts impending global holocaust by drawing on their individual skills , gaining knowledge through challenges and emerging victorious with new @-@ found love and respect for themselves and their companions . " Writing in the book Robot Ghosts and Wired Dreams , Livia Monnet stated the film remediated " the notion of life in the <unk> , evolutionary biology of Lynn Margulis and in contemporary theories on artificial life " , going on to state that the film 's exploration of the Gaia hypothesis raised interesting questions regarding the life and death process of both cinema and digital media , as well as contemporary life sciences , cybernetics , philosophy and science fiction . The concept of artificial life and resurrection was also discussed , and compared to similar themes in the 1914 book Locus Solus ; the Phantoms in The Spirits Within were considered to be brought to life by various forces : by the alien planet 's red Gaia and then by human spiritual energy . 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 Each character 's base body model was built from more than 100 @,@ 000 polygons , plus more than 300 @,@ 000 for clothing alone . Aki 's character model bears 60 @,@ 000 hairs , each of which were separately and fully animated and rendered . In creating the characters , designers had to transition between using PowerAnimator , Autodesk Maya and RenderMan . 
 Aki 's appearance was conceived by the lead animator of the project , Roy Sato , who created several conceptual designs for Sakaguchi to consider , and then used the selected design as a guide for her character model . Sato perceived Aki 's original look as a " supermodel " , and subsequently removed her make @-@ up and shortened her hair in order to give her a more intelligent look that would " convince people that she 's a scientist . " In an interview , Sato described actively trying to make her appear as realistic as possible , making her similar to himself in as many ways as he could in the animation , including elements of his personality through facial expressions . He concluded that Aki ended up being similar to him in almost every way , with the exception that " she 's a lot cuter " . The model for Aki was designed to closely follow human appearance , with Sakaguchi commenting in an interview " I think it 's OK to look at Aki and be convinced that she 's a human . " 
 While Square ruled out any chance of a sequel to The Spirits Within before it was even completed , Sakaguchi intended to position Aki as being the " main star " for Square Pictures , using her in later games and films by Square , and including the flexibility of being able to modify aspects such as her age for such appearances . Ming @-@ Na stated that she would be willing if asked to continue voicing Aki . Aki only made one appearance outside of the film ; in 2002 she appeared in a demonstration video that Square Pictures made to present to The Wachowskis before developing Final Flight of the Osiris for The Animatrix . The short film , appearing in the DVD 's bonus content and featuring her with a slightly modified design , shows her acrobatically dueling a robot from the Matrix setting . Shortly afterward , Square Pictures was closed and absorbed into Square Co. and the company ceased use of the character . 
 While the near lifelike appearance of the characters in the film was well received , some commentators felt the character renderings fell into the trap that many robotics scientists refer to as the " uncanny valley " . This concept describes when a robot or animated character becomes very realistic , but subtly different enough from reality to feel " creepy " . John Mangan from The Age cited the film as an example of this phenomenon . 
 = = = Music and soundtrack = = = 
 The soundtrack to the film was released on July 3 , 2001 by Sony Music . Elliot Goldenthal composed the entire score , plus the film 's theme song , " The Dream Within " , which had lyrics written by Richard Rudolf and vocals performed by Lara Fabian . Director Hironobu Sakaguchi opted for the acclaimed film composer instead of Nobuo Uematsu , the composer of the Final Fantasy games ' soundtracks , a decision met with mixed opinions as Goldenthal was completely unknown to many of the game 's fans . The last song on the album and the second and final song to play during the film 's credits ( after " The Dream Within " ) is " Spirit Dreams Inside " performed by Japanese rock band L 'Arc @-@ en @-@ Ciel . 
 The film 's score was performed by the London Symphony Orchestra and conducted by Belgian composer Dirk <unk> it was recorded in the United Kingdom at the Watford <unk> and the London AIR Lyndhurst Hall and was mixed at the Manhattan Center Studios in the United States . In the liner notes to the album , Goldenthal describes the soundtrack as combining " orchestration techniques associated with the late 20th @-@ century Polish avant @-@ garde , as well as my own experiments from Alien 3 , and 19th @-@ century Straussian brass and string instrumentation . " In the film 's ' Making of ' featurette , Goldenthal states he used " ghostly choral " music when the Phantoms are emerging , in an attempt to give a celestial feeling , and focused on low brass clusters and taiko drum rhythms for violent scenes . When Aki talks about a dying girl , Goldenthal used a piano in order to give a domestic home @-@ like feeling to a completely foreign environment , also choosing to use a flute each time Aki focusses on Gaia , as he believed it to be the most " human kind of instrument " . 
 The album was met with positive reviews . Neil <unk> from AllMusic , who gave the album 4 out of 5 , stated the album would probably have been nominated for an Oscar if the film itself had been more popular , as did the reviewer from Soundtrack Express , who gave the soundtrack 5 out of 5 . Christopher Coleman from Tracksounds gave the soundtrack 10 out of 10 , stating the feel of the album was " expansive and majestic " and that the score elevated the viewing experience of the film . A review from Filmtracks gave the album 4 out of 5 , calling it " an easy album to recommend " , adding " parts of it will blow you out of your seat . " Dan Goldwasser from Soundtrack.net also gave the soundtrack 4 out of 5 , calling it a " must have " . 
 The album peaked at No. 19 on Billboard 's Top Soundtracks list and No. 193 on the Billboard 200 on July 28 , 2001 . The track " The Dream Within " was nominated for " Best Original Song Written for a Film " at the 2002 World Soundtrack Awards , but lost to " If I Didn 't Have You " which was composed for Monsters , Inc .. 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Before the film 's release , there was already skepticism of its potential to be financially successful . Chris Taylor from Time magazine noted that video game adaptations had a poor track record at the box office and that it was Sakaguchi 's first feature film . The film debuted on July 2 , 2001 at the Mann Bruins Theater in Los Angeles , California , and was released in the United States on July 11 , making $ 32 million in North America and going on to gross $ 85 million in worldwide box office receipts . The film achieved average to poor results at the box office in most of Southeast Asia ; however , it performed well in Australia , New Zealand and South Korea . In 2006 Boston.com regarded it as the 4th biggest box office bomb , estimating the film 's losses at the end of its cinema run at over $ 94 million . In March 2012 CNBC considered it to be the 9th biggest box office bomb , though Time 's list of the ten biggest box office failures , which was released on the same day , did not include the film . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Spirits Within holds a 44 % approval rating at Rotten Tomatoes based on 143 reviews ( 63 positive , 80 negative ) , where the consensus is the film " raises the bar for computer animated movies , but the story is dull and emotionally removed . " Similarly it has a weighted score of 49 / 100 at Metacritic based on 28 professional reviews . 
 Roger Ebert was a strong advocate of the film ; he gave it 3 ½ stars out of four , praising it as a " technical milestone " while conceding that its " nuts and bolts " story lacked " the intelligence and daring of , say , Steven Spielberg 's A.I. " He noted that while he did not once feel convinced Aki Ross was an actual human being , she was " lifelike " , stating her creators " dare us to admire their craft . If Aki is not as real as a human actress , she 's about as human as a Playmate who has been retouched to glossy perfection . " He also expressed a desire for the film to succeed in hopes of seeing more films made in its image , though he was skeptical of its ability to be accepted . Peter Bradshaw gave a more negative review , stating that while the animation was brilliant , the " solemnly realist human faces look <unk> phoney precisely because they 're almost there but not quite " , concluding " The story is adequate , if familiar , but after half an hour relapses into cliche . " 
 = = = Reception of Aki Ross = = = 
 Aki 's appearance was received positively by critics , with praise for the finer details of the character model such as the rendering of her hair . Entertainment Weekly named Aki an " it girl " , stating that " Calling this action heroine a cartoon would be like calling a Rembrandt a doodle . " She was voted one of the sexiest women of 2001 by Maxim and its readers , ranking at No. 87 out of 100 , becoming the first fictional woman to ever make the list , additionally appearing on the issue 's cover in a purple bikini . The same image appeared in the " Babes : The Girls of Sci Fi " special issue of SFX . Ruth La Ferla from The New York Times described her as having the " sinewy efficiency " of Alien franchise character Ellen Ripley and visual appeal of Julia Roberts ' portrayal of Erin Brockovich . The book Digital Shock : Confronting the New Reality by Herve Fischer described her as a virtual actress having a " beauty that is ' really ' impressive " , comparing her to video game character Lara Croft . In contrast , Livia Monnet criticized her character as an example of the constantly kidnapped female in Japanese cinema , further " diluted " by her existence solely as a computer @-@ generated character representing " an ideal , cinematic female character that has no real referent . " Writing in the book Action and Adventure Cinema , Marc O 'Day described her as among the " least overtly eroticised " female characters in science fiction , though stated that Aki was " transformed in a variety of poses into an erotic fantasy machine " in a photo shoot that was included on the DVD 's special features . 
 = = = Legacy and related media = = = 
 The merger between Square and Enix , which had been under consideration since at least 2000 according to Yasuhiro Fukushima , Enix chairman at the time , was delayed because of the failure of the film and Enix ' hesitation at merging with a company that had just lost a substantial amount of money . Square Pictures announced in late January 2002 that they were closing down , largely due to the commercial failure of The Spirits Within . The film 's CGI effects have been compared favourably with later CGI films such as James Cameron 's 2009 film Avatar . In 2011 , BioWare art director Derek Watts cited The Spirits Within as a major influence on the successful Mass Effect series of action role @-@ playing games . In the first episode of the Square @-@ Enix published 2015 video game Life Is Strange , when the lead interacts with a TV , she mentions the idea of watching the film , and says " I don 't care what anybody says , that 's one of the best sci @-@ fi films ever made . " Although the film was loosely based on a video game series , there were never any plans for a game adaptation of the film itself . Sakaguchi indicated the reason for this was the lack of powerful gaming hardware at the time , feeling the graphics in any game adaptation would be far too much of a step down from the graphics in the film itself . A novelization was written by Dean Wesley Smith and published by Pocket Books in June 2001 . The Making of Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within , a companion book , was published by BradyGames in August 2001 . Edited by Steven L. Kent , the 240 page color book contains a foreword by director Sakaguchi and extensive information on all aspects of the film 's creation , including concept art , storyboards , sets and props , layout , motion capture and animation , as well as a draft of the full script . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film won the " Jury Prize " at the 2002 Japan Media Arts Festival . It was nominated for " Best Sound Editing – Animated Feature Film , Domestic and Foreign " at the 49th Golden Reel Awards as well as " Best Animated Feature " at the 5th Online Film Critics Society awards . The film 's trailer was nominated for the " Golden Fleece " award at the 3rd Golden Trailer Awards . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The DVD version of the film was released on 23 October 2001 , with the Blu @-@ ray edition released on 7 August 2007 . Two weeks before it was released the DVD version was listed on Amazon.com as one of the most @-@ anticipated releases , and it was expected to recuperate some of the money lost on the film 's disappointing box office performance . Both versions contained two full @-@ length commentary tracks ( one featuring <unk> Sakakibara , sequence supervisor Hiroyuki Hayashida , lead artist Tatsuro Maruyama , and creature supervisor <unk> Noguchi ; the second featuring animation director Andy Jones , editor Chris S. Capp , and staging director Tani <unk> ) as well as an isolated score with commentary . They also contained a version of the film in its basic CGI and sketch form , with the option of pop @-@ up comments on the film . An easter egg shows the cast of the film re @-@ enacting the dance from Michael Jackson 's Thriller . Fifteen featurettes , including seven on character biographies , three on vehicle comparisons and an interactive " Making Of " featurette , were also included . Other features included Aki 's dream viewable as a whole sequence , the film 's original opening sequence , and intentional outtakes . Peter Bracke from High @-@ Def Digest stated the DVD was " so packed with extras it was almost overwhelming " , stating that Sony went " all @-@ out " on the extra features in a likely attempt to boost DVD sales and recover losses . The DVD was nominated for " Best DVD Special Edition Release " at the 28th Saturn Awards . Aaron Beierle from DVD Talk gave a positive review of the DVD , rating it 4 ½ out of 5 stars for audio quality , video quality and special features . Dustin Somner from Blu @-@ ray.com gave the Blu @-@ ray version 5 out of 5 stars for video quality and special features , and 4 ½ stars for audio quality . Peter Bracke gave the Blu @-@ ray version 4 out of 5 stars overall . 
 = Interstate 680 ( Iowa – Nebraska ) = 
 Interstate 680 ( abbreviated I @-@ 680 ) in Nebraska and Iowa is the northern bypass of the Omaha – Council Bluffs metropolitan area . I @-@ 680 spans 42 @.@ 86 miles ( 68 @.@ 98 km ) from its southern ( counterclockwise ) end in western Omaha to its eastern ( clockwise ) end near Neola , Iowa . For a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) stretch , I @-@ 680 is co @-@ signed with I @-@ 29 . The freeway passes through a diverse range of scenes and terrains – the urban setting of Omaha , the Missouri River and its valley , the rugged Loess Hills , and the farmland of Pottawattamie County , Iowa . 
 Until 1973 , the section in Iowa between the current eastern end and I @-@ 29 was designated as Interstate 80N . I @-@ 680 in Omaha was originally designated Interstate 280 . Maps from the early and mid @-@ 1960s showed I @-@ 280 in Omaha . Since this highway would extend into Iowa , and I @-@ 280 was already planned for the Quad Cities area , this route was redesignated I @-@ 680 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Interstate 680 begins at a complex interchange with I @-@ 80 in Omaha . Due to the proximity of the West Center Road interchange on I @-@ 680 and the I , L and Q Street interchanges on I @-@ 80 , all of the exit and entrance ramps which connect I @-@ 80 to I @-@ 680 also connect to West Center Road and I , L and Q Streets . The freeway heads north through the heart of West Omaha ; it serves as a dividing line of several residential neighborhoods . Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of West Center Road , which prior to 2003 was N @-@ 38 , is a new interchange with U.S. Route 6 ( US 6 ) , known as Dodge Street in Omaha . Another mile north of Dodge Street is N @-@ 64 , known as Maple Street . 
 At N @-@ 133 , I @-@ 680 turns to the east towards Iowa . South of this interchange , I @-@ 680 travels through residential neighborhoods , but to the east , the population thins and the interstate passes through farmland for 4 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) . I @-@ 680 crosses over N @-@ 36 , which is accessed via the US 75 interchange 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) later . US 75 runs adjacent to I @-@ 680 for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before turning south at 30th Street . The interstate crosses the Missouri River to Iowa via the Mormon Bridge . 
 In Iowa , Interstate 680 is markedly less urban than in Nebraska . The first three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of I @-@ 680 travel through the flat bottoms of the Missouri River valley . At the interchange west of Crescent , eastbound I @-@ 680 joins northbound I @-@ 29 for just under ten miles ( 16 km ) . The north – south stretch of I @-@ 29 / I @-@ 680 sits approximately halfway between the Missouri River and the Loess Hills . Near the unincorporated village of Loveland , I @-@ 680 exits from I @-@ 29 and turns east again , immediately entering the Loess Hills . 
 For six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) , I @-@ 680 cuts through the rugged Loess Hills . Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of the I @-@ 29 interchange , there is a scenic overlook for westbound traffic . The Loveland overlook gives a view of the Loess Hills and Missouri River valley . Continuing east , I @-@ 680 travels over the rolling hills of rural Pottawattamie County . Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of Neola , I @-@ 680 meets the southern end of Iowa Highway 191 ( Iowa 191 ) before ending itself 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) later at a full Y interchange at I @-@ 80 . 
 = = History = = 
 In Nebraska , plans for Interstate 280 to bypass Omaha to the north to I @-@ 29 were drawn up in the late 1950s . At the same time , plans were being drawn up for an Interstate 280 to bypass the Quad Cities . Since two interstates cannot have the same designation in the same state , one of the I @-@ <unk> had to be renumbered . The Omaha I @-@ 280 was re @-@ designated as I @-@ 680 around 1965 . In Iowa , Interstate 80N opened to traffic on December 13 , 1966 . I @-@ 80N extended from the current northern interchange with I @-@ 29 near Loveland to the I @-@ 80 interchange near Neola . 
 In the early 1970s , AASHTO , the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials , decided that interstates with a directional suffix , such as I @-@ 80N , would have to be renumbered . By 1974 , I @-@ 80N had been re @-@ designated to I @-@ 680 to match Nebraska . The last piece of I @-@ 680 to be completed in Nebraska was the westbound bridge across the Missouri River . Paving in Iowa wrapped up in the years to come and the entire route was open to traffic by April 21 , 1979 . 
 = = = 2011 flooding = = = 
 Over the course of several months in 2011 , I @-@ 680 was severely damaged by flood waters from the Missouri River . The first sections of both I @-@ 680 and I @-@ 29 closed on June 10 . I @-@ 29 was closed from North 25th Street to the northern I @-@ 680 interchange near Loveland . I @-@ 680 was closed from US 75 in Omaha to the southern interchange with I @-@ 29 . A week later , water was diverted and drained from the area around the northern I @-@ 29 interchange to allow traffic to use the roads . I @-@ 680 was opened from the interchange to the <unk> exit and I @-@ 29 was reopened from the interchange to the US 30 exit at Missouri Valley . I @-@ 29 traffic was routed around the flooded area by using I @-@ 680 eastbound to I @-@ 80 westbound to Council Bluffs . 
 After flood waters receded and the damage was assessed , sections of I @-@ 680 were reopened to traffic . However , the section west of I @-@ 29 was the most heavily damaged and it remained closed . Contract bids were let on September 23 and reconstruction began on September 28 . Construction crews worked at " an accelerated pace " to complete the road in 34 days . The road was officially reopened on November 2 during a ceremony in Crescent hosted by Governor Terry Branstad . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Lysaker Station = 
 Lysaker Station ( Norwegian : Lysaker stasjon ) is a railway station on the Drammen Line and Asker Line situated at Lysaker in Bærum , Norway . Located 7 @.@ 00 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 35 mi ) from Oslo Central Station , Lysaker is served a mix of the Norwegian State Railways ' express , regional and Oslo Commuter Rail trains , as well as the Airport Express Train . The station is elevated and features two island platforms with four tracks . 
 Lysaker was one of two original Drammen Line station in Bærum , opening on 7 October 1872 . The original station building , designed by Georg Andreas Bull , burned down in 1914 and was replaced by a new station Adalbert Kielland . In the following years the elevated and double @-@ track layout was introduced . This station arrangement was demolished in 1987 to make way for a station designed by Arne Henriksen . Traditionally only served by commuter trains , the station was branded as Lysaker / Fornebu from 1990 to 2000 because of its vicinity to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . The station was rebuilt again from 2006 to 2009 in which it was expanded from two to four tracks . It became connected to the Asker Line in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bull 's station = = = 
 Proposals for a railway between Oslo and Drammen were launched in 1864 and planning commenced two years later . This involved deciding upon the location of the stations . Although the idea of placing one at the municipal centre of Sandvika was not met with protest , there was not consensus regarding the other and both Østre Stabekk and Lysaker were proposed . The latter was selected by the municipal council because of its vicinity to the Oslofjord and being located next to a waterfall . 
 The original station building at Lysaker was designed by Georg Andreas Bull . Lysaker Station and the Drammen Line opened on 7 October 1872 . It had an immediate impact on the surrounding area , stimulating both commerce and construction of private dwellings . 
 = = = Kielland 's station = = = 
 Bull 's station building burned down in 1914 and was replaced two year later by a new . By then it was decided that the line past Lysaker would be upgraded and Lysaker became the first of many stations on the line to be designed as an elevated station . The tracks were thereby placed elevated with an island platform with the station on the side , as the first station in Norway designed for double @-@ track operation . The new station was designed in Baroque Revival by Adalbert Kielland at NSB Arkitektkontor . One year later the wooden bridge over <unk> was replaced by a stone bridge . 
 The line from Sandvika to Oslo was substantially upgraded between 1917 and 1922 . From 27 February 1917 a passing loop was built at Lysaker and standard gauge traffic was carried out on the northern track . A southern track was then built , which was used by narrow gauge trains . However , both were dual gauge . All – standard gauge operations commenced on 9 February 1920 , although the dual gauge was not removed until 1922 . Electric traction started operation on 30 August 1922 . An interlocking system was installed on 29 July 1924 . From 1922 a half @-@ hour headway was introduced on the local trains between Sandvika and Oslo West Station . 
 During the Second World War Lysaker Station was hit by five sabotage missions by the Norwegian resistance movement , in which tanks of gasoline , attached or not attached to railroad cars , were blown up . The sabotages took place on 16 December 1944 and 9 , 10 , 12 and 13 January 1945 . On 13 January a tanker truck was attacked as well . There were three additional attacks on Lysaker in 1944 and 1945 , two of them against factories and workshops . Also , the Lysaker Bridge sabotage took place in the immediate vicinity of the station . 
 = = = Henriksen 's station = = = 
 A full upgrade of the station was carried out in 1987 . A main incentive was that the Norwegian Public Roads Administration wanted the station building removed to make room for a new interchange towards Jar . Therefore , Kielland 's station building was demolished in 1987 . The new station building , designed by NSB Arkitektkontor and Arne Henriksen , was built in glass and concrete with a dominant portal presenting the staircases . On the island platform a new ticket booth was built in steel and glass . The platform was covered by a roof of laminated wood and plywood held up by galvanized steel columns . The roof followed the shape of the curved platform and featured a gable . 
 Lysaker Station was the closest railway station to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . From 27 May 1990 , Scandinavian Airlines System and the Norwegian State Railways started a cooperation to better the connection between rail and airline services . The project included the station being branded as Lysaker / Fornebu and dedicated shuttle buses running from the station to the airport terminal . NSB changed their scheduled so all InterCity Express and long distance trains on the Drammen Line started stopping at Lysaker . 
 Lysaker Station received centralized traffic control on 3 December 1992 and after that it has only been manned for ticket sales . The Airport Express Train stated calling at Lysaker Station on 8 October 1998 , the same day that Oslo Airport , Fornebu was closed . The Lysaker / Fornebu name was in use until 9 January 2000 . By then the amount of traffic to Lysaker was so substantial , even without the airport , that NSB continues to stop its express trains at Lysaker . 
 = = = Snøhetta 's station = = = 
 Proposals for an upgrade of the Drammen Line to accommodate more trains started in 1991 . This resulted in the Asker Line , which was built in two steps between 2005 and 2011 . Ahead of the section stage , consisting of the Bærum Tunnel which would allow trains to run directly from Lysaker to Sandvika , Lysaker Station received a full modernization . The upgrades consisted of demolishing the existing station and building a new station with two island platforms . Snøhetta won the architecture competition for the station . The upgrades allowed several advantages : seven minutes shorter travel time west of Oslo combined with better regularity , trains previously turning at Skøyen Station could instead turn at Lysaker and a near doubling of the number of trains running through the West Corridor , allowing eleven more trains per hour . 
 The zoning plan for the station was passed in 1998 and demands for accessibility were laid down in 2003 , causing a contrast between these goals and the curved platforms . This would particularly be a challenge for the Class 70 trains , which would have a wide gap . Part of the dispute centered on the <unk> Bridge , whether or not it had a heritage status and whether or not its demolition would allow for a straight station . Minister of Transport and Communication Torild Skogsholm stated that she laid the blame on director of the National Rail Administration , Steinar Killi . Her successor , Liv Signe Navarsete , announced in July 2006 that the construction would continue following the curved design , though minor functional changes would be made . 
 During the late 1970s there arose plans to build a branch line from the Drammen Line to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . Initial plans called for it to split from the Drammen Line some 300 meters ( 980 ft ) east of Lysaker and then pass under Lysaker Station . It would then continue to the airport , but without the possibility for stopping at Lysaker . Later the plans were reformulated and for a while a people mover was a preferred mode . By 2007 Ruter had changed their opinion in the matter and instead wanted to operate a light rail to Fornebu . The Rail Administration therefore decided to remove the station hall for a people mover from the Lysaker Station plans . Because the people mover was canceled after construction of the station had started , the National Rail Administration has claimed the county for NOK 31 million to cover losses incurred . 
 The work stretched over a segment of 1 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) of line . Construction started in February 2006 with work on expanding <unk> Bridge , both lengthening it and building one parallel to it to allow four tracks . From May work commenced on the first new platform , which was completed in February 2007 and all traffic moved to the new tracks and platform . Then the old platform was demolished and a second new platform built , which was completed in 2009 . The work took 776 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours and cost NOK 1 @.@ 2 billion . The station was taken into use on 22 August 2009 , although the official opening of the new station took place on 1 September 2009 . The Bærum Tunnel opened on 26 August 2011 . To allow more trains to terminate at Lysaker , a suitable place to turn trains needed to be built . Høvik Station was chosen and received three new tracks . With its completion on 14 December 2014 all trains previously terminating at Skøyen were extended to Lysaker . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Lysaker Station is situated on the Drammen Line , 7 @.@ 00 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 35 mi ) from Oslo Central Station at an elevation of 7 @.@ 5 meters ( 25 ft ) above mean sea level . Lysaker is an elevated station with two island platforms and four tracks . To the east of the station the line runs across a bridge over <unk> before the four tracks merge to two . West of the station the Drammen Line splits , with two tracks becoming the Asker Line and running into the Bærum Tunnel . 
 The station is unstaffed , but features ticket machines , a waiting room , <unk> and taxicab stand . There is parking nearby in a parking house . The bus station features two sections , one for local buses and one for regional buses . Between them they have six stops . However , because of the design of European Road E18 , the station can only serve buses on the E18 which runs westwards — eastbound buses are served by a bus stop on the other side of the freeway . Ownership and operation of the bus terminal is carried out by Akershus <unk> . 
 Lysaker is dominated by offices and more than ninety percent of the station 's patronage is related to work . As of 2009 there were 25 @,@ 000 jobs within 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) of the station and the area is among the fastest growing office areas in Greater Oslo . Lysaker remains the train station serving Fornebu , via bus shuttles , where there are another 12 @,@ 000 jobs . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways serves Asker Station both with Oslo Commuter Rail trains as well as regional trains . Up to five daily express trains along the Sørlandet Line and the Bergen Line stop at Lysaker . It also serves an hourly headway of the R10 regional trains from the Vestfold Line and Dovre Line . There are five hourly trains heading to Asker via the Asker Line , including the L12 , <unk> and <unk> . Westwards L12 runs to Kongsberg while they eastwards serve the Gardermoen Line , Trunk Line and the Kongsvinger Line . L1 , a full @-@ stop service on the <unk> and Drammen Line , runs every thirty minutes . A rush @-@ hour service line 2x , serving the Østfold Line , terminates at Lysaker . 
 The Airport Express Train runs every 20 minutes to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . Ruter uses Lysaker Station as the main bus terminal for <unk> . Lysaker Station is in fare zone 1 and is served by bus routes 23 , 24 , 28 , 31 , <unk> , <unk> , 121 , 131 , 143 , 151 , 251 and 252 . There are about 1 @,@ 400 daily buses that call at Lysaker . Ruter 's 716 ferry to <unk> runs from a quay in the vicinity of the station . 
 = Independent Women 's Forum = 
 The Independent Women 's Forum ( IWF ) is a politically conservative American non @-@ profit organization focused on policy issues of concern to women . The IWF was founded by activist Rosalie Silberman to promote a " conservative alternative to feminist tenets " following the controversial Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas in 1992 . 
 The group advocates " equity feminism , " a term first used by IWF author Christina Hoff Sommers to distinguish " traditional , classically liberal , humanistic feminism " from " gender feminism " , which she claims opposes gender roles as well as patriarchy . According to Sommers , the gender feminist view is " the prevailing ideology among contemporary feminist philosophers and leaders " and " thrives on the myth that American women are the oppressed ' second sex . ' " Sommers ' equity feminism has been described as anti @-@ feminist by critics . 
 In the 2012 U.S. presidential election , Independent Women ’ s Voice ran an advertisement comparing President Obama to a dishonest boyfriend . 
 = = Origin and history = = 
 Founded in 1992 by Rosalie Silberman , Anita K. Blair , and Barbara Olson , the IWF grew out of the ad hoc group " Women for Judge Thomas , " created to defend Clarence Thomas against allegations of sexual harassment and other improprieties . By 1996 the organization had some 700 dues @-@ paying members who met regularly at luncheons to network and share ideas . Silberman was the IWF 's first president ; subsequent leaders have included Nancy Pfotenhauer and Anita Blair . The current executive director of the organization is Sabrina Schaeffer . The IWF has been described as " a virtual ' Who 's Who ' of Washington 's Republican establishment . " In 2006 , the organization had 20 @,@ 337 members and a budget of $ 1 @.@ 05 million . 
 = = Opposition to other feminist ideas = = 
 The IWF opposes many mainstream feminist positions , describing them as " radical feminism " . IWF @-@ affiliated writers have argued that the gender gap in income exists because of women 's greater demand for flexibility , fewer hours , and less travel in their careers , rather than because of sexism . In an article for the Dallas Morning News , IWF Vice @-@ President Carrie Lukas attributed gender disparities in income to " women 's own choices " , writing that women " tend to place a higher priority on flexibility and personal fulfillment than do men , who focus more on pay . Women tend to avoid jobs that require travel or relocation , and they take more time off and spend fewer hours in the office than men do . Men disproportionately take on the most dirty , dangerous and depressing jobs . " 
 Conservative commentators have praised the IWF ; Linda Chavez credited Women 's Figures : An Illustrated Guide to the Economic Progress of Women in America , a 1999 book published in part by the IWF , with " debunk [ ing ] much of the feminists ' voodoo economics . " Writing in Capitalist Magazine , John Stossel cited Michelle Bernard 's 2007 book Women 's Progress as evidence that " American women have never enjoyed more options or such a high quality of life . " 
 Some writers have asserted that feminist rhetoric is used by the IWF for anti @-@ feminist ends . A New York Times editorial described the IWF as " a right @-@ wing public policy group that provides <unk> support for extreme positions that are in fact dangerous to women . " 
 = = Domestic policy and programs = = 
 = = = United States healthcare policy = = = 
 In 2009 , IWF produced a political advertisement run on YouTube and in eight states arguing that " 300 @,@ 000 American women with breast cancer might have died " if U.S. healthcare included a government @-@ funded option . FactCheck.org labeled the IWF ad false and manipulative of women 's fears , finding that the IWF ad relied on " old statistics , faulty logic and false insinuations . " 
 = = = Education policy and campus programs = = = 
 The Forum is active in education policy discussions and focuses on a number of different issues both in primary / secondary education and higher education . 
 = = = = Title IX enforcement = = = = 
 Since shortly after the organization 's inception , the IWF has joined with groups like the National Wrestling Coaches Association in opposing the manner in which the United States Department of Education 's Office for Civil Rights has enforced Title IX gender equality legislation . The 1972 Title IX law that states : " No person in the United States shall , on the basis of sex , be excluded from participation in , be denied the benefits of , or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance . " According to IWF senior fellow Christine Stolba , the law has resulted in a number of negative , unintended consequences . Elaborating on the group 's position , Stolba asserts , 
 The ( women 's forum ) is often accused of opposing Title IX . But we don 't oppose Title IX .... What we 're opposing is the way the Office for Civil Rights chooses to enforce Title IX . Given their regulations , colleges are enforcing statistical proportionality .... Common sense and poll data suggest that men are more interested in playing sports than women . But there are more female students than male . It becomes a numbers game , where the number of athletes has to be proportional . The easiest way to do that is to cut men 's teams . 
 In support of the group 's claims that absent current Title IX enforcement , men are more likely to enroll in collegiate athletic programs than women , the IWF conducted a 1998 survey that examined the percentage of students at all @-@ women 's schools participating in athletics compared to the percentage of female students participating in similar programs at undergraduate schools generally . The survey found that female students at co @-@ educational schools are far more likely to be student athletes . Jeremy Rabkin cited the survey in an April 1999 article in the American Spectator , asking , " If ' discrimination ' keeps down the proportion of women athletes at co @-@ ed schools , what accounts for overall participation rates that are half of the national women 's average at Bryn Mawr , Mount Holyoke , Wellesley , and Smith ? " 
 In a January 2012 article remarking on the 40th anniversary of Title IX , IWF executive director Sabrina Schaeffer described her " hope [ that ] feminists will begin to accept that men and women — no matter how balanced the circumstances — maintain different strengths and preferences . Because what is very clear is that legislation in the name of " gender equality " does not actually make men and women the same . " 
 = = = = Advocacy for school choice = = = = 
 In response to falling test scores in American public elementary , middle , and high schools , particularly among young boys , IWF created its Women For School Choice project . The effort targets in part what the organization describes as the negative results of the Women 's Educational Equity Act . According to researcher Krista <unk> , whose report was published by the IWF , 
 <unk> is a solution without a problem . The program wastes money that would be better spent on actual crises — boys ' literacy for example — or returned to taxpayers .... Girls are more engaged and ambitious in school , while boys are more likely to suffer academic and behavioral problems . 
 The creation of this project was also largely a reaction to the National Organization for Women 's vocal opposition to single @-@ sex schools , which decried such arrangements as unacceptable modern examples of segregation . 
 = = = = 2006 Duke University lacrosse case = = = = 
 After rape accusations against Duke University lacrosse players surfaced in March 2006 , the IWF was quick to call attention to the fact that the parties involved in the case were receiving much attention in the press , something that would be harmful to their reputations regardless of the ultimate legal outcome . In April 2006 , Carrie Lukas of the IWF said , 
 At Duke , a woman has accused three men of raping her . Two have been indicted . We know the names of the accused ; we 've seen their pictures ; their lives will never be the same .... Perhaps the evidence will show they ... committed the heinous crime of rape . If so , they will be and they should be severely punished . Yet the media so quick to sensationalize the accuser 's account and condemn the lacrosse players now is revealing facts suggesting that the accused might be innocent of this crime . 
 Columnist Michael Gaynor , writing for Alan Keyes ' organization Renew America , noted IWF 's early criticism of the school 's and the district attorney 's mishandling of the case , saying , " The Independent Women 's Forum 's Charlotte Allen figured out early that the real scandal was the way the players were mistreated and her posts during April 2006 on the IWF website showed a commendable concern with due process and evidence instead of rushing to an erroneous misjudgment . " 
 = = = = Campus programs = = = = 
 The organization emphasizes traditional family roles and cultural norms as essential for civil society . In particular , IWF encourages young women to embrace what it presents as a healthy attitude towards dating , courtship , and marriage . This emphasis is reflected by high @-@ profile , sometimes controversial work on college campuses where IWF sponsors advertising campaigns and literature distribution to promote its views . One such effort included the running of advertisements with provocative headings such as " The Ten Most Common Feminist Myths . " IWF also offers internships and sponsors an annual essay contest open to full @-@ time female undergraduate students . 
 As a reaction to reports of growing promiscuity on college campuses and the V @-@ Day movement founded by Eve Ensler , IWF created its " Take Back the Date " campus program to " reclaim Valentine 's Day from radical feminists on campus who use a day of love and romance to promote vulgar and promiscuous behavior through activities like The Vagina Monologues . " Specifically addressing the controversial play , IWF 's " Take Back the Date " release states that , " although the play raises money for a good cause , the hyper @-@ sexualized play counteracts the positive contributions of the feminist movement and degrades women . " 
 In an article in The Guardian , Jessica Valenti wrote that the program was merely " [ r ] <unk> outdated notions of femininity and positioning them as cutting edge . " 
 = = = Right to keep and bear arms = = = 
 Individuals affiliated with IWF have advocated for the right of members of the public to keep and bear arms . Allison Kasic , director of the Forum 's R. Gaull Silberman Center for Collegiate Studies , wrote an article for Townhall.com praising Antonin Scalia 's District of Columbia v. Heller decision , in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution recognized an individual right to keep and bear arms . Kasic described her enthusiasm for the manner in which the court resolved the case by noting , " as Justice Scalia pointed out in his opinion , ' the American people have considered the handgun to be the quintessential self @-@ defense weapon . ' All citizens of D.C. should rejoice at their new found freedom . But for women especially , guns are the ultimate equalizer in self @-@ defense . " In January 2012 , Anna <unk> , an IWF senior fellow writing in support of federal legislation that would guarantee interstate reciprocity for concealed handgun <unk> , asserted that this issue is of particular importance to women because , 
 In many cases , women lack the physical ability to defend themselves against or outrun would @-@ be assailants . Intangible factors that make women vulnerable are heightened when traveling because of a tourist ’ s lack of familiarity with her surroundings and local trends in crime . Taking away a woman ’ s access to effective means of self @-@ defense makes her an even more attractive target . 
 = = International programs = = 
 Since its founding , IWF has sponsored numerous conferences , panels , and other programs designed to promote its message to an international audience . These primarily include activities and events discussing or taking place in the countries of Iraq and Afghanistan , and focus on promoting female participation in democracy . 
 In October 2004 , the Feminist Majority Foundation objected to the U.S. Department of State 's decision to award part of a grant to IWF . IWF 's work in Iraq is in concert with that of the American Islamic Conference and the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies , a neo @-@ conservative think tank . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Donors to IWF have included Donors Trust , the John William Pope Foundation , the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation , the Scaife Foundations and the Randolph Foundation . 
 = = Board members = = 
 The board is chaired by businesswoman Heather Higgins with other members Elizabeth <unk> , Yvonne Boice , <unk> Conway , Giovanna <unk> , Lisa Gable and Nan Hayworth . Directors <unk> of the organization include former Second Lady of the United States Lynne V. Cheney , writer Midge Decter , Kimberly O. Dennis , economist Wendy Lee Gramm , Elizabeth Lurie , journalist Kate O 'Beirne , Nancy Pfotenhauer and Louise V. Oliver . 
 = Flåm Line = 
 The Flåm Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 20 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometer ( 12 @.@ 6 mi ) long railway line between Myrdal and Flåm in Aurland , Norway . A branch line of the Bergen Line , it runs through the valley of Flåmsdalen and connects the mainline with Sognefjord . The line 's elevation difference is 863 meters ( 2 @,@ 831 ft ) ; it has ten stations , twenty tunnels and one bridge . The maximum gradient is 5 @.@ 5 percent ( 1 : 18 ) . Because of its steep gradient and picturesque nature , the Flåm Line is now almost exclusively a tourist service and has become the third @-@ most visited tourist attraction in Norway . 
 Construction of the line started in 1924 , with the line opening in 1940 . It allowed the district of Sogn access to Bergen and Oslo via the Bergen Line . Electric traction was taken into use in 1944 ; at first El 9 locomotives were used , and from 1982 El 11 . Until 1991 , the train connected with a ferry service from Flåm to Gudvangen . In 1992 , freight services were terminated , and due to low ticket prices and high operating costs , the line was nearly closed . In 1998 , Flåm Utvikling took over marketing and ticket sale for the line , prices were heavily increased and El 17 locomotives were introduced . The trains remain operated by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) , while the line itself is owned and operated by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Flåm Line runs from Myrdal on the Bergen Line to Flåm . Myrdal Station is located in a mountain pass at 863 @.@ 6 meters ( 2 @,@ 833 ft ) above mean sea level ( AMSL ) , while Flåm is located at 2 @.@ 0 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) AMSL . The line 's maximum gradient is 5 @.@ 5 percent , and 16 @.@ 1 kilometers ( 10 @.@ 0 mi ) of the line 's 20 @.@ 20 kilometers ( 12 @.@ 55 mi ) have at least 2 @.@ 8 percent gradient . The line has standard gauge and a minimum curve radius of 130 meters ( 430 ft ) , and is the steepest standard @-@ gauge railway in Europe . Maximum permitted speed upwards is 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) , while it is 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) downhill . The line has eight stops , twenty tunnels and one bridge . The line is electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC using overhead wire , and is equipped with Global System for Mobile Communications – Railway ( GSM @-@ R ) , but lacks centralized traffic control ( CTC ) . The infrastructure is owned and operated by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 At Myrdal Station , the Flåm Line runs in the same direction as the trains towards Oslo , but immediately starts running downwards into the Flåmsdalen valley . The first part of the line runs through snow shelters and several short tunnels . Vatnahalsen Station is located 1 @.@ 13 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 70 mi ) from Myrdal , at 811 meters ( 2 @,@ 661 ft ) AMSL . The line then runs through a horseshoe curve and the 880 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 890 ft ) Vatnahalsen Tunnel . It exits the tunnel onto an artificial shelf on a cliff which falls several hundred meters down . <unk> Station is located 2 @.@ 20 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 37 mi ) from Myrdal and at 767 meters ( 2 @,@ 516 ft ) elevation . It is followed by Kjosfossen Station , 4 @.@ 40 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 73 mi ) from Myrdal and 670 meters ( 2 @,@ 200 ft ) AMSL , which serves no other purpose than allowing tourists to look at the waterfall Kjosfossen . 
 The line then runs through the 1 @,@ 341 @.@ 5 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 4 @,@ 401 ft ) Nåli Tunnel , the longest on the line . At the end of the tunnel lies <unk> Station , traditionally serving the farm furthest up in the valley . The station is 6 @.@ 34 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 94 mi ) from Myrdal and 557 meters ( 1 @,@ 827 ft ) AMSL . On the other side of the valley is <unk> , the site of several avalanches every year . The line then runs through the 1 @,@ 029 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 3 @,@ 376 ft ) <unk> Tunnel , after which it reaches <unk> Station , 8 @.@ 40 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 22 mi ) from Myrdal and 458 meters ( 1 @,@ 503 ft ) AMSL . The railway then crosses the river <unk> and runs through a series of short tunnels . 
 At 10 @.@ 51 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 53 mi ) from Myrdal , the line reaches Berekvam Station , located at 344 meters ( 1 @,@ 129 ft ) AMSL . It is the only station to have a passing loop and thus the only location on the line where trains can meet . Because the station is unmanned and lacks CTC , crossing must be performed using flags at day and torches at night , set by personnel who travel from Myrdal or Flåm . At <unk> , the railway crosses the river again , this time by the river running in a tunnel under the tracks . The next station is <unk> Station , located 13 @.@ 90 kilometers ( 8 @.@ 64 mi ) from Myrdal and at 199 meters ( 653 ft ) AMSL . Just before reaching the last tunnel , the 424 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 391 ft ) long <unk> Tunnel , the line passes by the waterfall <unk> , which with a 140 @-@ meter ( 460 ft ) vertical drop is one of the line 's main attractions . 
 After <unk> Station , located 17 @.@ 21 kilometers ( 10 @.@ 69 mi ) from Myrdal at 48 meters ( 157 ft ) elevation , the valley widens and changes character , becoming flatter and with more vegetation . After passing Lunden Station , 18 @.@ 60 kilometers ( 11 @.@ 56 mi ) from Myrdal and at 16 meters ( 52 ft ) elevation , the line reaches the terminus , Flåm Station . Located on <unk> , a branch of the Sognefjord , Flåm has 400 residents and is nearly exclusively a tourist area , featuring amongst other things a hotel and a cruise ship port . The station also has a railway museum dedicated to the Flåm Line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Plans to build a railway to connect Norway 's two largest cities , Oslo and Bergen , were launched by Andreas <unk> <unk> in 1871 . He proposed that the line run via Hallingdal and Voss and include two short branch lines which would connect to the two major fjord systems in the area , Sognefjord and Hardangerfjord . The narrow gauge Voss Line from Bergen to Voss opened in 1883 , and the Bergen Line was completed as standard gauge in 1909 . During the construction of the Bergen Line , the path that ran up Flåmsdalen was upgraded by NSB to allow access to the area around Myrdal . The Hardanger Line , which connected the Bergen Line to Hardangerfjord , opened in 1935 , and was the country 's first railway to open with electric traction . 
 The first engineering surveys for the Flåm Line were performed in 1893 . It resulted in a proposal for a 1 @,@ 067 mm ( 3 ft 6 in ) narrow gauge railway which would be 18 @.@ 0 kilometers ( 11 @.@ 2 mi ) long . Most of the railway would be built as an adhesion railway with a 2 @.@ 5 percent gradient , although part of it would be a rack railway with a gradient of 10 @.@ 0 percent . It was at the time estimated to cost 3 @.@ 3 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . In 1904 , a radically different route to Sognefjord was proposed : a 47 @.@ 13 @-@ kilometer ( 29 @.@ 29 mi ) long adhesion line from Voss to Gudvangen via <unk> . It was estimated to cost NOK 3 @.@ 5 million , but was considered by local politicians to be inferior to the Flåm alternative . A third alternative was a combined tramway and funicular , which would be built between Myrdal and <unk> . It was estimated to cost NOK 800 @,@ 000 , but NSB was concerned that the proposal 's light rolling stock would not be sufficient to operate through snow during the winter . Estimated traffic for the Flåm Line was 22 @,@ 000 annual passengers . 
 As both the other alternatives were discarded , consensus gradually grew for the Flåm alternative , and the Railway Committee for Nordre Bergenhus County recommended this proposal . New plans from NSB criticized the mix of rack and adhesion railway , and instead proposed a conventional adhesion line all the way . Engineer Ferdinand <unk> traveled to Continental Europe to study several combined railways . He published a preliminary report in 1911 , which recommended an adhesion railway , although he also felt the need for a detailed study of a rack railway . His final report was finished in 1913 , and although it recommended adhesion , it pointed out that the line 's capacity would be smaller than predicted and that costs would be three times as high — NOK 5 @.@ 5 million . The plans were approved by the Ministry of Labour and NSB 's main board in 1915 . 
 The plans were approved by Parliament in 1916 . However , the decision concerning technical specifications was not taken by Parliament until 1923 , when it decided that the line was to be electric . The line was then estimated to cost NOK 14 @.@ 5 million — the increase caused by inflation during the First World War — of which NOK 1 @.@ 2 million was to be paid by the local governments . The line was to have tracks which weighed 25 kilograms per meter ( 50 lb / ft ) . The curve radius was set to minimum 150 meters ( 490 ft ) , although exceptionally 125 meters ( 410 ft ) was permitted . The steepest permitted gradient was 5 @.@ 5 percent ( 1 : 18 ) . 
 In 1915 , the first proposal was launched for using a bus service as an alternative to the train . This was rejected because buses were not able to give the comfort and reliability of a train . The idea was proposed again in 1922 by the director of the Norwegian Public Roads Administration . Among the strongest opponents to the bus alternative was <unk> Elster Christensen , County Governor of Sogn og Fjordane and later parliamentarian , who stated that the Nordre Bergenhus County ( today Sogn og Fjordane County Municipality ) had paid part of the regional financing of the Bergen Line on condition that they receive a branch line to the Sognefjord . 
 The 1920s saw high inflation and large public deficits . Several public committees were created solely to cut costs . One such proposal was to build a road to Flåm , with the proposal being led by Hans Kristian Seip , who was director of Bergen Public Road Administration . In 1925 , following the appointment of Mowinckel 's First Cabinet , it was proposed that the railway be built as a road , and the tracks laid later . One of NSB 's board members proposed instead building a suspended railway . The plans to cancel the railway were stopped because of parliamentarian support for the railway . Part of the political support was because there was agreement on a national railway plan , and removing parts of it would disrupt the geographical compromise . However , Parliament did vote to reduce the number of intermediate stations to one , which would allow trains to meet at Berekvam . The cost saving for a road was estimated at 30 percent . The issue of a road was taken up in a new vote in Parliament in 1927 , but was again rejected . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The administration office for the construction was established in 1923 and was until 1935 located at Voss . In that period , construction was led by Peter Bernhard Kristian <unk> , who was also responsible for the Hardanger Line . After the Hardanger Line was completed , <unk> retired , and the office was moved to Flåm where responsibility was taken over by Adolph M. B. Kielland . To start with , there were 120 men working on the construction , although this quickly increased to 220 . The numbers fluctuated between that and as low as 80 , although hit an all @-@ time high of 280 people in 1937 . To house the employees , eight barracks were built . Among the first things built were housing and station buildings , which could then be used by people working on the construction . The local economy was stimulated by farmers being paid for transport . Using horses , they would transport tourists by day and building materials by night . The competition was fierce , resulting in fights for customers , although it calmed down after traffic police were introduced . 
 In 1924 , there was a landslide at <unk> , covering the area planned for the railway . The area was made of phyllite and was the geologically most unstable area on the route . The initial response was to plan for a tunnel past the area , but this was quickly rejected because of the high price . Instead , the line was moved further away from the mountain side . Other slides during construction included an avalanche near Store <unk> on 10 February 1925 , which deposited up to 3 @.@ 5 meters ( 11 ft ) of earth . In April 1925 , a 1 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 35 @,@ 000 cu ft ) landslide took place above Berekvam . On 8 February 1928 , an avalanche did some damage to the right @-@ of @-@ way near Nåli . 
 The tunnels were the most difficult and time @-@ consuming part of construction . Of the twenty tunnels , machines were only used for the Nåli and Vatnahalsen Tunnels — the rest were built by hand . Hand @-@ construction was done by drilling up to 4 @.@ 2 meters ( 14 ft ) through the rock , filling the holes with dynamite and blasting . Construction of tunnels started in 1924 and the first tunnel was completed in 1926 ; the last tunnel was completed in 1935 . On average , tunneling proceeded at between 116 and 180 man @-@ hours per meter ( 35 – 55 hr / ft ) . The work caused death or lifelong respiratory problems through silicosis caused by inhaling the smoke . There were two fatal accidents , one in 1925 and one 1938 , both related to tunnel work . 
 Ten stations were built for the line , including a major upgrade to Myrdal and port facilities at Flåm . Myrdal Station was given side tracks and additional buildings to serve transferring passengers , with the upgrades costing NOK 0 @.@ 5 million . <unk> was the only place on @-@ route which received a passing loop . Flåm Station cost NOK 0 @.@ 8 million and was designed in the 1930s NSB simple wooden functionalist style , similar to what is found on the Nordland Line and the Sørland Line . Other stations received small , wooden buildings with a waiting room , as well as a room for cargo at Vatnahalsen , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Laying of tracks started in 1936 , and was assisted by two steam locomotives . The work started at Myrdal and reached <unk> the first year , Kjosfossen Tunnel the second year and the <unk> Tunnel in 1939 . The first train to operate on a regular schedule was in October 1939 , when a freight train between Myrdal and Berekvam ran three times a week . However , this service was stopped by the end of the month . With the German occupation of Norway in 1940 , work started later in the season , but the German authorities wanted to speed up the work to make the line usable for steam trains that same year . They scheduled the line for completion in 1942 . Track laying work was accelerated by increasing the number of workers from 58 to 195 . Regular freight operation on the Flåm Line started on 1 August 1940 , albeit limited to an axle load of 12 tonnes ( 12 long tons ; 13 short tons ) . At the time there were four trains each day , two in each direction . 
 Passenger trains started running on 10 February 1941 , also with two trains in each direction per day . Travel time was 65 minutes downhill and 80 minutes uphill . The official name of the line was decided by the ministry on 26 June 1941 . From 1 May 1942 , Rolf <unk> took over as head engineer after Kielland . During construction of the Bergen Line in 1898 , the upper part of Kjosfossen had been built up with a hydroelectric power station . Another power station was built there , and taken into use on 27 October 1944 . Built by Kværner and Norsk Elektrisk & Brown Boveri ( NEBB ) , it had a power output of 1 @,@ 700 kilowatts ( 2 @,@ 300 hp ) . 
 The costs for the project ended at NOK 26 @,@ 651 @,@ 900 , of which NOK 22 @.@ 0 million was for the railway . This total included NOK 2 @.@ 3 million for a power station and NOK 1 @.@ 2 million for a ferry quay at Flåm . The largest cost was for earthwork , which ended at NOK 9 @.@ 1 million ; other major costs were NOK 2 @.@ 4 million for rolling stock , NOK 1 @.@ 6 million for stations , NOK 1 @.@ 2 for tracks , NOK 1 @.@ 5 million for snow protection and NOK 675 @,@ 000 for electrification . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Regular operation with electric locomotives was introduced on 25 November 1944 . To begin with , Class 64 railcars were used . NSB had originally planned to use electric multiple units , but changed the plans during the war and instead decided to use locomotives and cars . The Class 64 trains remained in service on the Flåm Line until May 1947 . They were normally used on the Hardanger Line , but were regularly taken back into use on the Flåm Line when the traffic was at its lowest . 
 NSB ordered three El 9 locomotives from Thune on 4 October 1940 . The units were delivered in 1942 , with the electrical components from NEBB and the transformers and controllers from Per Kure . A delay was caused by bombing of Per Kure by the resistance . The locomotives were custom @-@ built for the steep gradients on the Flåm and Hardanger Lines , and were delivered with an axle load of 12 tonnes ( 12 long tons ; 13 short tons ) and a Bo 'Bo ' wheel configuration . The locomotives weighed 48 tonnes ( 47 long tons ; 53 short tons ) and the maximum permitted train weight was 85 tonnes ( 84 long tons ; 94 short tons ) . If the trains were to stop at <unk> , the weight was further limited to 65 tonnes ( 64 long tons ; 72 short tons ) . 
 Initially there were three trains on the Bergen Line in each direction per day , so only a single locomotive was necessary on the Flåm Line . From 1949 there were two locomotives on the Flåm Line and from 1955 all three were used there . Five passenger cars in aluminum were delivered by Strømmens Værksted . The cost of the three locomotives and five cars was NOK 2 @.@ 4 million . 
 The railway quickly saw an increase in traffic , with an average 11 percent annual increase from the opening until the mid @-@ 1950s . In part to allow access to Kjosfossen , Kjosfossen Station was opened in 1951 . By then , ridership had stabilized at 115 @,@ 000 people per year . A significant portion of the traffic consisted of tourists , in part from cruise ships docked in Flåm . In the latter half of the decade , NSB launched the Norway in a Nutshell package , which included a ride on the Flåm Line . A sleeping car was introduced on the night train between Flåm and Oslo in 1958 . It made three trips in each direction per week during the summer season , and achieved an 84 percent occupancy rate . The same year , <unk> Station became unmanned . Traffic remained stable throughout the 1960s , while interest in developing the railway for tourists declined and local politicians stated that a road was needed to attract tourists to Aurland . The power station was upgraded to 14 @,@ 000 kilowatts ( 19 @,@ 000 hp ) in 1969 . 
 In 1969 , ridership increased by 10 percent and by 12 percent the following year . In 1971 and 1972 , it saw a 20 @-@ percent increase — the latter representing the first year with InterRail tickets . By then the annual ridership had reached 175 @,@ 000 . In 1970 , an additional train was stationed at Flåm , which made it possible to travel a round trip between Flåm and Bergen in a day . Between 1975 and 1982 , NSB started running direct trains between Ål and Flåm . In 1978 , the morning express trains on the Bergen Line started stopping at Myrdal , allowing better access for tourists to the Flåm Line . Traffic increased further until 1980 , when it hit 200 @,@ 000 , and then remained stable through the decade . 
 When the line opened , it received a lot of freight traffic for the construction of a power station in <unk> . From the opening , the Flåm Line was the fastest means of transport between Sogn and both Oslo and Bergen , and most post was also sent via the line . From 1977 , most of the post was instead sent by truck via Gol , and only post from Aurland went via the railway . Other products sent by the line were milk to the dairy in Voss , which terminated in 1983 , as well as fruit . Partial loads saw a large increase during the 1960s , after NSB and the ferry operator <unk> i Sogn og Fjordane teamed up to send packages via Flåm to Oslo and Bergen . Flåm had several arrivals until 1973 , when Linjegods was established . Following a reorganization , the number of calls was reduced to once per week . Freight volume fell further during the 1980s ; an attempt in 1978 to force the three major distributors Linjegods , <unk> Billag and Sogn Billag to route traffic via the Flåm Line failed . 
 During the 1970s , NSB started the process of finding a replacement for the El 9 . New locomotives would cost NOK 20 million , and the company saw it as unrealistic to invest so much in a marginal branch line . NSB had also concluded its away @-@ with @-@ the @-@ steam program , and therefore had a lack of locomotives in general . If a new class of locomotives was to be built , it would have to satisfy more than the requirements for the Flåm Line , so NSB instead started investigating whether any of the older models could be used . Tests were performed in 1971 and 1973 with El 11 , built between 1951 and 1964 , and El 13 , built between 1957 and 1966 . Neither was considered optimal : El 11 allowed the train weight to increase to 100 tonnes ( 98 long tons ; 110 short tons ) , but the train had the steps for the voltage regulator and the commutation set for too high speeds . El 13 had rheostatic brakes , which were not suitable for the gradient ; the locomotives were also better suited for mainline service and would therefore not be prioritized for branch lines . 
 In 1972 , the Flåm Line was rebuilt to allow an axle load of 18 tonnes ( 18 long tons ; 20 short tons ) . El 11 was chosen as El 9 's replacement in the mid @-@ 1970s , but it was not until November 1980 that El 11 @.@ <unk> started being rebuilt for its new service . Upgrades included rheostatic brakes and electromagnetic brakes , new speed measurement and curve lights . The locomotive was taken into use on the Flåm Line in June 1982 . A year later , El 11 @.@ 2092 was also taken into use after a similar rebuild . El 9 remained in sporadic use until 1989 . Class 69 electric multiple units were taken into use starting on 10 August 1982 . These had been allocated to Bergen District for use on the Bergen Commuter Rail , and were also used on the direct trains between Bergen and Flåm . The main disadvantage with the class was the small windows , as the trains were designed for commuter traffic rather than sight @-@ seeing . 
 In 1990 , a fast ferry service was introduced in Sogn with direct services to Bergen . In 1991 , the Gudvangen Tunnel opened , giving Flåm a road connection to Gudvangen and terminating the ferry service . NSB was losing money on the line , in part because of very low revenue per rider . The same ticket prices were charged as elsewhere , based on a fee per kilometer ; the low speed combined with a lot of free travelers using InterRail tickets gave little revenue . From 1991 , the ticket prices were increased as if the line was 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) longer . In 1992 , a new station building was taken into use at Flåm . During the 1990s , X10 commuter trains from Stockholm were borrowed during the summer for extra trains . These trains had larger windows than Class 69 , giving better views . A museum and documentation center was established in 1995 . Originally located in an annex of <unk> Hotel , it moved in 1999 to the old station building at Flåm . 
 In March 1997 , NSB announced that they had plans to privatize the operations of the line from 1998 . The responsibility for setting the schedule , selling tickets and marketing was transferred to Flåm Utvikling , a newly established company that NSB owned 49 percent of , and Aurland <unk> 51 percent . The latter was owned by Aurland Municipality , the Industrial Development Corporation of Norway and Aurland Sparebank , a local bank . Flåm Utvikling also took over responsibility for other tourism @-@ related activities in Flåm , such as port facilities . NSB would still operate the trains , and Flåm Utvikling would pay NSB the cost of running the trains , but keep the profits from the ticket sales . The Norwegian National Rail Administration , which had been established in 1996 and had taken over the responsibility for infrastructure , retained ownership of the line itself . Flåm Utvikling also started building a cruise ship terminal at Flåm , so tourists could walk ashore and directly to the trains . 
 With the change of ownership , NSB also decided to replace the aging El 11 with El 17 . The locomotives had been delivered in 1987 and were intended for express train service , but had been plagued with technical problems and were not considered reliable enough to operate as single locomotives . The six newest trains of the class were painted in a new green livery and branded as <unk> rather than NSB . Older B3 carriages were renovated , given new panorama windows and painted in the same color scheme and taken into use on the line . In October 2000 , NSB sold its shares in Flåm Utvikling to Aurland <unk> . The line received GSM @-@ R from 1 May 2005 . The same year , <unk> , the neighboring fjord to where Flåm is located , was inscribed as a World Heritage Site . 
 = = Service = = 
 The line is solely served by a tourist @-@ oriented service operated by the Norwegian State Railways on behalf of Flåm Utvikling . From May through September , there are nine or ten departures in each direction per day . In the rest of the year , there are four . Fares do not follow the normal fares for NSB and are considerably higher than on other train routes . InterRail tickets are not valid for free travel , but give a 30 percent discount . Travel time varies between 50 and 59 minutes between the end stations . In 2007 , the line was the third @-@ most visited tourist attraction in Norway and carried 547 @,@ 000 passengers in 2010 . The service is provided by push – pull trains consisting of an El 17 at each end and with B3 carriages . The locomotives were built by Henschel in 1987 , with electrical equipment from NEBB . They have a power output of 3 @,@ 000 kilowatts ( 4 @,@ 000 hp ) and a Bo 'Bo ' wheel arrangement . 
 = Zenbook = 
 Zenbook are a family of <unk> – low @-@ bulk laptop computers – produced by Asus . The first Zenbooks were released in October 2011 , and the original range of products was amended and expanded during 2012 . Models range from 12 @-@ inch laptops , featuring power efficient components but lacking connectivity and having only integrated graphics processors , to 15 @-@ inch laptops with discrete graphics processing units and optical disc drives . Most ( though not all ) Zenbooks use Intel Core ultra @-@ low @-@ voltage processors and Nvidia GPUs when integrated graphics are not used . Asus introduced new models with touch screens to take advantage of Windows 8 after its release in late 2012 . Most models drew comparisons to the Macbook Air . The most recent release in the Zenbook line is the upmarket Zenbook Infinity <unk> series . 
 Asus designed the Zenbooks with brushed aluminium chassis and high rigidity , rather than plastic , the usual laptop construction material . A pattern of concentric circles on the lids is said to represent ripples in water and represent the " zen philosophy " that designers wanted to portray when creating the laptops . Zenbooks have been generally well received due to their chassis design and appearance as well as the high quality screens used in later models . However , the touchpad software was found to be erratic , particularly on the early models and some of the models received criticism for their high prices . Some models ( such as the UX32 ) suffer from lockdown when the lithium polymer battery cell gets drained or discharged below its recommended threshold , for example if the device is left on and unattended . The result is that the charger will fail to recharge the battery even when plugged in , leaving the machine in a near @-@ complete unresponsive off @-@ state . The machine can often be revived by pressing the power @-@ on key for 10 seconds , whereupon it will start recharging . 
 = = Design = = 
 In 2009 Asus released the <unk> , a 15 inch laptop that was focused on energy efficiency and had a thin profile . The laptop was rated poorly by reviewers as it under @-@ performed and had mediocre battery life , despite the installed energy efficient hardware . Although not branded as one , it bore the same " UX " product code as many of the later Zenbooks and was an early foray into the <unk> market . 
 The Zenbook name was proposed by Asus chairman <unk> Shih to reflect the " zen philosophy " applied to the design . The chief designer , Loewy Chen , had wanted to incorporate design elements from luxury watches into his products for a long time . Zenbooks were the first opportunity to put this into practice , the crossover being achieved , he said , by " the unfolding of the laptop from the side recalling the elegance of minute and hour hand movements " . The reference to watches is also reflected in the marketing of Zenbooks ; Asus published design sketches overlaying an open Zenbook on a watch face , and video advertisements feature similar imagery . The concentric circles on the lid of Zenbooks were intended to look like ripples in water and to reflect " philosophical ideas such as the infinite nature of Zen thinking and self @-@ improvement " . 
 The bodies of the Zenbooks are made of aluminium , chosen for its light weight , strength , vibration dampening , appearance and acoustic properties . Both the bodies and lids are CNC milled and brushed for appearance . Reviewers have noted the resulting superior rigidity and complimented the appearance of the Zenbook range . The lid is available in three colours : dark silver / purple ( pictured ) , rose gold and hot pink . 
 To preserve space , Zenbooks use two PCBs connected by a communications ribbon so it can have ports on both sides of the device , with a heatsink and fan centred between them . 
 = = Product range = = 
 = = = First generation = = = 
 The first generation of Zenbooks was announced on October 11 , 2011 , one day before release , although they were first demonstrated at Computex 2011 in May that year . Two models were released in 2011 to positive reviews : the 11 inch <unk> and the 13 inch <unk> , also frequently known as the <unk> and <unk> respectively . The design of the <unk> drew comparisons to the Macbook Air and it was regarded as an " excellent rival " by CNET reviewer Andrew Hoyle . Other aspects of the laptops that reviewers liked were the Bang and Olufsen speakers , fast boot times due to Asus ' BIOS design and the speed of general tasks within the operating system resulting from the SSD and Sandy Bridge processors . However , the screens drew criticism for their poor contrast ratio , colour accuracy and less than perfect viewing angle , although they were praised for their brightness and the sharpness of the <unk> 's screen . Reviewers also noted the shallow key @-@ press of the metal keyboard and lack of backlighting , a feature that Asus did not have time to implement before shipping . 
 = = = Zenbook Prime = = = 
 In April 2012 Asus revealed a revision of the two original Zenbooks , this time based on the Ivy Bridge microarchitecture . The model numbers were UX21A and UX31A for the 11 and 13 inch models respectively but are more frequently referred to as Zenbook Primes . Changes made to the original included the aforementioned update to Ivy Bridge processors and the introduction of the corresponding <unk> chipset bringing native USB 3 @.@ 0 , 1920 × 1080 IPS displays for both models , an Intel <unk> Wi @-@ Fi controller , an improved trackpad and new plastic keyboard with backlighting . The new screens were highly praised by reviewers when considering brightness , contrast ratio , viewing angle and colour accuracy , the improvements over previous models being put down to the switch from TN to IPS displays . The UX21A has contrast ratio of 939 and the UX31A achieved 1085 , giving it the highest resolution and contrast ratio of any ultrabook at the time of release . The improved keyboard also garnered praise for the increased backlighting and improved key travel while the Intel Wi @-@ Fi controller was found to perform better than the Qualcomm used in the first generation of Zenbooks . The Zenbook Primes still received some criticism : the latest version of the trackpad was acknowledged as an improvement over the original Zenbooks , but still irritating , and the sound quality was found to be worse than that with the first generation . Despite these issues , the overall reaction was positive : the UX31A was called " today 's best ultrabook " and " the best ultrabook out there " at the time of release . 
 = = = UX32 series = = = 
 As early as March 2012 , information was leaked hinting at a new series of Zenbooks and in early May Asus revealed the UX32 series , followed by their release on May 21 . Two models were announced : the UX32A and the UX32VD , both including a thicker chassis to accommodate a 500 GB / 24 GB flash hybrid drive and in the UX32VD an Nvidia Geforce GT <unk> . The UX32A was designed to be a cheaper Zenbook with a previous generation Sandy Bridge processor option , lower resolution screen and hybrid drive . 
 The UX32VD was well received for similar reasons to the Zenbook Prime . The screen , chassis and keyboard again garnered praise although the inclusion of a discrete GPU was noted as a major selling point . The hybrid drive attracted criticism for its slow performance and the same trackpad issues that the Zenbook Prime had were still present . The UX32 models have a 4 % smaller battery than the Zenbook Prime and the discrete GPU of the UX32VD consumes more power than the integrated GPUs of other Zenbooks ; and the shorter battery life was also a detraction . SLR Lounge criticised the slow hybrid drive and 4 GB of RAM , but suggested replacing them as the option is available , noting that it was an option not often offered on <unk> . 
 As a cheaper option the UX32A was praised by Chris Martin of PC Advisor for being " a more affordable luxury " , retaining the " premium feel " of the Zenbook range but at a lower price point . The aluminium chassis , which is identical to the UX32VD to keep costs down , was widely acclaimed for its strength and build quality . By contrast , the Sandy Bridge chip , a previous @-@ generation part at the time of sale , was outlined as a detraction as was the lower battery life compared to the <unk> . Although the screen used was a TN panel and of a lower resolution than the UX32VD or UX31A , it was considered an acceptable compromise for the price . The screen has a matte finish and relatively high brightness which Notebook Check 's reviewer , Christian <unk> , found " quite suitable for outdoor use " , noting that it had a good contrast ratio but a narrow range of colours . 
 = = = 14 and 15 inch Zenbooks = = = 
 On October 23 , 2012 , Asus hosted a launch event for Windows 8 , where it revealed UX42VS and UX52VS models to be released in November . The UX42VS is a 14 inch ultrabook and the UX52VS is a 15 inch laptop , which may qualify as an ultrabook depending on the options chosen . The UX42VS is available with an Intel Core i3 , i5 or i7 processor with up to 6 GB of RAM . In total , it weighs approximately 1 @.@ 9 kg ( 4 @.@ 2 lb ) . 
 The UX52VS has the option of Intel 's ultra @-@ low voltage i5 or i7 mobile processors , up to 10 GB of RAM and an optical disc drive . The latter is a first for the Zenbook product series . It drew criticism for its high price and lack of touch screen , but the screen quality , keyboard and system speed were praised . The battery life was considered acceptable taking into account the form @-@ factor and the discrete GPU , despite it being significantly shorter than the UX31A . 
 = = = Zenbook Touch = = = 
 First displayed in June 2012 at Computex , the Zenbook Touch series has touch screens to take advantage of the Windows 8 operating system . The Zenbook Touch series includes the UX31A which is the same as the Zenbook Prime , but with a touch enabled screen , and the U500VZ , a 15 inch model . A UX21A with a touch enabled screen was also demonstrated at Computex in June and officially announced in late August , though at the launch event on October 23 , 2012 , only the UX31A and the U500VZ were displayed . The U500VZ is thicker than previous Zenbooks at 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 " ) and uses a standard Ivy Bridge mobile processor rather than the ultra @-@ low voltage CPUs used in other Zenbooks , thus technically pushing it out of the ultrabook category , although it still meets other ultrabook specifications . AnandTech reviewer Jason <unk> found the touch screen to be so superior to the trackpad that he stopped using the trackpad altogether in his trial of a Zenbook Touch at the Asus launch event . Chris Griffith of The Australian found that the screen of the UX31A responded well and that the Windows 8 gestures worked predictably , his only criticism being the high price . 
 = = = Zenbook Infinity = = = 
 First displayed at Computex in 2013 , the Zenbook Infinity has a Gorilla Glass body ; a mobile Haswell CPU ( i5 or i7 ) ; at least <unk> of RAM ; and a 13 @.@ 3 @-@ inch touchscreen with a maximum resolution of <unk> . In place of the single SSD used in previous Zenbook are two SSDs in a RAID 0 configuration . 
 = = = Zenbook <unk> = = = 
 = = = Zenbook <unk> = = = 
