 = = Specifications = = 
 = Hurricane Janet = 
 Hurricane Janet was the most powerful tropical cyclone of the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season and one of the strongest Atlantic hurricanes on record . The eleventh tropical storm , ninth hurricane , and fifth major hurricane of the year , Janet formed from a tropical wave east of the Lesser Antilles on September 21 . Moving westward across the Caribbean Sea , Janet fluctuated in intensity , but generally strengthened before reaching its peak intensity as a Category 5 hurricane with winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) . The intense hurricane later made landfall at that intensity near Chetumal , Mexico on September 28 . After weakening over the Yucatán Peninsula , it moved into the Bay of Campeche , where it slightly strengthened before making its final landfall near Veracruz on September 29 . Janet quickly weakened over Mexico 's mountainous terrain before dissipating on September 30 . 
 In its developmental stages , Janet caused $ 7 @.@ 8 million in damage to the Lesser Antilles and 189 deaths in the Grenadines and Barbados . While Janet was in the central Caribbean Sea , a reconnaissance aircraft flew into the storm and was lost , with all eleven crew members believed to be perished . This remains the only such loss which has occurred in association with an Atlantic hurricane . A Category 5 upon landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula , Janet caused severe devastation in areas of Quintana Roo and British Honduras . Only five buildings in Chetumal , Mexico remained intact after the storm , and an estimated 500 deaths occurred in the Mexican state of Quintana Roo . At Janet 's second landfall near Veracruz , significant river flooding ensued , worsening effects caused by Hurricanes Gladys and Hilda earlier in the month . The floods left thousands of people stranded and killed at least 326 people in the Tampico area , leading to the largest Mexican relief operation ever executed by the United States . 
 Janet 's landfall as a Category 5 hurricane on the Yucatán Peninsula was the first recorded instance that a storm of such intensity in the Atlantic made landfall on a continental mainland ; prior to Janet , landfalls of Category 5 intensity were only known to have taken place on islands . Janet 's minimum barometric pressure , recorded in Chetumal , was at the time the second lowest recorded pressure on land associated with a tropical cyclone in the Atlantic , behind the 1935 Labor Day Hurricane . At least 1 @,@ 023 deaths were attributed to Hurricane Janet , as well as $ 65 @.@ 8 million in damages . The name Janet was later retired from the Atlantic list of tropical cyclone names due to its significance to the scientific research community . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak tropical disturbance was first reported by the Air France and Iberia airlines east of the Lesser Antilles early on September 21 . Although it was speculated that the disturbance originated from a tropical wave near Cape Verde , the Weather Bureau considered the system too weak to be detected due to a lack of reports from the islands . At 1800 UTC on September 21 , while it was located 350 mi ( 565 km ) east @-@ southeast of Martinique , the disturbance became sufficiently organized for the Weather Bureau to classify it as Tropical Storm Janet , the tenth named storm of the season . Upon classification , Janet quickly intensified as it moved to the west . On September 22 , Janet attained hurricane strength , and proceeded to rapidly intensify as it moved westward across the Windward Islands . By 1200 UTC that day , Janet already attained Category 3 hurricane strength with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , before stalling in intensification . 
 Shortly after 1700 UTC on September 22 , the eye of Janet passed over Barbados . A reconnaissance flight into the hurricane discovered that the Hurricane Janet 's eye measured only 20 mi ( 32 km ) in diameter , with gale force winds extending 120 mi ( 190 km ) away from the center of circulation . The flight also reported a minimum barometric pressure of 979 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 91 inHg ) . After passing between the islands of Grenada and Carriacou in the morning hours of September 23 , Janet entered an area of unfavorable conditions in the eastern Caribbean Sea . As a result , the hurricane became disorganized , with winds weakening to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) by 1200 UTC on September 23 . A U.S. Navy reconnaissance plane entered the hurricane early on September 24 , reporting a lack of organization , and noting an indiscernible center of circulation with weak rainbands . However , the hurricane began to reintensify in favorable conditions , regaining major hurricane strength by 1200 UTC on September 24 and subsequently Category 4 hurricane intensity by the next day . 
 While trekking across the central Caribbean Sea , Janet was only slightly larger than while it was moving over the Windward Islands , with gale force winds extending 125 mi ( 200 km ) out from the center by September 25 . Remaining a Category 4 hurricane as it moved erratically westward across the Caribbean , a reconnaissance flight mission during the night of September 25 – 26 indicated strong rainbands with frequent lightning strikes and a well @-@ defined eye , evidence that the storm was once again rapidly intensifying . As it neared the Yucatán Peninsula on September 26 , Janet began accelerating in forward speed . After the reconnaissance flight Snowcloud Five was lost while making a penetration into the hurricane 's eye , another flight early on September 27 reported a minimum pressure of 938 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 70 inHg ) , with winds in excess of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) " by a large and incalculable amount . " The hurricane was estimated to have intensified to Category 5 hurricane intensity — the highest rating on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale — at 1200 UTC on September 27 , while in the western Caribbean Sea . Janet continued to intensify afterwards , eventually reaching its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) , with gale force winds having expanded to at least 250 mi ( 400 km ) away from the center of the hurricane . Janet maintained peak intensity as it passed over the Swan Islands before making landfall in extreme southern Quintana Roo , Mexico , just east of Chetumal , Mexico . In that city , a barometer indicated a minimum barometric pressure of 914 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 00 inHg ) in the eye of Janet . At the time , this was the second lowest pressure ever recorded on land in a landfalling Atlantic hurricane , behind the 1935 Labor Day Hurricane , though Janet was later surpassed by hurricanes Dean and Gilbert , which also made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula as Category 5 hurricanes . 
 Once over land , Janet considerably weakened to a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) . After crossing the Yucatán Peninsula with a forward speed of 21 mph ( 34 km / h ) , the hurricane emerged into the Bay of Campeche by 1600 UTC on September 28 . The weakened hurricane marginally intensified as it crossed the Bay of Campeche to a secondary peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) with a minimum central pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 06 inHg ) . Janet eventually made its final landfall 50 mi ( 80 km ) north of the city of Veracruz by 2200 UTC on September 29 as a Category 2 hurricane . After moving inland , the hurricane became quickly disorganized due to the highly mountainous terrain of Mexico , and as a result the Weather Bureau issued its last advisory on Janet . The weakening system degenerated to tropical storm strength by September 30 , and later dissipated over central Mexico by 0600 UTC that day . Janet 's remnant circulation contributed to the development of a disturbed area of weather off the western coast of Mexico that would subsequently develop into a tropical storm on October 1 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Caribbean Islands = = = 
 Upon Janet 's formation east of the Windward Islands , the Weather Bureau office in San Juan , Puerto Rico advised small craft to remain in port and vessels in the path of the developing storm to exercise caution . After a reconnaissance flight reported much stronger winds than initially suggested , hurricane warnings were issued at 1600 UTC on September 22 for the entirety of the Lesser Antilles from Saint Lucia to Grenada , including Barbados . Storm warnings were issued for all islands in the Windward Islands from Saint Lucia south to Tobago , excluding St. Vincent and the Grenadines . All warnings in the Windward Antilles remained in effect until 1000 UTC on September 22 . Shortly after warnings were lowered in the Windward Islands , storm warnings were issued for the ABC islands and the <unk> Peninsula of Venezuela at 0200 UTC on September 23 . After Janet passed north of the islands , all storm warnings were lifted on the morning of September 25 . The Weather Bureau later warned interests in Jamaica , but did not issue any hurricane @-@ related warnings for the island . 
 = = = Yucatán Peninsula and Mexico = = = 
 The Weather Bureau first began cautioning areas of Central America at 1600 UTC on September 26 , advising people in areas of northeast Nicaragua and Honduras to take precautionary measures , along with all vessels and small craft in the Gulf of Honduras south to Cabo Gracias a Dios . After Janet began accelerating towards the west @-@ northwest , advisories warned areas in British Honduras and Quintana Roo of hurricane @-@ related impacts . Though no official warnings were issued for areas of Central America , advisories published by the Weather Bureau cautioned interests in the hurricane 's path up until landfall . Evacuations took place in several coastal towns in Quintana Roo upon notification of the oncoming storm . People were evacuated to inland hillside shelters . After the hurricane moved through the Yucatán Peninsula and entered the Bay of Campeche , the Weather Bureau alerted areas in the storm 's path on the western side of Mexico 's Gulf Coast . At the time , Janet was expected to make landfall between Veracruz and Tuxpan . Areas were warned of the storm 's potential flooding and coastal impacts . The Weather Bureau advised all small craft south of Port O 'Connor , Texas to remain in port . Notifications of Janet to potentially affected areas were stopped after the hurricane made landfall . 
 = = Impact = = 
 During its existence , areas of the Lesser Antilles , ABC islands , and Central America were affected by Janet . At least $ 65 @.@ 8 million in damages and 1 @,@ 023 deaths were caused by the hurricane , mostly in Quintana Roo . The large number of deaths and damage caused by Janet helped make the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season the deadliest and costliest hurricane season documented since comprehensive record of such statistics began in 1942 . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 As a small but rapidly intensifying hurricane , Janet passed just south of Barbados on September 22 , becoming the first hurricane to strike the island in 57 years , since the 1898 Windward Islands Hurricane . Maximum sustained winds on the south side of the island were estimated to be between 110 – 120 mph ( 180 – 190 km / h ) . The strong winds knocked out communication lines , preventing officials from accurately enumerating casualties on the island , though communications were still maintained by commercial cable companies and amateur radio . Electric power was later restored , allowing newspapers to publish information on the storm . Sugar cane , the island country 's main source of revenue , was severely damaged , with losses estimated to be in excess of $ 1 million . Poorly constructed dwellings were blown apart by the strong winds . An estimated 8 @,@ 100 homes were damaged by the hurricane . The destroyed buildings and trees blocked highways , and the Seawell Airport was forced to close . Heavy rains peaked at 4 in ( 100 mm ) and a storm surge of 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) swept away low @-@ lying houses along the coast . An estimated 2 @,@ 000 people were left homeless due to the hurricane . Property damage on Barbados was estimated to be $ 5 million , and at least 57 people were killed . 
 On September 23 Janet passed directly between Grenada and Carriacou in the Grenadines , killing 122 people in the island chain . An airport on Grenada was covered in debris strewn by the strong winds . Eight people were killed in a small town adjacent to the airport . Strong winds were also reported to have destroyed docks and warehouses , and unroofed a hotel in St. George 's , Grenada . Houses were also unroofed , and balconies of government offices in St. George 's were torn off . All bridges in the island 's interior regions collapsed , and spice crops sustained heavy damage . An estimated 75 % of nutmeg plantations were destroyed , along with nearly all of the island 's banana and cocoa crops . Three ships were also grounded in the local harbor . In The <unk> , the waterfront region of St. George 's , debris was scattered and an 820 ft ( 250 m ) pier collapsed . St. Vincent was mostly destroyed , and St. Lucia suffered significant coastal damage . Over $ 2 @.@ 8 million in damages were estimated throughout the Grenadines . Farther south , in Port of Spain , a church being used as a storm shelter collapsed , killing ten people . 
 Hurricane Janet skirted the ABC islands with strong winds as it passed to the north from September 24 – 25 . In Aruba , gusts peaked at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , uprooting trees . However , damage outside of trees was primarily insignificant . In Bonaire , piers were destroyed , and the island 's coastal boulevard was damaged . Beach facilities at Curaçao 's <unk> and <unk> Bays suffered considerable damage . Quays along the harbor entrance were also damaged . 
 = = = = Snowcloud Five = = = = 
 On September 26 , the Hurricane Hunter P2V @-@ <unk> Neptune aircraft Snowcloud Five , led by U.S. Navy Lieutenant Commander Grover B. Windham , was sent from Guantánamo Bay to investigate Janet , which was at the time a Category 4 hurricane south of Jamaica . Upon penetration of the hurricane 's eyewall at an altitude of 700 ft ( 200 m ) , a final transmission was received from the reconnaissance flight before it presumably crashed in the Caribbean Sea . All 11 people on board , including nine crew members and two journalists , were killed . Following the loss of the plane , an extensive search and rescue operation took place over a large area of the Caribbean Sea , with 3 @,@ 000 personnel involved with the search , returning no results . The exact cause of the crash remains unknown , though it is speculated that the plane 's altimeter gave an incorrect reading due to the low surrounding barometric pressure . Although four hurricane reconnaissance flights have been lost since operations began in 1943 , Snowcloud Five remains the only known loss of a reconnaissance aircraft as a result of a hurricane in the Atlantic basin , with the other three occurring as a result of Pacific typhoons . 
 = = = Yucatán Peninsula = = = 
 As it approached the Yucatán Peninsula , Janet passed over the Swan Islands north of Honduras as a Category 5 hurricane on September 27 . The hurricane caused rough seas , and strong winds uprooted trees and antennas . After gusts exceeded an estimated 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , officials on the islands took shelter in a Navy seismograph building . Though no deaths were reported , Janet destroyed almost all buildings on the islands . The U.S. Weather Bureau and Civil Aeronautics Authority requested food and supplies for 82 people on the island after the storm passed . 
 = = = = Quintana Roo = = = = 
 After passing the Swan Islands , Janet made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula between Corozal Town , British Honduras , and Chetumal , Mexico , at 1700 UTC on September 28 . At the time , it had winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) . Hurricane force winds were reported for two hours preceding the hurricane 's landfall , with numerous pressure readings below 948 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 00 inHg ) . Roads and crops on the peninsula sustained heavy damage due to Janet . In <unk> , Quintana Roo , the strong winds from Janet flattened the port 's infrastructure , and only one house remained intact after the storm 's passage . 97 people were killed in <unk> , constituting more than a third of the port 's population . Chetumal , Mexico was devastated , with only four buildings left standing . Storm surge pushed water to a depth of 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 m ) , 1600 ft ( 490 m ) inland , despite the peninsula protecting the city from the open ocean . The death toll in Chetumal remains uncertain ; 120 bodies were recovered in the city but it is unknown how many were ever found . An additional 10 @,@ 000 people in the city were left homeless after the hurricane , and were forced to sleep in the open overnight . Federal relief agencies previously providing service for areas affected by Hurricanes Gladys and Hilda earlier in the year in western areas of the Gulf Coast of Mexico were ordered to extend relief operations to the Yucatán Peninsula . In Quintana Roo , Hurricane Janet was estimated to have caused $ 40 million in damages and at least 500 deaths , the most of any region affected by Janet . 
 = = = = British Honduras = = = = 
 Making landfall near the border between Mexico and British Honduras , the latter colony 's Corozal and Orange Walk districts , containing a population of 15 @,@ 500 at the time , experienced severe devastation from Janet . Strong hurricane winds knocked down and damaged numerous trees across British Honduras , particularly in the Freshwater Creek Forest Preserve . There , an estimated 30 % of all trees had been damaged , especially mahogany and <unk> trees . Hurricane Janet also caused extensive damage to crops , with an estimated $ 2 @.@ 631 million in damages . Fruit trees , maize , and sugar cane crops suffered the most damage . Sugar cane was expected to have a 20 % decrease in yield due to the damage sustained after the storm . Pineapple crops and livestock experienced less significant losses . To a lesser extent , the hurricane also affected the Belize District and several of British Honduras ' offshore cayes . Similar to Corozal and Orange Walk Districts , corn , trees , and coconut experienced the most severe damage of any crop . 
 In Corozal Town , British Honduras , south of where Janet made landfall , 500 people were made homeless , and six people were killed . About 90 % of all buildings in the town were destroyed , and communications were knocked out by the strong winds . Based on an average home cost of $ 2 @,@ 000 , it was estimated that property damage to homes in Corozal Town totaled $ 800 @,@ 000 . Much of Santa Elena , British Honduras was also flattened by the strong winds . Farther south in Belize City , winds peaked at 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) , though no damage was reported . In British Honduras , the hurricane 's effects were less deadly than in Quintana Roo , but in northern portions of the colony the storm killed 16 people and caused $ 5 million in damages . 
 = = = Mainland Mexico = = = 
 While in the Bay of Campeche , the shrimp boat Celestino Arias was sunken by strong waves generated by Janet after it suffered engine failures . The stranded ship was heavily damaged by the hurricane 's strong winds in the bay , which broke towing lines . All of the ship 's crewmen , which had evacuated the boat after it sunk , were later rescued and brought back to Tampa , Florida . Along the coast , tides were reported to be 3 – 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) above average . Farther north along the Texas coast , tides were 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) above average , blocking beach roads near Corpus Christi . 
 Janet made its final landfall in the Mexican state of Veracruz between the cities of Nautla and Veracruz as a Category 2 hurricane at 2200 UTC on September 29 . In Nautla , communications were cut by strong winds from the hurricane . The strong winds also caused a relief plane to crash , causing five deaths . Heavy rains in the Tampico , Tamaulipas area added to floods caused by hurricanes Gladys and Hilda earlier in the year . The resulting flood was reported by the Weather Bureau office in New Orleans to be one of the worst natural disasters in Mexican history . In Tampico , 16 in ( 410 mm ) of rain was reported . The floods contributed to a localized typhoid fever and dysentery outbreak , causing over 1 @,@ 000 people to evacuate out of the city to prevent further spreading of the diseases . An additional 36 @,@ 000 people were being cared for in concentration centers . Although located south of where Janet made landfall , areas of Veracruz were inundated by strong storm surge , including the city 's main streets and port . Operations along a railroad stretching from Laredo , Texas to Mexico City were stopped , after having just reopened due to Hurricane Hilda . 
 Farther inland , as Janet dissipated over the mountainous central Mexico , the storm dropped torrential rainfall over the <unk> and <unk> River basins . The water levels in the <unk> River remained above flood stage for four weeks . In Tampico , the river flooded neighborhoods , forcing cables to be stretched along roads to prevent people from being swept away . Small boats were also sent to monitor streets . According to some sources , 800 people died from the floods , with thousands more being stranded in the city . Tamazunchale was inundated by an overflowing Moctezuma River . The rains caused a landslide in Colonia San Rafael , killing 12 people . Heavy rains also impacted Guadalajara , which had previously not been affected by any tropical cyclones earlier in the year . In <unk> , Jalisco , the Lerma and Duero Rivers overflowed , forcing 800 people in the town to evacuate . Farther north , in Sonora , cotton crops damaged by Janet were estimated to amount to $ 12 million in damages . Combined property damage in Mexico from Hurricanes Gladys , Hilda , and Janet was estimated to total $ 200 million , nearly half of the government 's 1955 national budget . Although there were no official damage or fatality estimates , at least 1 @,@ 000 people were injured and another 100 @,@ 000 people were made homeless on the Mexican mainland due to Janet . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 After Janet passed Barbados , the island was declared a state of emergency . Relief workers on Barbados helped to clean up debris scattered by the strong winds on highways , and the local government made requests for food and construction materials . The extensive damaged caused by Janet on the island to low @-@ income households led the passage of the 1955 Housing Act , which created the National Housing Authority ( NHA ) in 1956 . The NHA was responsible for the acquisition of lands on which houses could be built with stronger and more permanent materials , which was thought to minimize maintenance costs and hurricane @-@ related damage . The newly founded organization quickly worked to rebuild homes after the hurricane struck . 
 In Grenada , the island 's governor issued an emergency order against the hoarding of food in the aftermath of Janet , due to the food and water shortage that resulted from Janet . A United States destroyer and a British frigate were sent to bring relief supplies to Grenada , and ships departing from Jamaica and Trinidad were redirected to the island to help send supplies . The British government later announced that it would send £ 50 @,@ 000 ( US $ 155 @,@ 000 ) in relief to the Grenadines . The Crown Agents and Red Cross delivered relief supplies to Barbados and the Grenadines , which included aluminum roofing sheets and portable electric generators . 
 = = = British Honduras and Mexico = = = 
 Relief and reconstruction measures were enacted in the British Honduras beginning on September 30 . A large @-@ scale reconstruction program was initiated by the government to help rebuild 48 villages . The government also declared a state of emergency for Corozal , Orange Walk , and Belize administrative districts , including a ban on liquor sales . Temporary communication lines were rebuilt , which initially only allowed official communications with affected areas . Due to the severity of the damage in Corozal , an airstrip was built to help deliver relief to the city more efficiently . Food depots in Corozal , Louisville , and Orange Walk Town were tasked with distributing food . The potential for widespread disease following the devastation wrought by Janet forced a widespread vaccination initiative against typhoid fever in affected areas . The Jamaican government sent £ 20 @,@ 000 ( US $ 55 @,@ 000 ) to the colony in relief funds , while the British government sent £ 40 @,@ 000 ( US $ 110 @,@ 000 ) to affected areas in the British Honduras and other affected islands in the Caribbean . The United States sent the cargo ship USS Antares , which supplied the colony with various relief materials . In Corozal Town , a $ 3 @.@ 5 million grant was given to land surveyor H.C. Fairweather to plan and reconstruct the township . 
 A U.S. Navy relief plane was sent to Chetumal , Mexico , to deliver food and other relief supplies after Janet struck the region . In areas previously affected by hurricanes Gladys and Hilda earlier in the year , federal relief agencies were ordered to extend relief operations to the Yucatán Peninsula . However , after crossing the Bay of Campeche and making landfall near Veracruz , relief measures were once again implemented in the western Gulf Coast of Mexico . The Mexican Air Force , commercial and private planes , and helicopters were sent to bring relief supplies and airlift refugees . The United States initiated the largest relief campaign ever staged in Mexico at the time . Various government and relief agencies , including the American Red Cross and The Salvation Army , participated in the relief efforts . The United States Air Force and United States Army began a joint @-@ relief operation to send relief supplies to the Tampico area , beginning with the deployment of a Curtiss C @-@ 46 Commando from the Harlingen Air Force Base on October 1 . Ten other military transport aircraft from the United States Air Force were sent from Texas to provide food and clothing . Pan American World Airways sent a Boeing 314 from Miami , Florida to evacuate victims . Helicopters were sent from the USS Saipan to transfer food and medical supplies from the light aircraft carrier . Other ships also aided in delivering supplies , including the USS Siboney , which also deployed helicopters to assist in relief efforts . By October 6 , 1 @,@ 500 people were estimated to have been rescued from the Tampico area , and at least 280 @,@ 000 lb ( 130 @,@ 000 kg ) of food and clothing materials were estimated to have been delivered by the US Air Force to the city . There , typhoid serum shots were administered as a precautionary measure . Former president Manuel Ávila Camacho died of a heart ailment , in part due to over @-@ exertion in helping in the relief efforts . 
 Due to its large swath of destruction , the name Janet was retired by the Weather Bureau , becoming just the seventh Atlantic tropical cyclone to have its name retired , and the fourth to be retired in 1955 . 
 = 2010 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final = 
 The 2010 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was played on October 5 , 2010 , at Qwest Field ( since renamed CenturyLink Field ) in Seattle , Washington . The match determined the winner of the 2010 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup , a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation . This was the 97th edition of the oldest competition in United States soccer . Seattle Sounders FC won the match , defeating the Columbus Crew 2 – 1 in front of a sellout crowd of 31 @,@ 311 , the highest attendance at a U.S. Open Cup final . Kevin Burns scored first , giving the Columbus Crew an early lead . Sanna Nyassi then scored both goals for Seattle Sounders FC as it became the first team since 1983 to win two consecutive U.S. Open Cup championships . 
 Both the Columbus Crew and Seattle Sounders FC qualified automatically for the third round of the U.S. Open Cup tournament by finishing among the top six in the 2009 Major League Soccer season standings . Both clubs won three matches in the tournament to advance to the final . Seattle won the bidding process to host the final . 
 As a result of its U.S. Open Cup championship , Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2011 – 12 CONCACAF Champions League , as well as a $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize . The Crew received the runner @-@ up prize of $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Road to the final = = 
 The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all United States Soccer Federation affiliated teams , from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . The 2010 tournament was the 97th edition of the oldest soccer tournament in the United States . 
 In 2010 , MLS , which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada , was allowed to enter eight of its U.S.-based teams in the tournament . The top six MLS teams from the previous season 's league table qualified automatically for the tournament , while the remaining two spots are determined by preliminary qualification matches . The eight MLS entries began play in the third round of the tournament . In 2009 , both Seattle Sounders FC and the Columbus Crew finished among the top six teams in MLS overall league standings and therefore qualified automatically for the third round of the 2010 U.S. Open Cup . 
 = = = Columbus Crew = = = 
 Prior to 2010 the Columbus Crew had been to the U.S. Open Cup final twice , in 1998 and again in 2002 , winning the cup in the latter appearance . On June 29 , 2010 , the Crew began the competition in the third round , hosting the Rochester Rhinos of the D2 Pro League at Columbus Crew Stadium in Columbus , Ohio in front of a crowd of 1 @,@ 760 . The Crew 's Andy Iro scored in the 30th minute by heading in a corner kick from teammate Eddie Gaven . In the second half , Rochester evened the score when substitute Darren Spicer scored from 17 yards out . The Rhinos ' Alfonso <unk> was sent off in the 84th minute for a dangerous tackle on Emilio Rentería , forcing Rochester to play the final minutes of the game with 10 men . The score remained level until the fourth minute of stoppage time , when Steven Lenhart scored with a volley over the onrushing goalkeeper to give Columbus the victory . 
 A week later , on July 6 , Columbus faced the Charleston Battery of the USL Second Division in the U.S. Open Cup quarterfinals . The match was hosted by Columbus , again at Crew Stadium in front of a crowd of 1 @,@ 847 . In the 37th minute , Lenhart was fouled in the penalty area while going for a cross and the referee signaled for a penalty kick . Rentería took the penalty kick and drove a right @-@ footed shot into the back of the net , making the score 1 – 0 . Columbus extended its lead in the 70th minute through a goal from Lenhart , and again in the 87th minute when Gaven scored off of a pass from Emmanuel <unk> . The Crew won 3 – 0 , earning its first U.S. Open Cup semifinal appearance since 2002 . 
 On September 1 , 2010 , the Columbus Crew visited Washington , D.C. to face MLS club D.C. United in the semifinal match at RFK Stadium in front of a crowd of 3 @,@ 411 . Pablo Hernandez scored in the 17th minute on a penalty kick to give D.C. an early lead which it almost held for the victory . However , in the 89th minute D.C. ' s Marc Burch deflected a shot by Columbus 's Iro into the net for an own goal , tying the score and sending the match into extra time . In the 97th minute , the Crew 's Lenhart dribbled the ball into the 18 @-@ yard box and was tripped by D.C. United 's Carey Talley to draw a penalty . Guillermo Barros Schelotto took the penalty kick and scored the winning goal . The 2 – 1 final score secured the Crew 's spot in the final . 
 = = = Seattle Sounders FC = = = 
 Seattle won the 2009 U.S. Open Cup — the second MLS expansion club to do so in its inaugural season after the Chicago Fire in 1998 . Prior to the final , Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila , Washington . The facility is smaller than the club 's home stadium for league matches , Qwest Field , but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches . 
 On June 30 , 2010 , Seattle began the defense of its title in a match hosted by the Portland Timbers of the D2 Pro League in Portland , Oregon , at PGE Park in front of a crowd of 15 @,@ 422 . Sounders FC took the lead in the 13th minute on a header from Nate Jaqua , but the Timbers levelled the score in the 38th minute when Bright Dike scored on a shot from inside the penalty area . The score was 1 – 1 at halftime , and remained that way through full @-@ time and extra time . Seattle finally defeated Portland in a 4 – 3 penalty shootout with goalkeeper Kasey Keller making two saves and defender Zach Scott scoring the winning penalty kick . 
 Sounders FC hosted its quarterfinal match a week later on July 7 against an MLS club , the Los Angeles Galaxy , at Starfire Sports Complex in front of a sellout crowd of 4 @,@ 512 . Seattle forward Jaqua again led the attack scoring two goals in the second half . The first came in the 50th minute when he headed in a rebound off of the crossbar and the second came in the 62nd minute off a cross from Miguel Montaño . Seattle won 2 – 0 . Sounders FC 's reserve goalkeeper Terry Boss also made two saves in his first start for the team . 
 On September 1 , 2010 , Seattle hosted its semifinal match against another MLS club , Chivas USA . Like the quarterfinal , it was hosted at Starfire with a sellout crowd of 4 @,@ 547 . Jaqua gained Seattle an early lead in the 10th minute off a Steve Zakuani cross . Zakuani was involved again in the 58th minute , this time crossing to a diving Fredy Montero who increased the lead to two . Chivas USA 's Jesús Padilla scored in the 68th minute on a through ball from Justin Braun cutting the deficit to one . However , in second half stoppage time , Jaqua scored again making the score 3 – 1 and sealing the Sounders FC victory and an appearance in the tournament final . Jaqua 's two goals raised his total to five in the tournament . Zakuani , who had just returned from a pelvic strain injury , had two assists in the match . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue selection = = = 
 On August 26 , 2010 , U.S. Soccer announced the potential sites for the final , depending on the outcome of the semifinals . It was determined that if Seattle qualified for the final , they would host it at Qwest Field regardless of the opponent . If Chivas USA defeated Sounders FC in the semifinals , they would host the Columbus Crew at The Home Depot Center in Carson , California , or visit D.C. United at RFK Stadium in Washington , D.C. , depending on the outcome of the other semifinal match . Since Columbus and Seattle advanced from the semifinals , the final was held at Qwest Field in Seattle . This was the first U.S. Open Cup final to be played in the state of Washington . 
 Columbus general manager Mark McCullers expressed concerns about the fairness of the scheduling since he claimed it would be difficult for the Crew to travel to the West Coast on October 5 and then return to Chicago three days later for a league match . Crew head coach Robert <unk> also complained about the scheduling saying , " You make it to a final , but you have to go to Seattle on Sunday after playing a home game on Saturday ... You 've got to fly all day , play on the ( artificial ) turf on Tuesday and then you go play an important MLS game in Chicago on Friday . Great . " 
 A year after a public argument between Seattle and D.C. United ownership over the fairness of the bidding process to host the 2009 U.S. Open Cup Final — which D.C. United hosted — Sounders FC was successful in its bid to host the 2010 final . For the 2009 final , D.C. United drew an attendance of 17 @,@ 329 through extensive marketing efforts . Seattle began selling tickets to the 2010 final on September 7 and within six days 22 @,@ 000 had already been sold . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In 2010 , prior to meeting in the U.S. Open Cup final , Sounders FC and the Crew met twice in MLS league matches . The first was played on May 1 at Qwest Field and finished in a 1 – 1 draw . The second meeting between the two teams was played on September 18 , only 17 days before the Open Cup final , at Crew Stadium . Seattle won by a convincing scoreline of 4 – 0 . Regarding the score of the latter meeting , Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid stated , " I don 't think the difference between the two teams is four goals even though that was the score . " Discussing the difficulty of going into Seattle for the final , Crew forward Barros Schelotto commented , " The field is for Seattle . The stadium is for Seattle . Everything is for Seattle . But that does not matter . We have the final . We have 90 minutes to win a trophy . Nothing is more important . " 
 In the weeks leading up to the match , Seattle Sounders FC was on a six @-@ game home unbeaten streak . However , in the last match before the final ( a league match victory over Toronto FC ) goalkeeper Keller allowed a goal , ending his three @-@ game shutout streak . The Columbus Crew came into the final not having won a league match in the previous month , although their last match was a 0 – 0 draw with the San Jose Earthquakes on October 2 . 
 Since MLS teams began participating in the tournament in 1996 , the home team had won nine times and lost three in the U.S. Open Cup final prior to 2011 . The 2003 Chicago Fire , 2007 New England Revolution and 2009 Seattle Sounders FC were the only away teams to win a final . 
 = = Match = = 
 The 2010 U.S. Open Cup Final was played on October 5 at Qwest Field in Seattle , Washington . Live television coverage was provided nationally by Fox Soccer Channel . Prior to kickoff , Seattle 's 2009 U.S. Open Cup trophy was displayed at midfield . The final drew an attendance of 31 @,@ 311 surpassing the 81 @-@ year @-@ old record for the event . The previous record attendance for an Open Cup final was 21 @,@ 583 , set in 1929 when New York <unk> defeated the Madison Kennel Club of St. Louis . 
 Both clubs started mostly their first @-@ team players for the final . Costa Rican Leonardo González , a regular starter at left back for Sounders FC , was unavailable due to U.S. Open Cup roster limitations , which allow teams to have only five foreign players on their 18 @-@ man , game day roster . Defender Tyson Wahl started in his place . Crew backup goalkeeper Andy Gruenebaum also started in place of normal starter Will <unk> , though this was a normal change for U.S. Open Cup and CONCACAF Champions League matches . Each club was organized in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation at kickoff . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Seattle had most of the early scoring opportunities . Two minutes into the match , Montero took the first shot of the game with a header at close range which was saved by Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum . Seconds later , Montero had another shot from distance which went just over the bar . Four minutes later , Seattle midfielder Zakuani got around Crew defender Frankie Hejduk and passed the ball to Blaise Nkufo whose tap @-@ in attempt was saved by Gruenbaum . In the 12th minute , Gaven took the Crew 's first shot of the match but it flew high over the crossbar . In the 16th minute Zakuani had a run up the middle before passing to Montero , whose shot was again saved by Gruenbaum . Columbus successfully defended crosses from Zakuani and Nkufo in the 18th minute and kept Seattle from getting a shot off . Columbus nearly took the lead in the 20th minute as Emmanuel <unk> got behind the defense and made a quick pass back to Gaven , who missed a wide @-@ open shot over the bar . 
 While Seattle controlled the game for much of the first half , Columbus took the lead on a counterattack movement in the 24th minute . The play developed on the right side when Hejduk made a low pass to Lenhart from a forward position . Lenhart touched the ball to Kevin Burns for a low shot inside the far post for a goal . Few chances were created after the goal as Columbus ' strong defensive play held off Seattle 's attacks . In the 34th minute Tyson Wahl crossed the ball into the box but Gruenbaum was able to jump and grab the ball before Nkufo could direct it towards goal with his head . 
 Seattle equalized in the 38th minute . Montero passed to Tyson Wahl , who crossed the ball into the 18 @-@ yard @-@ box , where Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum hesitated on how to handle the ball . He knocked it away , and it fell to Nathan Sturgis , who passed the ball between the legs of Gaven to find teammate Sanna Nyassi 18 yards out . Nyassi turned on the ball and shot it past Gruenebaum , who was still out of position . Following the goal few scoring opportunities were created before halftime . After one minute of stoppage time , the first half ended with a tie score , 1 – 1 . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Columbus Crew midfielder Kevin Burns commented on the team 's attitude after the first half , " We were OK at halftime . Our heads weren 't down . " No substitutions were made as the teams returned to the field for the second half . 
 Despite Seattle 's continued control of the tempo of gameplay early in the second half , they were unable to create many scoring opportunities . In the 58th minute James Riley was alone on the edge of the penalty area after receiving a pass from Montero . However , Riley 's cross was deflected for a corner kick . Two minutes later Seattle 's Zakuani created a scoring threat when he received an aerial pass into the penalty area , but Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum was quick to get to the play causing Zakuani to fall down and the ball to bounce away before being cleared by Columbus . In the 64th minute , Kasey Keller made a diving save to stop Gaven 's shot from 30 yards out , his fourth shot on goal in the game . Two minutes later , the score line finally changed as Seattle completed 18 consecutive passes . Montero got open on the right side of the field to receive the 19th and then crossed a ball into the penalty area . Gruenebaum decided not to chase the pass as Zakuani ran inside of Crew defender Hejduk and headed a shot that hit the crossbar . The Crew defenders failed to clear the ball before Nyassi ran in and easily scored the go @-@ ahead goal . 
 Zakuani was again on the attack in the 75th minute with a run down the middle , but was " sandwiched " by two Columbus defenders and lost possession . Columbus made two substitutions in the 78th minute , bringing on fresh legs at forward with Rentería in for Lenhart and swapping midfielder Burns out for forward Andrés Mendoza . Shortly after the substitutions , Keller came out to grab a Columbus cross and made a long throw to Montero . Seattle pushed up the field and Montero took a shot which bounced off of teammate Nkufo 's back . In the 81st minute , Crew coach <unk> made his final substitution bringing on Robbie Rogers for Gaven . Shortly after , in the 85th minute , Columbus nearly equalized when Rogers received a pass from Hejduk and took a shot which bounced hard off of the crossbar . 
 Seattle made its first substitution in the 79th minute when Sanna Nyassi left the field to an ovation from the crowd as he was replaced by Álvaro Fernández . In the 87th minute , Zakuani ran free on a breakaway but was taken down by Crew forward Barros Schelotto who received a yellow card for the foul . Montero took the ensuing free kick and shot it on goal with Gruenebaum catching it for the save . 
 The referee added three minutes of stoppage time to the second half . During that time , Seattle made its remaining two substitutions . First in the 90th minute Roger Levesque was brought on for Zakuani , and then in the 93rd minute they brought on Jaqua for Montero . The referee blew his whistle ending the game shortly thereafter . Most of the fans in attendance remained after the game for the presentation of the trophy . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Sounders FC head coach Sigi Schmid discussed the match in the post @-@ game press conference saying : 
 I thought there was some good soccer that was played by both teams . We caught a break at the end when they hit the crossbar . You work hard to make your own luck . We showed a lot of character going down 1 – 0 and coming back . Attitude of our team has been very strong that way . Really proud and what we accomplished tonight is super . It sets us apart and makes us unique and this is the kind of franchise when Adrian [ Hanauer ] , Joe [ Roth ] , Drew [ Carey ] and Tod Leiweke and the rest of the internal ownership group and everyone else who works at this organization wanted us to be something unique , something special , something different . The fans were fantastic . That 's the loudest I 've heard this place . 
 Columbus Crew goalkeeper Andy Gruenbaum commented after the match , " We knew it was going to be a tough place to play , their fan base is great . Anytime you have a championship match on your own pitch , the odds are going to be against you . We knew we had to defend and take advantage of any opportunity . We came out and scored the first goal and they were able to capitalize on two weird bounces . " 
 Seattle Sounders FC is the first MLS club to repeat as the U.S. Open Cup champion and the first club overall to repeat since the New York Pancyprian @-@ Freedoms did so in 1982 and 1983 . The victory was also Sigi Schmid 's third Open Cup championship as a head coach . Sanna Nyassi was the first player to score multiple goals in an Open Cup final since Mike <unk> in 1994 . As champions of the tournament , Sounders FC received the $ 100 @,@ 000 cash prize while the Columbus Crew received $ 50 @,@ 000 as the runner @-@ up . Seattle also earned a berth into the preliminary round of the 2011 – 12 CONCACAF Champions League . 
 = Kent , Ohio = 
 Kent is a city in the U.S. state of Ohio and the largest city in Portage County . It is located along the Cuyahoga River in Northeast Ohio on the western edge of the county . The population was 28 @,@ 904 in the 2010 Census and 29 @,@ 810 in the 2015 estimate . The city is counted as part of the Akron Metropolitan Statistical Area and the larger Cleveland – Akron – Canton Combined Statistical Area . 
 Part of the Connecticut Western Reserve , Kent was settled in 1805 and was known for many years as Franklin Mills . Settlers were attracted to the area due to its location along the Cuyahoga River as a place for water @-@ powered mills . Later development came in the 1830s and 1840s as a result of the settlement 's position along the route of the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal . Leading up to the American Civil War , Franklin Mills was noted for its activity in the " Underground Railroad " . With the decline of the canal and the emergence of the railroad , the town became the home of the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad maintenance shops through the influence of Marvin Kent . In 1864 the town was renamed Kent in honor of and in gratitude for Marvin Kent 's efforts . It was incorporated as a village in 1867 and became a city after the 1920 Census . Today Kent is a college town best known as the home of the main campus of Kent State University , founded in 1910 , and as the site of the 1970 Kent State shootings . 
 Historically a manufacturing center , education is the city 's largest economic sector with Kent State University the city 's , and one of the region 's , largest employers . The Kent City School District and the Kent Free Library provide additional education opportunities and resources . Many of Kent 's demographic elements are influenced by the presence of the university , particularly the median age , median income , and those living below the poverty level . The city is governed by a council @-@ manager system with a city manager , a nine @-@ member city council , and a mayor . Kent has nearly 20 parks and preserves and hosts a number of annual festivals including ones related to Earth Day , folk music , and the U.S. Independence Day . In addition to the Kent State athletic teams , the city also hosts a number of amateur and local sporting events at various times during the year . Kent is part of the Cleveland @-@ Akron media market and is the city of license for three local radio stations and three television stations and includes the regional affiliates for National Public Radio ( NPR ) and the Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) . Although most residents commute to work in private vehicles , alternate transportation includes a public bus service and hike @-@ and @-@ bike trails . As the home of the Davey Tree Expert Company , Kent is known as " The Tree City " while residents are referred to as " <unk> " . The city has produced a number of notable individuals , particularly in politics , athletics , and the entertainment industry . 
 = = History = = 
 The region was originally inhabited by various tribes of American Indians , including the early Mound Builders . Around 1780 , Captain Samuel Brady achieved notoriety for his activities in the area , including his famous leap of 21 feet ( 6 m ) over the Cuyahoga River to avoid capture by an unknown band of American Indians . The site , known as Brady 's Leap , is now a city park . Settlement by Europeans began in the late 1790s and early 19th century . As part of the Connecticut Western Reserve , the area was divided into survey townships in 1798 and almost all of what is now Kent was originally part of Town 3 Range 9 , which would eventually be known as Franklin Township . Aaron Olmsted , a wealthy Connecticut merchant , had purchased the 16 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 6 @,@ 500 ha ) township and named it for his son Aaron Franklin Olmsted . 
 Franklin Township was surveyed in 1803 and settled in November 1805 when John Haymaker and his family moved west from Warren to the banks of the Cuyahoga River . They were joined by John 's brother George and their father Jacob Haymaker and their families early the next year , and built a gristmill in 1807 . Initial growth in the area was slow , but eventually two small villages would develop due to the potential for power generated by the Cuyahoga River that could be used in gristmills and manufacturing . The first village , known as Franklin Mills , or locally as the " Lower Village " , developed mostly around the original Haymaker property . In 1818 , Joshua Woodard arrived in the area and began constructing buildings just north of the village forming the " Upper Village " that would come to be known briefly as Carthage . 
 In the 1820s , Franklin Mills was included in the route of the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal ( P & O Canal ) . When construction began on the canal in the mid @-@ 1830s , land speculation was rampant in many areas of northeast Ohio along the canal , including Franklin Mills . As a result , an industrial and business region was established along the east side of the river in what is now downtown Kent . Factories and mills were either planned or constructed along the Cuyahoga River , some of which either were never built or ultimately failed , due mostly to effects of the Panic of 1837 . A lock and attached arch dam , however , was completed in 1836 . The canal officially opened in 1840 , but would only operate into the 1860s . By the 1870s the canal was completely shut down . 
 In the era leading up to the American Civil War , Franklin Mills was an active stop on the Underground Railroad , giving fugitive slaves shelter on their escape to Canada . There were three notable stops in Franklin Mills , one of which still stands as of 2010 . During this period , from 1835 to 1839 , noted American abolitionist John Brown moved to the village , operating a tannery along the Cuyahoga River with Zenas Kent . 
 In 1863 the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad was constructed through Franklin Mills , due largely to the efforts of local businessman Marvin Kent , son of Zenas Kent . Marvin Kent had started his own railroad company , the Franklin and Warren Railroad , in 1851 after Franklin Mills , already home to several Kent family ventures and properties , was bypassed by the Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad that same year . Kent was also successful in getting the village named as the location of the railroad 's maintenance yards and shops in 1864 . The geographic location along the railroad and being home to the shops reinvented and revitalized the village as an important stop on the east @-@ west line between St. Louis and New York City . The shops would open in 1865 and the railroad would play an important part of Kent 's industry and development through the early 20th century before the shops were completely shut down in 1930 . To honor Marvin Kent , the village was renamed Kent in 1864 , although this change was not official until the village was incorporated on May 6 , 1867 . 
 John Davey came to Kent in 1881 as head grounds keeper at Standing Rock Cemetery , and planted several trees , landscaped the cemetery , and performed experiments on trees . In 1901 , he published his theories on tree surgery with his book The Tree Doctor , and later established the Davey Tree Expert Company in 1909 . The efforts of Davey and the presence of Davey Tree led to the establishment of " The Tree City " as a nickname for Kent , which is reflected in the city 's seal . The company continues to be headquartered in Kent and serves as the city 's largest private employer . 
 After a fire destroyed the Seneca Chain Company in 1909 , one of the city 's main industries at the time , city leaders created the Kent Board of Trade in 1910 , a forerunner to the Chamber of Commerce . The new Board was successful later that year in having Kent selected out of twenty northeastern Ohio cities as the site of a new teacher training college , which became known as the " Kent State Normal School " . The site for the school was on 53 acres ( 21 ha ) of land donated by William S. Kent , son of Marvin Kent , on what was then the eastern edge of town . By 1929 the school was renamed Kent State College after the establishment of a college of liberal arts and degrees in the arts and sciences and in 1935 was renamed Kent State University after it was given authorization to grant advanced graduate degrees . The bill giving Kent State university status was signed into law by Ohio governor and Kent native Martin L. Davey , son of tree surgeon John Davey . During the 1950s and 1960s the growth of Kent State University combined with the effects of suburbanization resulted in significant population growth for the city , rising from just over 12 @,@ 000 residents at the 1950 census to over 28 @,@ 000 by 1970 . Black squirrels were brought to the campus from Canada in 1961 by Kent State University head groundskeeper Larry <unk> . The squirrels have become an icon for both KSU and the city and are often used as unofficial mascots and symbols . 
 In early May 1970 , protests began on the campus of Kent State University over the United States ' invasion of Cambodia in the Vietnam War . These protests and demonstrations , which included rioting in downtown Kent on May 2 , culminated in the Kent State shootings on May 4 , 1970 , where four students were killed and nine were wounded by the Ohio Army National Guard . Several memorials have been placed at the site over the years and commemorations have been held annually since 1971 . In 2010 the entire site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Also during the late 1960s and into the 1970s , construction of Haymaker Parkway , completed in 1975 , brought changes to the city 's layout while eliminating ongoing problems with traffic congestion and blocked rail crossings . 
 In 1995 , Kent received national attention when the city 's water was named " Best Tasting Municipality Water " at the Berkeley Springs International Water Tasting . The water and mayor Kathleen Chandler were featured on the March 3 episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . Since then , Kent has placed in the top five a total of six times with the most recent being a fifth @-@ place finish in 2011 . In 2003 , the 1836 arch dam was bypassed to meet water quality standards set by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency . To preserve the historic dam , a small park was built behind the dam and the river was rerouted through the old canal lock . During warm @-@ weather months , water is pumped over the dam . The park , known as Heritage Park , was formally dedicated in May 2005 . 
 = = = Redevelopment = = = 
 Beginning in 2008 , several redevelopment projects in the downtown area , some of which had been discussed for decades , were put into motion and resulted in nearly $ 110 million in total investment from public and private sources . The first of these was the Phoenix Project , a development privately financed by Kent resident Ron <unk> that renovated and expanded a section of commercial space along East Main Street . Included in the project was construction of a pedestrian alleyway lined with small shops , eventually known as Acorn Alley , which opened in 2009 . A second phase of Acorn Alley opened the next year . Other aspects of the redevelopment , which include a 360 @-@ space parking deck and bus transfer station , a hotel and conference center , and three separate mixed @-@ use buildings , began to take shape in 2010 following the demolition of several buildings in a four block area . New offices for <unk> and the Davey Tree Expert Company opened in late 2012 along with several new small businesses on the first floors of each building . The hotel , operated by Kent State University , opened in June 2013 and the new parking garage , operated by the Portage Area Regional Transportation Authority ( PARTA ) opened April 30 , 2013 , as the Kent Central Gateway . In addition to parking , the facility functions as PARTA 's main bus transfer station and has storefronts on the ground level facing East Erie Street . Included in the redevelopment was the purchase and renovation of the old Kent hotel , which first opened in 1920 . After being mostly vacant since 1979 and completely vacant since 2000 , it re @-@ opened on April 1 , 2013 , as the new home to the Kent location of Buffalo Wild Wings and also houses offices , a wine and jazz bar , and apartments . A five @-@ story mixed @-@ use building called The Landmark was completed in 2014 and construction started in November 2015 on an additional five @-@ story mixed @-@ use building featuring <unk> , scheduled to be completed in 2016 . The developments attracted the attention of The Plain Dealer and The New York Times and earned the city and university the 2013 Larry Abernathy Award from the International Town – Gown Association in recognition of the positive town – gown cooperation and collaboration . 
 Additional development has been ongoing on the campus of Kent State University and the largely residential neighborhood located between downtown Kent and the western edge of campus . The university began buying properties in that neighborhood in 2007 and by December 2012 had acquired 43 . Construction of the University Esplanade extension , designed to link campus with downtown , started in August 2012 after several of the buildings in the area , most of which had been rental homes , were demolished or moved . The Esplanade extension continued a segment of the Portage Hike and Bike Trail that extends to Dix Stadium and was completed in October 2013 . Kent State is constructing a new $ 48 million , 107 @,@ 000 square feet ( 9 @,@ 900 m2 ) facility for the College of Architecture and Environmental Design along the Esplanade extension and also relocated the former home of May Prentice , the first female faculty member at Kent State , to the extension as the home for the Wick Poetry Center . Construction on the architecture building started in October 2014 and is scheduled to be completed in 2016 . In total , there are plans totaling approximately $ 150 million for several other facilities and upgrades across campus , including a new building for the College of Applied Engineering , Sustainability and Technology and a renovation and reorganization of the facilities for the School of Art . The city and county have also seen developments in the same area . A new county municipal courthouse on East Main Street was completed in April 2014 , and in 2015 , Kent City Council approved the sale of the city hall complex to a private developer for construction of a five @-@ story apartment building on the site , scheduled to open in August 2016 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Kent is located in west @-@ central Portage County in Northeast Ohio approximately 10 miles ( 20 km ) northeast of Akron and 30 miles ( 50 km ) southeast of Cleveland . It is bordered by Franklin Township on the north and east , Brimfield Township on the south , and Stow on the west . Other nearby communities include Brady Lake and Ravenna to the east and Sugar Bush Knolls and Streetsboro to the north . It is included in the Akron Metropolitan Statistical Area and the larger Cleveland – Akron – Canton Combined Statistical Area . 
 Located on the western end of the Glaciated Allegheny Plateau , the topography of Kent includes rolling hills and varied terrain . The Cuyahoga River passes through the city , cutting a gorge with a drop of nearly 40 feet ( 10 m ) adjacent to the downtown area . The United States Geological Survey lists the city 's elevation at 1 @,@ 056 feet ( 322 m ) above sea level at a point near Kent 's geographic center . Elevations vary slightly within the city limits with several buildings on the Kent State University campus at altitudes in excess of 1 @,@ 160 feet ( 350 m ) and points as high as 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , as of 2010 the city has a total area of 9 @.@ 28 square miles ( 24 @.@ 04 km2 ) , of which 9 @.@ 17 square miles ( 23 @.@ 75 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 11 square miles ( 0 @.@ 28 km2 ) is water . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Kent 's climate is classified as a humid continental climate in the Dfa Köppen climate classification meaning it typically has very warm , humid summers and cold , snowy winters with moderate and variable spring and autumn seasons . The record high temperature is 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) , set on July 7 , 1988 , with the record low of − 22 ° F ( − 30 ° C ) recorded January 17 , 1982 . During the spring and summer months , thunderstorms are fairly common and the area is susceptible to tornadoes , though the last recorded tornado in Kent occurred in 1973 . Effects from tropical systems can also be felt , usually taking the form of increased humidity , rain , and wind , such as with the remnants of Hurricane Ike in September 2008 . During the winter months , snowfall is common and can occur in large quantities with considerable cloud cover . Kent is not considered part of the Lake Erie snowbelt , though lake @-@ effect snow does occur at times . The city is in what is referred to as the " secondary snowbelt " , meaning it will receive heavier snowfall totals from lake @-@ effect snow when certain wind directions are more prevalent , but typically sees far less snowfall than areas to the north closer to Lake Erie . While temperatures below the freezing point are typical in the winter months , thaw periods where temperatures exceed 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) and even 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) are not uncommon in January and February . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As a college town , Kent 's demographic and population statistics are greatly affected by the presence and growth of Kent State University . As a result , several statistics are noticeably higher or lower than state and national averages including median age and the percentage of residents in the 18 – 24 age bracket , individuals below the poverty line , and percentage of residents with a college degree . 
 Initial population growth in Kent was influenced by the location on the Cuyahoga River which led to the development of industrial and manufacturing jobs . Early settlers mainly came from the northeastern United States and were largely of German descent . After the arrival of the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad in 1863 , growth was steady into the early 20th century with the village battling Ravenna for the position of Portage County 's largest city . By the 1930 Census , Kent had passed Ravenna as the county 's most populous city with even larger population growth in the 1950s and 1960s rising from 12 @,@ 148 in 1950 to 28 @,@ 183 by 1970 . As of 2010 , Kent remains the county 's largest city . Most recent population measurements of the city have shown the effect of changes in the city 's overall population coinciding with changes in the number of students living on campus as well as a reduction in the number of persons per housing unit . 
 As of the 2010 Census , there were 28 @,@ 904 people residing in the city for a population density of 3 @,@ 150 @.@ 5 people per square mile ( 1 @,@ 216 @.@ 4 / km ² ) . There were 11 @,@ 174 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 218 @.@ 0 per square mile ( 470 @.@ 3 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 83 @.@ 1 % White , 9 @.@ 6 % African American , 3 @.@ 7 % Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % Native American , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 5 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 9 % from two or more races . 2 @.@ 2 % of the population is Hispanic or Latino of any race . Though slightly below the national averages for diversity , Kent is very close to the averages for Ohio and above the averages for the surrounding area . Between the 2000 and 2010 censuses , the city saw slight increases in the number of minority residents . The 2015 estimate placed the population at 29 @,@ 810 . 
 There were 10 @,@ 288 households in 2010 out of which 20 @.@ 9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 27 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 12 @.@ 5 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 56 @.@ 3 % were non @-@ families . 33 @.@ 4 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8 @.@ 0 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size in Kent was 2 @.@ 2 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 86 , which compares with the national average of 2 @.@ 58 for a household and 3 @.@ 14 for a family and the state average household size of 2 @.@ 44 and average family size of 3 @.@ 01 . 
 In the city the population was spread out with 29 @.@ 4 % ages 19 years and under , 44 @.@ 1 % from 20 to 39 , 15 @.@ 9 % from 40 to 59 , 8 @.@ 0 % from 60 to 79 , and 2 @.@ 5 % who were 80 years of age or older . The median age was 22 @.@ 7 years , which was well below both the median age for Ohio ( 38 @.@ 8 ) and the United States ( 35 @.@ 3 ) . The city 's population was 46 @.@ 3 % male and 53 @.@ 7 % female . The rate differs slightly from the national average of 49 @.@ 2 % male and 50 @.@ 8 % female and the state average of 48 @.@ 8 % male and 51 @.@ 2 % female . It contrasts with neighboring Franklin Township , which has a population that is 51 @.@ 3 % male and 48 @.@ 7 % female . 
 The mean income for a household in the city was $ 46 @,@ 848 , well below the mean household incomes for Ohio ( $ 61 @,@ 397 ) and the United States ( $ 70 @,@ 116 ) in the 2010 Census . The median household income in Kent was $ 28 @,@ 958 , compared to $ 46 @,@ 563 for Ohio and $ 51 @,@ 222 for the U.S. For families , the mean income in Kent was $ 71 @,@ 817 with a median income of $ 59 @,@ 936 , both of which were closer to the state ( $ 73 @,@ 084 mean , $ 58 @,@ 566 median ) and national ( $ 81 @,@ 568 mean , $ 62 @,@ 112 median ) averages . Males had a median income of $ 35 @,@ 316 versus $ 35 @,@ 255 for females . The per capita income for workers in the city was $ 18 @,@ 339 . 10 @.@ 4 % of families and 29 @.@ 3 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 21 @.@ 1 % of those under age 18 and 6 @.@ 6 % of those age 65 or over . While the number of individuals below the poverty line is significantly higher than both the state and national averages , with 14 @.@ 8 % of individuals in Ohio and 14 @.@ 4 % in the United States being below the poverty line , the percentage of families below the poverty line is slightly below the state ( 10 @.@ 5 % ) and national ( 10 @.@ 8 % ) averages . Measures of high poverty rates in similar college towns , however , is not uncommon across the U.S. 
 Educationally , Kent is above the national , state , and local averages for residents who have attained a bachelor 's , master 's , or above a master 's degree . At the 2010 Census , 41 @.@ 9 % of Kent 's population above the age of 25 had obtained a college degree compared to 24 @.@ 9 % of the same population in Portage County , 24 @.@ 1 % statewide , and 27 @.@ 9 % nationally . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Kent 's location along the Cuyahoga River and later the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal and multiple railroad lines made it attractive initially for the establishment of small gristmills for the production of flour and various factories . Progressively larger factories later developed due to increased power available from the river and eventually due to the ease and lower cost of transportation of goods to other markets . During the latter half of the 19th century and into the early 20th century , the city 's largest employers were all industrially based , including the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad and its successors , which operated its main maintenance shops in the village ; the Seneca Chain Company ; and bus manufacturer Twin Coach among others . A disastrous fire at the Seneca Chain Company in 1909 led to the creation of the Kent Board of Trade — an early Chamber of Commerce — which was successful in getting Kent selected in 1910 as the site of what would become Kent State University . 
 Changes in the structure of the railroad and declines in the manufacturing sector during the mid @-@ 20th century combined with the rapid growth of Kent State University following World War II led to the university becoming the city 's largest employer and influenced the development of other areas of the city 's economy . Beginning in the late first decade of the 21st century , the university , along with the city and private investors , began to play a more active role in the redevelopment of downtown Kent and has aided in the development of local high tech companies . Kent State operates Centennial Research Park , along Ohio State Route 59 in Kent 's Joint Economic Development District with Franklin Township , which houses two high tech start @-@ up companies in the liquid crystal industry . Kent has an additional Joint Economic Development District with Brimfield Township . Through the Kent Regional Business Alliance , the city also supports two business incubators . 
 As of 2010 , the educational , health , and social services fields were the city 's largest sector , and employed over 33 @.@ 5 % of well as Robinson Memorial Hospital , which operates an outpatient surgery center and general medical facility . 16 @.@ 3 % of the workforce is employed in arts , entertainment , and food service , with 12 @.@ 2 % employed in retail . Manufacturing accounts for 7 @.@ 1 % of the workforce with a Land O ' Lakes plant being the largest employer in the sector . Smithers @-@ Oasis , a floristry developer and manufacturer , was founded in Kent in 1954 and operates a plant in the city , with plans to return corporate offices to Kent by September 2013 . Kent is also home to the corporate headquarters of the Davey Tree Expert Company , which serves as the city 's largest private employer . In 2010 Davey Tree announced plans to relocate staff from its Davey Resource Group , who were previously in neighboring Stow , to Kent as part of a planned downtown development and has stated long @-@ term goals include having all corporate offices in Kent . The office , which included some office staff already in Kent at the main corporate headquarters , opened in August 2012 . 
 75 @.@ 1 % of those employed commuted alone to work by way of a car , truck , or van with another 7 @.@ 1 % carpooling . 10 @.@ 6 % of workers walked to work with 1 @.@ 9 % using public transportation . The average commute time was 22 minutes . 13 @.@ 0 % of the workforce was unemployed in 2010 , above the 9 @.@ 8 % for the state and 9 @.@ 0 % <unk> the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated the unemployment rate in Kent at 7 @.@ 9 % in 2010 and 6 @.@ 6 % in October 2011 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Cultural elements in Kent include various arts , environmental , and entertainment events during the year , as well as the Kent State University Museum . The Kent Heritage Festival is held every July in the downtown area , coinciding with the U.S. Independence Day . The festival includes crafts , booths , entertainment , train rides , 5K and 10K races , and fireworks , drawing approximately 25 @,@ 000 people each year . In October , Kent hosts the homecoming festivities for Kent State University , including a parade down East Main Street as well as other events and activities both on campus and around the city . Also in October , the downtown area hosts an annual , yet unofficial , Halloween celebration , which usually takes place the last Saturday of October . The event typically draws thousands , largely Kent State students , and includes many who dress in costume . In 2007 Main Street Kent , a local organization that promotes downtown Kent , created a family @-@ oriented Halloween event downtown that precedes the unofficial celebration . Since 2007 , Kent has hosted an annual environmental festival known as " Who 's Your Mama ? " which takes place in conjunction with Earth Day . The festival has events at various locations in the city , such as a vegan chef competition , concerts , a film festival , guest speakers , and booths on environment @-@ based topics . Through Main Street Kent , additional events downtown include an ice cream social event in August , an outdoor concert series and " sidewalk cinema " between May and September , an art and wine festival in June , a cider festival in November , and the Festival of Lights Christmas celebration in early December . 
 From May to October , the Haymaker Farmers ' Market operates every Saturday morning in the downtown area adjacent to and under the Greer Bridge of Haymaker Parkway . The location is marked by a commissioned mural completed in October 2012 on the two bridge supports that line each side of the market 's area . The market was established in 1992 and includes over 40 vendors , making it one of the oldest and largest farmers ' markets in Northeast Ohio . An indoor Winter Market , established in 2008 , is held Saturday mornings from November through April . 
 The Kent Stage , located downtown , is a performance venue for a variety of arts performances in music and theater . It hosts around 90 concerts , four theatrical performances , and four film festivals or movie premiers per year , including local , national , and international performers . Since opening in 2002 , it has been visited by approximately 120 @,@ 000 patrons from all over Ohio , 38 U.S. states , and 3 countries . In April , it hosts events related to the " Who 's Your Mama ? " Earth Day festival and in June , it is one of the host venues for the Kent Folk Festival , an annual event in folk music since the late 1960s . The festival includes multiple folk music acts at venues throughout the city over a period of several days . The Kent Stage also hosts the Kent Blues Festival and a local artist music festival known as the Up From The River Music Festival . 
 Kent is also home to the Kent State University Museum , located in Rockwell Hall on the KSU campus . The museum focuses on the history of fashion design and decorative arts in the United States and around the world from the 18th century to the present . Each year in early May , the university hosts an annual commemoration of the Kent State shootings , which typically features several speakers , forums , artwork , and other related events . On campus , Kent State operates the May 4 Visitors ' Center , which covers the shootings and the events surrounding them . It is housed in Taylor Hall on the site added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2010 and includes three galleries covering art and media from the era of the 1960s leading up to the shootings , images from the actual event , and the local and national impact after the shootings . The center opened to the public October 20 , 2012 , during the Kent State Homecoming weekend . 
 In addition to the Kent State Shootings Site near the center of campus , there are also a number of additional sites and districts in Kent on the National Register of Historic Places , some of which are open to the public . The Kent Industrial District is a historical district along the Cuyahoga River adjacent to downtown that includes an area and structures that were important in Kent 's early history . On the northwestern part of the Kent State University campus is the Ohio State Normal College At Kent district , which includes the school 's five original classic revival buildings dating to 1913 . There is also the West Main Street District just west of downtown that includes 20 private homes of architectural and historical significance from the post @-@ Civil War and early 20th century periods . The district includes the Kent Masonic Center , which was originally built in the early 1880s as the home of Marvin Kent and his family , and the former residence of Martin L. Davey , who served as Governor of Ohio . Buildings in Kent listed on the register include three private homes noted for their architecture styles : the John Davey House for the Second Empire style , and both the Aaron Ferrey and Charles Kent Houses as examples of Gothic Revival . Other buildings include the 1869 Kent Jail , now used by the Parks and Recreation Department , and the 1837 Franklin Township Hall , the site of eventual U.S. President James A. Garfield 's first nomination for public office in 1859 . As part of its renovation and redevelopment , the former Franklin Hotel , first opened in 1920 , was added to the NRHP in 2013 for its local historical significance and its connections to notable people . 
 = = Sports = = 
 As the home of Kent State University , Kent is also the home of the university 's athletic teams , the Golden Flashes , who compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) at the Division I level as a member of the Mid @-@ American Conference East Division . Several of Kent State 's teams have enjoyed league and national success , the most notable being the men 's basketball team 's run to the Elite Eight in the 2002 NCAA Tournament and the baseball team 's appearance in the 2012 College World Series . The 6 @,@ 327 @-@ seat Memorial Athletic and Convocation Center , commonly referred to as the MAC Center , is the site of a number of athletic events in multiple sports , including wrestling , women 's gymnastics , and women 's volleyball in addition to men 's and women 's basketball . It is also a regular site for the Mid @-@ American Conference 's wrestling and women 's gymnastics championships . 
 In addition to hosting the KSU football team , Kent State 's 25 @,@ 319 @-@ seat Dix Stadium has been a venue for high school football games both in the regular @-@ season and the state playoffs . The adjacent Murphy @-@ Mellis Field is a location for Ohio High School Athletic Association ( OHSAA ) field hockey tournament games and the Diamond at Dix is a regular venue for OHSAA regional softball tournament games . From 1975 to 1981 the Cleveland Browns held their training camp in Kent at Kent State University . 
 The Kent State University Ice Arena serves as host to several local ice hockey programs including youth leagues , high school and professional teams , and as a site for OHSAA high school tournament games and ice skating competitions in addition to being home of KSU 's club team , which competes in the American Collegiate Hockey Association . The ice arena is also the home of the Kent Twisters , a member of the Pennsylvania @-@ Ohio Women 's Hockey Association , an adult amateur women 's ice hockey league . Kent also plays host to the Portage County Open tennis tournament , held annually at the tennis courts of Theodore Roosevelt High School . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 The city operates nearly 20 parks and preserves , the largest of which is the 56 @-@ acre ( 23 ha ) Fred Fuller park along the Cuyahoga River , named after a former Kent Parks chairman . The park includes the Kramer Fields baseball and softball complex , which contains four fields , two of which are lighted . Several of the parks along the Cuyahoga River are on or near areas of historical significance . Franklin Mills <unk> Park , which follows the Cuyahoga River through downtown Kent , passes through a large portion of the Kent Industrial District along with Heritage Park and includes sites related to the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal . Adjacent on the south is the John Brown Tannery Park , on the site of the former tannery John Brown helped fund with Zenas Kent in the 1830s , while Brady 's Leap park , adjacent to the north , is at the location of the famed leap over the Cuyahoga River by Captain Samuel Brady circa 1780 . The parks and recreation department , in addition to operating and maintaining the city 's parks and preserves , also operates a recreation center on the city 's south side and offers several sports , arts , and education programs at various locations in Kent . The department also sponsors events throughout the year including Art in the Park , an ice @-@ skating party , hayrides , and Santa 's Arrival . The Kent City School District operates an indoor pool at Theodore Roosevelt High School that is available for public recreational and instructional use outside of its use by the school for athletics and physical education . The pool hosts swimming lessons and serves as a home venue for the Hudson @-@ based Hudson Explorers Aquatic Team , a competitive swimming program for ages five and above . 
 Within the city is are segments of the Portage Hike and Bike Trail , which is jointly managed with Kent State University , the Portage Park District , and the city of Ravenna . The main portion of the trail follows the Cuyahoga River in Kent with most of the trail paved with asphalt . In August 2012 , as part of several redevelopment projects in the downtown area , Kent State University began construction of the Esplanade Extension , which was completed in August 2013 and connects the university 's portion of trail extending to Dix Stadium , known as the University Esplanade , to downtown Kent . The trail connects with the hike and bike trails in neighboring Summit County and links Kent with nearby communities in Portage County . The city is also home to the Tom S. <unk> @-@ Kent Bog State Nature Preserve , located in the southern edge of Kent . It is one of the most intact bogs in Ohio , with the southernmost and largest stand of tamarack trees in the continental United States . 
 Through partnerships with Kent State University Recreational Services and other local agencies , additional recreational opportunities are available to city residents . A livery known as Crooked River Adventures is available at Tannery Park . The livery generally operates from May to October depending on weather and water levels . Canoe , kayak , tubing , and bicycle rentals are available to residents and students with kayak and canoe service as far as Brust Park in Munroe Falls and Water Works Park in Cuyahoga Falls . Kent also has a bicycle @-@ sharing system known as <unk> in partnership with the university and PARTA . The program offers yearly memberships or hourly rentals with locations on campus and in the downtown area . 
 = = Government = = 
 Kent is governed by a charter form of government with a council – manager system of nine council members and a mayor . The city is divided into six wards and voters select a mayor , a council member representing their ward , and three at @-@ large council members in staggered four @-@ year terms . The city charter , adopted in 1963 , is reviewed by a charter commission every 10 years who then make recommendations for changes , the last review being in 2015 . The city council hires a city manager who oversees the day @-@ to @-@ day operations in the various city departments and enforces policies set by council . The mayor serves a largely ceremonial role as president of the council and votes only in the event of a tie . Kent voters approved the change from a mayor @-@ council system to council @-@ manager in 1975 and it went into effect in 1977 . Jerry Fiala began his term as mayor January 1 , 2010 , and Dave <unk> began serving as city manager June 15 , 2005 . 
 As part of the city government , Kent also has departments of community development , health , human services , law , parks and recreation , public safety , and public service . The Public Service Department oversees a variety of construction and maintenance works as well as the city 's water treatment and water reclamation systems while the Public Safety Department includes both the police and fire departments . The Kent Police Department is housed in the city 's Safety Administration Building and includes 911 dispatch for Kent and Franklin Township . Kent State University also operates its own police department , which mainly patrols the KSU campus and KSU property in and out of the Kent city limits . The two departments frequently communicate and for several years were headed by identical twin brothers : James Peach in the city and John Peach at the university . The fire department operates two stations , the main station adjacent to the Safety Administration Building and the West Side Fire Station along North Mantua Street on the western side of the Cuyahoga River . Kent Fire also provides fire and emergency medical service coverage for Franklin Township and the village of Sugar Bush Knolls . 
 The city 's main sources of tax revenue come from income tax , set at 2 @.@ 25 % , and property tax . Voters approved an increase in the income tax rate from 2 @.@ 0 % in November 2013 to fund a new police station and the new rate took effect January 1 , 2014 . The rate increase includes a sunset provision that requires the tax rate to return to 2 @.@ 0 % once debt is paid off on the new facility . In 2014 , the city operated on a budget of approximately $ 40 million . The largest percentage of the budget , 31 % or $ 11 @.@ 9 million , was spent on public safety services followed by 22 % or $ 8 @.@ 5 million on basic utilities . Debt service accounted for $ 6 @.@ 0 million or 17 % of the budget while transportation projects accounted for 9 % or $ 3 @.@ 37 million of the budget , 8 % or $ 3 @.@ 33 million towards general government expenses , and $ 2 @.@ 35 million allocated for construction of a new police station . 
 At the state level , Kent is in the 68th district of the Ohio House of Representatives , represented since 2011 by Democrat Kathleen Clyde , a Kent resident . In the State Senate , Kent is part of the 18th district , represented since 2011 by Republican John Eklund of Geauga County . At the Federal level , Kent is included in Ohio 's 13th congressional district , represented since 2003 by Democrat Tim Ryan of Niles . 
 = = Education = = 
 Preschool , elementary , and secondary education is mainly provided by the Kent City School District with the small portion of the city south of State Route 261 a part of the neighboring Field Local School District . The Kent district was created around 1860 and later merged with the Franklin Township and Brady Lake school districts in 1959 . It serves most of Kent and Franklin Township , the villages of Brady Lake and Sugar Bush Knolls and a small part of southern Streetsboro . Kent has four neighborhood elementary schools that serve students in grades K – 5 , Stanton Middle School for grades 6 – 8 , and Theodore Roosevelt High School for grades 9 – 12 . The district also operates a preschool program housed at Davey Elementary School , and is a member of the Six District Educational Compact with five surrounding districts to facilitate vocational education , with many of these programs housed at Roosevelt High School . In 1985 , Roosevelt High School was given the United States Department of Education Excellence in Education award and the school has consistently been rated " Excellent " by the Ohio Department of Education since 2004 . For 2010 and 2015 , it was named in US News & World Report as one of the best high schools in the United States , earning the publication 's Bronze Medal designation . The Kent City School District has been consistently rated as " Excellent " or " Effective " by the Ohio Department of Education and in 2007 Walls Elementary School was named a " School of Promise " by the Ohio Department of Education , while <unk> Elementary earned the U.S. Department of Education 's prestigious Blue Ribbon School award . Kent also has one private school , St. Patrick School , which serves around 300 students in grades K – 8 from Kent and several surrounding communities . It is part of Kent 's St. Patrick parish and is affiliated with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Youngstown . 
 The Kent Free Library is the main public library . It was established in 1892 after Kent became the first village in Ohio to use an 1892 state law which allowed municipalities under a population of 5 @,@ 000 to tax residents for the upkeep of a library . Andrew Carnegie donated $ 10 @,@ 000 in 1901 for construction of a permanent home for the library , which opened in 1903 . The 2006 expansion to the library brought available space to 55 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 100 m2 ) with a book collection of 147 @,@ 390 items as of 2010 . It is a school district library associated with the Kent City School District and is also part of the Portage Library Consortium , connecting it with Reed Memorial Library in Ravenna and the Portage County District Library , which maintains six branch libraries across the county and a bookmobile . 
 The main campus of Kent State University is located in the southeastern part of the city . The campus itself occupies approximately 866 acres ( 350 ha ) and the university owns thousands of additional acres adjacent to the campus . Additional facilities include a research park and golf course just east of the city limits in Franklin Township and the Kent State University Airport , just west of Kent in Stow . Founded in 1910 as a teacher training institution , the university has become a world leader in the development of liquid crystals through the Liquid Crystal Institute and was the site of the first patent for the modern liquid crystal in the 1970s . Kent State also has a nationally recognized fashion design program and nationally ranked programs in library science and business . As of 2010 , the College of Nursing is the 5th @-@ largest nursing school in the United States and largest in Ohio . In 2009 the university inaugurated the College of Public Health , the second public health program in Ohio and 33rd in the U.S. The Kent State library system , which includes the 12 @-@ story main library and houses over 2 @.@ 6 million volumes , includes six additional department libraries on the main campus and a branch at each of the seven regional campuses . The library system is a member of the Association of Research Libraries , one of 3 in Ohio and 124 in North America . The university offers over 300 programs of study combined in the undergraduate and graduate levels and serves over 41 @,@ 000 students in eight campuses across Northeast Ohio with over 30 @,@ 000 at the campus in Kent . 
 = = Media = = 
 Kent is part of the Cleveland @-@ Akron Television Market Area as defined by the Federal Communications Commission , which includes a 17 @-@ county region of Northeast Ohio . As of 2015 it ranks as the 18th @-@ largest media market in the United States according to Nielsen Media Research . While most stations are located in Cleveland and Akron , Kent is home to the offices and main studio of Western Reserve Public Media , the PBS affiliate for Akron and Youngstown . The studios for <unk> and <unk> , local affiliates for the Retro Television Network , are located just east of the city limits in Franklin Township . TV @-@ 2 , a Kent State University student @-@ run production , is available on campus , on local cable , and online . Kent is also in range of the television stations that broadcast out of Youngstown . 
 For radio , Kent is part of the Akron Radio Market , though it is within range of major stations in the Cleveland Radio Market as well as many in the Youngstown @-@ Warren and Canton markets . Three stations , two FM and one AM , are licensed to Kent . <unk> , at 89 @.@ 7 FM , broadcasts from the campus of Kent State University and is the main affiliate for National Public Radio in Northeast Ohio for the Akron , Canton , and Cleveland radio markets via repeaters around the region . <unk> , at 100 @.@ 1 FM , is broadcast from studios shared with sister station <unk> and television stations <unk> and <unk> in Franklin Township . <unk> is centered on talk radio and news and is a local affiliate of ABC Radio and Westwood One . <unk> , which broadcasts at 1520 AM , is a daytime @-@ only news / talk station . Black Squirrel Radio is a student @-@ run online station from Kent State available online and on local cable . 
 The Record @-@ Courier , a daily newspaper which mainly covers Portage County , is the main source of printed news media for Kent . The Record @-@ Courier was formed by the merger of the Ravenna Evening Record and the Kent Courier @-@ Tribune and is published by the Record Publishing Company . The Record @-@ Courier maintained an office in Kent until 2008 before all offices were moved to Kent from Ravenna in 2012 . In addition to the Record @-@ Courier , the Kent offices house the various departments of Record Publishing and its other weekly newspapers that serve several Summit and Portage County communities . The building also includes some of the corporate offices of parent company Dix Communications , a regional media company in printed and radio media that also has offices in Wooster , Ohio . Kent Patch , a local division of Patch Media , mainly serves as an online bulletin board for local events . It was established in 2010 and functioned as a news source specific to Kent before Patch Media downsized hundreds of local Patch sites across the United States in October 2013 . The city is also served by Kent State University 's Daily Kent Stater , which is available in print at select locations on and off campus and online via <unk> , a collaborative site with TV @-@ 2 and Black Squirrel Radio . The Akron Beacon Journal and The Plain Dealer also serve Kent through regional coverage and delivery . Magazines published at Kent State include Fusion , a magazine devoted to sexual minority issues ; Kent State Magazine , an official publication of the university ; and The Burr , a student @-@ run magazine about events going on in and around Kent . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 The city operates its own water system , drawing groundwater from wells with an adjacent water treatment plant located just outside the city limits in Franklin Township as well as using a water reclamation facility along the Cuyahoga River in the southwestern part of the city . Waste collection for the entire city is handled through a local private contractor and Portage County handles the city 's recycling collection . Kent 's original recycling program was developed in 1970 by the Kent Environmental Council and was Ohio 's first comprehensive and self @-@ supporting program . Local phone utilities are provided through AT & T Ohio through the 330 and 234 area codes , electricity is supplied and lines are maintained by FirstEnergy in the former coverage area of Ohio Edison , and natural gas is supplied and lines are maintained by Dominion Resources East Ohio Energy . While residents are free to choose their own natural gas and electric suppliers , the city is part of the Northeast Ohio Public Energy Council , or <unk> , the largest government aggregation in the United States . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 State Route 59 is the main east – west highway , following East and West Main Streets and Haymaker Parkway . Summit Street is another major east @-@ west road mainly on Kent 's eastern side , passing through and linking much of the Kent State campus . Fairchild Avenue is an important east @-@ west road on the city 's west side connecting with Stow and Cuyahoga Falls . State Route 43 is the main north – south highway , mainly following North Mantua and South Water Streets . SR 43 connects Kent with Interstate 76 , approximately 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the south via exit 33 in Brimfield and to the Ohio Turnpike / Interstate 80 and the eastern terminus of Interstate 480 , approximately 7 miles ( 11 km ) to the north via Turnpike exit 187 in Streetsboro . Both SR 43 and SR 59 are four to five @-@ lane roads within the city limits . State Route 261 passes through the southern and eastern edges of the city and is a four @-@ lane divided highway for a short distance with the remainder a two @-@ lane highway . It serves as a bypass between SR 43 , SR 59 , and Summit Street on Kent 's south and eastern sides and to Tallmadge on the southwest . 
 Public transportation is provided by the Portage Area Regional Transportation Authority , known as PARTA , which is headquartered just outside the city limits in Franklin Township . PARTA serves Kent through a dial @-@ a @-@ ride service , the Suburban and Kent Circulator routes completely within the city limits , the seasonal Black Squirrel route along SR 59 during Kent State University 's Fall and Spring semesters , and the Interurban connecting with Stow and Ravenna . There are also two express routes , one to Akron connecting with METRO Regional Transit Authority via Brimfield , and a Cleveland Express route connecting with the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority via Streetsboro , <unk> , and Maple Heights . PARTA also includes Campus Bus Service , which provides three fixed routes on the campus of Kent State University . An intermodal transit facility , known as the Kent Central Gateway , opened in 2013 in the downtown area to provide better integration of the existing bus system , hike @-@ and @-@ bike trails , and parking . The building was financed mainly from a $ 20 million Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery ( TIGER ) grant received in February 2010 and construction began in April 2011 . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Hospital care is provided mainly through University Hospitals Portage Medical Center , affiliated with University Hospitals of Cleveland , which operates the UH Kent Health Center in the southern part of the city . The UH Kent Health Center includes an outpatient surgery center as well as a medical arts building housing a medical imaging center and family medicine doctors . The 150 @-@ bed main hospital is located in Ravenna and the system operates additional facilities throughout Portage County . Free clinics include the <unk> Community Health Center , located just east of the city limits in the Joint Economic Development District with Franklin Township , and a clinic in the downtown area operated by social agency Townhall II . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The earliest organized religious services in Kent were held in 1815 when a Methodist group was formed , followed by a Congregational church in 1819 . The first religious meetinghouse in Kent , which also served as the first schoolhouse , was built in 1817 and was used by several different denominations . Later , the Methodists built another building in 1828 that was also used by multiple denominations . The oldest church building in Kent still used as a place of worship is the Unitarian Universalist Church on <unk> Avenue , which was dedicated in 1868 . The former home of the Congregational Church was dedicated in 1858 and still stands along <unk> Avenue very near the Unitarian Universalist Church . It served as the home of the First Congregational Church — which became the Kent United Church of Christ in 1964 — until 1955 . It was later purchased by a local business and used as their corporate headquarters . 
 As of 2010 , within the city are two Roman Catholic parishes affiliated with the Diocese of Youngstown , one a family parish and one a Newman Center , as well as congregations of the United Methodist Church , African Methodist Episcopal Church , Free Methodist Church , United Church of Christ , Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod , Evangelical Lutheran Church in America , Church of the Brethren , the Christian Church ( Disciples of Christ ) , Presbyterian Church , Church of Christ , Episcopal Church , and Jehovah 's Witnesses . There are also Unitarian Universalist , non @-@ denominational Christian , and Bahá 'í Faith congregations . Although there are no Jewish synagogues or temples , there is a Hillel Jewish student center on the campus of Kent State University which serves students at both Kent State and the University of Akron . Just outside the city limits in Franklin Township are the Kent congregations of the Church of the Nazarene , Assemblies of God , as well as Baptist and Free Will Baptist churches . The Islamic Society of Akron and Kent operates a masjid and school on its main campus in Cuyahoga Falls , west of Kent . It was founded in Kent in 1979 and maintains an additional masjid in the city . Kent is also part of a ward of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints in <unk> that was first organized in Kent and includes most of southern Portage County . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Kent has produced and been home to a number of notable individuals in varying fields . Its natives and residents are referred to as " <unk> " . John Davey , a pioneer in tree surgery and founder of the Davey Tree Expert Company moved to Kent in the 1880s . His son , Martin L. Davey , would later serve as Governor of Ohio and a U.S. Representative . Other political figures to come from Kent include Wisconsin governor Lucius Fairchild , former U.S. Representative Robert E. Cook , and noted abolitionist John Brown , who lived in what was then Franklin Mills from 1835 – 1839 . Noted athletes to have come from Kent include former National Football League players Mike Adamle , Tom DeLeone , and Stan White and former Major League Baseball player , manager , and executive Gene Michael . Three members of the band Devo , which debuted in Kent in 1973 and was founded by Kent State University students , are natives of Kent : Gerald Casale , Peter Gregg , and Rod Reisman . Other performing artists to come from Kent include singer Julianne Baird , playwright Vincent J. Cardinal , and voice actor Joshua Seth . Lucien Price , an author and writer for The Boston Evening Transcript and The Atlantic Monthly grew up in Kent and used the pseudonym " <unk> " for Kent in some of his stories . Kent was also the home of inventor Lucien B. Smith , regarded as the inventor of barbed wire . Additionally , people who have lived in Kent while attending Kent State University include comedians Drew Carey and Arsenio Hall , actor Michael Keaton , musicians Joe Walsh and Chrissie Hynde , and additional members of the band Devo . Athletes include football players Antonio Gates , Joshua Cribbs , and Jack Lambert ; Major League Baseball players Thurman Munson , Rich Rollins , and Andy <unk> ; college football coaches Nick Saban and Lou Holtz ; and golfer Ben Curtis , who resides in Franklin Township just north of the Kent city limits and lists Kent as his residence . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Kent has one sister city , Dudince , a small spa town of about 1 @,@ 500 people in southern Slovakia . The relationship was established in 2003 through Sister Cities International and resulted in the formation of the Kent @-@ Dudince Sister City Association to promote learning and understanding of the Slovakian culture . The group meets regularly and organizes cultural exchanges and programs that feature Slovakian dance and music . Cultural exchanges have included a performance of a choir from Kent 's Theodore Roosevelt High School in Dudince in 2004 and tour groups from Kent visiting in 2006 and 2008 . 
 = ' Round Springfield = 
 " ' Round Springfield " is the 22nd episode of the sixth season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 30 , 1995 . In the episode , Bart is rushed to the hospital after eating a jagged metal Krusty @-@ O and decides to sue Krusty the Clown . Whilst visiting Bart , Lisa meets her old mentor , jazz musician Bleeding Gums Murphy ( last seen in Moaning Lisa ) . She is saddened when she later learns that Murphy has died , and resolves to honor his memory . Steve Allen ( as himself ) and Ron Taylor ( as Bleeding Gums Murphy ) guest star , each in their second appearance on the show . Dan Higgins also returns as the writer and performer of all of Lisa and Bleeding Gums ' saxophone solos . 
 It was written by Joshua Sternin and Jeffrey Ventimilia based on a story idea by Al Jean and Mike Reiss and was the first episode directed by Steven Dean Moore . Jean and Reiss , who were previously the series ' showrunners , returned to produce this episode ( as well as " A Star Is Burns " ) in order to lessen the workload of the show 's regular staff . They worked on it alongside the staff of The Critic , the series they had left The Simpsons to create . The episode marks the first time in which a recurring character was killed off in the show , something the staff had considered for a while . The episode features numerous cultural references , including Carole King 's song " Jazzman " , the actor James Earl Jones and the Kimba the White Lion / The Lion King controversy . 
 The episode also features the phrase " cheese @-@ eating surrender monkeys " , used by Groundskeeper Willie to describe the French , which has since entered the public lexicon . It has been used and referenced frequently by journalists and academics and has been included in two Oxford quotation dictionaries . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the day of a history test at school , Bart gets a stomachache after accidentally eating a jagged metal Krusty @-@ O with his breakfast cereal . Lisa is the only one who believes him , however , and Homer and Marge send him to school anyway . Bart struggles through the test , and after finally convincing Mrs. Krabappel that he is actually ill , she lets him go and see the nurse . Bart collapses on the medical room floor , and is taken to Springfield General Hospital where he undergoes surgery from Dr. Hibbert and Dr. Nick , as it emerges he has appendicitis . While visiting Bart in the hospital , Lisa meets her hero , <unk> Bleeding Gums Murphy , in a bed in another ward . 
 Later , Bleeding Gums lends Lisa his saxophone for her school recital . It starts off terribly ( owing to most of the orchestra having their <unk> removed so they could miss school ) , but Lisa gets up and performs a solo routine , becoming the star of the show . Returning to the hospital the next day , Lisa is saddened to learn that Bleeding Gums has died . Lisa is the only person who attends Bleeding Gums 's funeral , and she vows to make sure that everyone in Springfield knows the name Bleeding Gums Murphy . Bart , meanwhile , sues Krusty the Clown and is given a $ 100 @,@ 000 settlement . However , after Bart 's attorney Lionel Hutz takes his " legal fees " , Bart is left with only $ 500 , but does not realize the con and is thrilled with the amount . 
 Still stricken with grief , Lisa decides that the best way to honor Bleeding Gums ' memory is by having his album played at the local jazz station . Lisa spots it in the Android 's Dungeon store for $ 250 , but after hearing that Bleeding Gums is dead , Comic Book Guy doubles the price to $ 500 . Bart then walks in with his $ 500 to buy the ultimate pog with Steve Allen 's face . However , after remembering that Lisa was the only one who believed him about his stomachache , Bart decides to buy the album with his money . Lisa thanks him for it , but is worried he may never get the pog he wanted . Bart reassures her that he 's ok with it and reveals he got a better deal . He shows Lisa the new Krusty O 's cereal with flesh @-@ eating bacteria prizes in every box . When the station plays one of Bleeding Gums 's songs , Lisa is disappointed because the station 's tiny range still prevents anyone from hearing it . Lightning then strikes the antenna , giving it extra power and projecting it into every radio in Springfield . Lisa is finally satisfied . After proclaiming " that was for you Bleeding Gums , " she turns to leave , but not before Bleeding Gums appears from the heavens to tell Lisa that she had made " an old jazz man happy " . After saying a final goodbye , Lisa and Bleeding Gums jam to " Jazzman " one last time . 
 = = Production = = 
 " ' Round Springfield " was written by Joshua Sternin and Jeffrey Ventimilia , based on a story idea by Al Jean and Mike Reiss . It was the first episode directed by Steven Dean Moore . Due to Fox 's demand for 24 or 25 episodes per season , which the production staff found impossible to meet , two episodes of each season were written and produced by former showrunners , to relieve the stress on The Simpsons ' writing staff . Jean and Reiss , who were showrunners for the show 's third and fourth seasons returned to produce this episode , as well as " A Star Is Burns " , instead of the season 's main showrunner David Mirkin . On both episodes , they were aided by the staff of The Critic , the show the two left The Simpsons to create . Sternin and Ventimilia were writers on The Critic and were big fans of The Simpsons , so were thrilled to be able to write an episode . 
 This episode marked the first time a recurring character has been killed off on the show . The writers and production team felt that it would be a good , emotional storyline , which , through Lisa , could focus on the theme of grief . They decided that it could not be one of the main characters ; Jean joked that " we wouldn 't want it to be someone like Mr. Burns , that we 'd obviously want to see in the show again " . Eventually Jean decided on Bleeding Gums Murphy , a character introduced in the season one episode " Moaning Lisa " ; a flashback to " Moaning Lisa " is featured in the episode . Murphy was a fairly minor character , only appearing in a couple of episodes , but he appeared in the show 's opening sequence and remained there after this episode , until the opening was re @-@ designed in season 20 . Moore 's first ever job on the show was in the animation department for " Moaning Lisa " so he " appreciated " being able to direct this episode . Reiss stated " I had been polling for years to kill Marge 's mom but this was a better idea " . Actor Ron Taylor returned to guest star as Murphy in the episode . Comedian Steve Allen also made his second guest appearance on the show , having previously appeared in the episode " Separate Vocations " . This episode , alongside " Lisa 's Wedding " , served as the seed of a wave of character changes and developments , beginning with " Lisa the Vegetarian " , and continuing on for the rest of the series , finally laying to rest the creative team 's original mantra of maintaining a timelessness between episodes . 
 The main story of the episode 's first act sees Bart get appendicitis from eating a jagged metal Krusty @-@ O. Mike Reiss 's father , being a doctor , " sort of " acted as the medical consultant on this episode . He stated that " you can 't get " appendicitis from eating a piece of metal , but the writers decided to do it anyway . In his flashback , Murphy is shown as having a " $ 1 @,@ 500 a day Fabergé egg habit " ; Jean " didn 't realize just how expensive " Fabergé eggs actually were , so the joke does not make much sense . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contains numerous references to popular culture . The title is a play on both the jazz standard ' Round Midnight by Thelonious Monk and the similarly named film also about an unappreciated jazz musician . When a deceased Bleeding Gums Murphy appears to Lisa in a cloud near the end he is joined by Darth Vader , Mufasa , and James Earl Jones saying " This is CNN " . Although all three roles were portrayed by Jones , the characters in this scene were impersonated by cast member Harry Shearer ; Jones himself guest starred twice previously . Additionally , Mufasa accidentally mentions " Kimba " and corrects himself by saying " Simba " . This is a reference to the debate regarding The Lion King 's resemblance to the anime Kimba the White Lion . Lisa and Bleeding Gums play Carole King 's song " Jazzman " in this scene and in the hospital earlier in the episode . Bleeding Gums has to leave at the end of the scene because he has a date with the jazz singer Billie Holiday . 
 Additionally , Homer has a Starland Vocal Band tattoo on his arm , Bart considers buying a Steve Allen " ultimate pog " , while the music just before Bart 's operation is a parody of the theme music of ER . Bleeding Gums appears on an episode of The Cosby Show , a reference to Bill Cosby often getting jazz musicians he liked to appear on the show ; in the episode , Cosby is voiced by The Simpsons regular Dan Castellaneta . Also , Cosby is heard to say that jazz was like Jello Pudding Pops , Kodak Film or New Coke , products which Cosby has advertised on television . Lionel Hutz 's " crack team of lawyers " Robert <unk> and Albert <unk> are parodies of Robert Shapiro and Alan Dershowitz , two of the defense attorneys at the O. J. Simpson murder case . The three drive away in a white pickup truck , similar to the Ford Bronco that Al Cowlings and O.J. Simpson drove in their televised low @-@ speed pursuit before Simpson 's arrest . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " ' Round Springfield " finished 60th in the ratings for the week of April 24 to April 30 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 . The episode was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week . Mike Reiss and Al Jean thought that the episode would " get a ton of awards " , and joked that this was why they opted to receive a story credit , which they usually would not . Ultimately it did not win any awards . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide found that it was " a real tear @-@ jerker " and praised Grampa believing everything he saw was death . In a DVD review of the sixth season , Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict rated the episode a " B " . Adam Finley of TV Squad praised the episode , noting its many " great moments " including " Steve Allen pimping his books on TV : How to Make Love to Steve Allen ; Happiness is a Naked Steve Allen ; Journey to the Center of Steve Allen ; The Joy of Cooking Steve Allen " and " Moe running a " <unk> " clinic right next to a detox clinic " . On the other hand , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide called the episode " dull " stating that " some of the moments connected to Bart 's illness are funny , " but that he " really hate [ s ] that " Jazzman " song " and dislikes " the Bleeding Gums parts . " 
 = = = Cheese @-@ eating surrender monkeys = = = 
 In the episode , budget cuts at Springfield Elementary School force the janitor Groundskeeper Willie to be used as a French teacher . Expressing his disdain for the French , he exclaims to his class : " Bonjour , you cheese @-@ eatin ' surrender monkeys . " The quote , particularly the phrase " cheese @-@ eating surrender monkeys " , has since entered wider use . It was used particularly in the run @-@ up to the war in Iraq , having been popularized by the conservative National Review journalist Jonah Goldberg , to describe European and especially French opposition to military action . A piece in The Guardian noted that the phrase was " made acceptable in official diplomatic channels around the globe " . Ben Macintyre has written that the phrase is " perhaps the most famous " of the show 's coinages and since Goldberg 's usage it " has gone on to become a journalistic cliché . " 
 It has subsequently been used by the New York Post ( as " Surrender Monkeys " ) as the headline for its December 7 , 2006 , front page , referring to the Iraq Study Group and its recommendation that U.S. soldiers be withdrawn from Iraq by early 2008 . The Daily Mail has used the phrase in reference the French 's " attitude problem " , and the editor of Metro used it describe the " muted " European reaction to the death of Osama bin Laden , while The Daily Telegraph has cited it in relation to Anglo @-@ French military cooperation . The term has been used in books by commentator Laura Ingraham , and academics Stuart Croft , Stephen Chan , and Paul L. <unk> and Philip M. Taylor . Ned Sherrin included the quote in the Oxford Dictionary of Humorous Quotations ; it was introduced in the third edition in 2005 . It is also included in the Oxford Dictionary of Modern Quotations . Douglas Coupland 's 2009 novel Generation A refers to Groundskeeper Willie 's use of the phrase . 
 The line was " probably " written by Ken Keeler during one of the episode 's re @-@ write sessions , although none of those present on the episode 's DVD audio commentary could remember for sure . The writers were surprised it became as widely used as it did and never meant it as a political statement , merely as an " obnoxious " joke for Willie . The French dub of the show uses the line " singes <unk> de <unk> " , omitting the word " surrender " . 
 = Enchanted ( film ) = 
 Enchanted is a 2007 American musical live @-@ action / animated fantasy romantic comedy film , produced by Walt Disney Pictures with New York Academy Barry Sonnenfeld and Josephson Entertainment . Written by Bill Kelly and directed by Kevin Lima , the film stars Amy Adams , Patrick Dempsey , James Marsden , Timothy Spall , Idina Menzel , Rachel Covey , and Susan Sarandon . The plot focuses on Giselle , an archetypal Disney Princess , who is forced from her traditional animated world of Andalasia into the live @-@ action world of New York City . Enchanted was the first Disney film to be distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures , instead of Buena Vista Pictures Distribution . 
 The film is both a homage to , and a self @-@ parody of , Disney 's animated features , making numerous references to Disney 's past and future works through the combination of live @-@ action film @-@ making , traditional animation and computer @-@ generated imagery . It marks the return of traditional animation to a Disney feature film after the company 's decision to move entirely to computer animation in 2004 . Composer Alan Menken and lyricist Stephen Schwartz , who had written songs for previous Disney films , produced the songs of Enchanted , with Menken also composing its score . 
 The animation sequences were produced at James Baxter Animation in Pasadena . Filming of the live action segments took place around New York City . It premiered on October 20 , 2007 , at the London Film Festival before its wide release on November 21 , 2007 , in the United States . Enchanted was well @-@ received critically , established Adams as a leading lady , and earned more than $ 340 million worldwide at the box office . It won the 2007 Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Motion Picture , received two nominations at the 65th Golden Globe Awards and three Best Original Song nominations at the 80th Academy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the land of " Andalasia " , a drawn cartoon fairy tale world , in which there are talking animals and " happy endings " , the evil Queen Narissa fears that her stepson Prince Edward will soon find his true love , which means that her position on the throne would be taken over . In the forest in a cottage , a girl named Giselle and her animal friends are making a statue of a prince she dreamed about . Meanwhile , Edward and Nathaniel ( Queen Narissa 's henchman ) successfully capture a troll , ( which is a way to prevent Edward from meeting a girl ) but Edward hears Giselle singing " true love " and rides off to find her . Knowing Narissa 's wishes , Nathaniel sets the troll free to get rid of Giselle , but Edward saves her just in time . When they meet , they instantly fall in love and plan to get married the following day . 
 However , Narissa had witnessed everything in her crystal ball , so she meets Giselle while the peasant runs off to marry Edward . Narissa , disguised as an old hag , tricks Giselle and exiles her to the real world of Earth by falling through a portal in a well that leads to a sewer hole in New York City 's Times Square . Meanwhile , a divorce lawyer named Robert prepares to propose to his longtime girlfriend Nancy , much to the dismay of Morgan , his young daughter who thinks she 'll be an evil stepmother . While Robert and Morgan are heading home , they see a confused Giselle trying to enter a brightly lit pink castle on a billboard which she has mistaken for the <unk> palace . Luckily , Robert rescues her after she falls off , and he begrudgingly lets Giselle to stay at his apartment at the insistence of his daughter . Morgan thinks Giselle is a princess because of her wedding gown . As Giselle sleeps on the couch , Robert feels sorry for her . 
 Pip , Giselle 's best chipmunk friend from Andalasia , witnessed the events of Giselle 's fall through the portal and alerts Edward to it , ( there is a short film of how that happened ) so they embark on a rescue mission . Narissa sends Nathaniel through the well to stop Edward . In a restaurant , Narissa appears to Nathaniel in a soup pot and gives him three poisoned apples to get rid of Giselle . Pip eavesdrops on the conversation and Edward is unaware that Nathaniel is trying to eliminate chipmunk to stop him from helping Giselle . Meanwhile , Giselle accidentally makes the confused Nancy to think Robert is cheating on her . Robert decides to keep Giselle close by , knowing she needs help . Giselle questions the divorce lawyer about his relationship with Nancy , and decides to help the pair reconcile by sending heart shaped flowers and tickets to the " King and Queen 's Costume Ball " to Nancy . A great parade sings through New York ( That 's How You Know ) making everyone sing and dance along and making them extremely happy . 
 As they spend more time together , Giselle and Robert begin to develop feelings for each other while Edward continues to look for Giselle , eventually finding her at Robert 's apartment . While Edward is eager to take Giselle home to Andalasia and finally marry , she insists that they should first go on a date to get to know each other , still conflicted about her feelings . Giselle promises to return to Andalasia after ending their date at the King and Queen 's Ball , which Robert and Nancy are also attending . An angered Narissa , who has continued to spy on events , makes plans to come to New York City and kill Giselle herself after Nathaniel failed to poison her twice . She arrives in New York and learns that Giselle is at the Ball . Giselle and Robert dance as if they were the only couple in the room . From afar , Edward and Nancy sense the attraction between Giselle and Robert , and also discover a mutual attraction between themselves . At the climax of the ball , Narissa appears as the old hag and offers the last poisoned apple to Giselle , who is so bereft at the thought of leaving her true love behind that she takes a bite and falls to the floor unconscious . 
 As Narissa plans to escape with Giselle , Edward stops her and calls Robert and Nancy up . Nathaniel , realizing Narissa was using him and never loved him , reveals her plot . Robert realizes that true love 's kiss is the only force powerful enough to break the poisoned apple 's spell . After Edward 's kiss fails to wake Giselle , he prompts Robert to do so instead . When Robert kisses her just as the clock strikes twelve , Giselle awakens and the whole crowd cheers . The furious Narissa uses this moment of distraction to break free from Nathaniel 's grasp and transform into a giant blue dragon . When Robert shields Giselle after Narissa threatens to kill her , the evil witch takes him hostage instead . Giselle takes Edward 's sword , leaves her high heeled shoes behind and follows Narissa out the window and up to the top of the Woolworth Building . With Pip 's help , who was freed by Edward , Nathaniel and Nancy , Giselle successfully defeats Narissa , who falls off of the <unk> Building and lands in the street , disappearing into blue sparkles as she dies . After almost falling off the roof themselves , Robert and Giselle share a passionate kiss and embrace , while Edward puts Giselle 's shoes on Nancy which fit perfectly . Finding themselves in love , Edward and Nancy depart to Andalasia via manhole and got married there . 
 A happy new life follows , showing Edward and Nancy marrying in Andalasia , Giselle running a successful fashion business from memories back home and forming a happy family with Robert and Morgan , while Nathaniel becomes a best @-@ selling author on Earth , as does Pip in Andalasia . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Amy Adams as Giselle 
 A princess @-@ to @-@ be who ends up almost having her dream of meeting her prince a reality . Adams was announced to have been cast in the role of Giselle on November 14 , 2005 . Although the studio was looking for a film star in the role , director Kevin Lima insisted on casting a lesser @-@ known actress . Out of the 300 or so actresses who auditioned for the role , Adams stood out to Lima because not only did she look like " a Disney princess " but her " commitment to the character , her ability to escape into the character 's being without ever judging the character was overwhelming . " Hailing from Andalasia , Giselle displays similar traits to the Disney Princesses ; Lima describes her as " about 80 % Snow White , with some traits borrowed from Cinderella and Princess Aurora from Sleeping Beauty ... although her spunkiness comes from Princess Ariel from The Little Mermaid . " She is " eternally optimistic and romantic " but is also " very independent and true to her convictions " . Over the course of the film , she becomes more mature but maintains her innocence and optimism . 
 Patrick Dempsey as Robert 
 A cynical , New York City divorce attorney who does not believe in true love or happily @-@ ever @-@ after , or that Giselle understands his daughter , Morgan . Lima cast Dempsey after Disney was satisfied with the casting of Adams but had wanted more well @-@ known actors in the film . Dempsey , whose starring role on TV series Grey 's Anatomy had earned him the nickname " McDreamy " , was described by Lima as " a modern @-@ day Prince Charming to today 's audience " . The role was challenging for Dempsey because he had to play the straight man to Adams and Marsden 's more outrageous characters . 
 James Marsden as Prince Edward 
 A narcissistic and athletic , yet good @-@ hearted , prince who ends up confused with the world of New York once entering it . Marsden was announced to have been cast on December 6 , 2005 . At the time Marsden was auditioning , the role of Robert had not been cast but he decided to pursue the role of Prince Edward because he was " more fun and he responded more to that character . " Edward is a prince in Andalasia and the stepson of Narissa . He is " very pure , very simple @-@ minded and naive , but innocently narcissistic . " 
 Timothy Spall as Nathaniel 
 Nathaniel is a servant of Queen Narissa , who controls him through his infatuation with her and his own lack of self @-@ esteem . He initially does Narissa 's bidding , but ultimately realizes her true nature and rebels against her . He has a penchant for disguises . This is the first of two Disney films Timothy Spall has been in , the other being Tim Burton 's Alice in Wonderland in which he was the voice of Bayard the Bloodhound . 
 Idina Menzel as Nancy Tremaine 
 Robert 's fiancee . Once Giselle falls in love with Robert , she falls for and leaves with Edward . Menzel , who is well known for her Broadway musical roles in Wicked ( whose composer , Stephen Schwartz , wrote the lyrics to the film 's songs ) and Rent , was offered the role of Nancy Tremaine . Since the role did not require any singing , Menzel said in an interview that " it was a compliment to be asked to just be hired on her acting talents alone . " Nancy is a fashion designer and Robert 's girlfriend . She is named after Lady Tremaine , the stepmother from Cinderella . Menzel went on to play a Disney Princess : Elsa , the Snow Queen in Frozen , during which she worked with director Chris Buck , who previously directed Tarzan with Lima in 1999 . 
 Rachel Covey as Morgan 
 Morgan is Robert 's six @-@ year @-@ old daughter . Despite her father misunderstanding her and telling her otherwise , she believes in fairy tales and believes that magic exists . 
 Susan Sarandon as Queen Narissa 
 Queen Narissa is Edward 's evil stepmother , sorceress and a megalomaniac with a hatred for Giselle simply for being an obstacle for her to keep her power . Sarandon had been attracted to the project prior to Lima 's involvement as director . Since Sarandon 's on @-@ screen time was relatively short , it took only two weeks to film her scenes . Narissa 's mannerisms , characteristics , powers , and physical features were inspired by such classical Disney villains as the Evil Queen from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and Maleficent from Sleeping Beauty . 
 Jeff Bennett and Kevin Lima as Pip 
 Bennett provided the voice for the hand drawn animated Pip in the animated segment while Lima provided the voice for the computer @-@ generated Pip in the live @-@ action segment . Pip , a chipmunk friend of Giselle who has no trouble expressing himself through speech in Andalasia , loses his ability to speak in the real world and must communicate by acting . 
 Jon McLaughlin as himself 
 singing " So Close " at the ball while Robert and Giselle dance together as do Edward and Nancy . 
 Fred Tatasciore as the Troll from Andalasia who tried to eat Giselle 
 Several actresses who have played characters in Disney films have cameos : 
 Paige O 'Hara as Angela 
 a soap opera character . O 'Hara provided the speaking and singing voice of Belle in Beauty and the Beast . 
 Jodi Benson as Sam 
 Robert 's secretary . Benson provided the speaking and singing voice of Ariel in The Little Mermaid ; she also voiced the various Barbie dolls in Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3 . 
 Judy Kuhn as Pregnant Woman with Kids 
 Kuhn provided the singing voice of the title character in Pocahontas and its sequel . 
 Julie Andrews as the Narrator 
 Andrews played the title character in Mary Poppins as well as appearing in The Princess Diaries series as Queen Clarisse <unk> and Michaela Collins 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The initial script of Enchanted , written by Bill Kelly , was bought by Disney 's Touchstone Pictures and Sonnenfeld / Josephson Productions for a reported sum of $ 450 @,@ 000 in September 1997 . However , it was thought to be unsuitable for Walt Disney Pictures because it was " a racier R @-@ rated movie " . To the frustration of Kelly , the screenplay was rewritten several times , first by Rita Hsiao and then by Todd Alcott . The film was initially scheduled to be released in 2002 with Rob Marshall as director but he withdrew due to " creative differences " between the producers and him . In 2001 , director Jon <unk> was set to direct the film but he left soon after , later working with Disney and Jerry Bruckheimer on the National Treasure franchise . Adam Shankman became the film 's director in 2003 , while Bob Schooley and Mark McCorkle were hired by Disney to rewrite the script once again . At the time , Disney considered offering the role of Giselle to Kate Hudson or Reese Witherspoon . However , the project did not take off . 
 On May 25 , 2005 , Variety reported that Kevin Lima had been hired as director and Bill Kelly had returned to the project to write a new version of the script . Lima worked with Kelly on the script to combine the main plot of Enchanted with the idea of a " loving homage " to Disney 's heritage . He created visual storyboard printouts that covered the story of Enchanted from beginning to end , which filled an entire floor of a production building . After Lima showed them to Dick Cook , the chairman of the Walt Disney Studios , he received the green light for the project and a budget of $ 85 million . Lima began designing the world of Andalasia and storyboarding the movie before a cast was chosen to play the characters . After the actors were hired , he was involved in making the final design of the movie , which made sure the animated characters look like their real @-@ life counterparts . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Enchanted is the first feature @-@ length Disney live @-@ action / traditional animation hybrid since Disney 's Who Framed Roger Rabbit in 1988 , though the traditionally animated characters do not interact in the live @-@ action environment in the same method as they did in Roger Rabbit ; however , there are some scenes where live @-@ action characters share the screen with two @-@ dimensional animated characters , for example , a live @-@ action Nathaniel communicating with a cel @-@ drawn Narissa , who is in a cooking pot . The film uses two aspect ratios ; it begins in 2 @.@ 35 : 1 when the Walt Disney Pictures logo and Enchanted storybook are shown , and then switches to a smaller 1 @.@ 85 : 1 aspect ratio for the first animated sequence . The film switches back to 2 @.@ 35 : 1 when it becomes live @-@ action and never switches back , even for the remainder of the cartoon sequences . When this movie was aired on televised networks , the beginning of the movie ( minus the logo and opening credits ) was shown in standard definition ; the remainder of the movie was shown in high definition when it becomes live @-@ action . Lima oversaw the direction of both the live @-@ action and animation sequences , which were being produced at the same time . Enchanted took almost two years to complete . The animation took about a year to finish while the live @-@ action scenes , which commenced filming on location in New York City during the summer of 2006 and were completed during the animation process , were shot in 72 days . 
 = = = = Animation = = = = 
 Out of the film 's 107 minutes of running time , ten of the approximately 13 minutes of animation are at the beginning of the film . Lima tried to " cram every single piece of Disney iconic imagery " that he could into the first ten minutes , which were done in traditional cel animation ( in contrast to computer @-@ generated 3 @-@ D animation ) as a tribute to past Disney fairy tale films such as Sleeping Beauty , Cinderella , and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . It was the first Disney film theatrically released in America to feature traditional cel animation since Pooh 's <unk> Movie ( 2005 ) . This film , although quite different in terms of plot from any previous Disney film , also contained obvious homages to other Disney films of the distant past , such as Old Yeller , The Shaggy Dog , Swiss Family Robinson , Bon Voyage ! , and Savage Sam . As most of Disney 's cel animation artists were laid off after the computer graphics boom of the late 1990s , the 13 minutes of animation were not done in @-@ house but by the independent Pasadena @-@ based company James Baxter Animation , which was started by noted lead animator James Baxter . Baxter had previously worked for Walt Disney Animation Studios , bringing to life many memorable Disney animated characters like Jessica Rabbit ( Who Framed Roger Rabbit ) , Belle ( Beauty and the Beast ) , Rafiki ( The Lion King ) , and Quasimodo ( The Hunchback of Notre Dame ) . 
 Although Lima wanted the animation to be nostalgic , he wanted Enchanted to have a style of its own . Baxter 's team decided to use Art Nouveau as a starting point . For Giselle , the hand drawn animated character had to be " a cross between Amy Adams and a classic Disney princess . And not a caricature . " Seeing Giselle as " a forest girl , an innocent nymph with flowers in her hair " and " a bit of a hippie " , the animators wanted her to be " flowing , with her hair and clothes . Delicate . " For Prince Edward , Baxter 's team " worked the hardest on him to make him look like the actor " because princes " in these kinds of movies are usually so bland . " Many prototypes were made for Narissa as Baxter 's team wanted her face to " look like Susan Sarandon . And the costumes had to align closely to the live @-@ action design . " 
 To maintain continuity between the two media , Lima brought in costume designer Mona May during the early stages of the film 's production so the costumes would be aligned in both the animated and live @-@ action worlds . He also shot some live @-@ action footage of Amy Adams as Giselle for the animators to use as reference , which also allowed the physical movement of the character to match in both worlds . Test scenes completed by the animators were shown to the actors , allowing them to see how their animated self would move . 
 = = = = Live @-@ action = = = = 
 Principal photography began in April 2006 and ended in July 2006 . Because of the sequence setting , the live action scenes are filmed in New York City . However , shooting in New York became problematic as it was in a " constant state of new stores , scaffolding and renovation " . 
 The first scene in New York , which features Giselle emerging from a manhole in the middle of Times Square , was filmed on location in the center of the square . Because of the difficulties in controlling the crowd while filming in Times Square , general pedestrians were featured in the scene with hired extras placed in the immediate foreground . Similarly , a crowd gathered to watch as James Marsden and Timothy Spall filmed their scenes in Times Square . However , the scene Lima found the most challenging to shoot was the musical number , " That 's How You Know " , in Central Park . The five @-@ minute scene took 17 days to finish due to the changing weather , which allowed only seven sunny days for the scene to be filmed . The filming was also hampered at times by Patrick Dempsey 's fans . The scene was choreographed by John O 'Connell , who had worked on Moulin Rouge ! beforehand , and included 300 extras and 150 dancers . 
 Many scenes were filmed at Steiner Studios , which provided the three large stages that Enchanted needed at the same facility . Other outdoor locations included the Brooklyn Bridge and The Paterno , an apartment building with a curved , heavily embellished , ivory @-@ colored façade located on the corner of Riverside Drive and 116th Street , which is the residence of the film 's characters Robert and Morgan . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 All the costumes in the film were designed by Mona May , who had previously worked on Clueless , The Wedding Singer and The Haunted Mansion . To create the costumes , May spent one year in pre @-@ production working with animators and her costume department of 20 people , while she contracted with five outside costume shops in Los Angeles and New York City . She became involved in the project during the time when the animators are designing the faces and bodies of the characters as they had to " translate the costumes from two @-@ dimensional drawings to live @-@ action human proportion " . Her goal was to keep the designs " Disneyesque to the core but bring a little bit of fashion in there and humor and make it something new " . However , May admitted this was difficult " because they 're dealing with iconic Disney characters who have been in the psyche of the viewing audience for so long " . 
 For the character of Giselle , her journey to becoming a real woman is reflected in her dresses , which become less fairy tale @-@ like as the film progresses . Her wedding dress at the beginning of the film directly contrasts her modern gown at the end of the film . The wedding dress served to provide a " humongous contrast to the flat drawings " and to accentuate the image of a Disney Princess . In order to make the waist look small , the sleeves are designed to be " extremely <unk> " and the skirt to be as big as possible , which included a metal hoop that holds up 20 layers of petticoats and ruffles . Altogether , 11 versions of the dress are made for filming , each comprised 200 yards ( 183 m ) of silk satin and other fabric , and weighed approximately 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) . On the experience of wearing the wedding dress , Amy Adams described it as " grueling " since " the entire weight was on her hips , so occasionally it felt like she was in traction " . 
 Unlike Giselle , Prince Edward does not adapt to the real world and James Marsden , who plays Edward , had only one costume designed for him . May 's aim was to try " not to lose Marsden in the craziness of the outfit ... where he still looks handsome " . The costume also included padding in the chest , buttocks and crotch , which gave Marsden the " same exaggerated proportions as an animated character " and " posture – his back is straight , the sleeves are up and never collapse " . 
 May was delighted that Lima " went for something more fashion @-@ forward " with Susan Sarandon 's Queen Narissa . She decided to make her look like a " runway lady " , wearing something that is " still Disney " but also " high fashion , like something John Galliano or Thierry Mugler might design " . Since Narissa appears in three media : hand drawn animation , live @-@ action and computer animation , May had to make sure that the costume would be the same throughout in terms of " color , shape and texture " . The costume for Narissa consisted of a leather corset and skirt , which looked " reptilian " , as well as a cape . Working with the animators , May incorporated parts of the dragon 's form into the costume ; the cape was designed to look like wings , the layers of the skirt wrap around like a tail and a crown that would turn into horns during Narissa 's transformation into a dragon . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's score was written by accomplished songwriter and composer Alan Menken , who has worked on a number of Disney films previously . Fellow composer Stephen Schwartz wrote the lyrics for six songs , also composed by Menken . Menken and Schwartz previously worked together on the songs for Pocahontas and The Hunchback of Notre Dame . 
 Menken became involved with the film in the early stages of the film 's development and invited Schwartz to resume their collaboration . They began the songwriting process by searching for the right moments in the story in which a song moment was allowed . Schwartz found that it was easier to justify situations in which the characters would burst into songs in Enchanted than in other live @-@ action musicals as its concept " allowed the characters to sing in a way that was completely integral to the plot of the story . " The three songs Giselle sings contain references to earlier Disney films . The first song played in the film , " True Love 's Kiss " , was written to be " a send @-@ up of , and an homage to , the style of those Disney animated features " , namely , " I 'm Wishing " ( Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ) and " A Dream is a Wish Your Heart Makes " ( Cinderella ) , during which Disney heroines sing about the joy of being loved . It posed a challenge for Menken and Schwartz because of the " many preconceptions with that number " ; it had to be reflective of the era of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and Cinderella . Accordingly , Amy Adams performed the first song in an operetta style in contrast to the Broadway style of the later songs . 
 Both " Happy Working Song " and " That 's How You Know " also pay tributes to past Disney songs . " Happy Working Song " pays a lyrical homage to such songs as " Whistle While You Work " ( Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ) , " The Work Song " ( Cinderella ) " A Spoonful of Sugar " ( Mary Poppins ) and “ Making Christmas ” ( The Nightmare Before Christmas ) , and a musical homage to the Sherman Brothers ( with a self @-@ parodic " Alan Menken style " middle eight ) . " That 's How You Know " is a self @-@ parody of Menken 's compositions for his Disney features , specifically such big production numbers as " Under the Sea " ( The Little Mermaid ) and " Be Our Guest " ( Beauty and the Beast ) . To achieve this , Schwartz admitted he had to " push it a little bit further in terms of choices of words or certain lyrics " while maintaining " the classic Walt Disney sensibility " . However , Menken noted that the songs he has written for Disney have always been " a little tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " . As the film progresses , the music uses more contemporary styles , which is heard through the adult ballad " So Close " and the country / pop number " Ever Ever After " ( sung by Carrie Underwood as a voice @-@ over ) . 
 Out of the six completed songs written and composed by Menken and Schwartz , five remained in the finished film . The title song , " Enchanted , " a duet featuring Idina Menzel and James Marsden , was the only song of Menken 's and Schwartz 's authorship and composition that was deleted from the movie . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The majority of the visual effects shots in Enchanted were done by Tippett Studio in Berkeley , California , who contributed a total of 320 shots . These shots involved virtual sets , environmental effects and CG characters that performed alongside real actors , namely the animated animals during the " Happy Working Song " sequence , Pip and the Narissa dragon during the live action portions of the film . CIS Hollywood was responsible for 36 visual effects shots , which primarily dealt with wire removals and composites . Reel FX Creative Studios did four visual effects shots involving the pop @-@ up book page @-@ turn transitions while Weta Digital did two . 
 Out of all the animals that appear in the " Happy Working Song " sequence , the only real animals filmed on set were rats and pigeons . The real animals captured on film aided Tippett Studio in creating CG rats and pigeons , which gave dynamic performances such as having pigeons that carried brooms in their beaks and rats that scrubbed with toothbrushes . On the other hand , all the cockroaches were CG characters . 
 Pip , a chipmunk who can talk in the 2D world of Andalasia , loses his ability to communicate through speech in the real world so he must rely heavily on facial and body gestures . This meant the animators had to display Pip 's emotions through performance as well as making him appear like a real chipmunk . The team at Tippett began the process of animating Pip by observing live chipmunks which were filmed in motion from " every conceivable angle " , after which they created a photorealistic chipmunk through the use of 3D computer graphics software , Maya and <unk> . When visual effects supervisor Thomas <unk> showed the first animation of Pip to director Kevin Lima , he was surprised that he was a looking at CG character and not reference footage . To enhance facial expressions , the modelers gave Pip eyebrows , which real chipmunks do not have . During the filming of scenes in which Pip appears , a number of ways were used to indicate the physical presence of Pip . On some occasions , a small stuffed chipmunk with a wire armature on the inside was placed in the scene . In other situations , a rod with a small marker on the end or a laser pointer would be used to show the actors and cinematographer where Pip is . 
 Unlike Pip , the Narissa dragon was allowed to be more of a fantasy character while still looking like a living character and a classic Disney villain . The CG dragon design was loosely based on a traditional Chinese dragon and Susan Sarandon 's live @-@ action witch . When filming the scene which sees the transformation of Narissa from a woman into a dragon , a long pole was used to direct the extras ' eyelines instead of a laser pointer . Set pieces were made to move back and forth in addition to having a computer @-@ controlled lighting setup and a repeatable head on the camera that were all synchronized together . In the film 's final sequence , in which Narissa climbs the Woolworth Building while clutching Robert in her claws , a greenscreen rig was built to hold Patrick Dempsey in order to film his face and movements . The rig was a " puppeteering " approach that involved a robotic arm being controlled by three different floor effects artists . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures to 3 @,@ 730 theaters in the United States . It was distributed worldwide by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures International to over 50 territories around the world and topped the box office in several countries including the United Kingdom and Italy . It is the first movie to be released under the Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures name following the retirement of the previous Buena Vista Pictures Distribution . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Disney had originally planned to add Giselle to the Disney Princess line @-@ up , as was shown at a 2007 Toy Fair where the Giselle doll was featured with packaging declaring her with Disney Princess status , but decided against it when they realized they would have to pay for lifelong rights to Amy Adams ' image . While Giselle is not being marketed as one of the Disney Princesses , Enchanted merchandise was made available in various outlets with Adams ' animated likeness being used on all Giselle merchandise . Giselle led the 2007 Hollywood Holly @-@ Day Parade at Disney 's Hollywood Studios . She was also featured in the 2007 Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade in the Magic Kingdom with the official Disney Princesses . 
 A video game based on the film was released for Nintendo DS and mobile phones in addition to a Game Boy Advance title , Enchanted : Once Upon Andalasia , which is a prequel to the film , about Giselle and Pip rescuing Andalasia from a magic spell . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Enchanted was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on March 18 , 2008 , in the United States . While Enchanted topped the DVD sales chart on the week of its release in the United States , narrowly defeating the DVD sales of I Am Legend , the Blu @-@ ray Disc sales of I Am Legend were nearly four times the number of Blu @-@ ray Disc sales of Enchanted . The DVD was released in United Kingdom and Europe on April 7 , 2008 , and in Australia on May 21 , 2008 . 
 The bonus features included on both the DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc are " Fantasy Comes to Life " , a three @-@ part behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature including " Happy Working Song " , " That 's How You Know " and " A Blast at the Ball " ; six deleted scenes with brief introductions by director Kevin Lima ; bloopers ; " Pip 's Predicament : A Pop @-@ Up Adventure " , a short in pop @-@ up storybook style ; and Carrie Underwood 's music video for " Ever Ever After " . Featured on the Blu @-@ ray disc only is a trivia game titled " The D Files " that runs throughout the movie with high scoring players given access to videos " So Close " , " Making Ever Ever After " and " True Love 's Kiss " . In the United States , certain DVDs at Target stores contain a bonus DVD with a 30 @-@ minute long making @-@ of documentary titled Becoming Enchanted : A New Classic Comes True . This DVD is also sold with certain DVDs at HMV stores in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Enchanted earned $ 7 @,@ 967 @,@ 766 on the day of its release in the United States , placing at # 1 . It was also placed at # 1 on Thanksgiving Day , earning $ 6 @,@ 652 @,@ 198 to bring its two @-@ day total to $ 14 @.@ 6 million . The film grossed $ 14 @.@ 4 million on the following day , bringing its total haul to $ 29 @.@ 0 million placing ahead of other contenders . Enchanted made $ 34 @.@ 4 million on the Friday @-@ Sunday period in 3 @,@ 730 theaters for a per location average of $ 9 @,@ 472 and $ 49 @.@ 1 million over the five @-@ day Thanksgiving holiday in 3 @,@ 730 theaters for a per location average of $ 13 @,@ 153 . Its earnings over the five @-@ day holiday exceeded projections by $ 7 million . Ranking as the second @-@ highest Thanksgiving opening after Toy Story 2 , which earned $ 80 @.@ 1 million over the five @-@ day holiday in 1999 , Enchanted is the first film to open at # 1 on the Thanksgiving frame in the 21st century . 
 In its second weekend , Enchanted was also the # 1 film , grossing a further $ 16 @,@ 403 @,@ 316 at 3 @,@ 730 locations for a per theater average of $ 4 @,@ 397 . It dropped to # 2 in its third weekend , with a gross of $ 10 @,@ 709 @,@ 515 in 3 @,@ 520 theaters for a per theater average of $ 3 @,@ 042 . It finished its fourth weekend at # 4 with a gross of $ 5 @,@ 533 @,@ 884 in 3 @,@ 066 locations for a per theater average of $ 1 @,@ 804 . Enchanted earned a gross of $ 127 @,@ 807 @,@ 262 in the United States and Canada as well a total of $ 340 @,@ 487 @,@ 652 worldwide . It was the 15th highest @-@ grossing film worldwide released in 2007 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Enchanted received very positive reviews from critics . As of September 2014 , the movie review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes had tallied the film at an overall 93 % approval rating ( based on 187 reviews , with 174 " fresh " and 13 " rotten " ) , while Metacritic gave it a rating of 75 out of 100 based on 32 reviews . Rotten Tomatoes ranked the film as the ninth best reviewed film in wide release of 2007 and named it the best family film of 2007 . 
 Positive reviews praised the film 's take on a classic Disney story , its comedy and musical numbers as well as the performance of its lead actress , Amy Adams . Roger Ebert of Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three stars out of four , describing it as a " heart @-@ winning musical comedy that skips lightly and sprightly from the lily pads of hope to the manhole covers of actuality " and one that " has a Disney willingness to allow fantasy into life " . Film critics of Variety and LA Weekly remarked on the film 's ability to cater for all ages . LA Weekly described the film as " the sort of buoyant , all @-@ ages entertainment that Hollywood has been laboring to revive in recent years ( most recently with Hairspray ) but hasn 't managed to get right until now " , while Todd McCarthy of Variety commented , " More than Disney 's strictly animated product , Enchanted , in the manner of the vast majority of Hollywood films made until the ' 60s , is a film aimed at the entire population – niches be damned . It simply aims to please , without pandering , without vulgarity , without <unk> to pop @-@ culture fads , and to pull this off today is no small feat . " Enchanted was the Broadcast Film Critics Association 's choice for Best Family Film of 2007 , while Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer named it the 4th best film of 2007 . 
 Rolling Stone , Premiere , USA Today , and The Boston Globe all gave the film three out of four , while Baltimore Sun gave the film a B grade . They cited that although the story is relatively predictable , the way in which the predictability of the film is part of the story , the amazingly extravagant musical numbers , along with the way in which Disney pokes fun at its traditional line of animated movies outweighs any squabbles about storyline or being unsure of what age bracket the film is made for . Michael Sragow of Baltimore Sun remarked that the film 's " piquant idea and enough good jokes to overcome its uneven movie @-@ making and uncertain tone " , while Claudia Puig of USA Today stated that " though it 's a fairly predictable fish @-@ out @-@ of @-@ water tale ( actually a princess @-@ out @-@ of @-@ storybook saga ) , the casting is so perfect that it takes what could have been a ho @-@ hum idea and renders it magical . " 
 Amy Adams herself garnered many favorable reviews . Reviewers praised her singing ability and asserted that her performance , which was compared by some to her Academy Award @-@ nominated performance in Junebug , has made Adams a movie star , likening it to Mary Poppins ' effect on Julie Andrews ' career . Similarly , film critics Richard Roeper and Michael Phillips , who gave the film positive reviews on At the Movies with Ebert & Roeper , emphasized the effect of Adams ' performance on the film with remarks like " Amy Adams is this movie " and " Amy Adams shows how to make a comic cliché work like magic . " However , both agreed that the final sequence involving the computer @-@ generated dragon " bogged down " the film . 
 Empire stated that the film was targeted at children but agreed with other reviewers that the " extremely game cast " was the film 's best asset . It gave the film three out of five . TIME gave the film a C- , stating that the film " <unk> Walt 's vault for jokes " and " fails to find a happy ending that doesn 't feel two @-@ dimensional " . Similarly , Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian commented that the film " assumes a beady @-@ eyed and deeply humourless sentimentality " and that Adams ' performance was the " only decent thing in this overhyped family movie covered in a cellophane shrink @-@ wrap of corporate Disney plastic @-@ ness " . Bradshaw gave the film two out of five . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Disney references = = 
 According to director Kevin Lima , " thousands " of references are made to past and future works of Disney in Enchanted , which serve as both a parody of and a " giant love letter to Disney classics " . It took almost eight years for Walt Disney Studios to greenlight the production of the film because it " was always quite nervous about the tone in particular " . As Lima worked with Bill Kelly , the writer , to inject Disney references to the plot , it became " an obsession " ; he derived the name of every character as well as anything that needed a name from past Disney films to bring in more Disney references . 
 While Disney animators have occasionally inserted a Disney character into background shots , for example , Donald Duck appears in a crowd in The Little Mermaid , they have avoided " mingling characters " from other Disney films for fear of weakening their individual mythologies . In Enchanted , characters from past Disney films are openly seen , such as the appearances of Thumper and Flower from Bambi in the 2D animation portion of the film . Disney references are also made through camera work , sets , costumes , music and dialogue . Obvious examples include the use of poisoned apples from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and True Love 's Kiss from Snow White and Sleeping Beauty . Dick Cook , the chairman of Walt Disney Studios , admitted that part of the goal of Enchanted was to create a new franchise ( through the character of Giselle ) and to revive the older ones . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In February 2010 , Variety reported that Walt Disney Pictures planned to film a sequel with Barry Josephson and Barry Sonnenfeld producing again . Jessie Nelson was attached to write the screenplay and Anne Fletcher to direct . Disney hoped the cast members from the first film would return and for a release as early as 2011 . 
 On January 12 , 2011 , composer Alan Menken was asked about the sequel in an interview . His reply was , " I ’ ve heard things but there 's nothing yet . I don ’ t know much about what ’ s happening with that . Honestly , I don ’ t know what the studio wants to do next . I presume there will be some future projects for me to work on . I love doing that , I really do . But I ’ m not frustrated that it isn ’ t one of them . At the moment I have a lot of stage things happening and I ’ m busy enough with that , so I really don ’ t need more on my plate . " 
 On March 28 , 2011 , in an interview for his latest film , Hop , James Marsden was asked about the sequel . 
 I don 't know . I think that the clock is ticking on that one . Amy Adams and I are both saying , " If there 's going to be a sequel , we 're not getting any younger . " Since we play sort of ageless animated characters . Hopefully we do . That was something really special and I 'd love to come back and do another . I 've heard the same things you 've heard . There 's a script out there somewhere and there 's talk of it , but I never believe it until I see the script and learned we 're making that film . So I don 't know . Too many eggs in that basket . 
 As of July 2014 , Disney had hired screenwriters J. David Stem and David N. Weiss to write a script for a sequel and also hired Anne Fletcher to direct the film . 
 As of September 2015 , the sequel was in development under the working title Disenchanted . 
 = Tropical Storm Harvey ( 1999 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Harvey was a moderately strong tropical storm that caused flooding across south Florida during the 1999 Atlantic hurricane season . The tenth tropical cyclone and eighth named storm of the season , Harvey developed from a tropical wave in the Gulf of Mexico on September 19 . After forming , the system gradually intensified and became a tropical storm early on September 20 . Throughout the rest of its duration , Harvey slowly intensified as it headed eastward . Late on September 21 , Harvey made landfall in Southwest Florida with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Harvey emerged into the Atlantic early on September 22 , but was absorbed by an extratropical cyclone . The remnants of Harvey reached Atlantic Canada before dissipating . 
 Harvey caused minor flooding in south Florida because of light to relatively heavy rainfall in that portion of the state and at least 34 houses and businesses in southern Florida were flooded . There were sporadic reports of tropical storm @-@ force winds throughout the state , as well as two tornadoes . Damage estimates in Florida reached about $ 15 million ( 1999 USD ) . Throughout the rest of the United States , impact was limited , confined to light rainfall in Georgia , North Carolina and South Carolina . Heavy rainfall was reported in Atlantic Canada and Harvey became the wettest tropical cyclone on record in that country . Significant flooding , especially to roads and houses , was reported due to the heavy rainfall and damage throughout Atlantic Canada totalled several million dollars . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa on late on September 4 , 1999 and entered the Atlantic Ocean . The system trekked westward uneventfully and was unable to organize itself due to the influence of outflow from Hurricane Floyd . After Floyd moved northward , however , the system began developing convection as it traversed the Caribbean Sea . By September 16 the disturbance transitioned into a broad area of low pressure while tracking northwestward in the western Caribbean Sea . After two days the low had continued to intensify as it entered the southern Gulf of Mexico . Thunderstorm activity continued to increase in association with the weather system and a buoy in the eastern Gulf of Mexico recorded sustained winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . At 0600 UTC on September 19 , the system finally developed into Tropical Depression Ten , while located approximately 400 miles ( 640 km ) west @-@ southwest of St. Petersburg , Florida . The National Hurricane Center initiated advisories on the depression approximately four hours later . 
 Upon its designation the depression was still relatively weak and disorganized and , due to a number of factors , further strengthening was expected to be gradual . Outflow over the cyclone improved throughout the day on September 19 , however , as it drifted northward . At 0000 UTC on September 20 the depression was upgraded to the eighth named storm of the season , Tropical Storm Harvey , based on surface observations and reports from the Hurricane Hunters . Shortly thereafter the storm became nearly stationary while slowly beginning to turn eastward . Harvey remained disorganized due to persistent wind shear . Despite the strong wind shear , the cyclone managed to reach its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) late on September 20 . 
 By the early on September 21 Harvey accelerated slightly and turned southeastward . Although the center of the storm was poorly defined at the time and located to the northwest of the main area of thunderstorm activity , convection was strong in nature . Later that day the storm curved towards the east while approaching Florida . At around 1700 UTC on September 21 Harvey made landfall near Everglades City , Florida with sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm further accelerated across the Florida Peninsula and quickly merged with a developing storm off the coast of South Carolina at 0600 UTC on September 22 . Although the remnants of Harvey became unidentifiable later that day , Environment Canada reported that the system crossed Newfoundland before dissipating on September 24 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Early on September 19 a tropical storm watch was issued for the west coast of Florida from Bonita Beach to the mouth of the Suwannee River , which was upgraded to a tropical storm warning and hurricane watch the next day . Tropical storm watches were posted for the state 's Atlantic coast north of Jupiter Inlet to near Flagler Beach . A tropical storm watch , and later a warning , was issued for the northwestern Bahamas . The advisories were amended several times before being discontinued on September 20 through September 21 . 
 In advance of the storm , public schools and many private schools closed , Although no mandatory evacuations were ordered , multiple shelters were opened in schools and churches and government offices shut down in anticipation of Harvey 's onslaught . Several counties issued a state of emergency . Residents prepared individually by , for example , securing boats and lawn furniture . Free sand and sandbags were made available to the general public and inmates filled bags for those physically unable to do so themselves . Officials at Lake Manatee began lowering the water level to help avoid flooding . In Hillsborough County the threat of the storm forced the cancellation of local football programs . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Tropical Storm Harvey dropped moderate to heavy rainfall throughout much of Florida , although the highest amounts were concentrated near its landfall location . Precipitation peaked at 10 @.@ 24 inches ( 260 mm ) in Naples . The 4 to 7 inches ( 100 to 180 mm ) of rain in southern Lee County caused minor flooding in homes and businesses in lowly @-@ lying areas , mostly along U.S. Route 41 between Estero and Bonita Springs . Storm surge was light , with tides ranging from 1 to 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 61 m ) above normal in Levy , Citrus , Hernando , Pasco , Pinellas , Hillsborough , Manatee , and Sarasota counties ; the highest tide recorded was 2 @.@ 41 feet ( 0 @.@ 73 m ) above normal in Fort Myers . 
 Some tidal flooding occurred at Everglades City , where a runway at the county airport was inundated . Throughout Collier County , coastal flooding caused major street flooding and water entered 34 homes and buildings , as well as six cars . No locations on the East Coast of Florida reported abnormally high tides , although a storm surge of 0 @.@ 8 feet ( 0 @.@ 24 m ) and 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) was reported in Key West and Vaca Key , respectively . Minor coastal flooding was reported elsewhere , including along the Florida Keys ; part of State Road A1A was closed as a result . The surge combined with increased wave action to produce light beach erosion along the coast and in Everglades National Park . 
 The storm also spawned two tornadoes , in Collier and Miami @-@ Dade counties , one of which tore the roof off a house . The highest sustained wind speed was 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) , which was recorded at the Turkey Point Nuclear Generating Station , while the strongest wind gust was 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) off the coast of Key Largo . Strong winds in the Florida Keys downed a few trees , but minimal damage occurred otherwise . Overall , damage in Florida totaled to approximately $ 15 million ( 1999 USD ; $ 21 @.@ 3 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 = = = = Nova Scotia = = = = 
 In Nova Scotia the remnants of Harvey dropped torrential amounts of rainfall , peaking at 11 @.@ 89 inches ( 302 mm ) in Oxford . As a result , the system is , as of 2012 , ranked as the wettest known tropical cyclone ( or remnants ) in Canada . Several other locations reported heavy , but lesser , amounts of precipitation , including 5 @.@ 9 inches ( 150 mm ) in Cumberland County and Annapolis Valley , 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) in Greenwood , and between 1 @.@ 2 inches ( 30 mm ) and 1 @.@ 7 inches ( 43 mm ) in South Shore and Halifax . Throughout the province there was widespread flooding , countless road closures , and numerous flooded basements . Most notably , a portion of Trans @-@ Canada Highway and Highway 103 was inundated by water . Another major road was closed in <unk> after <unk> River overflowed . A street in Amherst was closed due to sewer backups and , nearby , a culvert washed away , leaving a 49 @.@ 2 feet ( 15 @.@ 0 m ) by 65 @.@ 6 feet ( 20 @.@ 0 m ) hole in the road . Additionally , a bridge collapsed near Collingwood . In Oxford alone , damage to roads cost at least $ 3 million ( 1999 CAD ) to repair . 
 Flooding damage was also reported to infrastructure other than roads . After two rivers overflowed , at least 70 % of Oxford was flooded , which included a hardware store and dozens of homes , while a senior citizens living complex were evacuated . The SOS Children 's Village in <unk> sustained approximately $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1999 CAD ) in flood damage . Schools in Amherst and the University of Windsor canceled afternoon classes on September 24 . In the Canning area , 1 @,@ 500 people were left without power , while electricity was also lost in Annapolis Valley , Yarmouth , Truro , Westville , Amherst , and <unk> . A woman required rescue by firemen after her van plunged into the swollen River Philip . In <unk> , a tractor trailer loaded with lumber went off the road . Damage in Nova Scotia likely exceeded $ 5 million ( 1999 CAD ) . 
 = = = = New Brunswick = = = = 
 In New Brunswick , flooding also occurred throughout the province . Rainfall totals in the province include , 6 @.@ 7 inches ( 170 mm ) in Saint John , 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 170 mm ) in Fredericton , 5 @.@ 9 inches ( 150 mm ) in Moncton , 4 inches ( 100 mm ) in Miramichi , 3 @.@ 6 inches ( 91 mm ) in Acadian Peninsula , 2 @.@ 7 inches ( 69 mm ) in St. Stephen , 1 @.@ 9 inches ( 48 mm ) in Campbellton , 2 inches ( 51 mm ) in Bathurst , and 1 @.@ 2 inches ( 30 mm ) in Saint @-@ Léonard . As a result , three roads were flooded in Saint John , three other streets were closed in Moncton , and one street each was inundated by water in Fox Creek and Riverview . In addition , the causeway connecting Moncton and Riverview was closed due to flood waters . In Dieppe a local state of emergency was declared because of the numerous washed out roads . Along Route 16 travelers rescued four senior citizens from their car , which soon sank into a ditch . Train service by Via Rail was temporarily suspended after the tracks were washed out near Memramcook . Damage in the province of New Brunswick was came several million dollars , most of it in Moncton . 
 = = = = Elsewhere in Canada = = = = 
 Strong winds were reported in Prince Edward Island , with gusts reaching more than 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) , while rainfall was relatively heavy , with a peak of 7 inches ( 180 mm ) in Prince County . At another location , Charlottetown , precipitation totals only reached 2 @.@ 1 inches ( 53 mm ) . Although potato fields were inundated by water , minimal damage occurred to that crop . In <unk> at least five roads were closed due to flooding and water entered the mechanical room via the telephone and electrical conduit at the local intermediate school . Road infrastructure was also affected , such as in <unk> , where a bridge slightly longer than 180 feet ( 55 m ) washed away . Restrictions were imposed on the use of the Confederation Bridge during the height of the storm . Adverse conditions also prevented the Northumberland Ferry from docking in Prince Edward Island , causing it to return to Nova Scotia . 
 As rainfall in Newfoundland peaked at only 1 @.@ 6 inches ( 41 mm ) , damage in the province was mostly from strong winds . At Channel @-@ Port aux Basques , a sustained wind speed of almost 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) and gust to nearly 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) were reported . Strong winds left 4 @,@ 500 people without electricity in St. John 's and the Burin Peninsula , knocked down traffic lights in St. John 's , and snapped and uprooted trees throughout the province . On the main land of Newfoundland and Labrador , rainfall was mostly between 2 and 3 @.@ 9 inches ( 51 and 99 mm ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The Tropicale , then owned by Carnival Cruise Lines , was left disabled after a fire on board shut down the vessel 's engines . The ship encountered 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) seas in the Gulf of Mexico before restarting one of its engines and taking a path around the storm , having initially planned to return to Tampa . The ship provided meteorological reports from the storm that were used to evaluate its winds . In the Bahamas Harvey caused flooding in low @-@ lying areas of three islands . In Georgia , much of the state reported rainfall , although totals did not reach 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , with a peak amount of 2 @.@ 9 inches ( 74 mm ) in Brunswick . Precipitation amounts were similar in South Carolina , peaking at 2 @.@ 6 inches ( 66 mm ) in Wagener . Rainfall was slightly heavier in North Carolina , with a few areas experiencing more than 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . 
 = Freedom fries = 
 Freedom fries is a political euphemism for French fries in the United States . The term came to prominence in 2003 when the then Republican Chairman of the Committee on House Administration , Bob Ney , renamed the menu item in three Congressional cafeterias in response to France 's opposition to the proposed invasion of Iraq . Although originally supported with several restaurants changing their menus as well , the term fell out of use due to declining support for the Iraq War . Following Ney 's resignation as Chairman in 2006 , it was quietly reverted . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = French war opposition = = = 
 Following the September 11 attacks by Al @-@ Qaeda and the declaration of a " War on Terror " by President George W. Bush , an invasion of Iraq was proposed . During the United Nations Security Council deliberations , French Minister of Foreign Affairs Dominique de Villepin made it clear France would neither support nor participate in the invasion . This caused some Americans to accuse France of betrayal , reigniting prior anti @-@ French sentiment in the United States . 
 = = = Initial renaming = = = 
 Renaming was initiated in February 2003 by Beaufort , North Carolina " Cubbie 's " restaurant owner Neal Rowland , who said he was motivated by similar actions against Germany in World War I , when " sauerkraut was called liberty cabbage , and <unk> were renamed hot dogs " . In an interview about the name change , Rowland commented " since the French are backing down [ from the war ] , French fries and French everything needs to be banned " . In March 2007 , Rowland obtained a trademark registration for the term " freedom fries " . 
 = = U.S. House adoption = = 
 On March 11 , 2003 Republican U.S. Representatives Bob Ney and Walter B. Jones directed the three House cafeterias to change all references to French fries and French toast on menus , and replace them with Freedom fries and Freedom toast , respectively . Jones chose to follow Cubbie 's example by circulating a letter to his colleagues advocating their renaming because , he said , " the French were ' sitting on the sidelines . ' " As Ney was Chairman of the United States House Committee on House Administration , the action did not require any vote , as the committee has authority over House cafeterias . According to a statement released by Ney , the renaming was intended to express displeasure with France 's " continued refusal to stand with their U.S. allies " . The statement further read : " This action today is a small but symbolic effort to show the strong displeasure many on Capitol Hill have with our so @-@ called ally , France . " When asked about his view on the change , Jones said it was a " lighthearted gesture . " 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 In response to the change , French Embassy spokeswoman Nathalie Loiseau commented " It 's exactly a non @-@ issue ... We focus on the serious issues " , and noted that fries originated in Belgium . She then remarked that France 's position on the change was that they were " in a very serious moment dealing with very serious issues , and we are not focusing on the name [ Americans ] give to potatoes . " After the name reversal , an Embassy spokeswoman said : " our relations are definitely much more important than potatoes ... and our relations are back on track . " 
 The very first episode of Anthony Bourdain : No Reservations , an American travel and food show , was broadcast during this era . Freedom fries was shown as an example of the then @-@ current frosty relations . It was named " Why the French Don 't Suck " . 
 In a 2005 opinion poll by Gallup , participants were asked if they felt the renaming of French fries and toast was " a silly idea or a sincere expression of patriotism ; " 66 % answered it was silly , 33 % answered it was patriotic , and 1 % had no opinion . Several restaurants followed the Houses ' change , and the name is still used by Geno 's Steaks and the chain restaurant Toby Keith 's I Love This Bar & Grill . Opposing the name change , The Saturn Cafe in Santa Cruz , California , changed their menu to " <unk> George W. Bush fries . " While Reckitt Benckiser , maker of French 's mustard , were sufficiently concerned about the movement to publicly clarify that its brand derived from a family name . 
 Massachusetts Democratic Congressman Barney Frank noted that the change made " Congress look even sillier than it sometimes looks . " New York Democratic Congressman José Serrano characterized the renaming as " petty grandstanding " , and urged fellow legislators to concentrate on more pressing issues . 
 In the March 15 , 2003 episode of Saturday Night Live , Tina Fey reported this on the satirical Weekend Update : " In a related story , in France , American cheese is now referred to as ' idiot cheese ' . " The 2006 documentary Freedom Fries : And Other Stupidity We 'll Have to Explain to Our Grandchildren directed by Carl Christman took a comedic viewpoint on American consumerism and patriotism . In the episode " Stan Knows Best " of American Dad ! , after being asked how his French toast is , the main character Stan remarks : " Smelly and ungrateful ! But this American toast is delicious . " In the comic strip Doonesbury , the characters Mark Slackmeyer and <unk> Harris criticized the name change in French . Slackmeyer said that , translated , the U.S. liberated France in World War II ; and that many French newspaper headlines after 9 / 11 were " We are all American . " At the end , he states that the anti @-@ French were " jingoistic , self @-@ regarding conquer @-@ monkeys ! " The French American indie band Freedom Fry chose their name based on the Freedom Fries phenomenon . In 2005 , Robert Plant and his band Strange Sensation released Mighty <unk> , which contained the track " Freedom Fries ; " an anti @-@ war song , its lyrics contained : " Freedom fries and burns and scars , the liberator goes too far . " 
 = = = Policy reversal = = = 
 On August 2 , 2006 the House cafeteria menus were changed back without any announcement . The change was made by the new House Administration Committee Chairman , Vern Ehlers , who replaced Ney following his resignation due to a scandal . When asked about his decision , Ehlers responded , " It 's no big deal ... It 's not news . " When asked about his opinion on the " freedom fries " episode , Walter B. Jones responded , " I wish it had never happened . " 
 = Lê Quang Tung = 
 Colonel Lê Quang Tung ( 1923 – 1 November 1963 ) was the commander of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam Special Forces under the command of Ngô Đình Nhu . Nhu was the brother of South Vietnam 's president , Ngô Đình Diệm . A former servant of the Ngô family , Tung 's military background was in security and counterespionage . 
 During the 1950s , Tung was a high @-@ ranking official in Nhu 's Cần Lao , a secret political apparatus which maintained the Ngô family 's grip on power , extorting money from wealthy businessmen . In 1960 , Tung was promoted directly to the rank of colonel and became the commander of the special forces . His period at the helm of South Vietnam 's elite troops was noted mostly for his work in repressing dissidents , rather than fighting the Viet Cong insurgents . His best @-@ known attack was the raid on Xá Lợi pagoda on 21 August 1963 , in which hundreds died or disappeared . 
 Tung 's main military programme was a scheme in which Army of the Republic of Vietnam personnel attempted to infiltrate North Vietnam in order to engage in intelligence gathering and sabotage . The program was ineffective ; the vast majority of infiltrators were killed or captured . Tung was also reported to be planning an assassination attempt on Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . , the United States Ambassador to South Vietnam . 
 Following the pagoda raids , the United States terminated funding to Tung 's men because they were used as a political tool rather than against the communists . Along with Diệm and Nhu , Tung was assassinated during the November 1963 coup . Nhu and Tung had been preparing a fake coup and counter @-@ coup in order to give a false demonstration of the regime 's strength . However , the pair were unaware that General Tôn Thất Đính , who was planning the phony operation , was involved in the real coup plot . Đính tricked Tung into sending his men into the countryside , leaving the regime in Saigon without the protection of the special forces . This led to the easy overthrow of the regime . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Tung was born in 1923 in central Vietnam , which was then the protectorate of Annam in French Indochina . The former servant of the Ngô family was devoutly Roman Catholic , short and bespectacled . Tung had a military background almost entirely in security and counterespionage , which was an unusual basis for leading the special forces . Tung had first served the French as a security officer in Central Vietnam . He then worked for Diệm as a lieutenant in the military security service in Central Vietnam . As a high @-@ ranking official in Nhu 's Cần Lao , the secret Catholic political apparatus which maintained the Ngô family 's grip on power , Tung raised party funds by extorting money from wealthy businessmen . Tung was primarily known among colleagues for his unwavering loyalty to Diệm . In 1960 , he was promoted straight to the rank of colonel and placed in charge of the special forces . The Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) regarded Tung as the third most powerful man in South Vietnam behind Diệm and Nhu , thereby ranking him as South Vietnam 's most powerful military officer . 
 = = Head of special forces = = 
 Tung had been trained by the CIA in the United States . A Diệm loyalist , he led a force of 1 @,@ 840 men , which operated under the direction of Nhu rather than the army command . He did not conduct operations against the communist Việt Cộng insurgents , but used his forces mainly in Saigon to repress opponents of the Diệm regime . Tung 's most notable attacks occurred during the Buddhist crisis of 1963 . During this period , the Buddhist majority engaged in mass protests against the pro @-@ Catholic policies of the Diệm regime . 
 On 21 August 1963 , Tung 's men , acting on Nhu 's orders , raided the Xá Lợi Pagoda , Saigon 's main Buddhist temple . The attacks were replicated across the nation , leaving a death toll estimated to be in the hundreds . The pagodas suffered extensive damage and a further 1 @,@ 400 monks and nuns were arrested . The attacks occurred after Nhu had tricked a group of Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) generals into agreeing to declare martial law . He knew the generals were plotting and hoped to exploit martial law to overthrow his brother , but outmanoeuvred them by sending Tung 's special forces into the pagodas disguised as regular ARVN soldiers . As a result , South Vietnam 's Buddhist majority initially thought the regular army had attacked the monks , damaging its generals ' credibility among the populace as potential leaders of the country . Following the attacks , U.S. officials threatened to withhold aid to the special forces unless they were used to fight communists rather than attacking political or religious dissidents . 
 Another notable religious attack was perpetrated by Tung 's men in 1963 . A hugely oversized carp was found swimming in a small pond near the central city of Đà Nẵng . Local Buddhists began to believe that the fish was a reincarnation of one of Gautama Buddha 's disciples . As more people made pilgrimages to the pond , so disquiet grew among the district chief and his subordinates , who answered to Ngô Đình Cẩn , another younger brother of Diệm . The officials mined the pond , but the fish survived . They raked the pond with machine gun fire , but the carp again escaped death . To deal with the tenacious fish , they called in Tung 's special forces . Tung 's men <unk> the pond , finally killing the carp . The killing backfired , because it generated more publicity – many newspapers across the world ran stories about the miraculous fish . Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) helicopters began landing at the site , with paratroopers filling their bottles with water that they believed to be magical . 
 Tung also headed a group run by the CIA , in which ARVN personnel of northern origin infiltrated North Vietnam , posing as locals . The objective was to gather intelligence and sabotage communist infrastructure and communications facilities . The recruits were trained in bases at Nha Trang , Đà Nẵng , and sometimes offshore in Taiwan , Guam and Okinawa . Around eighty groups of operatives , each numbering six or seven men , were deployed in 1963 . They entered the north via parachute drops or sampan journeys at night , but nearly all were captured or killed . The captives were frequently used in communist propaganda broadcasts . Tung was criticised for his management of the operations . 
 At Nhu 's request , Tung was reported to have been planning an operation under the cover of a government @-@ organised student demonstration outside the US Embassy , Saigon . In this plan , Tung 's men would assassinate ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr. and other key officials among the confusion . Another target was the Buddhist leader Thích Trí Quang , who had been given asylum in the embassy after being targeted in the pagoda raids . According to the plan , Tung 's men would then burn down the embassy . 
 = = U.S. sanctions = = 
 Following the pagoda raids , the U.S. began exploring the possibility of replacing Diệm . Cable 243 informed the US embassy to look for alternative leadership if Diệm did not remove Nhu . In September , the Krulak Mendenhall mission was despatched to South Vietnam to analyse the domestic situation and the war against the communists . One of the resulting suggestions was to terminate funding of the special forces as an expression of disapproval of Tung and Nhu 's actions . Another was to run covert campaigns to discredit Tung . The Krulak Mendenhall mission ended in a stalemate , so the Kennedy administration followed up with the McNamara Taylor mission . The second expedition resulted in the suspension of funding for the special forces until they were placed under the command of the army 's Joint General Staff ( JGS ) and sent into battle . 
 The McNamara Taylor mission 's report noted that one of the reasons for sending Tung 's men into the field was because they " are a continuing support for Diệm " . The Americans were aware that removing the special forces from Saigon would increase the chances that a coup would succeed , thereby encouraging the army to overthrow the president . Diệm and Nhu were undeterred by the suspension of aid , keeping Tung and his men in the capital . In private talks with US officials , Diệm insisted that the army was responsible for the pagoda attacks and that Tung 's men were already under the control of the JGS . 
 = = Coup and assassination = = 
 By September , Diệm and Nhu knew that a group of generals were planning a coup . Nhu ordered Tung and Tôn Thất Đính — a loyalist general who commanded the ARVN III Corps which encompassed the Saigon region — to plan a fake coup against the government . One objective was to trick anti @-@ government dissidents into joining the false uprising so that they could be identified and eliminated . Another aim was to provide a public relations stunt that would give a false impression of the strength of the regime . 
 Codenamed Operation Bravo , the first stage of the scheme involved some of Tung 's loyalist soldiers , disguised as insurgents , faking a coup . Tung would then announce the formation of a " revolutionary government " consisting of opposition activists , while Diệm and Nhu pretended to be on the run . During the orchestrated chaos of the first coup , the disguised loyalists would riot and in the ensuing mayhem , kill the leading coup plotters , such as Generals Dương Văn Minh , Trần Văn Đôn , Lê Văn Kim and junior officers that were helping them . Tung 's men and some of Nhu 's underworld connections were also to kill some figures who were assisting the conspirators , such as the titular but relatively powerless Vice President Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ , CIA agent Lucien Conein , who was on assignment in Vietnam as a military adviser , and Ambassador Lodge . These would then be blamed on " neutralist and pro @-@ communist elements " . This was to be followed by a fake " counter @-@ coup " , whereupon Tung 's special forces , having left Saigon on the pretext of fighting communists , as well as Đính 's forces would triumphantly re @-@ enter Saigon to reaffirm the Diệm regime . Nhu would then exploit the scare to round up dissidents . 
 However , Nhu and Tung were unaware that Đính was part of the real coup plot . The III Corps commander told Tung that the counter @-@ coup needed to employ an overwhelming amount of force . He said that tanks were required " because armour is dangerous " . In an attempt to outwit Tung , Đính said that fresh troops were needed , opining : 
 If we move reserves into the city , the Americans will be angry . They 'll complain that we 're not fighting the war . So we must camouflage our plan by sending the special forces out to the country . That will deceive them . 
 The loyalists were unaware that Đính 's real intention was to engulf Saigon with his rebel divisions and lock Tung 's loyalists in the countryside where they could not defend the president . Tung and the palace agreed to send all four Saigon @-@ based special forces companies out of the capital of Saigon on 29 October 1963 . 
 On 1 November 1963 , Tung was summoned by the coup organisers to the Joint General Staff headquarters at Tân Sơn Nhứt Air Base , on the pretext of a routine officers ' lunch meeting . At 13 : 30 , General Trần Văn Đôn announced that a coup was taking place . Most of the officers rose to applaud , but Tung did not . He was taken away by Nguyễn Văn Nhung , the bodyguard of General Dương Văn Minh . As he was led away , Tung shouted " Remember who gave you your stars ! " 
 During the early stages of the coup , the rebels forced Tung to order his men to surrender . This meant that only the Presidential Guard was left to defend Gia Long Palace . At 16 : 45 , Tung was forced at gunpoint to talk to Diệm on the phone , telling the president that he had told his men to surrender . Minh ordered Nhung to execute the Diệm loyalist . Tung had failed to convince the president to surrender and still commanded the loyalty of his men . The other generals had little sympathy , since the special forces commander had disguised his men in army uniforms and framed the generals for the pagoda raids . The generals were aware of the threat Tung posed ; they had discussed his elimination during their planning , having contemplated waging an offensive against his special forces . 
 At nightfall he was taken with Major Lê Quang Triệu , his brother and deputy , hands tied , into a jeep and driven to edge of the air base . Forced to kneel over two freshly dug holes , the brothers were shot into their graves and buried . The coup was successful , and on the following morning , Diệm and Nhu were captured and executed . 
 = Dunstan = 
 Dunstan ( Latin : <unk> ; 909 – 19 May 988 AD ) was an Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey , a Bishop of Worcester , a Bishop of London , and an Archbishop of Canterbury , later canonised as a saint . His work restored monastic life in England and reformed the English Church . His 11th @-@ century biographer , Osbern , himself an artist and scribe , states that Dunstan was skilled in " making a picture and forming letters " , as were other clergy of his age who reached senior rank . 
 Dunstan served as an important minister of state to several English kings . He was the most popular saint in England for nearly two centuries , having gained fame for the many stories of his greatness , not least among which were those concerning his famed cunning in defeating the devil . 
 = = Early life ( 909 – 43 ) = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Dunstan was born in Baltonsborough , Somerset . He was the son of Heorstan , a noble of Wessex . Heorstan was the brother of Athelm the bishop of Wells and of the Bishop of Winchester . It is recorded that his mother , Cynethryth , was a pious woman . Osbern 's life of Dunstan relates that a messenger miraculously told her of the saintly child she would give birth to : 
 She was in the church of St Mary on <unk> , when all the lights were suddenly extinguished . Then the candle held by Cynethryth was as suddenly <unk> , and all present lit their candles at this miraculous flame , thus foreshadowing that the boy " would be the minister of eternal light " to the Church of England . 
 The anonymous author of the earliest Life places Dunstan 's birth during the reign of Athelstan , while Osbern fixed it at " the first year of the reign of King Æthelstan " , 924 or 925 . This date , however , cannot be reconciled with other known dates of Dunstan 's life and creates many obvious anachronisms . Historians therefore assume that Dunstan was born around 910 or earlier . 
 = = = School to the king 's court = = = 
 As a young boy , Dunstan studied under the Irish monks who then occupied the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey . Accounts tell of his youthful optimism and of his vision of the abbey being restored . While still a boy , Dunstan was stricken with a near @-@ fatal illness and effected a seemingly miraculous recovery . Even as a child , he was noted for his devotion to learning and for his mastery of many kinds of artistic craftsmanship . With his parent 's consent he was tonsured , received minor orders and served in the ancient church of St Mary . He became so well known for his devotion to learning that he is said to have been summoned by his uncle Athelm , the Archbishop of Canterbury , to enter his service . He was later appointed to the court of King Athelstan . 
 Dunstan soon became a favourite of the king and was the envy of other members of the court . A plot was hatched to disgrace him and Dunstan was accused of being involved with witchcraft and black magic . The king ordered him to leave the court and as Dunstan was leaving the palace his enemies physically attacked him , beat him severely , bound him , and threw him into a cesspool . He managed to crawl out and make his way to the house of a friend . From there , he journeyed to Winchester and entered the service of his uncle , Ælfheah , Bishop of Winchester . 
 The bishop tried to persuade him to become a monk , but Dunstan was doubtful whether he had a vocation to a celibate life . The answer came in the form of an attack of swelling tumours all over Dunstan 's body . This ailment was so severe that it was thought to be leprosy . It was more probably some form of blood poisoning caused by being beaten and thrown in the cesspool . Whatever the cause , it changed Dunstan 's mind . He took Holy Orders in 943 , in the presence of Ælfheah , and returned to live the life of a hermit at Glastonbury . Against the old church of St Mary he built a small cell five feet long and two and a half feet deep . It was there that Dunstan studied , worked at his handicrafts , and played on his harp . It is at this time , according to a late 11th @-@ century legend , that the Devil is said to have tempted Dunstan and to have been held by the face with Dunstan 's tongs . 
 = = Monk , abbot , and bishop ( 943 – 60 ) = = 
 = = = Life as a monk = = = 
 Dunstan worked as a silversmith and in the scriptorium while he was living at Glastonbury . It is thought likely that he was the artist who drew the well @-@ known image of Christ with a small kneeling monk beside him in the Glastonbury <unk> , " one of the first of a series of outline drawings which were to become a special feature of Anglo @-@ Saxon art of this period . " Dunstan became famous as a musician , illuminator , and metalworker . Lady <unk> , King Æthelstan 's niece , made Dunstan a trusted adviser and on her death she left a considerable fortune to him . He used this money later in life to foster and encourage a monastic revival in England . About the same time , his father Heorstan died and Dunstan inherited his fortune as well . He became a person of great influence , and on the death of King Æthelstan in 940 , the new King , Edmund , summoned him to his court at Cheddar and made him a minister . 
 Again , royal favour fostered jealousy among other courtiers and again Dunstan 's enemies succeeded in their plots . The king was prepared to send Dunstan away . There were then at Cheddar certain envoys from the " Eastern Kingdom " , which probably meant East Anglia . Dunstan implored the envoys to take him with them when they returned to their homes . They agreed to do so , but it never happened . The story is recorded : 
 ... the king rode out to hunt the stag in Mendip Forest . He became separated from his attendants and followed a stag at great speed in the direction of the Cheddar cliffs . The stag rushed blindly over the precipice and was followed by the hounds . <unk> endeavoured vainly to stop his horse ; then , seeing death to be imminent , he remembered his harsh treatment of St Dunstan and promised to make amends if his life was spared . At that moment his horse was stopped on the very edge of the cliff . Giving thanks to God , he returned forthwith to his palace , called for St. Dunstan and bade him follow , then rode straight to Glastonbury . Entering the church , the king first knelt in prayer before the altar , then , taking St. Dunstan by the hand , he gave him the kiss of peace , led him to the abbot 's throne and , seating him thereon , promised him all assistance in restoring Divine worship and regular observance . 
 = = = Abbot of Glastonbury = = = 
 Dunstan , now Abbot of Glastonbury , went to work at once on the task of reform . He had to re @-@ create monastic life and to rebuild the abbey . He began by establishing Benedictine monasticism at Glastonbury . The Rule of St. Benedict was the basis of his restoration according to the author of ' Edgar 's Establishment of the Monasteries ' ( written in the 960s or 970s ) and according to Dunstan 's first biographer , who had been a member of the community at Glastonbury . Their statements are also in accordance with the nature of his first measures as abbot , with the significance of his first buildings , and with the Benedictine leanings of his most prominent disciples . 
 Nevertheless , not all the members of Dunstan 's community at Glastonbury were monks who followed the Benedictine Rule . In fact , Dunstan 's first biographer , ' B. ' , was a cleric who eventually joined a community of canons at Liège after leaving Glastonbury . 
 Dunstan 's first care was to rebuild the Church of St. Peter , rebuild the cloister , and re @-@ establish the monastic enclosure . The secular affairs of the house were committed to his brother , Wulfric , " so that neither himself nor any of the professed monks might break enclosure . " A school for the local youth was founded and soon became the most famous of its time in England . A substantial extension of the irrigation system on the surrounding Somerset Levels was also completed . 
 Within two years of Dunstan 's appointment , in 946 , King Edmund was assassinated . His successor was Eadred . The policy of the new government was supported by the Queen Mother , Eadgifu of Kent , by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Oda , and by the East Anglian nobles , at whose head was the powerful ealdorman Æthelstan the " Half @-@ king " . It was a policy of unification and conciliation with the Danish half of the kingdom . The goal was a firm establishment of royal authority . In ecclesiastical matters it favoured the spread of Catholic observance , the rebuilding of churches , the moral reform of the clergy and laity , and the end of the religion of the Danes in England . Against all these reforms were the nobles of Wessex , who included most of Dunstan 's own relatives , and who had an interest in maintaining established customs . For nine years Dunstan 's influence was dominant , during which time he twice refused the office of bishop ( that of Winchester in 951 and Crediton in 953 ) , affirming that he would not leave the king 's side so long as the king lived and needed him . 
 = = = Changes in fortune = = = 
 In 955 , Eadred died , and the situation was at once changed . Eadwig , the elder son of Edmund , who then came to the throne , was a headstrong youth wholly devoted to the reactionary nobles . According to one legend , the feud with Dunstan began on the day of Eadwig 's coronation , when he failed to attend a meeting of nobles . When Dunstan eventually found the young monarch , he was cavorting with a noblewoman named Ælfgifu and her mother , and refused to return with the bishop . Infuriated by this , Dunstan dragged Eadwig back and forced him to renounce the girl as a " strumpet " . Later realising that he had provoked the king , Dunstan fled to the apparent sanctuary of his cloister , but Eadwig , incited by Ælfgifu , whom he married , followed him and plundered the monastery . 
 Although Dunstan managed to escape , he saw that his life was in danger . He fled England and crossed the channel to Flanders , where he found himself ignorant of the language and of the customs of the locals . The count of Flanders , Arnulf I , received him with honour and lodged him in the Abbey of Mont Blandin , near Ghent . This was one of the centres of the Benedictine revival in that country , and Dunstan was able for the first time to observe the strict observance that had seen its rebirth at Cluny at the beginning of the century . His exile was not of long duration . Before the end of 957 , the Mercians and Northumbrians revolted and drove out Eadwig , choosing his brother Edgar as king of the country north of the Thames . The south remained faithful to Eadwig . At once Edgar 's advisers recalled Dunstan . On his return , the archbishop consecrated Dunstan a bishop and , on the death of <unk> of Worcester at the end of 957 , Oda appointed Dunstan to that see . 
 In the following year the See of London became vacant and was conferred on Dunstan , who held it in conjunction with Worcester . In October 959 , Eadwig died and his brother Edgar was readily accepted as ruler of Wessex . One of Eadwig 's final acts had been to appoint a successor to Archbishop Oda , who died on 2 June 958 . First he appointed Ælfsige of Winchester , but he perished of cold in the Alps as he journeyed to Rome for the pallium . In his place Eadwig nominated <unk> , the Bishop of Wells . As soon as Edgar became king he reversed this act on the ground that <unk> had not been able to govern even his former diocese properly . The archbishopric was then conferred on Dunstan . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury ( 960 – 78 ) = = 
 Dunstan went to Rome in 960 , and received the pallium from Pope John XII . On his journey there , Dunstan 's charities were so lavish as to leave nothing for himself and his attendants . His steward complained , but Dunstan seems to have suggested that they trust in Jesus Christ . 
 On his return from Rome , Dunstan at once regained his position as virtual prime minister of the kingdom . By his advice <unk> was appointed to the Bishopric of London , and Oswald to that of Worcester . In 963 , Æthelwold , the Abbot of Abingdon , was appointed to the See of Winchester . With their aid and with the ready support of King Edgar , Dunstan pushed forward his reforms in the English Church . The monks in his communities were taught to live in a spirit of self @-@ sacrifice , and Dunstan actively enforced the law of celibacy whenever possible . He forbade the practices of simony ( selling ecclesiastical offices for money ) and ended the custom of clerics appointing relatives to offices under their jurisdiction . Monasteries were built , and in some of the great cathedrals , monks took the place of the secular canons ; in the rest the canons were obliged to live according to rule . The parish priests were compelled to be qualified for their office ; they were urged to teach parishioners not only the truths of the Christian faith , but also trades to improve their position . The state saw reforms as well . Good order was maintained throughout the realm and there was respect for the law . Trained bands policed the north , and a navy guarded the shores from Viking raids . There was a level of peace in the kingdom unknown in living memory . 
 In 973 , Dunstan 's statesmanship reached its zenith when he officiated at the coronation of King Edgar . Edgar was crowned at Bath in an imperial ceremony planned not as the initiation , but as the culmination of his reign ( a move that must have taken a great deal of preliminary diplomacy ) . This service , devised by Dunstan himself and celebrated with a poem in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle forms the basis of the present @-@ day British coronation ceremony . There was a second symbolic coronation held later . This was an important step , as other kings of Britain came and gave their allegiance to Edgar at Chester . Six kings in Britain , including the kings of Scotland and of Strathclyde , pledged their faith that they would be the king 's liege @-@ men on sea and land . 
 Edgar ruled as a strong and popular king for 16 years . In 975 was succeeded by his eldest son Edward ( II ) " the Martyr " . His accession was disputed by his stepmother , Ælfthryth , who wished her own son Æthelred to reign . Through the influence of Dunstan , Edward was chosen and crowned at Winchester . Edgar 's death had encouraged the reactionary nobles , and at once there was a determined attack upon the monks , the protagonists of reform . Throughout Mercia they were persecuted and deprived of their possessions . Their cause , however , was supported by Æthelwine , the ealdorman of East Anglia , and the realm was in serious danger of civil war . Three meetings of the Witan were held to settle these disputes , at <unk> , at Calne , and at Amesbury . At the second of them the floor of the hall where the Witan was sitting gave way , and all except Dunstan , who clung to a beam , fell into the room below , several men were killed . 
 = = Final years ( 978 – 88 ) = = 
 In March 978 , King Eadweard was assassinated at Corfe Castle , possibly at the instigation of his stepmother , and Æthelred the Unready became king . His coronation on Low Sunday 31 March 978 , was the last state event in which Dunstan took part . When the young king took the usual oath to govern well , Dunstan addressed him in solemn warning . He criticised the violent act whereby he became king and prophesied the misfortunes that were shortly to fall on the kingdom , but Dunstan 's influence at court was ended . Dunstan retired to Canterbury , to teach at the cathedral school . 
 Only three more public acts are known . In 980 , Dunstan joined Ælfhere of Mercia in the solemn translation of the relics of King <unk> II , soon to be known as St Edward the Martyr , from their grave at Wareham to a shrine at Shaftesbury Abbey . In 984 , in obedience to a vision of St Andrew , he persuaded King Æthelred to appoint Ælfheah as Bishop of Winchester in succession to Æthelwold . In 986 , Dunstan induced the king , by a donation of 100 pounds of silver , to stop his persecution of the See of Rochester . 
 Dunstan 's retirement at Canterbury consisted of long hours , both day and night , spent in private prayer , as well as his regular attendance at Mass and the daily office . He visited the shrines of St Augustine and St Æthelberht , and there are reports of a vision of angels who sang to him heavenly canticles . He worked to improve the spiritual and temporal well @-@ being of his people , to build and restore churches , to establish schools , to judge suits , to defend widows and orphans , to promote peace , and to enforce respect for purity . He practised his crafts , made bells and organs and corrected the books in the cathedral library . He encouraged and protected European scholars who came to England , and was active as a teacher of boys in the cathedral school . On the vigil of Ascension Day 988 , it is recorded that a vision of angels warned he would die in three days . On the feast day itself , Dunstan said Mass and preached three times to the people : at the Gospel , at the benediction , and after the Agnus Dei . In this last address , he announced his impending death and wished his congregation well . That afternoon he chose the spot for his tomb , then went to his bed . His strength failed rapidly , and on Saturday morning , 19 May , he caused the clergy to assemble . Mass was celebrated in his presence , then he received Extreme Unction and the Viaticum , and died . Dunstan 's final words are reported to have been , " He hath made a remembrance of his wonderful works , being a merciful and gracious Lord : He hath given food to them that fear Him . " 
 The English people accepted him as a saint shortly thereafter . He was formally canonised in 1029 . That year at the Synod of Winchester , St Dunstan 's feast was ordered to be kept solemnly throughout England . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Until Thomas Becket 's fame overshadowed Dunstan 's , he was the favourite saint of the English people . Dunstan had been buried in his cathedral ; and when that building was destroyed by a fire in 1074 , his relics were translated by Archbishop Lanfranc to a tomb on the south side of the high altar in the rebuilt Canterbury Cathedral . 
 The monks of Glastonbury used to claim that during the sack of Canterbury by the Danes in 1012 , Dunstan 's body had been carried for safety to their abbey . This story was disproved by Archbishop William Warham , who opened the tomb at Canterbury in 1508 . They found Dunstan 's relics still to be there . Within a century , however , his shrine was destroyed during the English Reformation . 
 Dunstan became patron saint of English goldsmiths and silversmiths because he worked as a silversmith making church plate . His Feast Day is 19 May , which is why before the restoration the date year on London Assay Office hallmarks ran from 19 May one year to 18 May the next , not the calendar year . This was changed at the restoration of Charles II in 1660 so that the <unk> year began on the King 's birthday , 29 May . 
 St Dunstan 's — the charity that provides support , rehabilitation , and respite care to blind ex @-@ service personnel of the British Armed Forces — is named after him , as are many churches all over the world . St Dunstan 's , Mayfield , St Dunstan 's , Stepney , St Dunstan @-@ in @-@ the @-@ East , London , and St Dunstan @-@ in @-@ the @-@ West , London are four of the more well known in Britain . The church at the junction of London Road and Whitstable Road gives its name to the neighbourhood of Canterbury on the north bank of the River Stour . 
 English literature contains many references to him , for example in A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens , and in this folk rhyme : 
 St Dunstan , as the story goes , 
 Once pull 'd the devil by the nose 
 With red @-@ hot tongs , which made him roar , 
 That he was heard three miles or more . 
 This folk story is already shown in an initial in the Life of Dunstan in the Canterbury <unk> , from the second quarter of the 12th century ( British Library , Harley MS 315 , f . <unk> . ) , and the tongs have become a symbol of St Dunstan and are featured in the arms of Tower Hamlets . 
 Daniel <unk> has tentatively suggested that Dunstan may be the medieval author of Solomon and Saturn citing the style , word choice , and Hiberno @-@ Latin used in the texts . However , Clive Tolley examines this claim from a linguistic point @-@ of @-@ view and disagrees with <unk> 's claim . 
 Another story relates how Dunstan nailed a horseshoe to the Devil 's hoof when he was asked to re @-@ shoe the Devil 's horse . This caused the Devil great pain , and Dunstan only agreed to remove the shoe and release the Devil after he promised never to enter a place where a horseshoe is over the door . This is claimed as the origin of the lucky horseshoe . 
 The Eastern Orthodox Church , the Roman Catholic Church , and the Anglican Communion mark his feast day on 19 May . 
 At various passages in " The Deptford Trilogy " by the Canadian writer Robertson Davies , the character Dunstan Ramsay is compared with the saint of the same name , and in particular some stormy events in the character 's love @-@ life are rather humorously compared to Saint Dunstan 's famous struggle with Satan . 
 = 2003 FA Cup Final = 
 The 2003 FA Cup Final was the 122nd final of the FA Cup , the world 's oldest domestic football cup competition . The final took place on Saturday 17 May 2003 at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , in front of a crowd of 73 @,@ 726 . It was the third consecutive year the final was played at the stadium , due to the ongoing reconstruction of Wembley Stadium , the final 's usual venue . The 2003 final was the first to be played indoors ; the roof was closed because of bad weather . The clubs contesting the final were Arsenal , the holders of the competition and Southampton . This was Arsenal 's sixteenth appearance in a final to Southampton 's fourth . 
 As Premier League clubs , Arsenal and Southampton entered the FA Cup in the third round , which meant each club needed to progress through five rounds to reach the final . Arsenal made a convincing start , they won their opening three rounds , but needed a sixth @-@ round replay against Chelsea . By contrast , Southampton played one replay in the fourth round against Millwall . Arsenal entered the match as favourites and beat Southampton 6 – 1 nine days earlier in the league . Goalkeeper David Seaman captained Arsenal in the absence of the injured Patrick Vieira ; it was to be Seaman 's last appearance for the club . In defence for Southampton , Chris Baird made only his second competitive start . Chris Marsden captained the club in the absence of the injured club captain , Jason Dodd . 
 Arsenal began the match more effectively of the two and scored what proved to be the winning goal in the latter minutes of the first half – Freddie Ljungberg 's rebounded goal effort was converted by Robert Pirès . Midway through the second half , Southampton goalkeeper Antti Niemi was substituted , as he strained his calf muscle ; he was replaced by Paul Jones . In stoppage time , striker James Beattie had his header cleared off the line by Ashley Cole , in what was the final chance for Southampton . 
 Arsenal 's win marked the first time a team had retained the trophy since Tottenham Hotspur in 1982 . They later played against league champions Manchester United in the 2003 FA Community Shield . Given Arsenal had already qualified for Europe via their league position , their UEFA Cup spot was awarded to runners @-@ up Southampton . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round , receiving a bye as a Premier League club . Their opening match was a 2 – 0 home win against Oxford United on 4 January 2003 . Striker Dennis Bergkamp scored his 100th goal for the club and an own goal by defender Scott McNiven ensured progression to the next round . Arsenal faced non @-@ league side Farnborough Town ; the match switched from Farnborough 's ground at Cherrywood Road to Highbury due to concerns over safety . Farnborough began the match as the home team and conceded the first goal , scored by Arsenal defender Sol Campbell in the 19th minute . They went down to ten men after Christian Lee was sent off for a professional foul . Francis Jeffers scored twice before Rocky Baptiste added a consolation , beating Pascal Cygan for pace and despite having his first shot saved by goalkeeper Stuart Taylor , he managed to lift the ball over him and into the net . Lauren and Bergkamp each scored in the final 15 minutes to give Arsenal a 5 – 1 victory . 
 Arsenal 's fifth round match was away to league rivals Manchester United at Old Trafford on 16 February 2003 . After Ryan Giggs missed the chance to score past an open goal , midfielder Edu gave Arsenal the lead through a free kick which took a deflection off David Beckham 's shoulder . Striker Sylvain Wiltord scored the second goal of the match in the 52nd minute , running onto a pass from Edu and side @-@ footing the ball past goalkeeper Fabien Barthez . Arsenal captain Patrick Vieira said of the performance : " We knew when we lost here in the league that we had lost the battle in midfield . We had to put that right , and we did . " In the sixth round , Arsenal was drawn at home to Chelsea in a repeat of the previous season 's final . Chelsea defender John Terry put Chelsea ahead with a header from a set piece before Arsenal responded through Jeffers and Thierry Henry . Frank Lampard scored a late equaliser for the visiting team meaning the match was replayed at Stamford Bridge . An own goal by Terry and a strike by Wiltord in the space of seven minutes during the replay gave Arsenal an early lead against Chelsea . Despite going down to ten men after Cygan was sent off and Terry scoring from a header , the away team scored a third goal through Lauren to ensure progression into the semi @-@ finals . In the semi @-@ final against Sheffield United on 13 April 2003 at Old Trafford , Freddie Ljungberg scored the winning goal to help Arsenal reach their third successive FA Cup final appearance . The match was best remembered for David Seaman 's late save , which prevented Sheffield United from equalising . 
 = = = Southampton = = = 
 Like Arsenal , as a Premier League club , Southampton received a bye into the third round . Their opening match was a 4 – 0 win against fellow league club Tottenham Hotspur . A goal by defender Michael Svensson and three from Jo Tessem , Anders Svensson and James Beattie in the second half was the second straight victory against Tottenham , having beaten them on New Year 's Day in the league . In the fourth round , Southampton was drawn at home to First Division club Millwall on 25 January 2003 . The visitors took the lead through striker Steve Claridge but were denied victory 90 seconds from the end of the match as Southampton striker Kevin Davies scored from a rebounded shot . In the replay , midfielder Matthew Oakley scored twice for Southampton ( one in both halves ) after Steven Reid equalised for Millwall . 
 Southampton 's fifth round match was against Norwich City at home on 5 February 2003 . Two goals in the space of three minutes , scored by Svensson and Tessem was enough to take the team into the quarter @-@ finals . Southampton defender Claus <unk> was pleased with the win and said following the match : " When you get to this stage in the competition you have to believe you can win it . " The club then faced Wolverhampton Wanderers at home in the following round . Former Wolves player Chris Marsden gave Southampton the lead in the 56th minute and with nine minutes remaining of normal time , the team added a second goal when Tessem 's shot took a deflection off Paul Butler 's legs to go inside the goal net . The victory meant Southampton reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup for the first time in 17 years . At Villa Park , Southampton played First Division team Watford on 13 April 2003 . Brett Ormerod opened the scoring two minutes before half time and set up the second goal which the ball was taken over the line by Watford defender Paul Robinson . Despite Marcus Gayle scoring a late header to half the scoreline Southampton won the match . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Arsenal was appearing in the final of the FA Cup for the sixteenth time . They had won the cup eight times previously ( in 1930 , 1936 , 1950 , 1971 , 1979 , 1993 , 1998 and 2002 ) and had been beaten in the final seven times , the most recent in 2001 . By comparison , Southampton made their fourth appearance in a FA Cup final . Their previous best was winning the cup in 1976 , by beating opponents Manchester United . 
 Both clubs received an allocation of approximately 25 @,@ 000 tickets , with the remaining 25 @,@ 000 being sent out to other clubs . 17 @,@ 500 of those tickets were available to Southampton season ticket holders . Seat prices for the final exceeded £ 80 , with the cheapest tickets available at £ 25 . Southampton was given the South Stand , which was the larger end of the stadium , whereas Arsenal was situated at the opposite end . Although Southampton supporters were disappointed at the allocation share , chairman Rupert Lowe refused to criticise the FA 's decision , by saying : " The reality is that too many people want to go and there are never enough tickets . " In the lead up to the final , the South Wales Echo reported that many tickets were being sold on the black market , for " 20 times " the face @-@ value price . 
 Nine days before the final , the two clubs faced each other in a league match at Highbury . With Arsenal unable to retain the title , having lost to Leeds United , manager Arsène Wenger rested several players , as did Southampton manager Gordon Strachan , whose team started without six of their first @-@ choice eleven . Winger Jermaine Pennant on his league debut scored a hat @-@ trick , as did Pirès , in a 6 – 1 win . Strachan believed the result had little bearing on their chances of winning the cup , noting : " There is little pressure on Southampton to lift the trophy . We were not expected to reach the final and have already clinched a place in the UEFA Cup . " Wenger accepted his team were " favourites " but expected " ... Southampton to be at their best against us because it will be a different team than the one we faced in the championship recently . " 
 The traditional Cup Final hymn , " Abide with Me " was sung by Tony Henry , an opera singer from South London . Sir Bobby Robson was invited as the FA 's chief guest for the final and performed several duties ordinarily reserved for royalty , such as presenting the trophy to the winning captain . Heavy rain on Friday night and forecasted showers in Cardiff meant the final would be the first to be played indoors ; the stadium closed its retractable roof and floodlights were used to light up the ground . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Vieira was ruled out of the match because of a knee injury , so Seaman was named as Arsenal captain , in a match widely anticipated as his final for the club . With Campbell suspended and Cygan absent due to a thigh strain , Daily Mail journalists Steve Curry and Ian Gibb revealed the night before the final that midfielder Kolo Touré was pencilled in as an " emergency centre back " . Wenger however picked Oleg Luzhny to pair up with Martin Keown , who was rested the previous Sunday away to Sunderland . For Southampton , the major absentee was striker Marian <unk> , who underwent a third operation to overcome a troubling knee injury . Defender Chris Baird made his second competitive start for the club and Chris Marsden captained Southampton , given Jason Dodd 's absence with an injury . Although both teams set up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , Bergkamp was positioned as a deep @-@ lying forward behind Henry . 
 = = = Report = = = 
 Arsenal created their first chance inside 24 seconds , when Ljungberg put Henry clear down the right @-@ hand side . The striker used his pace to get the better of <unk> , only to have his shot blocked by goalkeeper Antti Niemi . Bergkamp 's goal effort in the eighth minute was cleared off the line by full back Chris Baird , after Niemi fumbled Henry 's initial shot . Southampton fashioned their first opportunity in the 15th minute through a high cross ; in spite of unsettling the Arsenal defence , the unmarked Svensson volleyed over the bar . Baird moments after won the ball in midfield and curled a shot that left Seaman " scrambling across his goal to save " . Seven minutes before the break , Arsenal went into the lead . Henry , receiving the ball from Parlour , slipped it into Bergkamp down the right . He in turn fed the ball to Ljungberg , whose shot was blocked . The ball rebounded in the direction of Pirès , who needed one touch to set himself and another to fire at the near post , despite Niemi getting a hand . Arsenal missed further chances to extend their lead when a cross from the right by Henry was shot over the bar by Pirès and from the same area , Bergkamp 's " cross @-@ cum @-@ shot " was missed by Ljungberg . 
 After the break , Southampton applied pressure and a poor clearance by Seaman invited a chance for Paul Telfer to shoot from " 35 yards out " ; his pass found Ormerod , but was eventually intercepted by Luzhny . Minutes after , Beattie failed to take advantage from Oakley 's cross , as the ball drifted wide . Arsenal regained possession and in the 52nd minute went close to doubling their lead . In Southampton 's penalty box , Bergkamp turned and beat Ormerod before curling a shot which Niemi palmed off ; it fell to the feet of Ljungberg , who shot the ball into the side @-@ netting . Telfer misguided his header from a Southampton corner , before Niemi denied Henry again . In the 65th minute , Niemi injured himself , in an attempt to clear the ball and was replaced by substitute Paul Jones . Both clubs made substitutions in the final third of the game , with Wiltord coming on for Bergkamp and Tessem replacing Svensson . Ormerod 's goal @-@ bound effort was saved by Seaman with 10 minutes remaining of the match . In the fourth minute of injury time , Southampton earned themselves a corner . Beattie 's on @-@ target header was cleared off the line by Ashley Cole and out for another corner , which Pirès kicked out in the final action of the game . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 In retaining the cup , Arsenal became the first team to do so since Tottenham Hotspur in 1982 . Wenger commented after the game that his team " got the trophy we wanted " while Strachan was in admiration of Southampton 's performance : " I 'm very proud of the way they competed . I couldn 't have asked for any more . " Keown said the FA Cup win was " the best ever " and Seaman felt the disappointment of losing out to Manchester United in the league spurred the team on . Football pundits Alan Hansen , Peter Schmeichel and Mark Hughes unanimously agreed that Arsenal deserved to win the match . 
 Arsenal 's victory set up a Community Shield match against Manchester United , winners of the 2002 – 03 Premier League . The FA Cup winners are awarded qualification into the UEFA Cup , but because Arsenal qualified for the UEFA Champions League via their league position , the UEFA Cup place was passed to Southampton , the runners @-@ up . 
 The match was broadcast live in the United Kingdom by both the BBC and Sky Sports , with BBC One providing the free @-@ to @-@ air coverage and Sky Sports 1 being the pay @-@ TV alternative . BBC One held the majority of the viewership , with a peak audience of 9 @.@ 6 million viewers ( 55 @.@ 7 % viewing share ) watching at 16 : <unk> and the match averaged at 8 @.@ 3 million ( 55 % ) – the highest audience for a FA Cup final in four years . Coverage of the final began on the channel at 12 : 10pm and averaged 5 @.@ 3 million ( 44 @.@ 4 % ) . The Match of the Day coverage concluded at different times dependent on station , with the broadcast in Scotland ending 10 minutes before the main broadcast finished . 
 = Pierre @-@ François Chabaneau = 
 Pierre @-@ François Chabaneau ( 1754 @-@ 1842 ) was a French chemist who spent much of his life working in Spain . He was one of the first chemists to succeed in producing malleable platinum . Chabaneau was born in Dordogne , France , and died near his home village at the age of 88 years . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chabaneau was born in 1754 in <unk> , a village in the Dordogne department of France . His uncle , a member of the order of Saint Anthony , encouraged him to study theology . While Chabaneau excelled in his studies , his distaste for metaphysical speculation led him to antagonize his teachers , which in turn caused him to be expelled from school . 
 Sympathetic towards Chabaneau 's state of poverty , the director of a Jesuit college in Passy offered him a position as a mathematics professor , despite Chabaneau having only a basic understanding of arithmetic . In studying the material for the next day 's lessons , Chabaneau taught himself algebra and geometry . His academic interest soon spread to physics , natural history , and chemistry . At the age of twenty , Chabaneau was convinced to join the newly established Real Seminario <unk> at Vergara to teach French and physics by brothers Fausto and Juan José Elhuyar . The two brothers , who later made a name for themselves by isolating metallic tungsten , had been hired by the Count of <unk> , who had sent them to France to find professors for the Vergara Seminary . 
 = = Platinum research = = 
 After the Elhuyar brothers isolated metallic tungsten in 1783 , Chabaneau collaborated with them in researching platinum . This did not last long , though , as the brothers had been appointed Directors General of Mining , and soon left Spain for South America . King Charles III created a public chair of mineralogy , physics and chemistry for Chabaneau in Madrid and provided him with a laboratory for his research . The Count d <unk> secured the government 's entire supply of platinum for Chabaneau 's laboratory . 
 Chabaneau was able to easily remove most of platinum 's natural impurities , including gold , mercury , lead , copper , and iron , leading him to believe that he was working with pure platinum . However , the metal displayed inconsistent characteristics . At times it was malleable , yet at times it was highly brittle . Sometimes it was entirely incombustible , yet sometimes it burned readily . These inconsistencies were a result of various impurities : rhodium , palladium , osmium , iridium , and ruthenium . These elements would later come to be known as the platinum group metals , but at the time of Chabaneau 's research , they had not yet been discovered . 
 So frustrated was Chabaneau by his research that , in 1786 , he lost his temper and smashed all of his equipment , exclaiming , " Away with it all ! I 'll smash the whole business ; you shall never again get me to touch the damned metal ! " Nevertheless , three months later Chabaneau presented the Count d <unk> with a 10 cm cube of pure malleable platinum . His process , involving powder metallurgy and intense heating , was kept secret until 1914 . 
 = = Platinum age and death = = 
 Chabaneau realized that the sheer difficulty of working with platinum would lend value to objects made from it . He and Don Joaquín Cabezas carried on a lucrative business producing platinum ingots and utensils . This marked the beginning of what is now known as the " platinum age in Spain , " during which nearly 18 @,@ 000 troy ounces of malleable platinum were produced in a span of 22 years . The platinum age ended in 1808 when Chabaneau 's laboratory was destroyed during Napoleon 's second invasion . 
 In 1799 , Chabaneau returned to France seeking rest near his native village of <unk> . There he remained until January 1842 , when he died at the age of 88 years . 
 = The Tower of Babble = 
 The Tower of Babble : Sins , Secrets and Successes inside the CBC is a Canadian non @-@ fiction book written by Richard Stursberg . The book is a memoir detailing Stursberg 's experience as the vice @-@ president in charge of English services at the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) between October 2004 and August 2010 . Stursberg was recruited by CBC president Robert Rabinovitch who understood and supported Stursberg 's intention to move the CBC 's focus more towards producing popular content with success and failure defined by the number of people who watch , rather than awards or critical praise . The book covers a range of topics relating to CBC , including acquiring popular shows , like Little Mosque on the Prairie and Heartland , for CBC Television , modernizing news coverage at CBC News , adjustments to CBC Radio , and CBC Sports losing broadcasting rights to its competitors . 
 This tell @-@ all memoir was called entertaining but was met with generally mixed reviews . While it was valued as an insider account of a well @-@ known institution , the author used the book to aggressively defend his views without relating to opposing views , and elaborate on what he views to be the CBC 's deficiencies . 
 = = Background = = 
 When The Tower of Babble was released in April 2012 , a little over one and a half years had elapsed since its author Richard Stursberg left the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) , in August 2010 . Stursberg had been recruited by CBC president Robert Rabinovitch , as his vice @-@ president in charge of English services . Stursberg had previously worked in the media business , most recently as the director of Telefilm Canada ( 2001 – 2004 ) . He entered CBC in October 2004 , to replace the retiring Harold <unk> , with the idea of changing the network 's direction , away from its focus on high arts and towards popular content . Though Rabinovitch supported him , Stursberg understood how difficult that transition would be and that he would face resistance and criticism . Stursberg 's vision was not supported by Rabinovitch 's successor , Hubert Lacroix , who eventually replaced Stursberg with <unk> Stewart . The 63 @-@ year @-@ old Stursberg left CBC in August 2010 and by October 2011 publisher Douglas & McIntyre acquired the world rights to his memoir . Douglas & McIntyre 's parent company , D & M Publishers , filed for bankruptcy in October 2012 , still owing Stursberg $ 13 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book is divided into ten subject @-@ related chapters . The first chapter provides an introduction to how Stursberg entered the CBC scene , how he viewed his role replacing the retiring Harold <unk> as the executive vice president in charge of English services , and previews what challenges he would encounter . The second chapter covers his experience entering CBC senior management amid contract negotiations with its union , the resulting lock out during summer 2005 , and the relations between what he labeled the Gang of Four ( senior management ) and the Central Committee ( union representatives ) . In the third chapter , Entertainment , he explains his plan for re @-@ orienting CBC television towards entertainment which would use audience numbers to gauge success . He cancelled critically acclaimed shows ( Da Vinci 's City Hall , This Is Wonderland , and Opening Night ) which had low ratings and ordered what he expected would be more audience @-@ friendly shows . Beginning in summer 2006 , the first new show under Stursberg 's strategy , The One , received very low ratings and was quickly cancelled . That Autumn 's schedule , though , was successful , introducing Little Mosque on the Prairie , The Tudors , Heartland . The nest year 's schedule introduced the successful The Border and Being Erica but also the unsuccessful MVP and <unk> . <unk> 's move of Marketplace to Friday nights resulted in higher ratings but his plan to move The National to 11pm was denied by the CBC board of directors . In the fourth chapter , The French , he details his relationship with his French counterpart , the style differences between English and French television shows , the disproportionate funding given to the French services , and the lack of CBC Board members who can understand French . As a means of trying to bridge the two cultures , he ordered English versions of the popular Quebec shows Rumours and Sophie but both received low ratings in English Canada . 
 In the fifth chapter , Stursberg recounts CBC 's experience losing sports licenses . While the CBC had superior market placement ( with respect to geographic coverage and experience with amateur sports ) , they lost the 2010 and 2012 Olympics to a joint CTV / TSN / Rogers $ 153 million bid . The Canadian Football League moved its broadcasting rights to TSN with Stursberg citing Commissioner Tom Wright 's displeasure with the CBC 's poor coverage of CFL games during the CBC 2005 lock @-@ out . The CBC also lost broadcasting rights for The Brier and the Tournament of Hearts to CTV / TSN . Stursberg negotiated for Hockey Night in Canada 's NHL rights with Gary Bettman and managed to extend their contract , but at a significantly higher price . The sixth chapter deals with CBC News which , as Stursberg explains , were scheduled to have the local newscasts eliminated . Instead , he initiated style and content reforms , taking effect in October 2009 , including the creation of an internal newswire to provide stories suitable for TV , radio , and web services . He also commissioned an independent study to analyze a perceived anti @-@ conservative bias in news coverage but the study found the coverage to be more conservative friendly than either the Global or CTV coverage . The chapter on Radio noted CBC Radio One 's dominance in the Canadian radio market but CBC Radio Two 's low ratings . Stursberg advocated for more local radio coverage , especially in the Hamilton area , and facilitated the programming change of CBC Radio Two by inserting more musical variety , specializing in Canadian music . 
 Chapter 8 , Money , describes the internal debate at CBC regarding how to cover a $ 70 million loss in advertising revenue from the 2008 @-@ 2009 recession with the government unwilling to cover the deficit or allow CBC to incur debt . Ultimately , they decided on cutting 400 jobs , reducing the number of episodes ordered , and selling excess real estate . Chapter 9 , The Plan , addresses CBC 's adaption to new technology and the consolidation of the Canadian telecommunications industry . Stursberg details his struggles with the new CBC president Hubert Lacroix , who did not endorse Stursberg 's strategy of providing popular content and initiated a new strategic planning process . In the final chapter Stursberg notes the changes that have occurred since his departure and predicts the demise of CBC Sports as it loses NHL rights to CTV / TSN . 
 = = Genre and style = = 
 The Tower of Babble is a memoir that focuses on how Stursberg saw CBC operations between 2004 and 2010 . He reveals details about his relationships with CBC presidents , Robert Rabinovitch and Hubert Lacroix and his fellow executives . Written about a year after he left CBC , Stursberg uses several themes such as illustrating the corporation 's deficiencies , such as the motif " superior losers " to describe attitude of superiority at the CBC despite low ratings , elaborating on what CBC should be ( providers of popular content ) , and defending his work there . His aggressive defense against his critics was compared to a similar tactic found in Conrad Black 's memoir , A Matter of Principle , which was released only a few months before . In addition to being called a " tell @-@ all memoir " , the book was also described as " as much an elegy as a chronicle " , a " catalogued defence ... [ or ] parting shot " and like a " diary of a battlefield general " . Regarding the title , a biblical reference to the Tower of Babel , one reviewer believed it to " hint at Stursberg 's view of [ CBC ] as the place that business common sense forgot " while another reviewer thought it " reflect [ ed ] the warring languages spoken by the author and his detractors " 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The book was published by the Vancouver @-@ based publisher Douglas & McIntyre . They published the hardcover and ebook versions in April 2012 . Stursberg promoted it through reading and book signing events across Canada , including in Winnipeg , Calgary , and Vancouver , as well as at the Ottawa International Writers Festival . Excerpts were published in the National Post , the Regina Leader @-@ Post , Winnipeg Free Press , Ottawa Citizen , and Maclean 's . 
 The book was called " entertaining " as well as " tough and eloquent " . As a memoir , one reviewer called it " well @-@ documented " though another complained about the use of unattributed quotations . The Winnipeg Free Press described the book as " certain to infuriate the CBC 's strongest adherents . ... its proclamations , though , deserve attention , strident though they may be . Not only is this the leading account of a tumultuous time within the institution — history written by a partial victor — but some elements of its prescription may help restore the public broadcaster to health . In particular , Stursberg 's analysis of the " intimidating frenemies " on the international media landscape merits attention . " Arts and culture editor Mike Landry of the Telegraph @-@ Journal found that " while well @-@ written , his attempts at humour and levity in The Tower of Babble often fall flat , more confusing than chuckle @-@ inducing . " 
 Writer Peter C. Newman concluded that " Stursberg 's rage dominates his crackling autobiography - as does his grief for the lost network 's unfulfilled promise . " Columnist Martin Knelman , in the Toronto Star , advised , " Don 't expect a balanced account of the troubles that brewed . This is strictly the Gospel According to Richard - entertaining but also blatantly self @-@ serving . ... He had no appetite for compromise , consensus or conciliation . He seemed to relish the chance to shock people , make them angry and create dramatic showdowns . Now with this book , he seizes the chance to attack those who stood in his way . " Knelman found the best parts were " the passages where he goes after his perceived enemies with a hatchet " , while Newman found " the volume 's most devastating profile [ to be ] that of CBC president Hubert Lacroix " . 
 Critic John Doyle wrote , " From what I 've seen , there is a lot of self @-@ serving blather in Stursberg 's book , and his loathing for shows that are " dark " ( Da Vinci 's Inquest , Intelligence ) is comical . But he 's correct that there is something genuinely appalling about CBC 's hand @-@ wringing about where it goes . " One journalist reported that the president of Canada Media Research challenged Stursberg 's interpretation of CBC 's ratings , failing to take into account a new method of calculating ratings which made the numbers appear higher , though Stursberg countered that he only used rating numbers that came from the CBC 's research department . 
 = Inocybe saliceticola = 
 Inocybe saliceticola is a fungus found in moist habitats in the Nordic countries . The species produces brown mushrooms with caps of varying shapes up to 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) across , and tall , thin stems up to 62 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long . At the base of the stem is a large and well @-@ defined " bulb " . The species produces unusually shaped , irregular spores , each with a few thick protrusions . This feature helps differentiate it from other species that would otherwise be similar in appearance and habit . 
 Inocybe saliceticola grows in mycorrhizal association with willow trees , and it is for this that the species is named . However , particular species favoured by the fungus are unclear and may include beech and alder taxa . The mushrooms grow from the ground , often among mosses or detritus . I. saliceticola was first described in 2009 , and within the genus Inocybe , the species is a part of the section Marginatae . The species has been recorded in Finland and Sweden and is relatively common in some areas . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Inocybe saliceticola was first described in 2009 by Jukka <unk> and Katri <unk> in the journal <unk> , based on around 20 specimens from Finland , the majority of which were collected by the authors . The holotype was collected from the shore of lake <unk> , near Nurmes . The specific name saliceticola is in reference to the fact that the species grows among willow ( Salix ) . Within the genus Inocybe , I. saliceticola belongs to the section Marginatae , as defined by Rolf Singer . The section has been defined in several ways . It was established in 1933 by Robert Kühner , who identified two key characteristics : a stem which does not feature a cortina ( a fragile , cobweb @-@ like partial veil ) but is entirely covered by cystidia , and the presence of a marginate " bulb " at the base of the stem . Singer emended the section in 1986 to take into account that a bulb is not always present . A slightly different infrageneric taxonomy was offered by Thom Kuyper in 1986 . He , like Singer , grouped Marginatae under Inocybe subg . Inocybe , but he labelled it a " supersection " . However , phylogenetic studies have indicated that neither Singer 's section Marginatae nor Kuyper 's " supersection " Marginatae truly form monophyletic groups , but that Singer 's section comes closer to doing so . Species within Marginatae similar to I. saliceticola include I. obtusiuscula , I. <unk> , I. salicis @-@ herbaceae , I. substellata , I. praetervisa , I. salicis and I. mixtilis . These species are all known to associate with willow , and all have macroscopic similarities . 
 = = Description = = 
 <unk> saliceticola produces mushrooms with caps of between 7 and 40 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 28 and 1 @.@ 57 in ) in diameter . The shape of the cap varies , depending on the age of the mushroom . In younger specimens , they are conical or nearly so , but as the mushroom matures , the caps flatten into a more convex or flat shape . As such , the height of the cap varies from 4 to 11 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 43 in ) . The cap features an umbo that is usually very prominent . Around the umbo , the cap surface is smooth , but towards the cap margin , the surface is defined by fibrils running from the margin towards the umbo . The cap sometimes splits along these . The cap 's colour varies from yellow @-@ brown to pale brown , and is palest at the margins . The umbo contrasts to this somewhat , being a grey @-@ brown or red @-@ brown . The slender stem measures from 0 @.@ 7 to 6 @.@ 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 3 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 059 to 0 @.@ 256 in ) thick . It thickens slightly towards the base , where it joins a large , well @-@ defined " bulb " that can be up to 11 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) across . Shallow grooves run up the surface of the stem , which is covered in a fine white powder . In one case , however , an atypical specimen was recovered with an almost completely smooth stem , free of striations or powder . The stem varies in colour , with whitish , pale yellow @-@ brown , pale red @-@ brown , pale brown and grey @-@ brown all observed , while the base is white . No veil or ring is visible . 
 The fairly crowded gills are adnate , meaning that they attach to the stem through their entire depth . They are a pale grey to pale grey @-@ brown when young , darkening to grey @-@ brown as they mature . The gill edges , which are slightly fimbriate , are the same colour or paler . The flesh lacks any strong or distinctive smell or taste , and is described in the original description as " fungoid " . In the cap , the flesh varies in colour from whitish to a pale brown @-@ grey or pale yellow , while in the stem , it is the same colour as the stem surface or slightly paler . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The irregularly shaped spores measure from 7 @.@ 2 to 11 @.@ 6 by 5 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 9 micrometres ( μm ) , each featuring a few thick <unk> . Abnormal spores of a different shape , sometimes with protrusions more distinct from the actual spore than is typical , can sometimes form ; this is perhaps due to poor weather . The club @-@ shaped basidia measure 25 to 40 by 9 to 14 μm , and each basidium bears four spores . The yellowish pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the face of the gill ) are ventricose or occasionally club @-@ shaped , measuring 41 to 89 by 12 to 23 μm , including a cell wall up to 4 @.@ 5 μm thick . The tip often bends and is encrusted with crystal @-@ like structures , while the base tapers , or narrows into a small stalk . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the edge of the gill ) are much the same , but they are typically somewhat shorter and stouter . The longer caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) occur all the way down the stem and measure up to 99 μm in length with a more variable shape . The mushrooms also feature " <unk> " , club @-@ shaped cystidia @-@ like structures on the gills lacking crystals , as well as " <unk> " on the stem . In Inocybe saliceticola , the <unk> are fairly abundant , with thin cell @-@ walls , while the abundant <unk> can have slightly thicker walls and are often arranged in clusters . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Of the species of Marginatae associated with willow , five ( I. salicis @-@ herbaceae , I. substellata , I. praetervisa , I. salicis and I. mixtilis ) can be readily distinguished from I. saliceticola as their spores feature distinct , strongly protruding excrescences . In addition , they are found in vastly different habitats : I. mixtilis and I. praetervisa favour willow only in montane habitats , while I. salicis @-@ herbaceae and I. substellata grow exclusively in montane habitats . I. salicis is rare in Nordic countries , and is typically collected from dunes . Of the other two listed by <unk> and <unk> , the spores of I. <unk> are distinctly larger and of a different shape to those of I. saliceticola , and the cystidia are shorter . While the species is typically found on the beach , it grows on fine sand , and has not been recorded in Finland . I. obtusiuscula also has larger spores of a different shape , and they are a darker colour , owing to their thick cell walls . Phylogenetic analysis of the respective internal transcribed spacer sequences has confirmed that I. obtusiuscula and I. saliceticola are separate species . 
 Inocybe <unk> and I. ochracea , regarded by some as the same species , can also be distinguished from I. saliceticola by the presence of protruding nodules on the spores . DNA analysis confirmed that they were separate from I. saliceticola , and , in any case , it is possible that they do not grow in association with willow . I. <unk> has been recorded growing near I. saliceticola , but can be differentiated both macroscopically and microscopically ; the mushrooms of I. <unk> have a much more fibrillose cap , and the stem does not join a bulb , while the spores are larger . <unk> , I. rivularis , which could grow in similar habitats to that of I. saliceticola , produces larger mushrooms and has powder only towards the top of the stem . It also differs microscopically . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Inocybe saliceticola grows in a mycorrhizal association with willow ( Salix ) . Precise favoured species are unclear ; at least one of the tea @-@ leaved willow ( Salix <unk> ) or the dark @-@ leaved willow ( S. myrsinifolia ) is a possible symbiont , while other trees that the species has been found near include the bay willow ( S. <unk> ) , the grey willow ( S. <unk> ) , the grey alder ( Alnus incana ) and species of birch ( Betula ) . I. saliceticola is found most typically in moist thickets or woodland close to shores , but recordings have also been made in other moist habitats . Mushrooms are encountered on the ground , growing from detritus or amongst moss , such as the heart @-@ leaved spear @-@ moss ( <unk> <unk> ) , the spiky @-@ bog moss ( Sphagnum <unk> ) and species of <unk> . They are typically near plants such as the tufted loosestrife ( Lysimachia <unk> ) , the creeping buttercup ( Ranunculus repens ) , the common marsh @-@ bedstraw ( Galium <unk> ) , the purple <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and the purple small @-@ reed ( Calamagrostis canescens ) , and share the habitat with other Inocybe , including I. acuta and I. lacera var. <unk> . 
 Inocybe saliceticola has been recorded in several locations around Finland , ranging from the hemiboreal zones in the east and the south of the country , to boreal areas in the north , and it has also been found in Sweden , close to the <unk> . At least in North Karelia , Finland , it is relatively common in the right habitats . It is one of over 150 species of Inocybe found in the Nordic countries , and fruit bodies can be encountered between late July and early October . 
 = Indestructible ( Robyn song ) = 
 " Indestructible " is a song by Swedish recording artist Robyn , taken from her seventh studio album Body Talk ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Robyn and Klas Åhlund , and produced by Åhlund . It was released as the lead single from Body Talk on 1 November 2010 in Sweden and one day later in the United States . The song was previously heard , in an acoustic form , as the final track on Body Talk Pt . 2 , released in September 2010 . The song was one of the first to be recorded for the Body Talk series , but Robyn saved it for later to give it a chance of becoming a single . 
 According to Robyn , " Indestructible " describes how meeting new people and falling in love can be scary and fun at the same time . The song is a synthpop ballad with string sounds , pulsing bass and an electronic arrangement . The song was met with generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its production and Robyn 's songwriting . It reached number four on the Sverigetopplistan chart , becoming Robyn 's ninth top ten hit in her native country . It charted moderately elsewhere , reaching number thirteen in Denmark and number twenty @-@ one on the UK Dance Chart . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Max Vitali and Nils <unk> . It shows scenes of couples having sex , and cutscenes of Robyn wearing a special designed dress featuring tubes with colored liquid . Robyn wanted to make the video to show the truth about sex . The dress was designed by Lucy McRae , who specializes in " body architecture " . An advanced machine was built to control the flow of the liquid and a kilometre of tubes were used . The video received positive reviews from critics , who called it honest and intriguing . Robyn performed the song at the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize Concert . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Indestructible " was written by Robyn and Klas Åhlund with production done by the latter . The song was recorded at a studio named Apmamman , in Stockholm , Sweden . The strings in the song were arranged by Carl Bagge , and played by various cello and violin players . The song alongside " Hang with Me " were among the first songs to be recorded for the Body Talk series , and Robyn said that she saved them for a later release because " [ she ] knew they would be singles , or could be singles , and [ she ] wanted them to get that chance . " Robyn described the song to The Macomb Daily as " a love song ... about what you can do in a club " . In an interview with MTV News , she elaborated on the song 's theme and message , saying , " I think ' Indestructible ' is a song that talks about what happens when you meet new people and fall in love , and how that can be scary and fun at the same time . " 
 An acoustic version of the song was featured on Body Talk Pt . 2 , released in September 2010 . The uptempo version was announced as the first single from Body Talk on 12 October 2010 , and the single artwork was released on the same date . The song premiered online on 14 October 2010 , via Robyn 's SoundCloud account . The single was initially planned to be released on 17 November 2010 in Sweden , but it was changed to 1 November 2010 . It was released in the United States on 2 November 2010 . A CD single was released in Germany on 18 February 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Indestructible " is an uptempo ballad that uses string sections and a pulsating beat . The song makes use of a synthpop style , and incorporates elements Europop . It carries a 4 / 4 beat that is driven by an " endlessly looped " arpeggio . The song utilizes ascending keyboard bubbles , disco claps , drum machines and whistles as backing . The string sounds from the acoustic version of the song are accompanied by four @-@ to @-@ the @-@ floor beats and an electronic arrangement , as well as " relentless " bass and pulsing synthesized chords . Molly Lambert of Pitchfork noted the " human quality " of Robyn 's voice on the track , writing that it is " cloaked in waves of arpeggiated synth " . 
 The lyrics speak of a love connection , where the protagonist makes bad decisions ; " I never was smart with love , I let the bad ones in and the good ones go " . In the chorus , Robyn sings " I 'm gonna love you like I 've never been hurt before / I 'm gonna love you like I 'm indestructible . " Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music noted that Robyn sings " tough and knowing " and " pessimistically optimistic " lines , but manages to make it sound romantic for the listener . Emma <unk> of Billboard commented on the lyrical content , saying , " Robyn 's heartfelt vocal turn prevents the backing music from overwhelming her story of a love connection found at the tail @-@ end of heartbreak . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song a positive review , awarding it five out of five stars . Levine praised the synths and strings present on the track , as well as Åhlund 's production . He commented that the lyrics made the song " not just touching , but utterly , utterly life @-@ affirming " . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music and compared it to " heartbreak songs " by ABBA , but noted its modern synthpop as opposed to 1970s disco . McAlpine noted that the song about dancing and being " terrified / upset " at the same time , and wrote that Robyn has created a " devastating <unk> feeling " . McAlpine awarded the song five out five stars , and gave it " special points " for its " faux @-@ classical synth solo " in the middle . Emma <unk> of Billboard highlighted the songwriting and praised it for being emotionally honest , without " generic pop cheesiness " . Molly Lambert of Pitchfork wrote a positive review of the song , saying that the drum machines on the track contrast well with the qualities of her voice . Lambert wrote , " “ Indestructible ” encapsulates the kind of freedom Robyn sings about ; freedom from reductionist categories , unfair expectations , and life 's daily indignities . " 
 Paul Davey of Drowned in Sound wrote that the song " sits comfortably alongside " previous singles " Hang with Me " and " Dancing on My Own " . Davey referred " Indestructible " to as " an example of a pop @-@ innovator at the top of her game " . Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine praised the song 's production and named it one of Robyn 's best singles . Keefe also named it the standout among the new songs on Body Talk . Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone gave it three and a half out of five stars , and wrote that " [ Robyn ] sings an uncommonly elegant Europop melody " . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters compared the song negatively to the acoustic version , believing it was a bad choice to " swap out strings for synths " . He wrote , " Robyn 's voice gets lost amidst the laser lights , and its impact just isn 't as strong " . Sawdey , however , considered it " great [ for ] the dance floor " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the issue dated 17 September 2010 of the Sverigetopplistan chart , the acoustic version of " Indestructible " debuted and peaked at number fifty @-@ four due to strong digital downloads . The original version of the song debuted at number nine on the issue dated 12 November 2010 , becoming Robyn 's ninth top ten hit in the country . Three weeks later , it peaked at number four . It was the thirtieth best @-@ selling song of 2010 in Sweden . In Denmark , the song debuted at number thirty @-@ eight on the chart issue dated 12 November 2010 , but fell off the chart next week . On 3 December 2010 , it re @-@ entered at number twenty @-@ four and peaked at number thirteen on 21 January 2011 . After thirteen non @-@ consecutive weeks , the song fell off the chart dated 4 March 2011 . On 20 October 2011 the song was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for sales of 15 @,@ 000 digital units in Denmark . 
 " Indestructible " managed to chart at number 171 on the UK Singles Chart , on the issue dated 18 December 2010 . It debuted at number thirty on the UK Dance Chart , and reached its peak of number twenty @-@ one on its second week on the chart . In Belgium , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Flanders Ultratop 50 chart , and number twenty @-@ nine on the Wallonia Ultratip airplay chart . In Germany , the song debuted at number fifty @-@ six , immediately becoming Robyn 's highest charting single in the country since " With Every Heartbeat " in 2007 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Indestructible " was directed by Max Vitali and Nils <unk> . Vitali had previously worked with Robyn on the music videos for " Hang with Me " and " Dancing on My Own " . For the video , Australian artist Lucy McRae , who makes " body architecture " , designed a special " tube dress " for Robyn to wear . McRae also designed the outfits Robyn wore on the Body Talk album covers . The dress for the video was made up of plastic pipes that were periodically filled with colored fluids and wrapped around Robyn 's body . Robyn recalled that the machine that kept the liquid flowing was " very complicated " . It was powered by drills and required " a whole lot of complex machinery to function " . The machine was built by McRae , who had to do it quickly because of the video 's budget . McRae said , " Me and the dream team had never done anything like this before , the whole project was happening for the first time . The machine was super loud . " The shooting stopped four times due to leaks , and the team had to mop and re @-@ set the technology . The shooting took twenty hours , and by 3 a.m. McRae said that Robyn was wrapped " in a kilometre of tubing draped over her head and body " . She praised Robyn 's stamina throughout the shoot , saying that " there were chaotic moments that could have been potentially disastrous and the entire time Robyn was working with us , smiling , moving when the tubes were stuck and just super happy we were making it happen . " 
 Due to the complex technology used to for the video , Robyn believed " It looked like ' MacGyver ' on the set . " She said that the video " [ is ] very much about [ ... ] giving almost a physical experience of what it feels like to be on a dance floor or fall in love , whether it 's blood or endorphins or other body fluids . " She wanted to make a video about sex , but said that " in a way that wasn 't so clichéd . [ ... ] And [ the video ] is made to give you a picture of what sex really is , which I think is something that 's very hard to do , because sex is everywhere all the time , but very rarely is it made out to be something real . " The video begins with a reversed scene of a young couple having sex . In cutscenes , Robyn appears with a tube dress with clear liquid flowing through it . When the young woman begins to switch her sex partners , the liquid in the tubes wrapped around Robyn begins to alter colors and flow more quickly . The video ends with Robyn standing alone with black liquid in the tubes . 
 The music video premiered via Robyn 's official Myspace account on 28 October 2010 . The video received positive reviews from critics . James Montgomery of MTV News called it " a clothing @-@ optional video that 's raising eyebrows ( and temperatures ) worldwide . Though [ ... ] there 's nothing really all that shocking about the clip ... except maybe for its honesty . " Megan Vick of Billboard was positive on the video , saying that , " We can 't be entirely sure what Robyn was trying to say with this treatment , but we do know that this video is hot – and intriguing . " Robbie Daw of music website Idolator compared it to a scene from The X @-@ Files . He concluded by saying that " This is hardcore , indeed . " Amber Katz of MTV Buzzworthy said that Robyn looks " cherubic and futuristic [ in the video ] , as if she belongs on the set of “ Caprica ” . " Katz compared Robyn 's outfit to Rebecca Horn 's " Overflowing Blood Machine " . DJ Ron Slomowicz of About.com called the video " creepy and confusing " and said , " Overall , it is a scintillating if not entirely clear video . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On 3 November 2010 , Robyn performed the song alongside several other songs on the Myspace Secret Shows in London . On 1 December 2010 , she made an appearance on The 5 : 19 Show on BBC to perform the song . " Indestructible " was performed on 11 December 2010 at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert . The performance opened with the Swedish folk song " Jag vet en <unk> rosa " and her previous single " Dancing on My Own " . Robyn was accompanied by two drummers and two keyboardist on stage , and string players later joined for " Indestructible " . The stage was designed with vertical light columns that altered colors in time with the music . Two days later , she performed the song at the Svenska <unk> awards ceremony in Sweden , broadcast on TV4 . The song was mixed with the acoustic version for this performance . She also performed the song during the Body Talk Tour . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Robyn and Klas Åhlund – music , lyrics , production , instruments and programming 
 Niklas Flyckt – mixing 
 Carl Bagge – string arranging 
 Marianne <unk> and Pelle Hansen – cello 
 Claudia Bonfiglioli , Erik <unk> , Patrik <unk> and Simona Bonfiglioli – violin 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Humphrey de Bohun , 3rd Earl of Hereford = 
 Humphrey ( V ) de Bohun ( c . 1249 – 31 December 1298 ) , 3rd Earl of Hereford and 2nd Earl of Essex , was an English nobleman known primarily for his opposition to King Edward I over the Confirmatio Cartarum . He was also an active participant in the Welsh Wars and maintained for several years a private feud with the earl of Gloucester . His father , Humphrey ( V ) de Bohun , fought on the side of the rebellious barons in the Barons ' War . When Humphrey ( V ) predeceased his father , Humphrey ( VI ) became heir to his grandfather , Humphrey ( IV ) . At Humphrey ( IV ) ' s death in 1275 , Humphrey ( VI ) inherited the earldoms of Hereford and Essex . He also inherited major possessions in the Welsh Marches from his mother , Eleanor de Braose . 
 Bohun 's spent most of his early career reconquering Marcher lands captured by Llywelyn ap Gruffudd during the Welsh war in England . This was finally accomplished through Edward I 's war in Wales in 1277 . Hereford also fought in Wales in 1282 – 83 and 1294 – 95 . At the same time he also had private feuds with other Marcher lords , and his conflict with Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Gloucester , eventually ended with the personal intervention of King Edward himself . Hereford 's final years were marked by the opposition he and Roger Bigod , Earl of Norfolk , mounted against the military and fiscal policy of Edward I. The conflict escalated to a point where civil war threatened , but was resolved when the war effort turned towards Scotland . The king signed the Confirmatio Cartarum – a confirmation of Magna Carta – and Bohun and Bigod agreed to serve on the Falkirk Campaign . Bohun died in 1298 , and was succeeded by his son , Humphrey de Bohun , 4th Earl of Hereford . 
 = = Family background and inheritance = = 
 Humphrey ( VI ) de Bohun was part of a line of Anglo @-@ Norman aristocrats going back to the Norman Conquest , most of whom carried the same name . His grandfather was Humphrey ( IV ) de Bohun , who had been part of the baronial opposition of Simon de Montfort , but later gone over to the royal side . He was taken prisoner at the Battle of Lewes in May 1264 , but was restored to favour after the royalist victory at the Battle of Evesham the next year . Humphrey ( IV ) ' s son , Humphrey ( V ) de Bohun , remained loyal to the baronial side throughout the Barons ' War , and was captured at Evesham on 4 August 1265 . In October that year Humphrey ( V ) died in captivity at Beeston Castle in Cheshire from injuries he had sustained in the battle . 
 Humphrey ( V ) had been excluded from succession as a result of his rebellion , but when Humphrey ( IV ) died in 1275 , Humphrey ( VI ) inherited the earldoms of Hereford and Essex . Humphrey ( VI ) had already served as deputy Constable of England under Humphrey ( IV ) . Humphrey ( IV ) had reserved the honour of Pleshey for his younger son Henry , but the remainder of his lands went to Humphrey ( VI ) . The inheritance Humphrey ( VI ) received – in addition to land in Essex and Wiltshire from Humphrey ( IV ) – also consisted of significant holdings in the Welsh Marches from his mother . His mother Eleanor was a daughter and coheir of William de Braose and his wife Eva Marshal , who in turn was the daughter and coheir of William Marshal , regent to Henry III . 
 Since Humphrey ( VI ) was only sixteen years old at the time of his father 's death , the Braose lands were taken into the king 's custody until 1270 . Part of this inheritance , the Marcher lordship of Brecon , was in the meanwhile given to the custody of Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Hertford . Humphrey technically regained his lordship from Clare in 1270 , but by this time these lands had effectively been taken over by the Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd , who had taken advantage of the previous decade 's political chaos in England to extend his territory into the Marches . 
 He granted his brother Gilbert de Bohun all of their mother 's lands in Ireland and some land in England and Wales . 
 = = Welsh Wars = = 
 Over the next years , much of Hereford 's focus was on reconquering his lost lands in the Marches , primarily through private warfare against Llywelyn . Henry III died in 1272 , while his son – now Edward I – was crusading ; Edward did not return until 1274 . Llywelyn refused to pay homage to the new king , partly because of the military actions of Bohun and other Marcher lords , which Llywelyn saw as violations of the Treaty of Montgomery . On 12 November 1276 , Hereford was present at a royal assembly where judgment was passed on Llewelyn , and in 1277 , Edward I declared war on the Welsh prince . Rebellion in his own Brecon lands delayed Hereford 's participation in the early days of the Welsh war . He managed , however , to both suppress the rebellion , and conquer lands further west . He then joined up with the royal army and served for a while in Anglesey , before returning to Brecon , where he received the surrender of certain Welsh lords . After the campaign was over , on 2 January 1278 , he received protection from King Edward to go on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in Spain . 
 In 1282 , war with Wales broke out again ; this time it would not be simply a punitive campaign , but a full @-@ scale war of conquest . Initially , the king wanted to fight the war with paid forces , but the nobility insisted on the use of the feudal summons . To men like Hereford , this was preferable , because as part of a feudal army the participants would have both a stake in the war and a justifiable claim on conquered land . In the end , although the earls won , none of them were paid for the war effort . Hereford jealously guarded his authority as hereditary Constable of England , and protested vigorously when the Gilbert de Clare , Earl of Gloucester was appointed commander of the forces in South Wales . In the post war settlement , however , neither Hereford nor Gloucester received any significant rewards of land , the way several other magnates did . Hereford fought again in Wales , in the suppression of the rebellion of 1294 – 95 , when he again had to pacify the territory of Brecon before joining the king in the north . 
 = = Private war in the Marches = = 
 Parallel with the Welsh Wars , Hereford was also struggling to assert his claims to lands in the Marches against other Marcher lords . In 1284 Edward I granted the hundred of <unk> in Carmarthenshire to John Giffard . Hereford believed the land belonged to him by right of conquest , and started a campaign to win the lands back , but the king took Giffard 's side . Problems also arose with the earl of Gloucester . As Gloucester 's former ward , Hereford had to buy back his own right of marriage , but Gloucester claimed he had not received the full sum . There was also remaining resentment on Hereford 's part for his subordination to Gloucester in the 1282 – 83 campaign . The conflict came to a head when Gloucester 's started construction of a castle at <unk> , which Hereford claimed was his land . In 1286 , the Crown ordered Gloucester to cease , but to no avail . 
 It had long been established Marcher custom to solve conflicts through private warfare . Hereford 's problem , however , was his relative weakness in the Marches , and now he was facing open conflict with two different enemies . He therefore decided to take the issue to the king instead , in a break with tradition . King Edward again ordered Gloucester to stop , but the earl ignored the order and initiated raids on Hereford 's lands . Hostilities continued and Hereford responded , until both earls were arrested and brought before the king . The real offense was not the private warfare in itself , but the fact that the earls had not respected the king 's injunction to cease . In the parliament of January 1292 , Gloucester was fined 10 @,@ 000 marks and Hereford 1 @,@ 000 . Gloucester 's liberty of Glamorgan was declared forfeit , and confiscated by the crown , as was Hereford 's of Brecon . 
 In the end the fines were never paid , and the lands were soon restored . Edward had nevertheless demonstrated an important point . After the conquest of Wales , the strategic position of the Marcher lordships was less vital to the English crown , and the liberty awarded to the Marcher lords could be curtailed . For Edward this was therefore a good opportunity to assert the royal prerogative , and to demonstrate that it extended also into the Marches of Wales . 
 = = Opposition to Edward I = = 
 In 1294 the French king declared the English duchy of Aquitaine forfeit , and war broke out between the two countries . Edward I embarked on a wide @-@ scale and costly project of building alliances with other princes on the Continent , and preparing an invasion . When the king , at the parliament of March 1297 in Salisbury , demanded military service from his earls , Roger Bigod , Earl of Norfolk , refused in his capacity of marshal of England . The argument was that the king 's subjects were not obliged to serve abroad if not in the company of the king , but Edward insisted on taking his army to Flanders while sending his earls to Gascony . 
 At the time of the Salisbury parliament , Hereford was accompanying two of the king 's daughters to Brabant , and could not be present . On his return , however , as Constable of England , he joined Bigod in July in refusing to perform feudal service . The two earls were joined in their opposition by the earls of Arundel and Warwick . The main reasons for the magnates ' defiance was the heavy burden of taxation caused by Edward 's continuous warfare in Wales , France and Scotland . In this they were also joined by Robert Winchelsey , the Archbishop of Canterbury , who was in the midst of an ongoing dispute with the king over clerical taxation . At one point Bohun and Bigod turned up in person at the Exchequer to protest a tax they claimed did not have the consent of the community of the realm . For Hereford there was also a personal element in the opposition to the king , after the humiliation and the affront to his liberties he had suffered over the dispute in the Marches . At a meeting just outside London , Bohun gave an impassioned speech objecting to the king 's abuse of power and demanding the restoration of ancient liberties . The grievances were summarised in a document known as the Remonstrances . 
 Neither party showed any inclination to back down , and the nation seemed on the brink of another civil war . Just as the conflict was coming to a head , however , external events intervened to settle it . In September 1297 , the English suffered a heavy defeat to the Scots at the Battle of Stirling Bridge . The Scottish victory exposed the north of England to Scottish raids led by William Wallace . The war with Scotland received wider support from the English magnates , now that their own homeland was threatened , than did the war in France to protect the king 's continental possessions . Edward abandoned his campaign in France and negotiated a truce with the French king . He agreed to confirm Magna Carta in the so @-@ called Confirmatio Cartarum ( Confirmation of the Charters ) . The earls consequently consented to serve with the king in Scotland , and Hereford was in the army that won a decisive victory over the Scots in the Battle of Falkirk in 1298 . Hereford , not satisfied that the king had upheld the charter , withdrew after the battle , forcing Edward to abandon the campaign . 
 = = Death and family = = 
 In 1275 Bohun married Maud de Fiennes , daughter of Enguerrand de Fiennes , chevalier , seigneur of Fiennes , by his 2nd wife , Isabel ( kinswoman of Queen Eleanor of Provence ) . She predeceased him , and was buried at Walden Priory in Essex . Hereford himself died at Pleshey Castle on 31 December 1298 , and was buried at Walden alongside his wife . They had one son Humphrey de Bohun , 4th Earl of Hereford , born around 1276 . The son was given possession of his father 's lands and titles on 16 February 1299 . The young Humphrey also inherited his father 's title of Constable of England . 
 A common theme in Humphrey de Bohun 's actions was his fierce protection of what he regarded as his feudal privileges . His career was marked by turbulence and political strife , particularly in the Marches of Wales , but eventually he left a legacy of consolidated possessions there . In 1297 , at the height of the conflict between Edward I and rebellious barons , the king had actively tried to undermine Hereford 's authority in the Marches , but failed due to the good relations the earl enjoyed with the local men . 
 = Iranian Embassy siege = 
 The Iranian Embassy siege took place from 30 April to 5 May 1980 , after a group of six armed men stormed the Iranian embassy in South Kensington , London . The gunmen took 26 people hostage — mostly embassy staff , but several visitors and a police officer , who had been guarding the embassy , were also held . The hostage @-@ takers , members of an Iranian Arab group campaigning for Arab national sovereignty in the southern region of Khūzestān Province , demanded the release of Arab prisoners from jails in Khūzestān and their own safe passage out of the United Kingdom . The British government quickly resolved that safe passage would not be granted , and a siege ensued . Over the following days , police negotiators secured the release of five hostages in exchange for minor concessions , such as the broadcasting of the hostage @-@ takers ' demands on British television . 
 By the sixth day of the siege the gunmen had become increasingly frustrated at the lack of progress in meeting their demands . That evening , they killed one of the hostages and threw his body out of the embassy . As a result , the British government ordered the Special Air Service ( SAS ) , a special forces regiment of the British Army , to conduct an assault to rescue the remaining hostages . Shortly afterwards , soldiers abseiled from the roof of the building and forced entry through the windows . During the 17 @-@ minute raid , the SAS rescued all but one of the remaining hostages , and killed five of the six terrorists . The soldiers subsequently faced accusations that they unnecessarily killed two of the terrorists , but an inquest into the deaths eventually cleared the SAS of any wrongdoing . The remaining terrorist was prosecuted and served 27 years in British prisons . 
 The hostage @-@ takers and their cause were largely forgotten after the Iran – Iraq War broke out later that year and the hostage crisis in Tehran continued until January 1981 . Nonetheless , the operation brought the SAS to the public eye for the first time and bolstered the reputation of Margaret Thatcher , the Prime Minister . The SAS was quickly overwhelmed by the number of applications it received from people inspired by the operation and , at the same time , experienced greater demand for its expertise from foreign governments . The building , having suffered major damage from a fire that broke out during the assault , was not reopened as the Iranian embassy until 1993 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Motives = = = 
 The hostage @-@ takers were members of the Democratic Revolutionary Front for the Liberation of <unk> ( DRFLA ) — Iranian Arabs protesting for the establishment of an autonomous Arab state in the southern region of the Iranian province of Khūzestān ( also known as <unk> ) which is home to an Arabic @-@ speaking minority . The oil @-@ rich area had become the source of much of Iran 's wealth , having been developed by multi @-@ national companies during the reign of the Shah . 
 According to Oan Ali Mohammed , suppression of the Arab sovereignty movement was the spark that led to his desire to attack the Iranian Embassy in London — a plan inspired by the Iran hostage crisis in which supporters of the revolution held the staff of the American embassy in Tehran hostage . 
 = = = Arrival in London = = = 
 Using Iraqi passports , Oan and three other members of the DRFLA arrived in London on 31 March 1980 and rented a flat in Earls Court . They claimed they had met by chance on the flight . The men typically returned to the flat drunk , late at night , and sometimes accompanied by prostitutes . Within a week , the housekeeper asked them to leave . They soon found another flat , where they told their new landlord they were moving because they had been joined by other men and required larger accommodation . Over the following days , the group swelled , with up to a dozen men in the flat on one occasion . 
 Oan was 27 and from Khūzestān ; he had studied at the University of Tehran , where he became politically active . He had been imprisoned by SAVAK , the Shah 's secret police , and bore scars which he said were from torture in SAVAK custody . The other members of his group were Shakir Abdullah <unk> , known as " Faisal " , Oan 's second @-@ in @-@ command who also claimed to have been tortured by SAVAK ; Shakir Sultan Said , or " Hassan " ; <unk> <unk> Hussein , or Abbas ; <unk> <unk> Nejad , or " Ali " ; and Makki Hanoun Ali , the youngest of the group , who went by the name of " Makki " . 
 On 30 April the men informed their landlord that they were going to Bristol for a week and then returning to Iraq , stated that they would no longer require the flat , and arranged for their belongings to be sent to Iraq . They left the building at 09 : 30 ( BST ) on 30 April . Their initial destination is unknown , but en route to the Iranian Embassy they collected firearms ( including pistols and submachine guns ) , ammunition and hand grenades . The weapons , predominantly Soviet @-@ made , are believed to have been smuggled into the United Kingdom in a diplomatic bag belonging to Iraq . Shortly before 11 : 30 , and almost two hours after vacating the nearby flat in <unk> Gardens in South Kensington , the six men arrived outside the embassy . 
 = = = Special Air Service = = = 
 The Special Air Service ( SAS ) is a regiment of the British Army and part of the United Kingdom 's special forces . The regiment was formed by Colonel David Stirling in Africa in 1941 , at the height of the Second World War . Its original role was to penetrate enemy lines and strike at airfields and supply lines deep in enemy territory , first in North Africa and later around the Mediterranean and in occupied Europe . Stirling established the principle of using small teams , usually of just four men , to carry out raids — having realised that a four @-@ man team could sometimes prove much more effective than a unit of hundreds of soldiers . 
 Western governments were prompted to form specialist anti @-@ terrorist units following the " Munich massacre " . During the 1972 Olympic Games , a firefight between a group of hostage @-@ takers and West German police left a police officer and all the hostages dead . The British government , worried that the country was unprepared for a similar crisis in the United Kingdom , ordered the formation of the Counter Revolutionary Warfare ( CRW ) Wing of the SAS , which became the UK 's primary anti @-@ terrorist and anti @-@ hijacking unit . The SAS had taken part in counter @-@ insurgency operations abroad since 1945 , and had trained the bodyguards of influential people whose deaths would be contrary to British interests . Thus , it was believed to be better prepared for the role than any unit in the police or elsewhere in the armed forces . The CRW Wing 's first operational experience was the storming of Lufthansa Flight 181 in 1977 , when a small detachment of soldiers were sent to assist GSG 9 — the elite West German police unit set up after the events of 1972 . 
 = = Siege = = 
 = = = Day one : 30 April = = = 
 At approximately 11 : 30 on Wednesday 30 April the six heavily armed members of DRFLA stormed the Iranian Embassy building on Princes Gate , South Kensington . The gunmen quickly overpowered Police Constable Trevor Lock of the Metropolitan Police 's Diplomatic Protection Group ( DPG ) . Lock was carrying a concealed Smith & Wesson .38 @-@ calibre revolver , but was unable to draw it before he was overpowered , although he did manage to press the " panic button " on his radio . Lock was later frisked , but the gunman conducting the search did not find the constable 's weapon . He remained in possession of the revolver , and refused to remove his coat — which he told the gunmen was to " preserve his image " as a police officer — in order to keep it concealed . The officer also refused offers of food throughout the siege for fear that the weapon would be seen if he had to use the toilet and a gunman decided to escort him . 
 Although the majority of the people in the embassy were captured , three managed to escape — two by climbing out of a ground @-@ floor window and the third by climbing across a first @-@ floor parapet to the Ethiopian Embassy next door . A fourth person , Gholam @-@ Ali Afrouz — the chargé d 'affaires and thus the most senior Iranian official present — briefly escaped by jumping out of a first @-@ floor window , but was injured in the process and quickly captured . Afrouz and the 25 other hostages were all taken to a room on the second floor . The majority of the hostages were embassy staff — predominantly Iranian nationals , but several British employees were also captured . The other hostages were all visitors , with the exception of Lock , the British police officer tasked with guarding the embassy . Afrouz had been appointed to the position less than a year before , his predecessor having been dismissed after the revolution . Abbas <unk> , who had been a butler before the revolution , was appointed the doorman by Afrouz . One of the British members of staff was Ron Morris , from Battersea , who had worked for the embassy in various positions since 1947 . 
 During the course of the siege , police and journalists established the identities of several other hostages . Mustapha <unk> was a journalist covering the crisis at the US Embassy in Tehran and was at the embassy for an interview with Abdul <unk> Ezzati , the cultural attaché . Muhammad <unk> <unk> was another journalist , at the embassy to interview Afrouz for an article on the Iranian Revolution . Simeon " Sim " Harris and Chris Cramer , both employees of the BBC , were at the embassy attempting to obtain visas to visit Iran — hoping to cover the aftermath of the 1979 revolution — after several unsuccessful attempts . They found themselves sitting next to <unk> <unk> , who was there to consult Ahmad <unk> , the embassy 's medical adviser , and Ali Asghar <unk> , who was collecting a map for use in a presentation he had been asked to give at the end of a course he had been attending . 
 Police arrived at the embassy almost immediately after the first reports of gunfire , and , within ten minutes , seven DPG officers were on the scene . The officers moved to surround the embassy , but retreated when a gunman appeared at a window and threatened to open fire . Deputy Assistant Commissioner John Dellow arrived nearly 30 minutes later and took command of the operation . Dellow established a temporary headquarters in his car before moving it to the Royal School of Needlework further down Princes Gate and then to 24 Princes Gate , a nursery school . From his various command posts , Dellow coordinated the police response , including the deployment of <unk> , the Metropolitan Police 's marksmen , and officers with specialist surveillance equipment . Police negotiators made contact with Oan via a field telephone passed through one of the embassy windows , and were assisted by a negotiator and a psychiatrist . At 15 : 15 Oan issued the DRFLA 's first demand , the release of 91 Arabs held in prisons in Khūzestān , and threatened to blow up the embassy and the hostages if this were not done by noon on 1 May . 
 Large numbers of journalists were on the scene quickly and were moved into a holding area to the west of the front of the embassy , while dozens of Iranian protesters also arrived near the embassy and remained there throughout the siege . Shortly after the beginning of the crisis , the British government 's emergency committee COBRA , was assembled . COBRA is made up of ministers , civil servants and expert advisers — including representatives from the police and the armed forces . The meeting was chaired by William Whitelaw , the Home Secretary , as Margaret Thatcher , the Prime Minister , was unavailable . The Iranian government accused the British and American governments of sponsoring the attack as revenge for the ongoing siege of the US Embassy in Tehran . Given the lack of co @-@ operation from Iran , Thatcher — who was kept apprised of the situation by Whitelaw — determined that British law would be applied to the embassy , despite the Vienna Convention , under which the embassy is considered Iranian soil . 
 At 16 : 30 , the gunmen released their first hostage , Frieda Mozaffarian . She had been unwell since the siege began , and Oan had asked for a doctor to be sent into the embassy to treat her , but the police refused . The other hostages deceived Oan into believing that Mozaffarian was pregnant , and Oan eventually released Mozaffarian after her condition deteriorated . 
 = = = Day two : 1 May = = = 
 The COBRA meetings continued through the night and into Thursday . Meanwhile , two teams were dispatched from the headquarters of the Special Air Service ( SAS ) near Hereford , and arrived at a holding area in Regent 's Park Barracks . The teams — from B Squadron , complemented by specialists from other squadrons — were equipped with CS gas , stun grenades , and explosives and armed with Browning Hi @-@ Power pistols and Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine guns . Lieutenant Colonel Michael Rose , commander of 22 SAS had travelled ahead of the detachment and introduced himself to Dellow , the commander of the police operation . At approximately 03 : 30 on 1 May , one of the SAS teams moved into the building next door to the embassy , normally occupied by the Royal College of General Practitioners , where they were briefed on Rose 's " immediate action " plan — to be implemented should the SAS be required to storm the building before a more sophisticated plan could be formed . 
 Early in the morning of 1 May , the gunmen ordered one of the hostages to telephone the BBC 's news desk . During the call , Oan took the receiver and spoke directly to the BBC journalist . He identified the group to which the gunmen belonged and stated that the non @-@ Iranian hostages would not be harmed , but refused to allow the journalist to speak to any other hostages . At some point during the day , the police disabled the embassy 's telephone lines , leaving the hostage @-@ takers just the field telephone for outside communication . As the hostages woke up , Chris Cramer , a sound organiser for the BBC , became seriously ill and his colleague , Sim Harris , was taken to the field telephone to negotiate for a doctor . The police negotiator refused the request , instead telling Harris to persuade Oan to release Cramer . The ensuing negotiations between Harris , Oan , and the police took up most of the morning , and Cramer was eventually released at 11 : 15 . He was rushed to hospital in an ambulance , accompanied by police officers sent to gather information from him . 
 As the deadline of noon approached , set the previous day for the release of the Arab prisoners , the police became convinced that the gunmen did not have the capability to carry out their threat of blowing up the embassy , and persuaded Oan to agree to a new deadline of 14 : 00 . The police allowed the deadline to pass , to no immediate response from the gunmen . During the afternoon , Oan altered his demands , requesting that the British media broadcast a statement of the group 's grievances and for ambassadors of three Arab countries to negotiate the group 's safe passage out of the UK once the statement had been broadcast . At approximately 20 : 00 , Oan became agitated by noises coming from the Ethiopian Embassy next door . The noise came from technicians who were drilling holes in the wall to implant listening devices , but PC Trevor Lock , when asked to identify the sound , attributed it to mice . COBRA decided to create ambient noise to cover the sound created by the technicians and instructed British Gas to commence drilling in an adjacent road , supposedly to repair a gas main . The drilling was aborted after it agitated the gunmen , and instead British Airports Authority , owner of London Heathrow Airport , was told to instruct approaching aircraft to fly over the embassy at low altitude . 
 = = = Day three : 2 May = = = 
 At 09 : 30 on 2 May , Oan appeared at the first @-@ floor window of the embassy to demand access to the telex system , which the police had disabled along with the telephone lines , and threatened to kill Abdul <unk> Ezzati , the cultural attaché . The police refused and Oan pushed Ezzati , who he had been holding at gunpoint at the window , across the room , before demanding to speak to somebody from the BBC who knew Sim Harris . The police , relieved to have a demand to which they could easily agree , produced Tony Crabb , managing director of BBC Television News and Harris 's boss . Oan shouted his demands — for safe passage out of the UK , to be negotiated by three ambassadors from Arab countries — to Crabb from the first @-@ floor window , and instructed that they should be broadcast along with a statement of the hostage @-@ takers ' aims by the BBC . The Foreign and Commonwealth Office informally approached the embassies of Algeria , Jordan , Kuwait , Lebanon , Syria and Qatar to ask if their ambassadors would be willing to talk to the hostage @-@ takers . The Jordanian ambassador immediately refused and the other five said they would consult their governments . The BBC broadcast the statement that evening , but in a form unsatisfactory to Oan , who considered it to be truncated and incorrect . 
 Meanwhile , the police located the embassy caretaker and took him to their forward headquarters to brief the SAS and senior police officers . He informed them that the embassy 's front door was reinforced by a steel security door , and that the windows on the ground floor and first floor were fitted with armoured glass — the result of recommendations made after the SAS had been asked to review security arrangements for the embassy several years earlier . Plans for entering the embassy by battering the front door and ground @-@ floor windows were quickly scrapped and work began on other ideas . 
 = = = Day four : 3 May = = = 
 Oan , angered by the BBC 's incorrect reporting of his demands the previous evening , contacted the police negotiators shortly after 06 : 00 and accused the authorities of deceiving him . He demanded to speak with an Arab ambassador , but the negotiator on duty claimed that talks were still being arranged by the Foreign Office . Recognising the delaying tactic , Oan told the negotiator that the British hostages would be the last to be released because of the British authorities ' deceit . He added that a hostage would be killed unless Tony Crabb was brought back to the embassy . Crabb did not arrive at the embassy until 15 : 30 , nearly ten hours after Oan demanded his presence , to the frustration of both Oan and Sim Harris . Oan then relayed another statement to Crabb via Mustapha <unk> , a journalist also being held hostage in the embassy . The police guaranteed that the statement would be broadcast on the BBC 's next news bulletin , in exchange for the release of two hostages . The hostages decided amongst themselves that the two to be released would be <unk> Kanji and Ali @-@ Guil <unk> ; the latter was apparently released for no other reason than his loud snoring , which kept the other hostages awake at night . 
 Later in the evening , at approximately 23 : 00 , an SAS team reconnoitred the roof of the embassy . They discovered a skylight , and succeeded in unlocking it for potential use as an access point , should they later be required to storm the building . They also attached ropes to the chimneys to allow soldiers to abseil down the building and gain access through the windows if necessary . 
 = = = Day five : 4 May = = = 
 During the day , the Foreign Office held further talks with diplomats from Arabian countries in the hope of persuading them to go to the embassy and talk to the hostage @-@ takers . The talks , hosted by Douglas Hurd , ended in stalemate . The diplomats insisted they must be able to offer safe passage out of the UK for the gunmen , believing this to be the only way to guarantee a peaceful outcome , but the British government was adamant that safe passage would not be considered under any circumstances . <unk> , through whom Oan had issued his revised demands the previous day , became increasingly ill throughout the day and by the evening was feverish , which led to suggestions that the police had spiked the food that had been sent into the embassy . John Dellow , the commander of the police operation , had apparently considered the idea and even consulted a doctor about its viability , but eventually dismissed it as " impracticable " . 
 The SAS officers involved in the operation — including Brigadier Peter de la Billière , Director Special Forces ; Lieutenant Colonel Mike Rose , Commander of 22 SAS ; and Major Hector <unk> , commander of the team that would undertake any raid — spent the day refining their plans for an assault . 
 = = = Day six : 5 May = = = 
 Oan woke Lock at dawn , convinced that an intruder was in the embassy . Lock was sent to investigate , but no intruder was found . Later in the morning , Oan called Lock to examine a bulge in the wall separating the Iranian embassy from the Ethiopian embassy next door . The bulge had , in fact , been caused by the removal of bricks to allow an assault team to break through the wall and to implant listening devices , resulting in a weakening of the wall . Although Lock assured him that he did not believe the police were about to storm the building , Oan remained convinced that they were " up to something " and moved the male hostages from the room in which they had spent the last four days to another down the hall . Tensions rose throughout the morning and , at 13 : 00 , Oan told the police that he would kill a hostage unless he was able to speak to an Arab ambassador within 45 minutes . At 13 : 40 , Lock informed the negotiator that the gunmen had taken Abbas Lavasani — the embassy 's chief press officer — downstairs and were preparing to execute him . Lavasani , a devout believer in the Iranian Revolution , had repeatedly provoked his captors during the siege . According to Lock , Lavasani stated that " if they were going to kill a hostage , [ Lavasani ] wanted it to be him . " At exactly 13 : 45 , 45 minutes after Oan 's demand to speak to an ambassador , three shots were heard from inside the embassy . 
 Home Secretary Willie Whitelaw , who had been chairing COBRA during the siege , was rushed back to Whitehall from a function he had been attending in Slough , roughly 20 miles ( 30 km ) away , arriving 19 minutes after the shots had been reported . He was briefed on the SAS plan by de la Billière , who told him to expect that up to 40 per cent of the hostages would be killed in an assault . After deliberations , Whitelaw instructed the SAS to prepare to assault the building at short notice , an order that was received by Mike Rose at 15 : 50 . By 17 : 00 , the SAS were in a position to assault the embassy at ten minutes ' notice . The police negotiators recruited the imam from a local mosque at 18 : 20 , fearing that a " crisis point " had been reached , and asked him to talk to the gunmen . Three further shots were fired during the course of the imam 's conversation with Oan . Oan announced that a hostage had been killed , and the rest would die in 30 minutes unless his demands were met . A few minutes later , Lavasani 's body was dumped out of the front door . Upon a preliminary examination , conducted at the scene , a forensic pathologist estimated that Lavasani had been dead for at least an hour — meaning he could not have been killed by the three most recent shots , and leading the police to believe that two hostages had been killed . In fact , only Lavasani had been shot . 
 After Lavasani 's body had been recovered , Sir David McNee , Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police , contacted the Home Secretary to request approval to hand control of the operation over to the British Army , under the provisions of Military Aid to the Civil Power . Whitelaw relayed the request to Thatcher , and the prime minister agreed immediately . Thus John Dellow , the ranking police officer at the embassy , signed over control of the operation to Lieutenant Colonel Mike Rose at 19 : 07 , authorising Rose to order an assault at his discretion . Meanwhile , the police negotiators began stalling Oan . They offered concessions in order to distract him and prevent him killing further hostages , buying time for the SAS to make its final preparations for the now @-@ inevitable assault . 
 = = SAS assault = = 
 The two SAS teams on @-@ scene — Red Team and Blue Team — were ordered to begin their simultaneous assaults , under the codename Operation Nimrod , at 19 : 23 . One group of four men from Red Team abseiled from the roof down the rear of the building , while another four @-@ man team lowered a stun grenade through the skylight . The detonation of the stun grenade was supposed to coincide with the abseiling teams detonating explosives to gain entry to the building through the second @-@ floor windows . Their descent had not gone according to plan and the staff sergeant leading the <unk> became entangled in his rope . While trying to assist him , one of the other soldiers had accidentally smashed a window with his foot . The noise of the breaking window alerted Oan , who was on the first floor communicating with the police negotiators , and he went to investigate . The soldiers were unable to use explosives for fear of injuring their stranded staff sergeant , but managed to smash their way into the embassy . 
 After the first three soldiers entered , a fire started and travelled up the curtains and out of the second @-@ floor window , severely burning the staff sergeant . A second wave of <unk> cut him free , and he fell to the balcony below before entering the embassy behind the rest of his team . Slightly behind Red Team , Blue Team detonated explosives on a first @-@ floor window — forcing Sim Harris , who had just run into the room , to take cover . Much of the operation at the front of the embassy took place in full view of the assembled journalists and was broadcast on live television , thus Harris 's escape across the parapet of a first @-@ floor balcony was famously captured on video . As the soldiers emerged onto the first @-@ floor landing , Lock tackled Oan to prevent him attacking the SAS men . Oan , still armed , was subsequently shot dead by one of the soldiers . Meanwhile , further teams entered the embassy through the back door and cleared the ground floor and cellar . The SAS then began evacuating hostages , manhandling them down the stairs towards the back door of the embassy . Two of the terrorists were hiding amongst the hostages — one of them produced a hand grenade when he was identified . An SAS soldier , who was unable to shoot for fear of hitting a hostage or another soldier , pushed the grenade @-@ wielding terrorist to the bottom of the stairs , where two other soldiers shot him dead . 
 The raid lasted 17 minutes and involved 30 – 35 soldiers . The terrorists killed one hostage and seriously wounded two others during the raid while the SAS killed all but one of the terrorists . The rescued hostages and the remaining terrorist , who was still concealed amongst them , were taken into the embassy 's back garden and restrained on the ground while they were identified . The last terrorist was identified by Sim Harris and led away by the SAS . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the end of the siege , PC Trevor Lock was widely considered a hero . He was awarded the George Medal , the United Kingdom 's second @-@ highest civil honour , for his conduct during the siege and for tackling Oan during the SAS raid — the only time during the siege that he drew his concealed side arm . In addition , he was honoured with the Freedom of the City of London and in a motion in the House of Commons . Police historian Michael J. <unk> , referring to the television series Dixon of Dock Green , suggested that Lock 's restraint in the use of his revolver was " a defining example of the power of the Dixon image " , and Maurice Punch noted the contrast between Lock 's actions and the highly aggressive tactics of the SAS . Sergeant Tommy Palmer was awarded the Queen 's Gallantry Medal for his part in the assault , in which he shot dead a terrorist who was apparently about to throw a grenade amongst the hostages . After the operation concluded , the staff sergeant who was caught in his abseil rope was treated at St Stephen 's Hospital in Fulham . He suffered serious burns to his legs , but went on to make a full recovery . 
 The Iranian government welcomed the end of the siege , and declared that the two hostages killed were martyrs for the Iranian Revolution . They also thanked the British government for " the persevering action of your police force during the unjust hostage @-@ taking event at the Embassy " . 
 After the assault concluded , the police conducted an investigation into the siege and the deaths of the two hostages and five terrorists , including the actions of the SAS . The soldiers ' weapons were taken away for examination and , the following day , the soldiers themselves were interviewed at length by the police at the regiment 's base in Hereford . There was controversy over the deaths of two terrorists in the telex room , where the male hostages were held . Hostages later said in interviews that they had persuaded their captors to surrender and television footage appeared to show them throwing weapons out of the window and holding a white flag . The two SAS soldiers who killed the men both stated at the inquest into the terrorists ' deaths that they believed the men had been reaching for weapons before they were shot . The inquest jury reached the verdict that the soldiers ' actions were justifiable homicide ( later known as " lawful killing " ) . 
 <unk> Nejad was the only gunman to survive the SAS assault . After being identified , he was dragged away by an SAS trooper , who allegedly intended to take him back into the building and shoot him . The soldier reportedly changed his mind when it was pointed out to him that the raid was being broadcast on live television . It later emerged that the footage from the back of the embassy was coming from a wireless camera placed in the window of a flat overlooking the embassy . The camera had been installed by ITN technicians , who had posed as guests of a local resident in order to get past the police cordon , which had been in place since the beginning of the siege . Nejad was arrested , and was eventually tried , convicted , and sentenced to life imprisonment for his role in the siege . He became eligible for parole in 2005 . As a foreign national , he would normally have been immediately deported to his home country but Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights , incorporated into British law by the Human Rights Act 1998 , has been held by the European Court of Human Rights to prohibit deportation in cases where the person concerned would be likely to be tortured or executed in his home country . Nejad was eventually paroled in 2008 and granted leave to remain in the UK , but was not given political asylum . The Home Office released a statement , saying " We do not give refugee status to convicted terrorists . Our aim is to deport people as quickly as possible but the law requires us to first obtain assurances that the person being returned will not face certain death " . After 27 years in prison , Nejad was deemed no longer to be a threat to society , but Trevor Lock wrote to the Home Office to oppose his release . 
 = = Long @-@ term impact = = 
 The SAS raid , codenamed " Operation Nimrod " , was broadcast live at peak time on a bank holiday Monday evening and was viewed by millions of people , mostly in the UK , making it a defining moment in British history . Both the BBC and ITV interrupted their scheduled programming to show the end of the siege , which proved to be a major career break for several journalists . Kate Adie , the BBC 's duty reporter at the embassy when the SAS assault began , went on to report from war zones across the world and eventually to become chief news correspondent for BBC News , while David Goldsmith and his team , responsible for the hidden camera at the back of the embassy , were awarded a BAFTA for their coverage . The success of the operation , combined with the high profile it was given by the media , invoked a sense of national pride compared to Victory in Europe Day — the end of the Second World War in Europe . The operation was declared " an almost unqualified success " . Margaret Thatcher recalled that she was congratulated wherever she went over the following days , and received messages of support and congratulation from other world leaders . However , the incident strained already @-@ tense relations between the UK and Iran following the Iranian Revolution . The Iranian government declared that the siege of the embassy was planned by the British and American governments , and that the hostages who had been killed were martyrs for the Revolution . 
 Operation Nimrod brought the SAS , a regiment that was largely unknown at the time owing to the covert nature of its operations , into the public eye . The regiment was not pleased with its new high profile , having enjoyed its previous obscurity . Nonetheless , the operation vindicated the SAS , which had been threatened with disbandment and whose use of resources had previously been considered a waste . The regiment was quickly overwhelmed by new applicants . Membership of 22 SAS is open only to individuals currently serving in the Armed Forces ( allowing applications from any individual in any service ) , but the unit also has two regiments from the volunteer Territorial Army ( TA ) — 21 SAS and 23 SAS . Both the TA regiments received hundreds more applications than in previous years , prompting de la Billière to remark that the applicants seemed " convinced that a balaclava helmet and a Heckler & Koch sub @-@ machine gun would be handed to them over the counter , so that they could go off and conduct embassy @-@ style sieges of their own " . All three units were forced to introduce additional fitness tests at the start of the application process . The SAS also experienced an increased demand for their expertise in training the forces of friendly countries and those whose collapse was considered not to be in Britain 's interest . 
 The British government 's response to the crisis , and the successful use of force to end it , strengthened the Conservative government of the day and boosted Thatcher 's personal credibility . McNee believed that the conclusion of siege exemplified the British government 's policy of refusing to give in to terrorist demands , " nowhere was the effectiveness of this response to terrorism more effectively demonstrated " . 
 The embassy building was severely damaged by fire . It was more than a decade before the British and Iranian governments came to an agreement whereby the United Kingdom would repair the damage to the embassy in London and Iran would pay for repairs to the British embassy in Tehran , which had been damaged during the 1979 Iranian Revolution . Iranian diplomats began working from 16 Princes Gate again in December 1993 . 
 The DRFLA was undermined by its links with the Iraqi government after it emerged that Iraq had sponsored the training and equipping of the hostage @-@ takers . The Iran – Iraq War started five months after the end of the siege and continued for eight years . The campaign for autonomy of Khūzestān was largely forgotten in the wake of the hostilities , as was the DRFLA . 
 = Ecstasy ( My Bloody Valentine album ) = 
 Ecstasy is the second mini album by the alternative rock band My Bloody Valentine , released on 23 November 1987 on Lazy Records . Released in a limited edition of 3 @,@ 000 copies , it was the band 's final release for Lazy Records and second to feature vocalist and guitarist Bilinda Butcher , who was recruited in April 1987 following the departure of original My Bloody Valentine vocalist David Conway . Ecstasy followed the noise pop and twee pop standards of My Bloody Valentine 's earlier releases for the label , drawing influence from various artists including The Jesus and Mary Chain , Love and The Byrds , and the album distanced the band further from their earlier post @-@ punk and gothic rock sound . 
 The album experienced several technical and financial problems during its recording sessions , including errors in the mastering process , and the band were dissatisfied with its outcome ; although upon its release , Ecstasy received moderate critical acclaim and peaked at number 12 on the UK Independent Albums Chart . The album was later combined with My Bloody Valentine 's preceding single , " Strawberry Wine " , and reissued on the compilation album Ecstasy and Wine ( 1989 ) , which was released on Lazy Records without the band 's consent . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following minor success on the underground scene after the release of The New Record by My Bloody Valentine ( 1986 ) and 1987 's " Sunny Sundae Smile " , original My Bloody Valentine vocalist David Conway left the band due to a gastric illness , disillusionment with music and his ambitions to become a writer . The remaining members — guitarist Kevin Shields , drummer Colm Ó Cíosóig and bassist Debbie Googe — considered splitting up and forming a new band under a different name . However , the band placed advertisements for a vocalist in the local music press in London , which Shields referred to later as " pointless , … disastrous and <unk> [ sic ] " due to the advertisements attracting a number of Morrissey inspired vocalists who he referred to as " <unk> " . Through mutual friends the band recruited two vocalists , Joe Byfield and Bilinda Butcher . After performing one show in April 1987 with both on vocals , My Bloody Valentine considered Byfield " unsuitable " for the band and he was subsequently fired . Butcher , whose prior musical experience had been playing classical guitar as a child , and singing and playing tambourine " with some girlfriends for fun " , was chosen as My Bloody Valentine 's new vocalist and began rehearsing with the band in the middle of 1987 . 
 Lazy Records , on which the band released " Sunny Sundae Smile " , requested a full @-@ length album from My Bloody Valentine during summer 1987 . The band refused the label 's request , claiming their newly formed line @-@ up " had only been together a couple of months and hadn 't really had time to get settled " . However , the band compromised and agreed to record a mini album , provided they could release a single beforehand . The preceding single , " Strawberry Wine " , was released on 9 November 1987 and peaked at number 13 on the UK Independent Singles Chart . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The recording sessions for Ecstasy took place a week after the recording sessions for " Strawberry Wine " . My Bloody Valentine spent a total of 10 days recording the album . According to Kevin Shields , the sessions " had no direction and [ the band ] didn 't even know what [ they ] were doing " and " bashed out all these tunes quickly , very demo @-@ like " . A number of songs were recorded that did not feature on the final release , as the band considered them " awful " . However , the sessions were " the first time [ the band had ] actually played around properly in the studio " , which resulted in " extreme " and " quite nasty " guitar sounds , which My Bloody Valentine would later become associated with . 
 Ecstasy 's recording was plagued by technical and financial errors , which impacted the eventual release of the album . The mastering process was affected by the album 's engineer Steve Nunn , who mislaid the source material of the final mix prior to its transfer to the master recording . Shields subsequently " brought an independent engineer in to the studios to point out what was wrong " but Lazy Records refused to invest further finances into the album 's recording process . As a result , " much of what was originally the sound of Ecstacy [ sic ] was lost , and much of the tone was dulled " and the album " showed a group who appeared to have run out of money half way through recording " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 All of Ecstasy 's seven tracks were written and composed by Kevin Shields , with Colm Ó Cíosóig credited as the co @-@ writer of three tracks — " The Things I Miss " , " Clair " and " ( Please ) Lose Yourself in Me " . Regarding the lyrical content of the album in contrast to the music , Shields said that " the songs may sound sweet , but the subject matter isn 't necessarily very nice . A lot of it is relationship @-@ based , but it 's always vague , and never just boy @-@ meets @-@ girl . It could easily be boy @-@ meets @-@ boy , or girl @-@ meets @-@ girl . Then there 's hate , and whimsical thoughts you get from nowhere " . Ó Cíosóig remarked that " it 's more weird perversions of feeling you get in a relationship " and referred to the lyrics as being marked by " extremes , because we 're entertained by extreme things " . Shields noted that the lyrics were a progression from the band 's earlier releases as " the idea of composing a sweet pop song that sugar @-@ coated some lyrical horror and sending it hurtling up the charts appealed to our sense of humour " and considered the songwriting process for Ecstasy as " fresh after having made pure noise earlier " . 
 My Bloody Valentine experimented with a noise pop sound on the album , a venture which was influenced by The Jesus and Mary Chain , and incorporated elements of twee pop similar to " Strawberry Wine " . Shields used a twelve @-@ string electric guitar during the Ecstasy 's recording sessions and was influenced by The Byrds during the writing process , which resulted in the guitar tones being " too <unk> jangly " . Writer Colin Larkin described Ecstasy 's sound as " bubblegum pop with buzzsaw guitars " , which was similar to their prior releases and further diverged from their earlier post @-@ punk and gothic rock sound . Jim DeRogatis noted that Ecstasy 's overall sound " ushered in a sunnier , more optimistic vibe " for the band which was reminiscent of the sound of 1960s American <unk> , in particular the Los Angeles based band Love . " Clair " , one of the first recordings to feature Bilinda Butcher , features a sampled tape loop of audience screams from The Beatles ' live album , The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl ( 1977 ) . The sample was processed through audio filters to emulate guitar feedback . 
 However , the music on Ecstasy has been criticised as being " directionless and floundered about within the framework of songs which appeared to be only half formed ideas , " which was due to the band 's in @-@ studio experimentation with different aspects of their guitar sound . In hindsight , Shields said that " even when we 'd finished it we didn 't like half the songs we 'd done . The record never came out right and it made us realise that we were still too twee " . In response to the band 's " unwanted reputation for jangly <unk> " , My Bloody Valentine later incorporated elements of American indie rock music and Shields customised his guitars ' tremolo systems , resulting in the band pioneering an alternative rock subgenre known as shoegazing . The term " shoegazing " , which was considered derogatory , was coined by Sounds journalists in the early 1990s to describe certain bands ' " motionless performing style , where they stood on stage and stared at the floor " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ecstasy was released on 23 November 1987 on Lazy Records . It received a limited edition release of 3 @,@ 000 LP copies distributed by Rough Trade Records and went out of print within three months of its release . The album entered the UK Independent Albums Chart in December 1987 and spent four weeks in total on the chart , peaking at number 12 . The contents of the album were later combined with the band 's preceding single , " Strawberry Wine " , and reissued on the compilation album Ecstasy and Wine , released in February 1989 on Lazy Records . Ecstasy and Wine , however , was released without the band 's consent and Kevin Shields retrieved 10 @,@ 000 LP copies from the manager of Lazy Records soon after its release . Shields sold the records to various distributors in the early 1990s , after My Bloody Valentine were dropped from Creation Records , and used the funds to finance later recording sessions . 
 Upon its release Ecstasy received moderate critical acclaim . Melody Maker referred to the album as " a series of aloof , pastel washes of sound , suspended guitars , words from the back of beyond tying in to a large , shifting whole " and " larger than the sum of its parts " . In Loveless , a book from the 33 ⅓ series about the My Bloody Valentine album of the same name , Mike <unk> referred to Ecstasy as a " rarified , effete and poppy approach to <unk> rock " and AllMusic rated the album two and a half out of five stars . In a separate review of Ecstasy and Wine , AllMusic writer Bradley Torreano described Ecstasy as the point where the band " started moving toward Cocteau Twins territory , using guitarist Bilinda Butcher 's airy voice to define their image " and when " Shields and Butcher [ were ] exploring the guitar landscapes that would later become their trademark " . 
 On Ecstasy 's supporting tour My Bloody Valentine conceived the idea of " the holocaust " , an interlude of noise and excessive feedback during live performances which was later attributed to their song " You Made Me Realise " and often exceeded 130 decibels . The band toured small student venues and , according to Kevin Shields , at " one particular place , there were these guy playing pool in the background , shouting amongst themselves and being quite loud and not paying attention " . Before performing " Clair " , Shields said to the band " let 's just do it until those guys stop " and performed a two @-@ chord riff in the song that lasted for an approximate 30 minutes . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kevin Shields unless otherwise noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All personnel credits adapted from Ecstasy 's liner notes . 
 My Bloody Valentine 
 Kevin Shields – vocals , guitar 
 Bilinda Butcher – vocals , guitar 
 Debbie Googe – bass 
 Colm Ó Cíosóig – drums 
 Additional musicians 
 Nick Brown – violin ( 5 ) 
 Technical personnel 
 My Bloody Valentine – production 
 Steve Nunn – engineering 
 Lucy Smith – photography 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Lee Smith ( baseball ) = 
 Lee Arthur Smith ( born December 4 , 1957 ) is a retired American right @-@ handed baseball pitcher who played 18 years in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for eight teams . Pitching primarily for the Chicago Cubs , with whom he spent his first eight seasons , Lee served mostly as a relief pitcher during his career . One of the dominant closers in baseball history , Smith held the major league record for career saves from 1993 until 2006 , when San Diego Padres relief pitcher Trevor Hoffman passed his final total of 478 . 
 A native of Jamestown in Bienville Parish in north Louisiana , Smith was scouted by Buck O 'Neil and drafted by the Cubs in the 1975 Major League Baseball Draft . Smith was an intimidating figure on the pitcher 's mound at 6 feet , 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) and 265 pounds ( 120 kg ) with a 95 @-@ mile per hour ( 150 km / h ) fastball . In 1991 , Smith set a National League ( NL ) record with 47 saves for the St. Louis Cardinals , and was runner @-@ up for the league 's Cy Young Award ; it was the second of three times he led the NL in saves , and he later led the American League ( AL ) once while with the Baltimore Orioles in 1994 . He also set the major league career record for games finished ( 802 ) , and his 1 @,@ 022 career games pitched were the third @-@ most in history when he retired ; he still holds the team records for career saves for the Cubs ( 180 ) , and he also held the Cardinals record ( 160 ) until 2006 . 
 Smith has been a candidate for induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame 14 times , but has generally received 37 – 47 % of the necessary votes on all total ballots cast by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , with 75 % needed for election . After the end of his major league career , Smith spent time working as a pitching instructor at the minor @-@ league level with the San Francisco Giants . He then served as the pitching coach for the South Africa national baseball team in the 2006 World Baseball Classic and 2009 World Baseball Classic . Lee currently continues his job as a minor @-@ league roving pitching instructor for the Giants . 
 = = Early life and early career = = 
 Lee Smith was born in Jamestown , Louisiana , and raised in the small town of Castor in Bienville Parish . Buck O 'Neil claimed credit for having scouted him . At age 17 , partly on O 'Neil 's recommendation , Smith was drafted in the second round as the 28th overall pick by the Chicago Cubs in the 1975 draft . Smith began his professional career as a starting pitcher . In 1978 with the Class AA minor league Midland Cubs , Smith struggled as a starter with an ERA near 6 @.@ 00 , prompting manager Randy Hundley to move him to the bullpen . Smith resisted the move and briefly tried college basketball at Northwestern State University . At the behest of former Cubs outfielder Billy Williams , Smith returned to Midland as a reliever for the 1979 season and pitched well enough to earn a promotion to Class AAA baseball for 1980 . With the major league Chicago Cubs struggling to a last @-@ place finish , Smith came into the big leagues as a September call @-@ up that season . 
 = = Professional baseball career = = 
 = = = Chicago Cubs ( 1980 – 87 ) = = = 
 Smith made his major league debut with the Cubs on September 1 , 1980 , against the Atlanta Braves , coming in relief for starting pitcher Dennis Lamp , who had given up four runs and eight hits in the four innings he pitched . Smith pitched one inning , giving up no hits , striking out one and walking two . He finished the season for the last @-@ place Cubs and was invited back to the majors for 1981 . He was used mostly as a middle relief pitcher . A streak of poor pitching was interrupted by the 1981 Major League Baseball strike , and he finished with an ERA of 3 @.@ 51 . 
 The Cubs ' closer for 1981 , Dick <unk> , had a 3 – 10 season with a 5 @.@ 06 ERA , and as a result , in 1982 Smith , Willie Hernández and Bill Campbell shared closing duties . Smith pitched well and even started five games from mid @-@ June to early July . Significantly , former Cubs star pitcher Ferguson Jenkins returned to the team in 1982 , and became a major influence on the young reliever ; Smith credited Jenkins with simplifying his delivery , introducing him to the slider and forkball , and teaching him how to set up hitters . In what would be the last start of his career , Smith picked up his first major league hit , a home run off eventual Hall of Famer Phil Niekro . Smith managed only two singles for the rest of his career . He saved 17 games during that season and performed as the regular closer for the Cubs , a position he held for the next five years . 
 In 1983 , Smith had his best season in the majors up to that point . By May 6 , he had pitched in ten games without allowing any runs while allowing only three hits and striking out 12 batters . His ERA rose to 1 @.@ 85 by the end of May , but he lowered it to 1 @.@ 15 in July . Smith was selected for his first All @-@ Star Game but did not fare well , surrendering the final two runs in the American League 's 13 – 3 rout . Although the Cubs continued losing , Smith finished with a career @-@ best 1 @.@ 65 ERA — more than two points below the league average — and a career @-@ best 1 @.@ 074 WHIP while leading the National League with 29 saves and 56 games finished . He also received a point in the NL 's Cy Young Award voting and eight points in the NL Most Valuable Player Award voting . 
