 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Passaic County . 
 = Firefly ( TV series ) = 
 Firefly is an American space Western drama television series created by writer and director Joss Whedon , under his Mutant Enemy Productions label . Whedon served as an executive producer , along with Tim Minear . The series is set in the year 2517 , after the arrival of humans in a new star system and follows the adventures of the renegade crew of Serenity , a " Firefly @-@ class " spaceship . The ensemble cast portrays the nine characters who live on Serenity . Whedon pitched the show as " nine people looking into the blackness of space and seeing nine different things " . 
 The show explores the lives of a group of people who fought on the losing side of a civil war and others who now make a living on the fringe of society , as part of the pioneer culture that exists on the fringes of their star system . In this future , the only two surviving superpowers , the United States and China , fused to form the central federal government , called the Alliance , resulting in the fusion of the two cultures . According to Whedon 's vision , " nothing will change in the future : technology will advance , but we will still have the same political , moral , and ethical problems as today " . 
 Firefly premiered in the U.S. on the Fox network on September 20 , 2002 . By mid @-@ December , Firefly had averaged 4 @.@ 7 million viewers per episode and was 98th in Nielsen ratings . It was canceled after eleven of the fourteen produced episodes were aired . Despite the relatively short life span of the series , it received strong sales when it was released on DVD and has large fan support campaigns . It won a Primetime Emmy Award in 2003 for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series . TV Guide ranked the series at No. 5 on their 2013 list of 60 shows that were " Cancelled Too Soon " . 
 The post @-@ airing success of the show led Whedon and Universal Pictures to produce Serenity , a 2005 film which continues from the story of the series , and the Firefly franchise expanded to other media , including comics and a role @-@ playing game . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 The series takes place in the year 2517 , on a variety of planets and moons . The TV series does not reveal whether these celestial bodies are within one star system , only saying that Serenity 's mode of propulsion is a " gravity @-@ drive " . The film Serenity makes clear that all the planets and moons are in one large system , and production documents related to the film indicate that there is no faster @-@ than @-@ light travel in this universe . The characters occasionally refer to " Earth @-@ that @-@ was " , and the film establishes that , long before the events in the series , a large population had emigrated from Earth to a new star system in generation ships : " Earth @-@ that @-@ was could no longer sustain our numbers , we were so many " . The emigrants established themselves in this new star system , with " dozens of planets and hundreds of moons " . Many of these were terraformed , a process in which a planet or moon is altered to resemble Earth . The terraforming process was only the first step in making a planet habitable , however , and the outlying settlements often did not receive any further support in the construction of their civilizations . This resulted in many of the border planets and moons having forbidding , dry environments , well @-@ suited to the Western genre . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The show takes its name from the " Firefly @-@ class " spaceship , Serenity , that the central characters call home . It resembles a firefly in general arrangement , and the tail section , analogous to a bioluminescent insectoid abdomen , lights up during acceleration . The ship was named after the Battle of Serenity Valley , where Mal and Zoe were on the losing side . It is revealed in " <unk> " that the Battle of Serenity Valley is widely considered the loss which sealed the fate of the Independents . 
 Throughout the series , the Alliance is shown to govern the star system through an organization of " core " planets , following its success in forcibly unifying all the colonies under a single government . DVD commentary suggests that the Alliance is composed of two primary " core " systems , one predominantly Western in culture , the other pan @-@ Asian , justifying the mixed linguistic and visual themes of the series . The central planets are firmly under Alliance control , but the outlying planets and moons resemble the 19th @-@ century American West , with little governmental authority . Settlers and refugees on the outlying worlds have relative freedom from the central government , but lack the amenities of the high @-@ tech civilization that exists on the inner worlds . In addition , the outlying areas of space ( " the black " ) are inhabited by the Reavers , a cannibalistic group of nomadic humans that have become savage and animalistic . 
 The captain of the crew of Serenity is Malcolm " Mal " Reynolds ( Nathan Fillion ) and the episode " Serenity " establishes that the captain and his first mate Zoe Washburne ( Gina Torres ) are veteran " Browncoats " of the Unification War , a failed attempt by the outlying worlds to resist the Alliance 's assertion of control . A later episode , titled " Out of Gas " , reveals that Mal bought the spaceship Serenity to continue living beyond Alliance control . Much of the crew 's work consists of cargo runs or smuggling . One of the main story arcs is that of River Tam ( Summer Glau ) and her brother Simon ( Sean Maher ) . River is a child prodigy , whose brain was subjected to experiments at the hands of Alliance scientists at a secret government institution . As a result , she displays schizophrenia and often hears voices . It is later revealed that she is a " reader " , one who possesses telepathic abilities . Simon gave up a career as a highly successful trauma surgeon to rescue her from the Alliance , and as a result of this rescue they are both wanted fugitives . In the original pilot " Serenity " , Simon joins the crew as a paying passenger with River smuggled on board as cargo . As Whedon states in an episodic DVD commentary , every show he does is about creating family . By the last episode , " Objects in Space " , the fractured character of River has finally become whole , partly because the others decided to accept her into their " family " on the ship . 
 = = = Signature show elements = = = 
 The show blended elements from the space opera and Western genres , depicting humanity 's future in a manner different from most contemporary science fiction programs in that there are no large space battles . Firefly takes place in a multi @-@ cultural future , primarily a fusion of Western and East Asian cultures , where there is a significant division between the rich and poor . As a result of the Sino @-@ American Alliance , Mandarin Chinese is a common second language ; it is used in advertisements , and characters in the show frequently use Chinese words as curses . According to the DVD commentary on the episode " Serenity " , this was explained as being the result of China and the United States being the two superpowers that expanded into space . 
 The show also features slang not used in contemporary culture , such as adaptations of modern words , or new words altogether . For example , " shiny " is frequently used in a similar manner as the real world slang " cool " , and " <unk> " is used as a mild swear word . Written and spoken Chinese as well as Old West dialect are also employed . As one reviewer noted : " The dialogue tended to be a bizarre purée of wisecracks , old @-@ timey Western @-@ paperback patois , and snatches of Chinese " . 
 Tim Minear and Joss Whedon pointed out two scenes that , they believed , articulated the mood of the show exceptionally clearly . One scene is in the original pilot " Serenity " , when Mal is eating with chopsticks and a Western tin cup is by his plate ; the other is in " The Train Job " pilot , when Mal is thrown out of a holographic bar window . The DVD set 's " making @-@ of " documentary explains the distinctive frontispiece of the series ( wherein Serenity soars over a herd of horses ) as Whedon 's attempt to capture " everything you need to understand about the series in five seconds " . 
 One of the struggles that Whedon had with Fox was the tone of the show , especially with the main character Malcolm Reynolds . Fox pressured Whedon to make Mal more " jolly " , as they feared he was too dark in the original pilot , epitomized by the moment he suggests he might " space " Simon and River , throwing them out of the airlock to die . In addition , Fox was not happy that the show involved the " nobodies " who " get squished by policy " instead of the actual policy makers . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Firefly maintained an ensemble cast that portrayed nine crew members and passengers of the ship , Serenity . These characters fight criminals and schemers , Alliance security forces , the utterly psychotic and brutal Reavers , and the mysterious men with " hands of blue " — who are apparently operatives of a secret agency which is part of the megacorporation referred to in the DVD commentary only as The Blue Sun Corporation . The crew is driven by the need to secure enough income to keep their ship operational , set against their need to keep a low profile to avoid their adversaries . Their situation is greatly complicated by the divergent motivations of the individuals on board Serenity , but complex characterization was hampered by the show 's brief run . 
 All nine of the main characters appeared in every episode , with the exception of " Ariel " , from which Book is absent — he was meditating at an abbey . 
 Nathan Fillion as Malcolm " Mal " Reynolds — the owner and captain of Serenity and former Independent sergeant in the pivotal Battle of Serenity Valley . Malcolm grew up on a ranch , and was raised by his mother and the ranch hands . In the Unification War , he fought for the Independent Army , the " Browncoats " , as a platoon sergeant in the 57th Overlanders . He is cunning , a capable leader and a skilled fighter . Mal 's main character drive is his will for independence . While he is not above petty theft , smuggling or even killing to maintain his free lifestyle , he is generally honest in his dealings with others , fiercely loyal to his crew and closely follows a personal moral code . He is openly antagonistic toward religion . 
 Gina Torres as Zoe Alleyne Washburne — second @-@ in @-@ command onboard Serenity , a loyal wartime friend of Captain Reynolds , and the wife of Wash . Her surname during the Unification War was Alleyne . She was born and raised on a ship and served under Mal during the war as a corporal . Described by her husband as a " warrior woman " , she is a capable fighter who keeps calm even in the most dangerous situations . She demonstrates an almost unconditional loyalty to Mal , the only exception noted being her marriage to Wash , which the captain claims was against his orders . 
 Alan Tudyk as Hoban " Wash " Washburne — Serenity 's pilot and Zoe 's husband . Deeply in love with his wife , Wash expresses jealousy over his wife 's " war buddy " relationship and unconditional support of their captain , most particularly in the episode " War Stories " , in which he confronts Mal regarding their relationship . He joined pilot training just to see the stars , which were invisible from the surface of his polluted homeworld , and he joined Serenity despite being highly sought after by other ships . He is very light @-@ hearted and tends to make amusing comments , despite the severity of any situation . 
 Morena Baccarin as Inara Serra — a Companion , which is the 26th century cross between a geisha and an escort or mistress , who rents one of Serenity 's two small shuttles . Inara enjoys high social standing . Her presence confers a degree of legitimacy and social acceptance the crew of Serenity would not have without her on board . Inara displays great dignity , civility and compassion . There is strong romantic tension between her and Mal , who share many character traits , but each jokingly objects to the other 's " whoring " or " petty theft " , respectively . Both refuse to act on their feelings , and try to keep their relationship professional . 
 Adam Baldwin as Jayne Cobb — a mercenary . He and Mal met on opposite sides of a rivalry ; Mal , while held at gunpoint , offered Jayne his own bunk and a higher cut than his current employer , so he turned coat and shot his then @-@ partners . In the original Pilot " Serenity " he intimates to Mal that he did not betray him because " The money wasn 't good enough , " however previously he had pointedly asked the Alliance agent whether he would be required to turn on the captain to help him , and in " Ariel " defends his actions alerting the authorities regarding Simon and River by claiming he had not intended to betray Mal . He is someone who can be depended on in a fight . He tends to act like a " <unk> " who thinks he is the smartest person in space , but occasional hints of intelligence peek through this façade , giving the impression that he acts dumber than he is . As Whedon states several times , Jayne is the man who will ask the questions that no one else wants to . Even though he is a macho character , he has shown a particularly intense fear of Reavers , more so than the rest of the crew . Despite his amoral mercenary persona , he sends a significant portion of his income to his mother , again suggesting that there is more to his character than what he presents to the rest of the crew . 
 Jewel Staite as <unk> Lee " Kaylee " Frye — the ship 's mechanic . In the episode " Out of Gas " , it is established that she has no formal training , but keeps Serenity running with an intuitive gift for the workings of mechanical equipment . Jewel Staite explains Kaylee 's character as being wholesome , sweet , and " completely genuine in that sweetness " , adding " She loves being on that ship . She loves all of those people . And she is the only one who loves all of them incredibly genuinely . " She has a crush on Dr. Simon Tam . Kaylee is the heart of the ship : according to creator Joss Whedon , if Kaylee believes something , it is true . 
 Sean Maher as Dr. Simon Tam — a trauma surgeon of the first caliber ( top 3 % in his class at a top core @-@ planet institution ) , who is on the run after breaking his sister River out of a government research facility . In the episode " Safe " , it is revealed that he and River had a privileged upbringing with access to the best education . In rescuing River over his stern father 's severe objections , Simon sacrificed a highly successful future in medicine . His bumbling attempts at a romantic relationship with Kaylee are a recurring subplot throughout the series , and at every turn he seems to find a way to unwittingly foil his own attempts at romance . His life is defined by caring for his sister . 
 Summer Glau as River Tam — smuggled onto the ship by her brother . A highly intelligent , compassionate and intuitive child prodigy . Experiments and invasive brain surgery at an Alliance secret facility left her delusional , paranoid , and at times violent , though her uncanny ability to seemingly sense things before they happen leaves questions as to where the delusions end and reality begins for her . The experiments seemed to have made her a psychic . The experiments also gave her with a seemingly innate ability in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , and she is capable of killing or incapacitating several stronger opponents with ease . She gets frequent fits of anxiety and experiences post @-@ traumatic flashbacks of her time in the Alliance facility . Her mental instability and uncanny abilities , paired with several erratic and violent acts , are a recurring source of fear and doubt among the crew , especially with Jayne , whom she once slashed with a knife . Jayne very frequently requests that River and Simon be taken off the ship . 
 Ron Glass as <unk> Book — a Shepherd ( equivalent to a pastor ) . Although presented as a devout Christian , Book has profound , unexplained knowledge about criminal activities , police corruption , and military strategy , tactics , and weapons . In " Safe " , he was shown to have sufficient status in the Alliance to receive emergency medical treatment from an Alliance ship , with no questions asked . He is also proficient in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and the use of firearms . While objecting to violence most of the time , on a rescue mission he joins the fight , stating that while the Bible is quite specific about killing , it is " somewhat fuzzier on the subject of kneecaps " . Book is a moral guide for Mal and the rest of the crew , a voice of reason , conscience and spirituality . At the same time , he seems to get along well with the amoral mercenary Jayne , with the two spotting each other while working out using a bench press . His hidden backstory would have been gradually revealed , had the series continued , but was instead explored in the 2010 comic book The Shepherd 's Tale . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Despite the series ' short run , several recurring characters emerged from the inhabitants of the Firefly universe : 
 Badger ( Mark Sheppard ) is an established smuggling middleman on the planet Persephone . He provided jobs for Serenity on at least two occasions . In the DVD commentary for the episode " Serenity " , it was revealed that this part was originally written with the intention of Whedon himself playing the part . Badger appeared in the original pilot " Serenity " and in " Shindig " , with a return in the comic book series Serenity : Those Left Behind . 
 <unk> <unk> ( Michael Fairman ) is a criminal kingpin who has a reputation for violent reprisals , including severe , prolonged torture , against those who fail him or even irritate him . He appeared in " The Train Job " and " War Stories " . 
 " Saffron " ( Christina Hendricks ) is a con artist whose real name is unknown . She first appeared in the episode " Our Mrs. Reynolds " as Mal 's involuntarily acquired wife . She has a habit of marrying her marks during her scams . She returns in episode " Trash " , where Mal jokingly addresses her as " <unk> " , a portmanteau of her three aliases , " Yolanda " , " Saffron " , and " Bridget " . 
 " The Hands of Blue " ( Jeff Ricketts and Dennis <unk> ) : Two anonymous men wearing suits and blue gloves who pursue River , apparently to return her to the institute from which she escaped , as shown in " The Train Job " , " Ariel " , and the Serenity : Those Left Behind comic . They kill anyone , including Alliance personnel , who had contact with her , using a mysterious hand @-@ held device that causes fatal hemorrhaging in anyone at whom it is aimed . River , during anxiety attacks or psychological meltdowns , has repeated the phrase " Two by two / hands of blue " in a way that resembles poetic meter . This suggests that River has had close experience ( s ) with them . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Whedon developed the concept for the show after reading The Killer Angels , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novel by Michael Shaara chronicling the Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War . He wanted to follow people who had fought on the losing side of a war and their experiences afterwards as pioneers and immigrants on the outskirts of civilization , much like the post @-@ American Civil War era of Reconstruction and the American Old West culture . He intended the show to be " a Stagecoach kind of drama with a lot of people trying to figure out their lives in a bleak pioneer environment " . Whedon wanted to develop a show about the tactile nature of life , a show where existence was more physical and more difficult . After reading The Killer Angels , Whedon read a book about Jewish partisan fighters in World War II that also influenced him . Whedon wanted to create something for television that was more character @-@ driven and gritty than most modern science fiction . Television science fiction , he felt , had become too pristine and rarefied . 
 Whedon wanted to give the show a name that indicated movement and power , and felt that " Firefly " had both . This powerful word 's relatively insignificant meaning , Whedon felt , added to its allure . He eventually wound up creating the ship in the image of a firefly . 
 = = = Format = = = 
 During filming of the pilot episode , Whedon was still arguing with Fox that the show should be displayed in widescreen format . Consequently , he purposely filmed scenes with actors on the extreme edge of both sides so that they could only be shown in widescreen . This led to a few scenes on the DVD ( and later Blu @-@ ray ) where objects or setups that were not visible in the original 4 : 3 broadcasts were now displayed — such as the scene in the pilot where Wash mimes controlling the ship with a non @-@ existent yoke . However , the pilot was rejected by the Fox executives , who felt that it lacked action and that the captain was too " dour " . They also disliked a scene in which the crew backed down to a crime boss , since the scene implied the crew was " being nothing " . Thus , Fox told Whedon on a Friday afternoon that he had to submit a new pilot script on Monday morning or the show would not be picked up . Whedon and Tim Minear closeted themselves for the weekend to write what became the new pilot , " The Train Job " . At the direction of Fox , they added " larger than life " characters such as the henchman " Crow " , and the " hands of blue " men , who also introduced an X @-@ Files @-@ type ending . 
 For the new pilot , Fox made it clear that they would not air the episodes in the widescreen format . Whedon and company felt they had to " serve two masters " by filming widescreen for eventual DVD release , but keeping objects in frame so it could still work when aired in pan and scan full frame . To obtain an immersive and immediate feel , the episodes were filmed in a documentary style with hand @-@ held cameras , giving them the look of " found footage " , with deliberately <unk> or out @-@ of @-@ focus subjects . As Whedon related : " ... don 't be arch , don 't be sweeping — be found , be rough and tumble and docu [ <unk> ] and you @-@ are @-@ there " . Computer @-@ generated scenes mimicked the motion of a hand @-@ held camera . This style was not used , however , when shooting scenes that involved the central government , the Alliance . Tracking and steady cameras were used to show the sterility of this aspect of the Firefly universe . Another style employed was lens flares harking back to 1970s television . This style was so desired that the director of photography , David Boyd , sent back the cutting @-@ edge lenses which reduced lens flare in exchange for cheaper ones . 
 Unlike most other science fiction shows , which add sound to space scenes for dramatic effect , Firefly portrays space as silent , because a vacuum cannot transmit sound . 
 = = = Set design = = = 
 Production designer Carey Meyer built the ship Serenity in two parts ( one for each level ) as a complete set with ceilings and practical lighting installed as part of the set that the cameras could use along with moveable parts . The two @-@ part set also allowed the second unit to shoot in one section while the actors and first unit worked undisturbed in the other . As Whedon recalled : " ... you could pull it away or move something huge , so that you could get in and around everything . That meant the environment worked for us and there weren 't a lot of adjustments that needed to be made . " There were other benefits to this set design . One was that it allowed the viewers to feel they were really in a ship . For Whedon , the design of the ship was crucial in defining the known space for the viewer , and that there were not " fourteen hundred decks and a holodeck and an all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat buffet in the back " . He wanted to convey that it was utilitarian and that it was " beat @-@ up but lived @-@ in and ultimately , it was home " . As Joss Whedon discusses in the DVD commentary , each room represented a feeling or character , usually conveyed by the paint color . He explains that as you move from the back of the ship in the engine room , toward the front of the ship to the bridge , the colors and mood progress from extremely warm to cooler . Besides evoking a mood associated with the character who spends most time in each area , the color scheme also alludes to the heat generated in the tail of the ship . Whedon was also keen on utilizing vertical space ; thus , having the crew 's quarters accessible by ladder was important . Another benefit of the set design was that it also allowed the actors to stay in the moment and interact , without having to stop after each shot and reset up for the next . This helped contribute to the documentary style Whedon strove for . 
 The set had several influences , including the sliding doors and tiny cubicles reminiscent of Japanese hotels . Artist Larry Dixon has noted that the cargo bay walls are " reminiscent of interlaced , overlapping Asian designs , cleverly reminding us of the American @-@ Chinese Alliance setting while artistically forming a patterned plane for background scale reference " . Dixon has also remarked on how the set design contributed to the storytelling through the use of color , depth and composition , lighting , as well as its use of diagonals and patterned shadows . 
 Their small budget was another reason to use the ship for much of the storytelling . When the characters did go off the ship , the worlds all had Earth atmosphere and coloring because they could not afford to design alien worlds . " I didn 't want to go to Yucca Flats every other episode and transform it into Bizarro World by making the sky orange " , recalled Whedon . As Meyer recalled : " I think in the end the feel was that we wound up using a lot of places or exteriors that just felt too Western and we didn 't necessarily want to go that way ; but at some point , it just became the lesser of two evils — what could we actually create in three days ? " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Greg Edmonson composed the musical score for the series . He stated that he wrote for the emotion of the moment . However , one reviewer averred that he also wrote for the characters , stating : " Edmonson has developed a specialized collection of musical symbolism for the series " . To help illustrate the collection , the reviewer gave key leitmotifs , or " signatures " , various names , noting that " Serenity " recalls the theme of the show and is used when they return to the ship , or when they were meeting clandestinely ; it was " the sound of their home " . The slide guitar and fiddle used in this piece are portable instruments which fit the lifestyle of the crew : " the music they make calls up tunes played out in the open , by people who were hundreds of miles away yesterday . ' Serenity ' conjures the nomadic lifestyle the crew leads and underlines the western aspect of the show . " Another emotional signature was " Sad Violin " . It was used at the end of the Battle of Serenity Valley , but also helped set up the joke for when Mal tells Simon that Kaylee is dead in the episode " Serenity " . The most memorable use of " Sad Violin " , however , is at the end of " The Message " , when the crew mourned the death of Tracey . This was also the last scene of the last episode the actors shot , and so this was seen by them , and Edmonson , as Firefly 's farewell . To denote impending danger , " Peril " was used , which is " a low pulse , like a heartbeat , with deep chimes and low strings " . The reviewer also noted character signatures . The criminal <unk> has his own signature : Eastern European or Middle Eastern melodies over a low drone . Simon and River 's signature was a piano played sparsely with a violin in the background . This is in contrast to the portable instruments of " Serenity " : the piano is an instrument that cannot be easily moved and evokes the image of " the distant house and family they both long for " . The various signatures were mostly established in the first pilot , " Serenity " , and helped enhance the narrative . 
 In every episode , the musical score intensified my experience of this intelligent , remarkable show . Using and combining all these signatures , Greg Edmonson brought out aspects of Firefly 's story and characters that were never explicitly revealed in the other elements of the series . 
 The musical score expressed the cultural fusion depicted in the show . Cowboy guitar blended with Asian influence produced the atmospheric background for the series . As one reviewer stated : 
 Old music from the future — the music of roaring campfires and <unk> [ sic ] cowboys mixed with the warm , pensive sounds of Asian culture and , occasionally , a cold imperial trumpet , heralding the ominous structural presence of a domineering government . Completely thrilling . 
 — Steve <unk> 
 The show 's theme song , " The Ballad of Serenity " , was written by Joss Whedon and performed by Sonny Rhodes . Whedon wrote the song before the series was greenlit and a preliminary recording performed by Whedon can be found on the DVD release . The soundtrack to the series was released on CD on November 8 , 2005 , by Varèse Sarabande , although a 40 @-@ minute soundtrack was released by Fox Music in September 2005 as a digital EP . " The Ballad of Serenity " was used by NASA as the wake @-@ up song for astronaut Robert L. <unk> and the other crewmembers of STS @-@ 130 on February 12 , 2010 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In casting his nine @-@ member crew , Whedon looked first at the actors and considered their chemistry with others . Cast member Sean Maher recalls , " So then he just sort of put us all together , and I think it was very quick , like right out of the gate , we all instantly bonded " . All nine cast members were chosen before filming began . However , while filming the original pilot " Serenity " , Whedon decided that Rebecca Gayheart was unsuitable for the role of Inara Serra , and shot her scenes in singles so that it would be easier to replace her . Morena Baccarin auditioned for the role and two days later was on the set in her first television show . " Joss brought me down from the testing room like a proud dad , holding my hand and introducing me , " Baccarin recalled . 
 Whedon approached Nathan Fillion to play the lead role of Malcolm Reynolds ; after Whedon explained the premise and showed him the treatment for the pilot , Fillion was eager for the role . Fillion was called back several times to read for the part before he was cast . He noted that " it was really thrilling . It was my first lead and I was pretty nervous , but I really wanted that part and I wanted to tell those stories . " Fillion later said he was " heartbroken " when he learned the series had been cancelled . Fillion has called his time on Firefly the best acting job he ever had , and compares every job he has had to it . 
 Alan Tudyk applied through a casting office and several months later was called in for an audition , where he met with Whedon . He was called back to test with two candidates for the role of Zoe ( Wash 's wife ) and was told that it was down to him and one other candidate . The <unk> he tested with were not selected ( Gina Torres eventually received the role ) and Tudyk was sent home , but received a call informing him he had the part anyway . His audition tape is included in the special features of the DVD release . 
 Gina Torres , a veteran of several science fiction / fantasy works ( Cleopatra 2525 , The Matrix Reloaded , Alias , Hercules : The Legendary Journeys ) , was at first uninterested in doing another science fiction show , but " was won over by the quality of the source material " . As she recalled , " you had these challenged characters inhabiting a challenging world and that makes for great storytelling . And no aliens ! " 
 For Adam Baldwin , who grew up watching westerns , the role of Jayne Cobb was particularly resonant . 
 Canadian actress Jewel Staite videotaped her audition from Vancouver and was asked to come to Los Angeles to meet Whedon , at which point she was cast for the role of Kaylee Frye , the ship 's engineer . 
 Sean Maher recalls reading for the part and liking the character of Simon Tam , but that it was Whedon 's personality and vision that " sealed the deal " for him . For the role of Simon 's sister , River Tam , Whedon called in Summer Glau for an audition and test the same day . Glau had first worked for Whedon in the Angel episode " Waiting in the Wings " . Two weeks later , Whedon called her to tell her she had the part . 
 Veteran television actor Ron Glass has said that until Firefly , he had not experienced or sought a science @-@ fiction or western role , but he fell in love with the pilot script and the character of Shepherd Book . 
 = = = Production staff = = = 
 Tim Minear was selected by Whedon to be the show runner , who serves as the head writer and production leader . According to Whedon " [ Minear ] understood the show as well as any human being , and just brought so much to it that I think of it as though he were always a part of it " . Many of the other production staff were selected from people Whedon had worked with in the past , with the exception of the director of photography David Boyd , who was the " big find " and who was " full of joy and energy " . 
 The writers were selected after interviews and script samplings . Among the writers were José Molina , Ben Edlund , Cheryl Cain , Brett Matthews , Drew Z. Greenberg and Jane Espenson . Espenson wrote an essay on the writing process with Mutant Enemy Productions . A meeting is held and an idea is floated , generally by Whedon , and the writers brainstorm to develop the central theme of the episode and the character development . Next , the writers ( except the one working on the previous week 's episode ) meet in the anteroom to Whedon 's office to begin ' breaking ' the story into acts and scenes . For the team , one of the key components to devising acts is deciding where to break for commercial and ensuring the viewer returns . " Finding these moments in the story help give it shape : think of them as <unk> that support the structure " . For instance , in " Shindig " , the break for commercial occurs when Malcolm Reynolds is gravely injured and losing the duel . " It does not end when Mal turns the fight around , when he stands victorious over his opponent . They 're both big moments , but one of them leaves you curious and the other doesn 't . " 
 Next , the writers develop the scenes onto a marker @-@ filled whiteboard , featuring " a brief ordered description of each scene " . A writer is selected to create an outline of the episode 's concept — occasionally with some dialogue and jokes — in one day . The outline is given to showrunner Tim Minear , who revises it within a day . The writer uses the revised outline to write the first draft of the script while the other writers work on developing the next . This first draft is usually submitted for revision within three to fourteen days ; afterward , a second and sometimes third draft is written . After all revisions are made , the final draft would be produced as the ' shooting draft ' . 
 = = = Costume = = = 
 Jill <unk> , Firefly 's original costume designer , brought on Shawna Trpcic as her assistant for the pilot . When the show was picked up , <unk> was involved in another job and declined Firefly , suggesting Trpcic for the job . 
 The costumes were chiefly influenced by World War II , the American Civil War , the American Old West , and 1861 samurai Japan . Trpcic used deep reds and oranges for the main cast , to express a feeling of " home " , and contrasted that with grays and cool blues for the Alliance . Since the characters were often getting shot , Trpcic would make up to six versions of the same costume for multiple takes . 
 For River , mostly jewel tones were used to set her apart from the rest of the Serenity crew . River had boots to contrast with the soft fabrics of her clothes , " because that 's who she is — she 's this soft , beautiful , sensitive girl , but with this hardcore inner character , " recalled Trpcic . 
 The designers also wanted to contrast Simon , River 's brother , with the rest of the crew . Whereas they were dressed in cotton , Simon wore wool , stiff fabrics , <unk> and silk . He was originally the " dandy " , but as the show progressed , he loosened up slightly . 
 For Kaylee , Trpcic studied up on Japanese and Chinese youth , as originally the character was Asian . Other inspirations for Kaylee 's costumes were Rosie the Riveter and Chinese Communist posters . 
 Inara 's costumes reflect her high status , and are very feminine and attractive . 
 Trpcic designed and created the clothes for the minor character of Badger with Joss Whedon in mind , since he intended to play that part . When Mark Sheppard played the role instead , he was able to fit into the clothes made for Whedon . 
 For the Alliance , besides the grays and cool blues , Trpcic had in mind Nazi Germany , but mixed it with different wars , as the first sketches were " too Nazi " . The uniforms of the Alliance soldiers are from the 1997 film Starship Troopers . 
 In the commentary for the pilot episode Whedon points out that " bad guys wear hats , good guys don 't " . 
 = = = Unproduced episodes = = = 
 Since the cancellation of the series , various cast and crew members have revealed details they had planned for the show 's future : 
 Alan Tudyk had the idea for an episode about a planet that is always day on one side , and night on the other . On the night side , Jayne accidentally spills a type of pheromone on himself and the crew , which attracts a species of dogs . The crew are chased back to the ship by these dogs . There River uses her mind powers to domesticate the dogs . 
 Adam Baldwin wanted to make an episode in which Jayne goes up against Mal as captain of his own ship . 
 Tim Minear revealed the secret of Inara 's syringe , as seen in the pilot episode ; she is infected with a deadly disease . There would have been an episode where she is gang @-@ raped by Reavers . Because she injected herself with the syringe , all of the Reavers on the ship die . 
 According to Nathan Fillion , there was an episode in which the crew land on a dying planet . The inhabitants try to steal Serenity , after they explain to the crew about their need to get off the planet . The problem is that unless they were to run into another ship along the way , with the extra passengers , Serenity would not have enough fuel and oxygen to make it to the closest destination . While everyone else is asleep , Mal takes the ship himself and discovers that help never would have arrived . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Many reviews focused on the show 's fusion of Wild West and outer space motifs . TV Guide 's Matt Roush , for instance , called the show " oddball " and " offbeat " , and noted how literally the series took the metaphor of space operas as Westerns . Roush opined that the shift from space travel to horseback was " jarring " , but that once he got used to this , he found the characters cleverly conceived , and the writing a crisp balance of action , tension and humor . Several reviewers , however , criticized the show 's setting ; Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle felt that the melding of the western and science fiction genres was a " forced hodgepodge of two alarmingly opposite genres just for the sake of being different " and called the series a " vast disappointment " , and Carina Chocano of Salon.com said that while the " space as Wild West " metaphor is fairly redundant , neither genre connected to the present . Emily Nussbaum of the New York Times , reviewing the DVD set , noted that the program featured " an oddball genre mix that might have doomed it from the beginning : it was a character @-@ rich sci @-@ fi western comedy @-@ drama with existential underpinnings , a hard sell during a season dominated by Joe Millionaire " . 
 The Boston Globe described Firefly as a " wonderful , imaginative mess brimming with possibility " . The review further notes the difference between the new series and other programs was that those shows " burst onto the scene with slick pilots and quickly deteriorate into mediocrity ... Firefly is on the opposite creative journey . " Jason Snell called the show one of the best on television , and one " with the most potential for future brilliance " . 
 Reviewers also compared Firefly to Whedon 's other series , Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Chocano noted that the series lacks the psychological tension of Buffy , and suggests that this might be attributable to the episodes being aired out of order . MSN , on the other hand , pointed out that after viewing the DVD boxed set it was easy to see why the program had attracted many die @-@ hard fans . " All of Whedon 's fingerprints are there : the witty dialogue , the quirky premises and dark exploration of human fallacy that made Buffy brilliant found their way to this space drama " . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 Firefly generated a loyal base of fans during its three @-@ month original broadcast run on Fox in late 2002 . These fans , self @-@ styled Browncoats , used online forums to organize and try to save the series from being canceled by Fox only three months after its debut . Their efforts included raising money for an ad in Variety magazine and a postcard writing campaign to UPN . While unsuccessful in finding a network that would continue the show , their support led to a release of the series on DVD in December 2003 . A subsequent fan campaign raised over $ 14 @,@ 000 in donations to have a purchased Firefly DVD set placed aboard 250 U.S. Navy ships by April 2004 for recreational viewing by their crews . 
 These and other continuing fan activities eventually persuaded Universal Studios to produce a feature film , Serenity . ( The title of Serenity was chosen , according to Whedon , because Fox still owned the rights to the name ' Firefly ' ) . Numerous early screenings of rough film cuts were held for existing fans starting in May 2005 as an attempt to create a buzz to increase ticket sales when the final film cut was released widely on September 30 , 2005 . The film was not as commercially successful as fans had hoped , opening at number two and making only $ 40 million worldwide during its initial theatrical release . 
 On June 23 , 2006 , fans organized the first worldwide charity screenings of Serenity in 47 cities , dubbed as Can 't Stop the Serenity or <unk> , an homage to the movie 's tagline , " Can 't stop the signal " . The event raised over $ 65 @,@ 000 for Whedon 's favorite charity , Equality Now . In 2007 , $ 106 @,@ 000 was raised ; in 2008 , $ 107 @,@ 219 ; and in 2009 , $ 137 @,@ 331 . 
 In July 2006 , a fan @-@ made documentary was released , titled Done the Impossible , and is commercially available . The documentary relates the story of the fans and how the show has affected them , and features interviews with Whedon and various cast members . Part of the DVD proceeds are donated to Equality Now . 
 NASA <unk> astronaut Steven Swanson took the Firefly and Serenity DVDs with him on Space Shuttle Atlantis 's STS @-@ 117 mission in June 2007 . The DVDs were added to the media collection on the International Space Station as entertainment for the station 's crews . 
 A fan @-@ made , not @-@ for @-@ profit , unofficial sequel to Serenity , titled Browncoats : Redemption , premiered at Dragon * Con 2010 on September 4 , 2010 . According to the film 's creator and producer , Whedon gave " his blessing " to the project . The film was sold on DVD and Blu @-@ ray at the film 's website , with all proceeds being distributed among five charities . The film was also screened at various science @-@ fiction conventions across the United States , with admission receipts similarly being donated . All sales ended on September 1 , 2011 , one year after its premiere , with total revenues exceeding $ 115 @,@ 000 . Community discussion continues regarding screenings in conjunction with the Can 't Stop the Serenity project . 
 = = = Cult status = = = 
 In 2005 , New Scientist magazine 's website held an internet poll to find " The World 's Best Space Sci @-@ Fi Ever " . Firefly came in first place , with its cinematic follow @-@ up Serenity in second . In 2012 , Entertainment Weekly listed the show at No. 11 in the " 25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years , " commenting , " as it often does , martyrdom has only enhanced its legend . " 
 Brad Wright , co @-@ creator of Stargate SG @-@ 1 has said that the 200th episode of SG @-@ 1 is " a little kiss to Serenity and Firefly , which was possibly one of the best canceled series in history " . In the episode , " Martin Lloyd has come to the <unk> [ Stargate Command ] because even though ' Wormhole X @-@ Treme ! ' was canceled after three episodes , it did so well on DVD they 're making a feature [ film ] " . The follow @-@ up film , Serenity , was voted the best science fiction movie of all time in an SFX magazine poll of 3 @,@ 000 fans . Firefly was later ranked # 25 on TV Guide 's Top Cult Shows Ever . The name for the Google beta app Google Wave was inspired by this TV series . 
 On the CBS sitcom , The Big Bang Theory , Sheldon Cooper is a fan of Firefly . When he and Leonard Hofstadter are discussing their roommate agreement , they include a passage in which they dedicate Friday nights to watching Firefly , as Sheldon believes it will last for years . Upon its cancellation , he brands Rupert Murdoch , the owner of Fox , a traitor . During the second season of The Big Bang Theory , in episode 17 ( " The Terminator Decoupling " ) , Summer Glau appears as herself , encountering Sheldon , Leonard , and their friends on a train to San Francisco . When Raj tries to hit on her he says that although he is an astrophysicist , she was actually in space during the shooting of Firefly . Glau chides him for believing this and Raj <unk> , saying , " Those are crazy people ! " 
 On the NBC comedy Community , the characters Troy and Abed are fans of the show . They have an agreement that if one of them dies , the other will stage it to look like a suicide caused by the cancellation of Firefly , in the hopes that it will bring the show back . 
 In the 2003 Battlestar Galactica miniseries / pilot , a ship resembling Serenity appears in the background of the scene with Laura Roslin ( Mary McDonnell ) . Serenity is one of several spaceships inserted as cameos into digital effects scenes by Zoic Studios , the company responsible for digital effects in both Firefly and Battlestar Galactica . 
 In an interview on February 17 , 2011 , with Entertainment Weekly , Nathan Fillion joked that : " If I got $ 300 million from the California Lottery , the first thing I would do is buy the rights to Firefly , make it on my own , and distribute it on the Internet " . This quickly gave rise to a fan @-@ run initiative to raising the funds to purchase the rights . On March 7 , 2011 , the organizers announced the closure of the project due to lack of endorsement from the creators , with $ 1 million pledged at the time it was shut down . 
 Joss Whedon , Tim Minear , and cast members Nathan Fillion , Alan Tudyk , Summer Glau , Adam Baldwin and Sean Maher reunited at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con for a 10th anniversary panel . Ten thousand people lined up to get into the panel , and the panel ended with the entire crowd giving the cast and crew a standing ovation . 
 A tenth anniversary special , Browncoats Unite , was shown on the Science Channel on November 11 , 2012 . The special featured Whedon , Minear , and several of the cast members , in a discussion on the series ' history . 
 The television series Castle , where Fillion plays the lead character Richard Castle , has made ongoing homages to Firefly . Castle has props from Firefly as decorative items in his home , has dressed up as a " space cowboy " for Halloween ( " You wore that five years ago , " cracked his daughter ) , speaks Chinese that he learned from " a TV show [ he ] loved " , and has made rapid " two @-@ by @-@ two " finger motions while wearing blue surgical gloves . He has been humorously asked if he has ever heard of a spa known as " Serenity " , and Firefly catchphrases such as " shiny " , " special hell " and " I was aiming for the head " have been used as punchlines during various dramatic scenes in Castle . He has worked a murder case at a science fiction convention with suspects being the cast of a long @-@ cancelled space opera that only ran for a season , and has had incidental interaction with people portrayed by Firefly cast members . 
 Con Man , a 2015 comedy web series created by Tudyk and co @-@ produced by Fillion , draws on the pair 's experiences as cult science fiction actors touring the convention circuit . Though it is not autobiographical , the show 's fictional Spectrum echoes Firefly and Tudyk 's and Fillion 's roles reflect their own Firefly roles . Torres and Maher made guest appearances . Maher played himself as a former Firefly actor . 
 According to Reason 's Julian Sanchez , Firefly 's cult following " seems to include a disproportionate number of libertarians . " The story themes are often cautionary about too @-@ powerful central authority and its capacity to do bad while being considered by the majority as good . The characters each exhibit traits that exemplify core libertarian values , such as the right to bear arms ( Jayne , Zoe ) , legal prostitution ( Inara ) , freedom of religion ( Book ) , logic and reasoning ( Simon ) , and anti @-@ conscription ( River ) . Joss Whedon notes this theme , saying " Mal is , if not a Republican , certainly a libertarian , he 's certainly a less @-@ government kinda guy . He 's the opposite of me in many ways . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Firefly won the following awards : 
 Emmy Award : Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series , 2003 
 Visual Effects Society : Best visual effects in a television series , 2003 ( episode " Serenity " ) 
 Saturn Award : Cinescape Genre Face of the Future Award , Male , 2003 ( Nathan Fillion ) 
 Saturn Award : Saturn Award for Best DVD Release ( television ) , 2004 
 SyFy Genre Awards : Best Series / Television , 2006 
 SyFy Genre Awards : Best Actor / Television Nathan Fillion , 2006 
 SyFy Genre Awards : Best Supporting Actor / Television Adam Baldwin , 2006 
 SyFy Genre Awards : Best Special Guest / Television Christina Hendricks for " Trash " , 2006 
 SyFy Genre Awards : Best Episode / Television " Trash " , 2006 
 The series was also nominated for the following awards : 
 Visual Effects Society : Best compositing in a televised program , music video , or commercial , 2003 
 Motion Picture Sound Editors , USA , " Golden Reel Award " : Best sound editing in television long form : sound effects / foley , 2003 
 Hugo Award : Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , 2003 ( episode " Serenity " ) 
 Hugo Award : Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , 2004 ( episodes " Heart of Gold " and " The Message " , which at that time had not been shown on television in the USA ) 
 Golden Satellite Award : Best DVD Extras , 2004 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 At the time the series was cancelled by Fox , it averaged 4 @.@ 7 million viewers and ranked 98th in Nielsen ratings . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Firefly consists of a two @-@ hour pilot and thirteen one @-@ hour episodes ( with commercials ) . The series originally premiered in the United States on Fox in September 2002 . The episodes were aired out of the intended order . Although Whedon had designed the show to run for seven years , low ratings resulted in cancellation by Fox in December 2002 after only 11 of the 14 completed episodes had aired in the United States . The three episodes unaired by Fox eventually debuted in 2003 on the Sci Fi Channel in the United Kingdom . Prior to cancellation , some fans , worried about low ratings , formed the Firefly Immediate Assistance campaign whose goal was to support the production of the show by sending in postcards to Fox . After it was canceled , the campaign worked on getting another network such as UPN to pick up the series . The campaign was unsuccessful in securing the show 's continuation . 
 The A.V. Club cited several actions by the Fox network that contributed to the show 's failure , most notably airing the episodes out of sequence , making the plot more difficult to follow . For instance , the double episode " Serenity " was intended as the premiere , and therefore contained most of the character introductions and back @-@ story . However , Fox decided that " Serenity " was unsuitable to open the series , and " The Train Job " was specifically created to act as a new pilot . In addition , Firefly was promoted as an action @-@ comedy rather than the more serious character study it was intended to be , and the showbiz trade paper Variety noted Fox 's decision to occasionally preempt the show for sporting events . 
 Fox remastered the complete series in 1080i high @-@ definition for broadcast on Universal HD , which began in April 2008 . 
 On March 12 , 2009 , the series was the winner of the first annual Hulu awards in the category " Shows We 'd Bring Back " . 
 The Science Channel began airing the series on March 6 , 2011 . All episodes aired in the intended order , including episodes " Trash " , " The Message " and " Heart of Gold " , which were not aired in the original Fox series run . Along with each episode , Dr. Michio Kaku provided commentary about the real @-@ life science behind the science fiction of the show . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 A box set containing the fourteen completed episodes ( including those which had not yet aired in the United States ) was released on region 1 DVD on December 9 , 2003 , region 2 on April 19 , 2004 , and region 4 on August 2 , 2004 . The box features the episodes in the original order in which the show 's producers had intended them to be broadcast , as well as seven episode commentaries , outtakes and other features . The DVDs feature the episodes as they were shot in 16 : 9 widescreen , with anamorphic transfers and Dolby Surround audio . By September 2005 , its DVD release had sold approximately 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The series was re @-@ released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on November 11 , 2008 , comprising three discs ; exclusive extras to the Blu @-@ ray release include extra audio commentary from Joss Whedon , Nathan Fillion , Alan Tudyk and Ron Glass for the episode " Our Mrs. Reynolds " , as well as an additional featurette , " Firefly " Reunion : Lunch with Joss , Nathan , Alan and Ron . 
 = = Media franchise = = 
 The popularity of the short @-@ lived series served as the launching point for a media franchise within the Firefly universe , including the feature film Serenity , which addresses many plot points left unresolved by the series ' cancellation . 
 Additionally , there are two comic @-@ book mini @-@ series , Serenity : Those Left Behind ( 3 issues , 104 pages , 2006 ) , Serenity : Better Days ( 3 issues , 80 pages , 2008 ) and a one @-@ shot hardcover Serenity : The Shepherd 's Tale ( 56 pages , 2010 ) , along with the one @-@ shots Serenity : Downtime and The Other Half and Serenity : Float Out in which Whedon explored plot strands he had intended to explore further in the series . The comics are set , in plot terms , between the end of the TV series and the opening of the feature film . The two mini @-@ series were later published in collected form as hardcover and paperback graphic novels . A six @-@ issue series titled Serenity : Leaves on the Wind began in January 2014 and the series takes place after the events of the film . 
 In July 2014 , the release of video game Firefly Online was announced , in which all the cast will reprise their roles . 
 = Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy = 
 The Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy ( or Muhammad cartoons crisis ) ( Danish : <unk> ) began after the Danish newspaper Jyllands @-@ Posten published 12 editorial cartoons on 30 September 2005 , most of which depicted Muhammad , the principal figure of the religion of Islam . The newspaper announced that this was an attempt to contribute to the debate about criticism of Islam and self @-@ censorship . Muslim groups in Denmark complained , and the issue eventually led to protests around the world , including violent demonstrations and riots in some Muslim countries . 
 Islam has a strong tradition of <unk> , and it is considered highly blasphemous in most Islamic traditions to visually depict Muhammad . This , compounded with a sense that the cartoons insulted Muhammad and Islam , offended many Muslims . Danish Muslim organisations that objected to the depictions responded by petitioning the embassies of Islamic countries and the Danish government to take action in response , and filed a judicial complaint against the newspaper , which was dismissed in January 2006 . After the Danish government refused to meet with diplomatic representatives of the Muslim countries and would not intervene in the case , a number of Danish imams visited the Middle East in late 2005 to raise awareness of the issue . They presented a dossier containing the twelve cartoons from the Jyllands @-@ Posten , and other information some of which was found to be falsified . As a result , the issue received prominent media attention in some Muslim countries , leading to protests across the world in late January and early February 2006 . Some escalated into violence resulting in more than 200 reported deaths , attacks on Danish and other European diplomatic missions , attacks on churches and Christians , and a major international boycott . Some groups responded to the outpouring of protest by endorsing the Danish policies , launching " Buy Danish " campaigns and other displays of support . The cartoons were reprinted in newspapers around the world both in a sense of journalistic solidarity and as an illustration in what became a major news story . 
 Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen described the controversy as Denmark 's worst international relations incident since the Second World War . The incident came at a time of heightened political and social tensions between Muslim majority countries and Western countries , following several , high profile Islamic terrorist attacks in the West — including the September 11 attacks — and Western military interventions in Muslim countries , such as Iraq and Afghanistan . The cartoons and the reaction to them aggravated already @-@ strained relations . The relationship between Muslims in Denmark and the broader society was similarly at a low @-@ point , and the conflict came to symbolise the misunderstandings between the Islamic community and the rest of society . In the years since , terrorist plots claiming to be in retaliation for the cartoons have been planned , and some executed , against targets affiliated with newspapers that published the cartoons or Denmark . 
 Supporters said that the publication of the cartoons was a legitimate exercise of free speech regardless of the validity of the expression , that it was important to openly discuss Islam without fear or that the cartoons made important points about topical issues . The Danish tradition of relatively high tolerance for freedom of speech became a focus of some attention . The controversy ignited a debate about the limits of freedom of expression in all societies , religious tolerance and the relationship of Muslim minorities with their broader societies in the West , and relations between the Islamic World in general and the West . Critics of the cartoons described them as Islamophobic , racist , or baiting and blasphemous to Muslims , possibly intended to humiliate a Danish minority . Others saw them as a manifestation of ignorance about the history of Western imperialism , double standards , and stereotyping . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Debate about self @-@ censorship = = = 
 On 16 September 2005 , Danish news service <unk> published an article discussing the difficulty encountered by the writer Kåre Bluitgen , who was initially unable to find an illustrator prepared to work on his children 's book The Qur 'an and the life of the Prophet Muhammad ( Danish : <unk> og <unk> <unk> liv ) . Three artists declined Bluitgen 's proposal out of fear of reprisals . 
 One artist agreed to assist anonymously ; he said that he was afraid for his and his family 's safety . According to Bluitgen , one artist declined due to the murder in Amsterdam of the film director Theo van Gogh the year before ; another cited the attack in October 2004 on a lecturer at the Carsten Niebuhr Institute at the University of Copenhagen ; he was assaulted by five assailants who opposed his reading of the Qur 'an to non @-@ Muslims during a lecture . The story gained some traction , and the major Danish newspapers reported the story the following day . 
 The supposed refusals from these first three artists to participate was seen as evidence of self @-@ censorship out of fear of violence from Islamists , which led to much debate in Denmark . The Danish news paper Politiken stated at February 12 , 2006 , that they asked Bluitgen to put them in touch with the artists , so the claim that none of them dared to work with him could be proved . The author refused , and nobody has ever been able to confirm whether the incident is properly described . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 At an editorial meeting of Jyllands @-@ Posten ( " The Jutland Post " , Denmark 's largest daily newspaper ) on 19 September , reporter Stig <unk> mooted the idea of asking the members of the newspaper illustrators union if they would be willing to draw Muhammad . This would be an experiment to see the degree to which professional illustrators felt threatened . Flemming Rose , culture editor , was interested in the idea and wrote to the 42 members of the union asking them to draw their interpretations of Muhammad . 
 15 illustrators responded to the letter ; three declined to participate , one did not know how to contribute to what he called a vague project , one thought the project was stupid and badly paid , and one said he was afraid . 12 drawings had been submitted — three from newspaper employees and two which did not directly show Muhammad . The editors thought that some of the illustrators who had not responded were employed by other newspapers and were thus contractually prohibited from working for Jyllands @-@ Posten . In the end , editor @-@ in @-@ chief Carsten Juste decided that given its inconclusive results , the story was better suited as an opinion piece rather than a news story , and it was decided to publish it in the culture section , entirely under the direction of editor Flemming Rose . 
 Peter Hervik , a professor of Migration Studies , has since written that the results of this experiment disproved the idea that self @-@ censorship was a serious problem in Denmark because the overwhelming majority of cartoonists had either responded positively or refused for contractual or philosophical reasons . Carsten Juste has said that the survey " lacked validity and the story fell short of sound journalistic basis . " Hervik said that this , along with the fact that the most controversial cartoons were drawn by the newspaper 's staff cartoonists , demonstrates that the newspaper 's " desire to provoke and insult Danish Muslims exceeded the wish to test the self @-@ censorship of Danish cartoonists . " 
 Rose wrote the editorial which accompanied the cartoons in which he argued there had been several recent cases of self @-@ censorship , weighing freedom of speech against the fear of confronting issues about Islam , so he thought it was legitimate news story . Among the incidents he cited were : the translators of a book critical of Islam did not want their names published ; the Tate gallery in London withdrew an installation by the avant @-@ garde artist John Latham depicting the Quran , Bible and Talmud torn to pieces , and comedian Frank <unk> said in an interview with Jyllands @-@ Posten that he would hypothetically dare to urinate on the Bible on television , but not on the Quran . Rose also mentioned the case of a Danish imam who had met with Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen and " called on the prime minister to interfere with the press in order to get more positive coverage of Islam . " 
 On 30 September 2005 , Jyllands @-@ Posten published an article entitled " <unk> <unk> " ( " The face of Muhammad " ) incorporating the cartoons . The article consisted of the 12 cartoons and an explanatory text , in which Rose wrote : 
 Modern , secular society is rejected by some Muslims . They demand a special position , insisting on special consideration of their own religious feelings . It is incompatible with contemporary democracy and freedom of speech , where one must be ready to put up with insults , mockery and ridicule . It is certainly not always attractive and nice to look at , and it does not mean that religious feelings should be made fun of at any price , but that is of minor importance in the present context . ... we are on our way to a slippery slope where no @-@ one can tell how the self @-@ censorship will end . That is why Morgenavisen Jyllands @-@ Posten has invited members of the Danish editorial cartoonists union to draw Muhammad as they see him . 
 Later , Rose explained his intent further in The Washington Post : " The cartoonists treated Islam the same way they treat Christianity , Buddhism , Hinduism and other religions . And by treating Muslims in Denmark as equals they made a point : We are integrating you into the Danish tradition of satire because you are part of our society , not strangers . The cartoons are including , rather than excluding , Muslims . " The publication of the cartoons was also accompanied by an editorial titled ' <unk> fra mørket ( ' The Threat from the Darkness ) condemning Islamic spiritual leaders " who feel entitled to interpret the prophet 's word , and cannot abide the insult that comes from being the object of intelligent satire . " In October 2005 , Politiken , another leading Danish newspaper , published its own poll of thirty @-@ one of the forty @-@ three members of the Danish cartoonist association . Twenty @-@ three said they would be willing to draw Muhammad . One had doubts , one would not be willing because of fear of possible reprisals , and six artists would not be willing because they respected the Muslim ban on depicting Muhammad . 
 = = = Description of the cartoons = = = 
 The 12 cartoons were drawn by 12 professional cartoonists in Denmark . Four of the cartoons have Danish texts , one deliberately evades the issue and depicts a school child in Denmark named Muhammad rather than the Islamic prophet , one is based on a Danish cultural expression , and one includes a Danish politician . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 The immediate responses to the publication included newspaper sellers refusing to distribute that day 's paper . In the following days , the cartoons received significant attention in other Danish press outlets . According to Jytte Klausen , " most people groaned that the newspaper was at it again , bashing Muslims . The instinct was to split the blame . " Berlingske @-@ Tidende criticised the ' gag ' , but also said that Islam should be openly criticised . Politiken attacked Rose 's account of growing self @-@ censorship ; it also surveyed Danish cartoonists and said that self @-@ censorship was not generally perceived as a problem . On October 4 , a local teenager telephoned the newspaper offices threatening to kill the cartoonists , but he was arrested after his mother turned him in . 
 Shortly after the publication , a group of Islamic leaders formed a protest group . Raed Hlayhel called a meeting to discuss their strategy , which took place in Copenhagen a few days after the cartoons appeared . The Islamic Faith Community and four mosques from around the country were represented . The meeting established 19 " action points " to try to influence public opinion about the cartoons . Ahmed Akkari from an mosque in Aarhus was designated the group 's spokesman . The group planned a variety of political activities , including launching a legal complaint against the newspaper , writing letters to media outlets inside and outside Denmark , contacting politicians and diplomatic representatives , organising a protest in Copenhagen , and mobilising Danish Muslims through text messages and mosques . A one @-@ day strike and sleep @-@ in were planned , but never took place . A peaceful protest , which attracted about 3 @,@ 500 demonstrators , was held in Copenhagen on 14 October 2005 . 
 Having received petitions from Danish imams , eleven ambassadors from Muslim @-@ majority countries — Turkey , Saudi Arabia , Iran , Pakistan , Egypt , Indonesia , Algeria , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Libya , Morocco — and the Head of the Palestinian General Delegation asked for a meeting with Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen on 12 October 2005 . They wanted to discuss what they perceived as an " on @-@ going smearing campaign in Danish public circles and media against Islam and Muslims " . In a letter , the ambassadors mentioned the issue of the Muhammad cartoons , a recent indictment against Radio Holger , and statements by MP Louise <unk> and the Minister of Culture Brian Mikkelsen . It concluded : 
 We deplore these statements and publications and urge Your Excellency 's government to take all those responsible to task under law of the land in the interest of inter @-@ faith harmony , better integration and Denmark 's overall relations with the Muslim world . 
 The government answered with a letter without addressing the request for a meeting : " The freedom of expression has a wide scope and the Danish government has no means of influencing the press . However , Danish legislation prohibits acts or expressions of blasphemous or discriminatory nature . The offended party may bring such acts or expressions to court , and it is for the courts to decide in individual cases . " 
 The refusal to meet the ambassadors was later prominently criticised by the Danish political opposition , twenty @-@ two Danish ex @-@ ambassadors and the Prime Minister 's fellow party member , former Minister of Foreign Affairs <unk> <unk> @-@ Jensen . Hervik wrote , " While it is certainly true that the prime minister did not have a legal right to intervene in the editorial process , he could have publicly ( as an enactment of free speech ) dissociated himself from the publication , from the content of the cartoons , from Rose 's explanatory text , from Jyllands @-@ Posten 's editorial of the same day , and from the general association of Islam with terrorism . Rasmussen did none of those . Instead , he used his interview [ on 30 October 2005 ] to endorse Jyllands @-@ Posten 's position and the act of publishing the cartoons . " 
 The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation ( OIC ) and Arab League also wrote a joint letter to the Prime Minister expressing alarm about the cartoons and other recent incidents and insults committed by Danish politicians . The Muslim countries continued to work diplomatically to try to have the issue — and the other issues mentioned in their initial letter — addressed by the Danish government . Turkey and Egypt were particularly active . Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan visited Copenhagen in November in an encounter which the Turkish press described as a crisis . Erdogan clashed with Rasmussen over the cartoons as well as <unk> TV — a television station affiliated with the Kurdistan Workers ' Party — being allowed to broadcast from Denmark . After trying to engage the Danish government diplomatically , Egyptian foreign minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit and the secretary @-@ generals of the OIC and the Arab League sent letters to the OSCE , OECD , and EU foreign policy coordinator complaining about Danish inaction . 
 = = = Judicial investigation of Jyllands @-@ Posten ( October 2005 – January 2006 ) = = = 
 On 27 October 2005 , representatives of the Muslim organisations which had complained about the cartoons in early October filed a complaint with the Danish police claiming that Jyllands @-@ Posten had committed an offence under section 140 and 266b of the Danish Criminal Code , precipitating an investigation by the public prosecutor . 
 Section 140 of the criminal code , known as the blasphemy law , prohibits disturbing public order by publicly ridiculing or insulting the dogmas of worship of any lawfully existing religious community in Denmark . Only one case , a 1938 case involving an anti @-@ Semitic group , has ever resulted in a sentence . The most recent case was in 1971 when a programme director of Danmarks Radio was accused in a case involving a song about the Christian god , but was found not guilty . 
 Section 266b criminalises insult , threat or degradation of natural persons , by publicly and with malice attacking their race , colour of skin , national or ethnic roots , faith or sexual orientation . 
 On 6 January 2006 , the Regional Public Prosecutor in Viborg discontinued the investigation as he found no basis for concluding that the cartoons constituted a criminal offence because the publication concerned a subject of public interest and Danish case law extends editorial freedom to journalists regarding subjects of public interest . He stated that in assessing what constitutes an offence , the right to freedom of speech must be taken into consideration , and said that freedom of speech must be exercised with the necessary respect for other human rights , including the right to protection against discrimination , insult and degradation . In a new hearing resulting from a complaint about the original decision , the Director of Public Prosecutors in Denmark agreed with the previous ruling . 
 = = = Danish Imams tour the Middle East = = = 
 In December , after failing to make any progress with the Danish government or the newspaper , the " Committee for Prophet Honouring " decided to gain support and leverage outside of Denmark by meeting directly with religious and political leaders in the Middle East . They created a 43 @-@ page dossier ( commonly known as the Akkari @-@ Laban dossier , after two leading imams ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ) containing the cartoons and supporting materials for their meetings . 
 The dossier , finalised for the group 's trip to Lebanon in mid @-@ December , contained the following : 
 An introduction describing the situation of Muslims in Denmark , the country itself , background on the cartoons , and the group 's action plan . 
 Clippings of the articles and editorials from 30 September 2005 that accompanied the cartoons and a copy of the page with cartoons translated into Arabic ; 
 An 11 @-@ point declaration by Raed Hlayhel against alleged Western double standards about free speech ; he wrote that Islam and Muhammed are ridiculed and insulted under the guise of free speech while parallel insults would be unacceptable ; 
 11 of the 12 cartoons from the paper itself blown up to A4 size and translated . The cartoon with Muhammad and the sword was not shown here , only in the overview page ; 
 Copies of letters and the group 's press releases ; 
 Arabic translation of the Jyllands @-@ Posten editorial of 12 October discussing the early controversy and refusing to apologise ; 
 10 satirical cartoons from another Danish newspaper , <unk> , published in November 2005 in response to the Jyllands @-@ Posten controversy , which Kasem Ahmad , spokesman for <unk> <unk> , called " even more offensive " than the original 12 cartoons despite being intended as satire . He said that they were part of a broader campaign to denigrate Muslims and were gratuitously provocative ; 
 Three additional pictures that the dossier 's authors alleged were sent to Muslims in Denmark , said to be indicative of the " hate they feel subjected to in Denmark " ' 
 Some clippings from Egyptian newspapers discussing the group 's first visit to Egypt . 
 The dossier also contained " falsehood about alleged maltreatment of Muslims in Denmark " and the " tendentious lie that Jyllands @-@ Posten was a government @-@ run newspaper " . 
 The imams said that the three additional images were sent anonymously by mail to Muslims who were participating in an online debate on Jyllands @-@ Posten 's website , and were apparently included to illustrate the perceived atmosphere of Islamophobia in which they lived . On 1 February , BBC World incorrectly reported that one of the images had been published in Jyllands @-@ Posten . This image was later found to be a wire @-@ service photograph of a contestant at a French pig @-@ squealing contest in the Trie @-@ sur @-@ <unk> 's annual festival . One of the other two additional images ( a photograph ) portrayed a Muslim being mounted by a dog while praying , and the other ( a cartoon ) portrayed Muhammad as a demonic paedophile . 
 Experts — including Helle Lykke Nielsen — who have examined the dossier said that it was broadly accurate from a technical point of view but contained a few falsehoods and could easily have misled people not familiar with Danish society , an assessment which the imams have since agreed to . Some mistakes were that Islam is not officially recognised as a religion in Denmark ( it is ) , that the cartoons are the result of a contest , and that Anders Fogh Rasmussen in his role as Prime Minister gave a medal to Ayaan Hirsi Ali ( he gave one in his capacity as party leader of the Liberal Party ) . The imams also claimed to speak on behalf of 28 organisations , many of which later denied any connection to them . Additions such as the " pig " photograph may have polarised the situation ( the association of a person and a pig is considered very insulting in Islamic culture ) , as they were confused for the cartoons published in the newspaper . Muslims who met with the group later said Akkari 's delegation had given them the impression that Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen somehow controlled or owned Jyllands @-@ Posten . 
 Delegations of imams circulated the dossier on visits to Egypt , Syria and Lebanon in early December 2005 , presenting their case to many influential religious and political leaders and asking for support . The group was given high level access on these trips through their contacts in the Egyptian and Lebanese embassies . The dossier was distributed informally on 7 – 8 December 2005 at a summit of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference in Mecca , with many heads of state in attendance . The OIC issued a condemnation of the cartoons : " [ We express our ] concern at rising hatred against Islam and Muslims and condemned the recent incident of desecration of the image of the Holy Prophet Mohamed . " The communique also attacked the practice of " using the freedom of expression as a pretext for defaming religions . " Eventually an official communiqué was issued requesting that the United Nations adopt a binding resolution banning contempt of religious beliefs and providing for sanctions to be imposed on contravening countries or institutions . The attention of the OIC is said to have led to media coverage which brought the issue to public attention in many Muslim countries . 
 = = = International protests = = = 
 Protests against the cartoons were held around the world in late January and February 2006 . Many of these turned violent , resulting in at least 200 deaths globally , according to the New York Times . Large demonstrations were held in many majority @-@ Muslim countries , and almost every country with significant Muslim minorities , including Nigeria , Canada , India , the United States , the United Kingdom ( see : 2006 Islamist demonstration outside the Embassy of Denmark in London ) , Australia , New Zealand , Kenya , and throughout continental Europe . In many instances , demonstrations against the cartoons became intertwined with those about other local political grievances . Muslims in the north of Nigeria used protests to attack local Christians as part of an ongoing battle for influence , radical Sunnis used protests against governments in the Middle East , and authoritarian governments used them to bolster their religious and nationalist credentials in internal disputes ; these associated political motives explain the intensity of some of the demonstrations . 
 Several Western embassies were attacked ; the Danish and Austrian embassies in Lebanon and the Norwegian and Danish representations in Syria were severely damaged . Christians and Christian churches were also targets of violent retribution in some places . Condoleezza Rice , Secretary of State of the United States , accused Iran and Syria of organising many of the protests in Iran , Syria and Lebanon . However , Hezbollah , ally of Syria and Iran in Lebanon , has condemned the attack on the Danish Embassy . Several death threats were made against the cartoonists and the newspaper , resulting in the cartoonists going into hiding . Danish Prime Minister Rasmussen called it Denmark 's worst international relations incident since the Second World War . 
 Peaceful counter @-@ demonstrations in support of the cartoons , Denmark , and freedom of speech were also held . Three national ministers lost their jobs amid the controversy : Roberto <unk> in Italy for his support of the cartoons , Laila <unk> in Sweden for her role in shutting down a website displaying the cartoons , and the Libyan Interior Minister after a riot in Benghazi in response to <unk> 's comments , which led to the deaths of at least 10 people . In India , Haji <unk> <unk> , a minister in the Uttar Pradesh state government , announced a cash reward for anyone who beheaded " the Danish cartoonist " who caricatured Mohammad . Subsequently , a case was filed against him in the Lucknow district court and eminent Muslim scholars in India were split between those supporting punishment for the cartoonists and those calling for the minister 's sacking . As of 2011 , legal action was ongoing . 
 = = = = Boycott = = = = 
 A consumer boycott was organised in Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , and other Middle Eastern countries against Denmark . On 5 March 2006 , Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri of Al @-@ Qaeda urged all Muslims to boycott not only Denmark , but also Norway , France , Germany and all others that have " insulted the Prophet Mohammed " by printing cartoons depicting him . Consumer goods companies were the most vulnerable to the boycott ; among companies heavily affected were Arla Foods , Novo Nordisk , and <unk> . Arla , Denmark 's biggest exporter to the Middle East , lost 10 million kroner ( 1 @.@ 6 million US dollars , 1 @.@ 3 million euros ) per day in the initial weeks of the boycott . Scandinavian tourism to Egypt fell by between 20 – 30 % in the first two months of 2006 . 
 On 9 September 2006 , BBC News reported that the Muslim boycott of Danish goods had reduced Denmark 's total exports by 15 @.@ 5 % between February and June . This was attributed to an approximated 50 % decline in exports to the Middle East . The BBC said , " The cost to Danish businesses was around 134 million euros ( $ <unk> ) , when compared with the same period last year , the statistics showed . " However , The Guardian newspaper in the UK said , " While Danish milk products were dumped in the Middle East , fervent right @-@ wing Americans started buying Bang & Olufsen stereos and Lego . In the first quarter of this year Denmark 's exports to the US soared 17 % . " Overall the boycott did not have a significant effect on the Danish economy . 
 = = = Response to protests and reprintings = = = 
 In response to the initial protests from Muslim groups , Jyllands @-@ Posten published an open letter to the citizens of Saudi Arabia on its website , in Danish and in Arabic , apologising for any offence the drawings may have caused but defending the right of the newspaper to publish them . A second open letter " to the honourable Fellow Citizens of the Muslim World " , dated 8 February 2006 , had a Danish version , an Arabic version , and an English version . It said , 
 Serious misunderstandings in respect of some drawings of the Prophet Mohammed have led to much anger ... Please allow me to correct these misunderstandings . On 30 September last year , Morgenavisen Jyllands @-@ Posten published 12 different cartoonists ' idea of what the Prophet Mohammed might have looked like ... In our opinion , the 12 drawings were sober . They were not intended to be offensive , nor were they at variance with Danish law , but they have indisputably offended many Muslims for which we apologise . 
 Six of the cartoons were first reprinted by the Egyptian newspaper El <unk> on 17 October 2005 , along with an article strongly denouncing them , but this did not provoke any condemnations or other reactions from religious or government authorities . Between October 2005 and early January 2006 , examples of the cartoons were reprinted in major European newspapers from the Netherlands , Germany , Scandinavia , Romania , and Switzerland . After the beginning of major international protests , they were re @-@ published around the globe , but primarily in continental Europe . The cartoons were not reprinted in any major newspapers in Canada , the United Kingdom , or many in the United States where articles covered the story without including them . 
 Reasons for the decision not to publish the cartoons widely in the United States — despite that country 's permissive free speech laws — included increased religious sensitivity , higher integration of Muslims into mainstream society , and a desire to be tactful considering the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 Numerous newspapers were closed and editors dismissed , censured , or arrested for their decision or intention to re @-@ publish the cartoons . In some countries , including South Africa , publication of the cartoons was banned by government or court orders . 
 The OIC denounced calls for the death of the Danish cartoonists . The OIC 's Secretary General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu said at the height of crisis that the violent protests were " un @-@ Islamic " and appealed for calm . He also denounced calls for a boycott of Danish goods . Twelve high @-@ profile writers , among them Salman Rushdie , signed a letter called Manifesto : Together Facing the New Totalitarianism which was published in a number of newspapers . It said that the violence sparked by the publication of cartoons satirising Muhammad " shows the need to fight for secular values and freedom . " 
 = = = Later developments = = = 
 Numerous violent plots related to the cartoons have been discovered in the years since the main protests in early 2006 . These have primarily targeted editor Flemming Rose , cartoonist Kurt Westergaard , the property or employees of Jyllands @-@ Posten and other newspapers that printed the cartoons , and representatives of the Danish state . Westergaard has been the subject of several attacks or planned attacks and now lives under special police protection . On 1 January 2010 , police used firearms to stop a would @-@ be assassin in Westergaard 's home . In February 2011 , the attacker , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old Somalian man , was sentenced to nine years in prison . In 2010 , three men based in Norway were arrested on suspicion that they were planning a terror attack against Jyllands @-@ Posten or Kurt Westergaard ; two of the men were convicted . In the United States , David Headley and Tahawwur Hussain Rana were convicted of planning terrorism against Jyllands @-@ Posten and were sentenced in 2013 . 
 Naser Khader , a Muslim Danish MP , founded an organisation called Democratic Muslims in Denmark in response to the controversy . He was worried that what he believed to be Islamists were seen to speak for all Muslims in Denmark . He said that there is still a sharp division within the Danish Muslim community between Islamists and moderates , and that Denmark had become a target for Islamists . He said that some good came from the crisis because " the cartoon crisis made clear that Muslims are not united and that there is a real difference between the Islamists and people like myself . Danes were shown that talk of ' the Muslims ' was too monolithic . " He also said that the crisis served as a wake @-@ up call about radical Islam to European countries . 
 In 2009 , when Brandeis professor Jytte Klausen wanted to publish a book about the controversy titled The Cartoons that Shook the World , Yale University Press refused to publish the cartoons and other representations of Muhammad out of fear for the safety of its staff . In response , another company published Muhammad : The " Banned " Images in what it called " a ' picture book ' — or errata to the bowdlerized version of Klausen 's book . " Five years to the day after the cartoons were first published in Jyllands @-@ Posten , they were republished in Denmark in Rose 's book Tyranny of Silence . When the book 's international edition was published in the United States in 2014 it did not include the cartoons . 
 In 2013 , The Islamic Society in Denmark stated that they regretted their visit to Lebanon and Egypt in 2006 to show the caricatures because the consequences had been much more serious than they expected . In August 2013 , Ahmed Akkari expressed his regret for his role in the Imams ' tour of the Middle East , stating " I want to be clear today about the trip : It was totally wrong . At that time , I was so fascinated with this logical force in the Islamic mindset that I could not see the greater picture . I was convinced it was a fight for my faith , Islam . " Still a practising Muslim , he said that printing the cartoons was ok and he personally apologised to the cartoonist Westergaard . Westergaard responded by saying " I met a man who has converted from being an Islamist to become a humanist who understands the values of our society . To me , he is really sincere , convincing and strong in his views . " A spokesman for the Islamic Society of Denmark said " It is still not OK to publish drawings of Muhammad . We have not changed our position . " 
 = = = = Charlie Hebdo controversies & attacks = = = = 
 The French satirical weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo was taken to court for publishing the cartoons ; it was acquitted of charges that it incited hatred . The incident marked the beginning of a number of violent incidents related to the cartoons of Muhammad at the newspaper over the following decade . 
 On 2 November 2011 , Charlie Hebdo was firebombed right before its 3 November issue was due ; the issue was called <unk> Hebdo and satirically featured Muhammad as guest @-@ editor . The editor , Stéphane Charbonnier , known as Charb , and two co @-@ workers at Charlie Hebdo subsequently received police protection . Charb was placed on a hit list by Al @-@ Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula along with Kurt Westergaard , Lars Vilks , Carsten Juste and Flemming Rose after editing an edition of Charlie Hebdo that satirised Muhammad . 
 On 7 January 2015 , two masked gunmen opened fire on Charlie Hebdo 's staff and police officers as vengeance for its continued caricatures of Muhammad , killing 12 people , including Charb , and wounding 11 others . Jyllands @-@ Posten did not re @-@ print the Charlie Hebdo cartoons in the wake of the attack , with the new editor @-@ in @-@ chief citing security concerns . 
 In February 2015 , in the wake of the Charlie Hebdo shootings in Paris , a gunman opened fire on attendants and police officers at a meeting discussing freedom of speech with the Swedish cartoonist Lars Vilks among the panelists , and later attacked a synagogue killing two people in Copenhagen in the 2015 Copenhagen shootings . 
 = = Background , opinions and issues = = 
 = = = Danish journalistic tradition = = = 
 Freedom of speech was guaranteed in law by the Danish Constitution of 1849 , as it is today by The Constitutional Act of Denmark of 5 June 1953 . Danish freedom of expression is quite far @-@ reaching — even by Western European standards — although it is subject to some legal restrictions dealing with libel , hate speech , blasphemy and defamation . The country 's comparatively lenient attitude toward freedom of expression has provoked official protests from several foreign governments , for example Germany , Turkey and Russia for allowing controversial organisations to use Denmark as a base for their operations . Reporters Without Borders ranked Denmark at the top of its Worldwide Press Freedom Index for 2005 . Danish newspapers are privately owned and independent from the government . 
 Denmark has a blasphemy law , which makes it an offence to " mock legal religions and faiths " . However , no @-@ one has been charged with the law since 1971 and no @-@ one has been convicted since 1938 . A complaint was filed against Jyllands @-@ Posten under this section of the law , but in his decision the Regional Public Prosecutor stated " that in assessing what constitutes an offence under both section 140 and section 266 b of the Danish Criminal Code , the right to freedom of expression must be taken into consideration " ; he found that no criminal offence had taken place in this case . However , the Director of Public Prosecutions said , " there is , therefore , no free and unrestricted right to express opinions about religious subjects . It is thus not a correct description of existing law when the article in Jyllands @-@ Posten states that it is incompatible with the right to freedom of expression to demand special consideration for religious feelings and that one has to be ready to put up with ' scorn , mockery and ridicule ' . " <unk> intended for public dissemination deemed hateful based on ' race , colour , national or ethnic origin , belief or sexual orientation ' can be penalised under Section 266b of the criminal code . Some people have been convicted under this provision , mostly for speech directed at Muslims . 
 = = = = Jyllands @-@ Posten = = = = 
 While Jyllands @-@ Posten has published satirical cartoons depicting Christian figures , it rejected unsolicited cartoons in 2003 which depicted Jesus , opening it to accusations of a double standard . In February 2006 , Jyllands @-@ Posten refused to publish Holocaust cartoons , which included cartoons that mocked or denied the Holocaust , offered by an Iranian newspaper which had held a contest . Six of the less controversial images were later published by Dagbladet Information , after the editors consulted the main rabbi in Copenhagen , and three cartoons were later reprinted in Jyllands @-@ Posten . After the competition had finished , Jyllands @-@ Posten also reprinted the winning and runner @-@ up cartoons . 
 Jyllands @-@ Posten has been described as conservative and it was supportive of the then @-@ ruling party Venstre . It frequently reported on the activities of imams it considered radical , including Raed Hlayhel and Ahmed Akkari . Peter Hervik has argued that anti @-@ Islamic positions and discourse dominated Jyllands @-@ Posten 's editorial leadership from at least 2001 until the cartoon crisis . An article written by journalist Orla Borg , employed at the paper , won second prize in the EU " For Diversity . Against Discrimination " Awards for journalism that contributed to " better public understanding of the benefits of diversity and the fight against discrimination in employment " in 2005 . 
 = = = Islamic tradition = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The Qu 'ran condemns idolatry , and this has led some Islamic scholars to interpret it as prohibiting figurative representation ; this is known as <unk> . However , since Islam has many centres of religious authority , opinion and tradition about this is not uniform . In popular practice today there is no general injunction against pictorial representation of people outside of religious contexts . Generally , images of Muhammad have been prohibited throughout history . In practice , images of Muhammad have been made on many occasions , generally in a restricted and socially regulated way ; for example , they are often stylised or do not show Muhammad 's face . Within Muslim communities , views about pictorial representations have varied : Shi 'a Islam has been generally tolerant of pictorial representations of human figures while Sunni Islam generally forbids any pictorial representation of living beings , albeit with some variation in practice outside a religious context . Some contemporary interpretations of Islam , such as those followed by adherents of Wahhabism , are entirely <unk> and condemn pictorial representations of any kind . 
 = = = = <unk> Muhammad = = = = 
 In Muslim societies , insulting Muhammad is considered one of the gravest of all crimes . According to Ana Belen <unk> of the University of Granada , " The Islamic <unk> 'a has traditionally considered blasphemy punishable by death , although modern Muslim thinkers such as Mohammad Hashim Kamali maintain that , given that the Quran does not prescribe a punishment , determining a penalty is left to the judicial authorities of the day . " In the Quran itself , " God often instructs Muhammad to be patient to those who insult him and , according to historical records , no action was taken against them during his years in Mecca . " Many Muslims said their anti @-@ cartoon stance is against insulting pictures and not so much as against pictures in general . According to the BBC , " It is the satirical intent of the cartoonists and the association of the Prophet with terrorism , that is so offensive to the vast majority of Muslims . " This link played into a widespread perception among Muslims across the world that many in the West are hostile towards Islam and Muslims . 
 = = = Political issues = = = 
 The cartoon controversy became one of the highest profile world events in 2006 . It attracted a great deal of coverage and commentary , mostly focusing on the situation of Muslims living in the West , the relationship between the Western world and Islamic world , and issues surrounding freedom of speech , secularism , and self @-@ censorship . 
 = = = = Situation of Muslim minority in Denmark = = = = 
 Approximately 350 @,@ 000 non @-@ Western immigrants lived in Denmark in 2006 , representing about 7 % of the country 's population . According to figures reported by the BBC , about 270 @,@ 000 of these were Muslim ( ca . 5 % of the population ) . In the 1970s Muslims arrived from Turkey , Pakistan , Morocco and Yugoslavia to work . In the 1980s and 90s most Muslim arrivals were refugees and asylum seekers from Iran , Iraq , Somalia and Bosnia . Muslims are the second @-@ largest religious group in Denmark behind Lutherans . 
 Peter Hervik said that the cartoon controversy must be seen in the context of an increasingly politicised media environment in Denmark since the 1990s , increasingly negative coverage of Islam and the Muslim minority in Denmark , anti @-@ Muslim rhetoric from the governing political parties , and government policies such as restrictions on immigration and the abolishment of the Board for Ethnic Equality in 2002 . Hervik said these themes are often ignored in international coverage of the issue and that they render conclusions that Jyllands @-@ Posten and the Danish government were innocent victims in a dispute over freedom of speech inaccurate . Against this background , Danish Muslims were particularly offended by the cartoons because they reinforced the idea that Danes stigmatize all Muslims as terrorists and do not respect their religious beliefs . 
 Heiko Henkel of British academic journal Radical Philosophy wrote : 
 the solicitation and publication of the <unk> <unk> was part of a long and carefully orchestrated campaign by the conservative Jyllands @-@ Posten ( also known in Denmark as Jyllands @-@ <unk> – the plague from Jutland ) , in which it backed the centre @-@ right Venstre party of Prime Minister Fogh Rasmussen in its successful bid for power in 2001 . Central to <unk> campaign , aside from its neoliberal economic agenda , was the promise to tackle the problem of foreigners who refused to ' integrate ' into Danish society . 
 Kiku Day , writing in the Guardian said , " We were a liberal and tolerant people until the 1990s , when we suddenly awoke to find that for the first time in our history we had a significant minority group living among us . Confronted with the terrifying novelty of being a multicultural country , Denmark took a step not merely to the right but to the far right . " Professor Anders Linde @-@ Laursen wrote that while the controversy " should be understood as an expression of a growing Islamophobic tendency in Danish society , " this is just latest manifestation of a long @-@ standing , and particularly deep conflict between traditionalists and agents of modernity in Denmark , and should not be seen as a major departure for Danish society . 
 Danish Muslim politician Naser Khader said , " Muslims are no more discriminated against in Denmark than they are elsewhere in Europe ... Generally , Danes give you a fair shake . They accept Muslims if you declare that you are loyal to this society , to democracy . If you say that you are one of them , they will accept you . If you have reservations , they will worry . " His concern has centred on the power of " Islamism " or fundamentalist political Islam in Denmark 's Muslim community which he has tried to fight , especially in the wake of the controversy by forming an association of democratic , moderate Muslims . 
 = = = = Relationship between the West and Muslims = = = = 
 The incident occurred at a time of unusually strained relations between the Muslim world and the West . This was a result of decades of Muslim immigration to Europe , recent political struggles , violent incidents such as September 11 and a string of Islamist terrorist attacks and Western interventions in Muslim countries . The cartoons were used as a tool by different political interests in a wide variety of local and international situations . Some debate surrounded the relationship between Islamic minorities and their broader societies , and the legal and moral limits that the press should observe when commenting on that minority or any religious minority group . 
 = = = = = Cartoons as a political tool in the West = = = = = 
 Some commentators see the publications of the cartoons as part of a deliberate effort to show Muslims and Islam in a bad light , thus influencing public opinion in the West in aid of various political projects . Journalist Andrew Mueller wrote , " I am concerned that the ridiculous , disproportionate reaction to some unfunny sketches in an obscure Scandinavian newspaper may confirm that ... Islam and the West are fundamentally irreconcilable " . Different groups used the cartoon for different political purposes ; Heiko Henkel wrote : 
 the critique of ' Muslim fundamentalism ' has become a cornerstone in the definition of European identities . As well as replacing anti @-@ communism as the rallying point for a broad ' democratic consensus ' ( and , in this shift , remaking this consensus ) , the critique of Islamic fundamentalism has also become a conduit for imagining Europe as a moral community beyond the nation . It has emerged as a banner under which the most diverse sectors of society can unite in the name of ' European ' values . 
 = = = = = Use by Islamists and Middle @-@ Eastern governments = = = = = 
 Some commentators believed that the controversy was used by Islamists competing for influence both in Europe and the Islamic world . Jytte Klausen wrote that the Muslim reaction to the cartoons was not a spontaneous , emotional reaction arising out of the clash of Western and Islamic civilisations . " Rather it was orchestrated , first by those with vested interests in elections in Denmark and Egypt , and later by Islamic extremists seeking to destabilise governments in Pakistan , Lebanon , Libya , and Nigeria . " Other regimes in the Middle East have been accused of taking advantage of the controversy and adding to it to demonstrate their Islamic credentials , distracting from their domestic situations by setting up an external enemy , and according The Wall Street Journal , " [ using ] the cartoons ... as a way of showing that the expansion of freedom and democracy in their countries would lead inevitably to the denigration of Islam . " 
 Among others , Iran 's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei blamed a Zionist conspiracy for the row over the cartoons . Palestinian Christian diplomat Afif <unk> , then the Palestine Liberation Organization 's envoy to Washington , alleged the Likud party concocted the distribution of Muhammad caricatures worldwide in a bid to create a clash between the West and the Muslim world . 
 = = = = = Racism and ignorance = = = = = 
 One controversy that arose around the cartoons was the question of whether they were racist . The United Nations Commission on Human Rights ( <unk> ) Special Rapporteur " on contemporary forms of racism , racial discrimination , xenophobia and related intolerance " , <unk> <unk> , saw xenophobia and racism in Europe as the root of the controversy , and partly criticised the government of Denmark for inaction after the publication of the cartoons . 
 However , Aurel Sari has since said that the special rapporteur 's interpretation was wrong and that " neither the decision to commission images depicting the Prophet in defiance of Islamic tradition , nor the actual content of the individual cartoons can be regarded as racist within the meaning of the relevant international human rights instruments " although " some of the more controversial pictures may nevertheless be judged ' gratuitously offensive ' to the religious beliefs of Muslims in accordance with the applicable case @-@ law of the European Court of Human Rights . " This means that the Danish authorities probably could have prohibited the drawings ' dissemination if they had chosen to . Randall Hansen said that the cartoons were clearly anti @-@ Islamic , but that this should not be confused with racism because a religion is a system of ideas not an inherent identity . Tariq <unk> said that the cartoons were essentially racist because Muslims are in practice treated as a group based on their religion , and that the cartoons were intended to represent all of Islam and all Muslims in a negative way , not just Muhammad . Erik <unk> said that while the cartoons did <unk> Islam in a potentially racist way , they ranged from offensive to pro @-@ Muslim so labelling them as a group was problematic . The Economist said Muslims were not targeted in a discriminatory way , since unflattering cartoons about other religions or their leaders are frequently printed . Noam Chomsky posited that the cartoons were inspired by a spirit of " ordinary racism " and that they must be seen in the context of Jyllands @-@ Posten agenda of incitement against immigrants in Denmark . 
 On 26 February 2006 , the cartoonist Kurt Westergaard who drew the " bomb in turban " cartoon — the most controversial of the 12 — said : 
 There are interpretations of [ the drawing ] that are incorrect . The general impression among Muslims is that it is about Islam as a whole . It is not . It is about certain fundamentalist aspects , that of course are not shared by everyone . But the fuel for the terrorists ' acts stem from interpretations of Islam ... if parts of a religion develop in a totalitarian and aggressive direction , then I think you have to protest . We did so under the other ' isms ' . 
 Many Muslims saw the cartoons as a sign of lack of education about Islam in Denmark and in the West . Egyptian preacher and television star Amr Khaled urged his followers to take action to remedy supposed Western ignorance , saying , " It is our duty to the prophet of God to make his message known ... Do not say that this is the task of the ulema ( religious scholars ) — it is the task of all of us . " Ana <unk> said , " the targeting of a religious symbol like Muhammad , the only prophet that Muslims do not share with Jews and Christians , was perceived as the last in a long list of humiliations and assaults : it is probably not a coincidence that the more violent demonstrations were held in countries like Syria , Iran and Libya , whose relations with the West are tense . " Yusuf al @-@ Qaradawi , a prominent Islamic theologian , called for a day of anger from Muslims in response to the cartoons . He supported calls for a UN resolution that " categorically prohibits affronts to prophets — to the prophets of the Lord and His messengers , to His holy books , and to the religious holy places " . He also castigated governments around the world for inaction on the issue , saying , " Your silence over such crimes , which offend the Prophet of Islam and insult his great nation , is what begets violence , generates terrorism , and makes the terrorists say : Our governments are doing nothing , and we must avenge our Prophet ourselves . This is what creates terrorism and begets violence . " 
 = = = = = Double standards = = = = = 
 Ehsan <unk> of Asia Times accused some European countries of double standards in adopting laws that outlaw Holocaust denial but still defended the concept of freedom of speech in this case . Anti @-@ holocaust or genocide denial laws are in place in Austria , Germany , Belgium , the Czech Republic , France , Israel , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Poland , Portugal , and Romania in 2005 . However , Denmark has no such laws and there was — and still is — no EU @-@ wide law against holocaust denial . Randall Hansen said that laws against holocaust denial were not directly comparable with restrictions on social satire , so could not be considered a double standard unless one believed in an absolute right to freedom of speech , and that those who do would doubtless oppose holocaust denial laws . Columnist Charles Krauthammer wrote that there was a double standard in many protesters ' demands for religious sensitivity in this case , but not in others . He asked , " Have any of these ' moderates ' ever protested the grotesque caricatures of Christians and , most especially , Jews that are broadcast throughout the Middle East on a daily basis ? " 
 = = = = = Relationship between the Liberal West and Islam = = = = = 
 Francis Fukuyama of online magazine Slate wrote that " while beginning with a commendable European desire to assert basic liberal values , " the controversy was an alarming sign of the degree of cultural conflict between Muslim immigrant communities in Europe and their broader populations , and advocated a measured and prudent response to the situation . Helle <unk> wrote in Danish Foreign Policy Yearbook 2007 that most of the debate around the cartoon controversy was over @-@ simplified as a simple matter of free speech against religion . She said that the actual dispute was more nuanced , focusing on the tone of the debate and broader context of Western @-@ Islamic relations . 
 Christopher Hitchens wrote in Slate that official reaction in the West — particularly the United States — was too lenient toward the protesters and Muslim community in Denmark , and insufficiently supportive of Denmark and the right to free speech . He said , " nobody in authority can be found to state the obvious and the necessary — that we stand with the Danes against this defamation and blackmail and sabotage . Instead , all compassion and concern is apparently to be expended upon those who lit the powder trail , and who yell and scream for joy as the embassies of democracies are put to the torch in the capital cities of miserable , fly @-@ blown dictatorships . Let 's be sure we haven 't hurt the vandals ' feelings . " William Kristol also wrote that the response of Western leaders , with the exception of the Danish Prime Minister , was too weak and that the issue was used as an excuse by " those who are threatened by our effort to help liberalize and civilize the Middle East " to fight back against the " assault " on radical Islamists and Middle Eastern dictatorships . 
 Flemming Rose said he did not expect a violent reaction , and talked about what the incident implies about the relationship between the West and the Muslim world . He said , 
 I spoke to [ historian of Islam ] Bernard Lewis about this , and he said that the big difference between our case and the Rushdie affair is that Rushdie is perceived as an apostate by the Muslims while , in our case , Muslims were insisting on applying Islamic law to what non @-@ Muslims are doing in non ‑ Muslim countries . In that sense , he said it is a kind of unique case that might indicate that Europe is perceived as some kind of intermediate state between the Muslim world and the non @-@ Muslim world . 
 = = = = Freedom of speech , political correctness and self @-@ censorship = = = = 
 One of the principal lines of controversy surrounding the cartoons concerned the limits of free speech , how much it should be legally or ethically constrained and whether the cartoons were an appropriate expression for a newspaper to print . The cartoons were first printed in response to the perception of some journalists at the newspaper that self @-@ censorship was becoming a problem ; the ensuing reaction did nothing to dispel that idea . Rose said : 
 When I wrote the accompanying text to the publication of the cartoons , I said that this act was about self @-@ censorship , not free speech . Free speech is on the books ; we have the law , and nobody as yet has thought of rewriting it . This changed when the death threats were issued ; it became an issue of the Sharia trumping the fundamental right of free speech . " 
 Rose also highlighted what he believed to be a difference between political correctness and self @-@ censorship — which he considered more dangerous . He said : 
 There is a very important distinction to be made here between what you perceive as good behavior and a fear keeping you from doing things that you want to do ... A good example of this was the illustrator who refused to illustrate a children 's book about the life of Mohammed . He is on the record in two interviews saying that he insisted on anonymity because he was afraid . 
 Christopher Hitchens wrote that it is important to affirm " the right to criticize not merely Islam but religion in general " . He criticised media outlets which did not print the cartoons while covering the story . Ralf <unk> wrote that the violent reaction to the cartoons constituted a sort of counter @-@ enlightenment which must be defended against . Sonia <unk> wrote in Die Tageszeitung , " I hereby refuse to feel badly for the chronically insulted . I refuse to argue politely why freedom of expression , reason and humour should be respected " . She said that those things are part of a healthy society and that deeply held feelings or beliefs should not be exempt from commentary , and that those offended had the option of ignoring them . 
 Ashwani K. <unk> of Wilfrid Laurier University wrote that in a liberal democracy freedom of speech is not absolute , and that reasonable limits are put on it such as libel , defamation and hate speech laws in almost every society to protect individuals from " devastating and direct harm " . He said that the cartoons " create a social environment of conflict and intimidation for a community that already feels that its way of life is threatened . I do not see how such tactics incorporate people into the wider public and democratic sphere , as Rose argues . They have the opposite effect : the marginalised feel further marginalised and powerless . " He said that it is reasonable to consider two of the cartoons as hate speech , which directly undermine a group of people ( Muslims ) by forming part of an established discourse linking all Muslims with terrorism and barbarity . 
 In France , satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo was taken to court for publishing the cartoons ; it was acquitted of charges that it incited hatred . In Canada a human rights commission investigated The Western Standard , a magazine which published the cartoons , but found insufficient grounds to proceed with a human rights tribunal ( which does not imply criminal charges , but is a quasi @-@ judicial , mandatory process ) against the publication . These government investigations of journalists catalysed debate about the role of government in censoring or prosecuting expressions they deemed potentially hateful . Critics said the cartoon controversy was a sign that attempts at judicial codification of such concepts as respect , tolerance and offence have backfired on the West . Michael Neumann wrote , " Western piety has left the West without a leg to stand on in this dispute . It is no good trumpeting rights of free expression , because these rights are now supposed to have nebulous but severe limitations . " Tim Cavanaugh wrote that the incident revealed the danger of hate speech laws , writing , " The issue will almost certainly lead to a revisiting of the lamentable laws against ' hate speech ' in Europe , and with any luck to a debate on whether these laws are more likely to destroy public harmony than encourage it . " 
 = = Comparable incidents = = 
 The following incidents are often compared to the cartoon controversy : 
 The Satanic Verses controversy ( novel , 1988 , global ) 
 The Calcutta Quran Petition ( a controversy about a petition to ban the Quran , 1985 , India ) 
 Mohammad , Messenger of God ( film , 1977 , United States , Libya , UK and Lebanon ) 
 Capitalist Piglet ( cartoon , published in response to the Jyllands @-@ Posten incident , generating national attention , 2006 , Canada ) 
 Gregorius <unk> ( cartoons , 2008 , Netherlands ) 
 Innocence of Muslims ( film , 2012 , United States ) 
 Charlie Hebdo ( cartoon controversies , 2011 and 2012 ; terror attack 2015 ) 
 Fitna , 2008 Dutch film about Islam , which led to worldwide Muslim protests and a hate speech trial 
 <unk> , ( 2004 play , United Kingdom ) 
 Submission ( film , 2004 , the Netherlands ) 
 Lars Vilks Muhammad drawings controversy 
 2015 Copenhagen shootings 
 = = = Inline citations = = = 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Protesters Burn European Embassies , Consulates , Churches in Damascus and Beirut 4 – 5 February 2006 
 BBC HARDtalk : Ahmad Abu Laban and Fleming Rose , 8 February 2006 
 Bloody Cartoons A documentary by Carsten Kjær from October 2007 on the cartoon affair , including many interviews with the major protagonists . 
 = = = Images = = = 
 The 12 cartoons in full size at Newspaper Index ( Internet Archive ) 
 Picture series – Burning of the Danish embassy in Syria 
 Copy of Akkari @-@ Laban dossier 
 = David Archuleta = 
 David James Archuleta ( born December 28 , 1990 ) is an American singer @-@ songwriter , musician , and actor . At ten years old , he won the children 's division of the Utah Talent Competition leading to other television singing appearances . When he was twelve years old , Archuleta became the Junior Vocal Champion on Star Search 2 . In 2007 , at sixteen years old , he became one of the youngest contestants on the seventh season of American Idol . In May 2008 he finished as the runner @-@ up , receiving 44 percent of over 97 million votes . 
 In August 2008 Archuleta released " Crush " , the first single from his self @-@ titled debut album . The album , released three months later , debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart ; it has sold over 750 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. , and over 900 @,@ 000 worldwide . In October 2010 he released a third album , The Other Side of Down , featuring lead single " Something ' Bout Love " . On March 28 , 2012 , Archuleta left on a two @-@ year hiatus to be a missionary of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints in Chile , but stated that he will continue his music career after that . As of February 2012 , Archuleta has sold 1 @,@ 108 @,@ 000 albums and 3 @,@ 327 @,@ 000 tracks in the United States . 
 In March 2012 , Archuleta released his fourth album , Forevermore , exclusively in the Philippines . This was his first Original Pilipino Music album , composed of several covers of Filipino songs . The album was certified gold in the Philippines ( 10 @,@ 000 units ) as of June 2012 . Archuleta 's fifth album , Begin , was released on August 7 , 2012 , in the United States . His sixth album , No Matter How Far , was released on March 26 , 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Archuleta was born on December 28 , 1990 in Miami , Florida , to Lupe Marie ( née Mayorga ) , a salsa singer and dancer , and Jeff Archuleta , a jazz musician . His mother is from Honduras and his father is of Spanish – Basque , Danish , Irish , German , and Iroquois descent . He speaks fluent Spanish . Archuleta has four siblings . His family moved to the Salt Lake City suburb of Sandy , Utah , when he was six years old . He now lives in Murray where he attended Murray High School . Archuleta earned his Eagle Scout award in 2010 of the Boy Scouts of America . When Archuleta , a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , was 21 , he volunteered for two years as a full @-@ time missionary in Santiago , Chile . Archuleta is also a graduate of Barbizon Modeling and Acting School in Salt Lake City . 
 Archuleta started singing at the age of six , inspired by a Les Misérables video . " That musical is what started all of this , " he said . He started performing publicly at age ten when he participated in the Utah Talent Competition , singing " I Will Always Love You " by Dolly Parton ; he won the Child Division . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 2003 – 06 : Star Search and musical beginnings = = = 
 In 2003 , when he was twelve years old , Archuleta sang on several episodes of the television show Star Search . He ended up as the Junior Vocal Champion on Star Search 2 , losing the Junior Grand Champion title to Tiffany Evans . On one episode , he sang against then @-@ 11 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Lushington , who became a " top 20 " semi @-@ finalist on American Idol alongside Archuleta . Around the second year of being on Star Search he started focusing on the lyrics , " I didn 't even pay attention to the lyrics when I was 12 , 13 " . 
 Archuleta 's competing on Star Search was preceded by an appearance on The Jenny Jones Show , meeting the finalists from American Idol 's first season , for whom he performed a spontaneous a cappella rendition of " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " from Dreamgirls . He received praise from Season 1 winner Kelly Clarkson , and the episode led to appearances on CBS 's The Early Show . The year after Star Search , he found out he had partial vocal paralysis but declined risky surgery and has said he feels he is almost fully recovered . He limited his singing for specific occasions like Stadium of Fire , the Independence Day celebration at Brigham Young University Stadium . 
 Archuleta made initial attempts at songwriting and arranging music after his Star Search experience and has written at least three songs . His first singles in 2002 written by his father and Sunny Hilden " Dream Sky High " and a song he had written by Yani <unk> " Don 't Tell Me " . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 : American Idol and David Archuleta = = = 
 Archuleta received his ticket to the Hollywood auditions at the San Diego tryouts – held at Qualcomm Stadium at the end of July 2007 – with a performance of John Mayer 's " Waiting on the World to Change " with judge Randy Jackson spontaneously joining in to sing the background " waiting " in the song . He was sixteen during the Hollywood auditions and attended school while a part of American Idol 's seventh season . A parent / guardian was required to be there because he was a minor . Archuleta also took advantage of the decision to allow contestants to play musical instruments when he accompanied himself on piano for his performances of " Crazy " , " Another Day in Paradise " , and " Angels " . 
 During the 1970s themed week Archuleta sang the John Lennon song " Imagine " , omitting the earlier verses in favor of the last one . Los Angeles Times columnist Ann Powers speculated that he wanted to avoid singing " no religion too " because of his faith . " As a Mormon , he 's unlikely to espouse the song 's agnostic ideal " , she wrote . However , he did sing the entire song on Good Things Utah when he was thirteen . When asked by judge Randy Jackson why he didn 't sing the first verse , Archuleta said the third verse was his favorite because it has " a great message . " 
 After his performance of " We Can Work It Out " , which judge Simon Cowell called " a mess " , Entertainment Tonight reported that Archuleta was feeling pressure from his father , Jeff Archuleta , who " reportedly yelled at " his son after a recording session the previous night . Jeff Archuleta , in an interview with Us Weekly , denied the claim . A May 2008 Associated Press article reported that Jeff Archuleta had his son add a lyric from the Sean Kingston song " Beautiful Girls " into an interpretation of " Stand by Me " ( from which " Beautiful Girls " samples its bass line ) , increasing the costs for licensing , and that this had resulted in Jeff Archuleta being banned from American Idol backstage rehearsals . Archuleta defended his father , calling him " a great guy " who keeps him grounded . 
 During the Top 7 results show , the contestants were split into two groups . In one group was <unk> Mercado , Brooke White , and Kristy Lee Cook . In the other group was David Cook , Carly Smithson , and Jason Castro . Archuleta was the only one not sorted into a group . He was declared safe after the groups were formed , then was asked to choose the group he thought was safe . He refused , and sat down on the floor of the stage , much as Melinda Doolittle had done the previous season . 
 In the finale he sang " Don 't Let the Sun Go Down on Me " , " In This Moment " and " Imagine " . Judge Simon Cowell declared that Archuleta won the evening and even David Cook , who ultimately won , thought Archuleta would win : " I have to concede it , the kid came out all three songs and nailed it , " said Cook . In the final tally , Archuleta received 44 percent of the votes . During the finale show , identical commercials featuring Archuleta and fellow finalist Cook mimicked the Tom Cruise scene from Risky Business where he dances in his underwear playing an air guitar ; they were promoting the game franchise Guitar Hero . 
 Archuleta 's first appearances on music ranking charts were with the three songs he performed in the American Idol finale ; " Don 't Let the Sun Go Down on Me " , " In This Moment " , and " Imagine " , debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart the week of June 7 , 2008 . " Imagine " entered at number 36 ( giving Archuleta his first top forty hit ) , " Don 't Let the Sun Go Down on Me " at number 58 , and " In This Moment " entered at number 60 . That same week he had three songs on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart as well , where his versions of " Longer " , " Think of Me " , and " Angels " debuted at number 15 , number 19 , and number 24 respectively . In July 2008 So You Think You Can Dance , a dance competition reality show , Archuleta 's cover of " Imagine " by John Lennon was the featured music for contestants Katee Shean and William Wingfield with their pas de deux performance . 
 Archuleta signed with Jive Records in June 2008 . His self @-@ titled album , David Archuleta , was released in November 2008 . His first single , " Crush " , was released in August 2008 on Z100 , a New York radio station . On August 12 " Crush " became available on iTunes . It debuted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 , beaten only by Rihanna 's " Disturbia " . It was the best chart debut in more than 18 months . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the track sold 166 @,@ 000 downloads in the first week in the United States . It has sold 1 @.@ 92 million digital copies in the US . 
 Along with American Idol winner David Cook , Archuleta placed second on Forbes ' list of " Breakout Stars of 2008 " . The two co @-@ presented an award at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards in August 2008 . Archuleta also received the Teen Choice Award surfboard for " Most Fanatic Fans " . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Christmas from the Heart , The Other Side of Down , Asian Tour and My Kind of Christmas Tour = = = 
 Since the release of his debut album , Archuleta has released three new songs : " Let 's Talk About Love ( The Build @-@ A @-@ Bear theme song ) " , " Save the Day ( released only in Japan as a bonus track in his album ) " , and " Zero Gravity " . In February , it was announced that Archuleta would be touring the United Kingdom , supporting British band McFly on their " Up Close ... And This Time It 's Personal " tour . The tour began on April 21 , 2009 , and continued until May . Archuleta became the opening act for Demi Lovato 's tour which began June 21 , 2009 . 
 On April 22 , 2009 , Archuleta returned to the American Idol stage in its eighth season and performed the third single from his debut album , " Touch My Hand " . On April 30 , 2009 , he made his first UK television appearance , on The Paul O 'Grady Show , performing " Crush " and chatting about his album , which was released there in May . In May , Archuleta and fellow American Idol David Cook visited the Philippines . Two days later he made live appearances on two of GMA @-@ 7 's shows , Sis and Eat Bulaga ! . He also confirmed that month that he was working on two new albums , his sophomore pop album and a Christmas album . In August 2009 , Archuleta won three Teen Choice Awards for Breakout Artist , Love Song , and the Music Tour category with Demi Lovato . In September he won the Year in Music – Rising Male Star award at the ALMA Awards and performed a cover of the standard " Contigo en la Distancia " . 
 Archuleta 's acting debut was when he appeared as himself on Nickelodeon 's show iCarly , in " <unk> the Vote " . The episode aired February 7 , 2009 . He made a special guest appearance in Season 3 of the Disney Channel show Hannah Montana in the episode " <unk> Mia " as himself , and he sang a duet ( " I Wanna Know You " ) with Miley Cyrus , who played the title character . The song was featured on the soundtrack Hannah Montana 3 and also appeared later on the compilation Best of Hannah Montana . 
 On May 16 , 2009 , Archuleta and David Cook performed in the Mall of Asia : Concert Grounds for their Back @-@ to @-@ Back Concert in Manila , Philippines . On June 1 , 2010 , Archuleta released Chords of Strength : A Memoir of Soul , Song , and the Power of Perseverance , a memoir which refers to " the partial vocal paralysis he suffered in 2004 but has now fully recovered from " . He went on a book signing tour beginning in Ridgewood , New Jersey . The book was a bestseller . 
 Archuleta came back to the American Idol stage on April 7 , 2010 , on the show 's ninth season and performed John Lennon 's " Imagine " , which David had performed previously in the Top 20 Week when he was a contestant on the show . After his performance , he mentioned that he was working on his third studio album . Archuleta sang " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " and " Stand by Me " at the 30th anniversary of the annual A Capitol Fourth concert in Washington , D.C. on the Fourth of July . The show was aired on PBS at 8pm EST live and tape delay PT . 
 Archuleta sang live at the Tejano Music Awards , covering Selena 's songs , Como La Flor and No Me Queda Más at the event as a tribute on July 11 , 2010 . In an interview with AOL 's Something <unk> , Archuleta revealed that the release of his next album was planned for Fall 2010 ( he did mention a late September release , but then went back to the Fall ) . On June 24 , 2010 , Jive Records announced that his new single would be released on <unk> on July 13 , and iTunes on July 20 . However , on June 30 , 2010 , the full version of " Something ' Bout Love " became available to play on his website . His album The Other Side of Down was released on October 5 , 2010 . 
 On October 7 , 2010 , it was announced that David Archuleta would be the guest star at the annual Christmas concert of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir . Archuleta sang in performances on December 16 – 19 . On September 6 , 2011 , Glad Christmas Tidings , a concert CD and DVD of the choir and Archuleta 's performance , was released . 
 On February 18 , 2011 , it was announced by Jive Records that David Archuleta had been released from his contract with them . It was also announced on February 17 , 2011 , that Archuleta left his management Wright Entertainment Group . Archuleta intends to spend time working on writing original material . On July 2 , 2011 , Archuleta joined Brad Paisley to perform at the Stadium of Fire , where he performed the national anthem in addition to his five @-@ song set . From July 16 to 26 , 2011 , Archuleta toured Asia , performing in Indonesia , Philippines , Vietnam ( Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh ) , and Malaysia . 
 At the conclusion of the December 19 , 2011 , show of the My Kind of Christmas Tour , Archuleta announced his intention to serve as a missionary for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints for two years . He stated that he would return to music upon the completion of his mission . 
 = = = 2012 @-@ 2014 : Nandito Ako , missionary work , Forevermore , Begin , No Matter How Far and Social Media Break = = = 
 In early 2012 , Archuleta signed a contract with TV5 to shoot a prime @-@ time mini series in the Philippines titled Nandito Ako ( Here I Am ) , which was broadcast from February to March 2012 . An Original Pilipino Music album was released in March 26 , 2012 , in the Philippines , titled Forevermore . This album contains covers of classic Filipino songs , including " Nandito Ako " by <unk> <unk> , " Forevermore " by Side A , and South Border 's " Rainbow " . 
 As announced at the end of 2011 , Archuleta would serve a two @-@ year mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . The singer , who was reportedly assigned to Chile , entered the Provo , Utah , Missionary Training Center on March 28 , 2012 . On August 7 , 2012 , a pre @-@ recorded album titled Begin was released in the United States . The album consists of cover songs as well as a new original track titled " Broken " . On February 12 , 2013 , a new song called " Don 't Run Away " , which had leaked online back in October 2012 , was released on iTunes as the lead single from Archuleta 's second release while serving on his mission . The album titled No Matter How Far , which consists of tracks previously only available in Asia and two newly released original songs , was released on March 26 , 2013 . Archuleta confirmed on March 24 , 2014 , that his mission is now completed and he is back home in Utah . 
 Archuleta embarked on a Military Tribute Tour . 
 = = = 2015 @-@ present : Meet the Mormons = = = 
 Archuleta has been reportedly shooting a music video in Costa Rica for an untitled track , following a tweet from his manager , Kari <unk> , attached with a picture that shows sets for shooting concluded with hashtag # <unk> , which fans have been tweeting on his absence for 2 years . On September 25 , photos surfaced online from the set of the shoot for the music video , the title of which remains unrevealed . The song and its music video were to debut on February 12 – 15 , 2015 , to perform at <unk> 2015 with comedy sketch group Studio C. On September 28 , he released a new single as a free download titled " Glorious " . The song was used in the motion picture Meet the Mormons . 
 Archuleta performed on the fifteenth season finale of American Idol in April 2016 . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Along with Do Something and the Dunkin ' Brands Community Foundation , Archuleta is involved with helping willing teenagers make a difference in others ' lives with disaster relief . He was also one of several teen celebrities taking part in <unk> 's Teens for Jeans charity initiative , which donates denim to homeless teenagers nationwide . In January 2010 , Haiti was hit with a major earthquake . On January 22 , 2010 , Archuleta joined other celebrities for a 2 @-@ hour fundraising telethon , where he answered phones and even stayed longer afterward to keep answering the phones . 
 Archuleta partnered with ChildFund International for his My Kind of Christmas Tour in an effort to increase awareness and recruit new sponsors for children in need worldwide . Archuleta also surprised some of ChildFund 's children in their Philippines program , when he sang " Bridge Over Troubled Water , " and then met with the children in small groups . He has also been one of the most consistent artist supporters of Invisible Children , rallying fans to donate to protection initiatives in Central Africa , and performing at events held by the organization . 
 In January 2011 , Archuleta travelled to Chennai , India , with Rising Star Outreach , a non @-@ profit charity giving children from leper colonies a first @-@ class education and a chance at a future in India . 
 Archuleta was one of the many Latino singers who participated in Somos El Mundo , the Spanish version of " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " . The song and video premiered on the Cristina Show in March 2010 ; funds raised benefited Haiti relief . 
 = = Musical influences = = 
 Archuleta 's mother is from Honduras , and much of the music he listened to as a child was Latin @-@ influenced , including watching his mom sing at events with her sisters . She also " was big on dancing " according to Archuleta , and would " make " him dance to traditional music with his older sister . He also listened to jazz music , he said , from his father 's collection as well as gospel , pop , rock and " soulful music . " In a later interview , he revealed that his father was a jazz musician . Archuleta also said he enjoys Broadway musicals . 
 On his American Idol " Fast Facts " page , Archuleta cited his musical influences as Natalie Cole , Stevie Wonder , Kirk Franklin and Bryan Adams . Like Elliott Yamin and another singer he admires , John Mayer , Archuleta tries to infuse his pop selections with a soulful vibe . In a Seventeen interview , he cited Sara Bareilles as a clever singer @-@ songwriter whom he looks up to . 
 = = Discography = = 
 David Archuleta ( 2008 ) 
 Christmas from the Heart ( 2009 ) 
 The Other Side of Down ( 2010 ) 
 Forevermore ( 2012 ) 
 Begin ( 2012 ) 
 No Matter How Far ( 2013 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 As main act 
 American Idols LIVE ! Tour 2008 ( 2008 ) 
 David Archuleta Live In Concert ( 2009 ) 
 Christmas from the Heart Tour ( 2009 ) 
 The Other Side of Down Asian Tour ( 2011 ) 
 My Kind of Christmas Tour ( 2011 ) 
 As supporting act 
 McFly Up Close and This Time It 's Personal Tour ( 2009 ) 
 Demi Lovato Summer Tour 2009 ( 2009 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = 1860 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 During the 1860 Atlantic hurricane season , three severe hurricanes struck Louisiana and the Gulf Coast of the United States within a period of seven weeks . The season effectively began on August 8 with the formation of a tropical cyclone in the eastern Gulf of Mexico , and produced seven known tropical storms and hurricanes until the dissipation of the last known system on October 24 . Six of the seven storms were strong enough to be considered hurricanes on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , of which four attained Category 2 status and one attained Category 3 major hurricane strength . The first hurricane was the strongest in both winds and pressure , with peak winds of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 950 millibars ( 28 inHg ) . Until contemporary reanalysis discovered four previously unknown tropical cyclones that did not affect land , only three hurricanes were known to have existed ; all three made landfall in Louisiana , causing severe damage . 
 The first two hurricanes to strike the Gulf Coast — in August and September , respectively — caused significant inundation of low @-@ lying and coastal communities , inflicting severe damage and killing dozens of people . In some cases , flood waters were more than 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep , and the center of destruction shifted slightly with each storm . Sugar cane crops were destroyed by these two systems as well as the succeeding storm in early October . Property and infrastructure suffered with all three events . With the third storm that made landfall , extreme winds blasted the city of New Orleans and surrounding areas . All other storms remained away from land with no effects except on shipping . 
 = = Methodology = = 
 Prior to the advent of modern tropical cyclone tracking technology , notably satellite imagery , many hurricanes that did not affect land directly went unnoticed , and storms that did affect land were not recognized until they made landfall . As a result , information on older hurricane seasons was often incomplete . Modern @-@ day efforts have been made and are still ongoing to reconstruct the tracks of known hurricanes and to identify initially undetected storms . In many cases , the only evidence that a hurricane existed was reports from ships in its path . However , judging by the direction of winds experienced by ships , and their location in relation to the storm , it is possible to roughly pinpoint the storm 's center of circulation for a given point in time . This is the manner in which four of the seven known storms in the 1860 season were identified by hurricane expert José Fernández Partagás 's reanalysis of hurricane seasons between 1851 and 1910 . Partagás also extended the known tracks of three other hurricanes previously identified by scholars . The information Partagás and his colleague uncovered was largely adopted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's Atlantic hurricane reanalysis in their updates to the Atlantic hurricane database ( HURDAT ) , with some slight adjustments . HURDAT is the official source for such hurricane data as track and intensity , although due to a sparsity of available records at the time the storms existed , listings on some storms are incomplete . 
 Although extrapolated peak maximum sustained winds based on whatever reports are available exist for every storm in 1860 , estimated minimum central barometric air pressure listings are only present for the three storms that made landfall in the United States . As the three landfalling storms moved inland , information on their meteorological dissipation was limited . As a result , the intensity of these storms after landfall and until dissipation is based on an inland decay model developed in 1995 to predict the deterioration of inland hurricanes . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 The first known storm of the season — which would also become the strongest — is listed in the hurricane database as having formed on August 8 in the eastern Gulf of Mexico , just offshore the west coast of the Florida peninsula , although it is possible the hurricane was related to a heavy gale encountered by a ship on August 5 during its voyage from Havana , Cuba to New York City . The cyclone drifted southwest for three days , gradually intensifying to attain a strength corresponding to Category 3 major hurricane status on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Beginning on August 11 , the hurricane slowly curved to the north , then gained an easterly component to its movement , and was at its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) about midday . 
 Coming ashore at an " oblique " angle , the storm crossed the coast at modern Burrwood , Louisiana , and traversed the Mississippi River Delta . The storm made landfall in Mississippi between Biloxi and Pascagoula early on August 12 . The hurricane quickly weakened as it continued inland and turned toward the east , likely deteriorating below tropical storm status while over southern Georgia , although because the hurricane database does not utilize tropical depression status for storms before 1871 , it is listed as maintaining tropical storm intensity as it crossed the southeastern U.S. ; by August 14 , it had remerged into the western Atlantic Ocean . Ship reports from the vicinity of the system indicate it regained some strength once over open waters , although it only persisted a couple more days before it disappeared on records . 
 Storm conditions battered New Orleans , Louisiana , on August 11 , with winds of up to roughly 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and heavy rainfall . The hurricane wrought a great deal of damage throughout southeastern Louisiana . At least 35 to 40 people drowned when a low @-@ lying community at the eastern end of Lake Pontchartrain was inundated with flood waters up to a depth of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , a result of intense and persistent winds generating a significant storm surge . It was reported that in the town " there is hardly a house remaining " . A railroad wharf near the lake was largely destroyed , and another settlement called <unk> was flooded ; residents were rescued by boat . In Plaquemines Parish , where vast areas of land were left underwater , the hurricane was the most severe since 1812 . At least 20 additional people drowned , although it was suspected that since up to 200 fishermen along the Mississippi River would have had extreme difficulty finding shelter amid the rapidly rising waters , the death toll was likely substantially higher . The storm flattened sugarcane fields across the parish : " the knowing ones will say that two thousand hogshead of sugar less will be made here " , according to a post @-@ storm account . Monetary losses from the destruction totaled over $ 250 @,@ 000 . Rice and corn crops were also ruined , and 300 head of cattle drowned in the flood on Cat Island . 
 At La Balize ( now known as Pilottown ) , ominous weather conditions on the night of August 9 preceded the onset of gathering clouds and " a violent storm " , characterized by building seas and torrents of rain and wind such that water was driven under roof shingles , " leaving not a dry spot to lay our heads " . Sea water swamped the town overnight on August 10 , and it was not until around noon when the storm let up and waters receded with a shift in winds . Property damage was widespread and many trees were blown down . The hurricane beached several watercraft , destroyed wharves , and inflicted losses that " can hardly by estimated " , but were initially judged at up to $ 10 @,@ 000 . No lives were lost in Balize . Further down the storm 's track , Biloxi , Mississippi , experienced a gale beginning on the morning of August 11 and lasting until early the next morning . Tides ran 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above average at Biloxi , and in Mobile , Alabama , residents also found wind @-@ driven rain seeping " through cracks and crevices not known before to exist " in dwellings " always waterproof to ordinary showers " . Waters rose enough to cause minor inundations , but not nearly at the same severity as those that occurred in other areas . Heavy storm conditions extended as far east as Pensacola , Florida , where 3 @.@ 03 in ( 77 mm ) of rain fell , accompanied by frequent thunder and lightning . The overall death toll from the hurricane was at least 47 . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 Over a week after the dissipation of the first system , another tropical storm formed to the east of Florida on August 23 . The storm tracked generally northeastward , roughly paralleling the East Coast of the United States as it peaked with sustained winds of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) on August 25 . These winds would have made it a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Continuing in the same general direction , the hurricane began to weaken shortly after attaining peak intensity , and the last official data point for the storm places it east of New England on August 26 . The hurricane was undetected until modern @-@ day reanalysis reconstructed its path based on reports from ships in the area . On August 24 , the vessel Mary <unk> encountered the storm and sustained some damage . A day later , a heavy southeasterly gale left the vessel <unk> in a " sinking condition " ; her captain and crew were rescued by the crew of the Zurich . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The second storm discovered in contemporary reanalysis was identified based on meteorological reports from a single ship , the Ocean Spray , which experienced a northeast gale shifting to northwest on September 11 . Given the intensity of the winds , the cyclone is estimated to have been a Category 1 hurricane , although due to a nearly complete lack of information on the system , its track is unknown with the exception of a single set of coordinates well to the southeast of Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 A hurricane in the middle of September affected some of the same areas along the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico as the August hurricane . It was first detected on the evening of September 10 in the southeastern Gulf , although its track may be far off from the actual storms movement due to a lack of available information . Its first data point in the hurricane database lists it as possessing sustained winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , placing it at Category 2 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm followed a broad northward curve through the central Gulf of Mexico , making landfall along the Mississippi River Delta of Louisiana on the night of September 14 . It continued toward the north @-@ northeast , dissipating on September 16 . 
 Once again , Balize , Louisiana was directly in the hurricane 's path , and suffered heavily as a consequence . The storm lasted from the afternoon on Friday , September 14 to late Saturday morning . Local reports indicate heavy rain and large hail fell in association with the cyclone , and in Balize , nearly every structure was destroyed ; any buildings that withstood the initial winds were swept away by the ensuing inundation . Floodwaters killed ten people at one location alone in Plaquemines Parish . Residents of the hardest @-@ hit communities were forced to wade to safety , in some cases through water shoulder @-@ high . Northerly winds drove water from Lake Pontchartrain that had already been built up by northeasterly winds southward over small fishing and resort towns along the southern bank of the lake . Sheds , wharves , and bathhouses along that section of the lake were destroyed . Several people drowned in flood waters that covered lower Plaquemines Parish . The hurricane drove several ships , including the steamer Galveston , ashore . 
 An article published in The Times @-@ Picayune contrasted this hurricane with the cyclone of August , noting that the two storms were of similar intensity , and although the September system did not last as long in any one location , hydrology played a more significant role : " in August the swamps were nearly dry and the waters from the lake found a natural outlet ; whereas , yesterday , the swamp being full , the water rose in the streets of <unk> and covered the railroad track for some distance . " In New Orleans proper , heavy rain and gusty winds were reported , but no flooding was observed . The worst damage from the hurricane most likely occurred in Biloxi , where the coastline itself was altered by up to 20 to 30 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 1 m ) and the lighthouse was swept out to sea . A hotel collapsed amid the disaster , killing at least one person , and loose debris covered the town . At East Pascagoula , Mississippi , the sea rose well beyond that of any storm in around 40 years , and nearby a wharf was totally destroyed . Initial estimates placed total damage in the area at $ 40 @,@ 000 . The storm was just as severe in Mobile , Alabama , and the majority of the $ 1 million in losses there was from lost cotton stored on flooded wharves . At Pascagoula , water reportedly rose 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) in 20 minutes . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 The fifth known storm of the year was yet another cyclone first identified in post @-@ season reanalysis . Forming on September 18 well to the north of Puerto Rico , efforts made to piece together wind observations from ships reveal a track that curved toward the northwest , passing about midway between the U.S. East Coast and Bermuda before heading northeast . Based on available information , the cyclone is estimated to have remained at tropical storm intensity for its entire existence . It is last noted southeast of New England on September 21 . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 The third and final hurricane known to have existed prior to reanalysis formed in the south @-@ central Gulf of Mexico . Ludlum ( 1963 ) describes the storm along the Gulf Coast , but a reconstruction of its track further south , including its intensification , was made possible by ship reports . In particular , a schooner along the coast of the Yucatán Peninsula encountered stormy conditions around September 30 with southeasterly winds and was driven northward through the Gulf . The storm moved toward the north for a few days , reaching its peak with winds of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) early on October 2 . It likely made landfall on the Atchafalaya Basin around noon on October 2 before passing west of New Orleans , weakening to a tropical storm before moving into central Mississippi . Strong winds at New Orleans lasted more than 24 hours . 
 The New Orleans area was hit harder than in the two prior storms to strike the Gulf Coast ; the most densely populated areas were now located in the eastern semicircle of the storm , which is one of the most intense quadrants . Residents in Plaquemines Parish , Louisiana reported the storm to be the worst wind event they had ever experienced . Coinciding with the beginning of the annual season of sugar production , the storm destroyed vast fields of sugar cane south and southwest of New Orleans and flattened many sheds used to store farming equipment . Winds throughout the region of south @-@ central Louisiana inflicted " <unk> destruction " , causing major structural damage . It was reported to be nearly impossible to walk through the streets of the city at the height at the storm ; the winds came with over 5 in ( 130 mm ) of rain . Thirteen people died in the hurricane at New Orleans . A five @-@ story brick building succumbed to the force of the hurricane and crashed onto the city below ; caught in its path were two other buildings . This particular incident killed two people . Many other buildings suffered damaged roofs and broken glass , and telegraph and police wires were brought down . 
 The easterly winds created a storm surge on Lake Pontchartrain and inundated eastern and northern areas of New Orleans . The dynamics of the flood were considered " unprecedented " , having come within 0 @.@ 75 mi ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) of the Mississippi River . Flood waters rose until early on October 4 , when they slowly began to recede . The Jackson Railroad , on the western and northwestern shore of the lake , was flooded up to a depth of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) , and 11 mi ( 18 km ) of track were washed out . Numerous families in residents near the railroad were forced to leave their homes and seek shelter upon the onset of rising waters . Numerous coal boats and steamboats were swamped and sunk in and around Baton Rouge , which experienced its first severe hurricane strike in many years . Countless trees were uprooted along the Mississippi , and crop damage continued its prevalence going further north . Natchez saw the highest winds in the town since a tornado in 1840 , and although the hurricane struck further west than the previous two , gale winds still extended eastward to Pensacola . 
 = = = Hurricane Seven = = = 
 The final known storm of the season existed in late October , and followed roughly the same track as Tropical Storm Five , forming in the southwestern Atlantic basin and curving northward between the U.S. and Bermuda . Its track is only known between October 20 and October 24 , and it was also not recognized until subsequent reanalysis . It was determined to have attained the equivalence of Category 2 hurricane intensity based on reports from many ships . Its last data point places it southeast of Nova Scotia early on October 24 . The hurricane is thought to have only been a threat to shipping interests , and numerous ships encountered dangerous conditions in association with the cyclone . A few vessels sustained significant damage : the Gondar experienced winds " with such violence that the top gallant mast was broken off by the cap , the <unk> was blown to pieces and the ship thrown on her beam ends . " 
 = Minnehaha Park ( Minneapolis ) = 
 Minnehaha Park is a city park in Minneapolis , Minnesota , United States , containing Minnehaha Falls and the lower reaches of Minnehaha Creek . Minnehaha Park lies within the Mississippi National River and Recreation Area , a unit of the National Park Service . The park was designed by landscape architect Horace W.S. Cleveland in 1883 as part of the Grand Rounds Scenic Byway system , and was part of the popular steamboat Upper Mississippi River " Fashionable Tour " in the 1800s . 
 The park preserves historic sites that illustrate transportation , pioneering , and architectural themes . Preserved structures include the Minnehaha Princess Station , a Victorian train depot built in the 1870s ; the John H. Stevens House , built in 1849 and moved to the park from its original location in 1896 , utilizing horses and 10 @,@ 000 school children ; and the Longfellow House , a replica of the Henry Wadsworth Longfellow House in Cambridge , Massachusetts . The park was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1969 as the Minnehaha Historic District in recognition of its state @-@ level significance in architecture , commerce , conservation , literature , transportation , and urban planning . 
 The central feature of the park , Minnehaha Falls , has long been a favorite subject of artists and pioneer photographers , beginning with Alexander Hesler 's daguerreotype in 1852 . Although he never visited the park , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow helped to spread the park 's notoriety when he wrote his famous poem , The Song of Hiawatha . The falls are located on Minnehaha Creek near the creek 's confluence with the Mississippi River , near Fort Snelling . The main Minnesota Veterans Home is located on a bluff where the Mississippi and Minnehaha Creek converge . More than 850 @,@ 000 people visit Minnehaha Falls each year , and it continues to be one of the most photographed sites in Minnesota . 
 = = History = = 
 Settlement in the area began in 1805 when the US military bought a nine @-@ square @-@ mile tract of land at the confluence of the Mississippi and Minnesota River from the Sioux Nation . On a bluff overlooking the rivers , Fort Snelling , a military outpost , was built under the command of Colonel Josiah Snelling between 1820 and 1824 . In 1821 Snelling 's son , William Joseph Snelling came to the fort after leaving West Point and spending a year with friendly Sioux . According to a Minnesota history account written in 1858 , " The year after he came to the fort young Snelling set out in company with Joseph R. Brown , a frontiersman and local celebrity , to explore the rivulet that supplies the cascade of Minne Ha @-@ Ha , as far as Lake Minne Tonka . " Both " men " were 17 @-@ year @-@ old boys at the time . 
 Although some very early records refer to the falls as " Brown 's Falls " , leading historians to assume they were named after Joseph Brown , Park Ranger Kathy Swenson , writing for the National Park Service in 2009 states : " The over <unk> evidence points to Brown ’ s Falls ( and creek ) being named for Jacob Brown , major general and commander in chief of the army from 1814 – 1828 rather than for Joseph R. Brown , teenage musician at Fort Snelling and later army sergeant ( 1820 – 1828 ) , fur trader , politician , editor , and inventor . However , I have not yet found a document that officially or specifically mentions Jacob Brown as the namesake . " Swenson explains " ' Browns Fall / Creek ' seems to be most associated with military maps and personnel while ' Little Falls / Creek ' seems to be favored by those without a strong military connection although there are exceptions . " 
 = = = The Song of Hiawatha brings fame = = = 
 The name " Minnehaha Falls " was the common name by 1855 , when the publication of The Song of Hiawatha by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow brought the falls world @-@ wide fame . Longfellow 's epic poem features Hiawatha , a Native American hero who falls in love with Minnehaha , a Native American woman who later dies during a severe winter . Longfellow never visited the falls himself ; he was inspired by the stories of Mary H. Eastman and Henry Rowe Schoolcraft , and by a photograph created by Alexander Hessler , when he chose the name for Hiawatha 's lover . The photograph was taken in 1851 , according to a tribute written for Hessler when he died in 1895 . The author of the eulogy wrote : " It has been the subject of much comment among artists and poets that it was Mr. Hessler who was principally responsible for the inspiration which induced Henry W. Longfellow to write ' Hiawatha ' . " 
 = = = The " Fashionable Tour " = = = 
 Beginning in 1828 , steamboats began to travel the Mississippi River as far north as St. Anthony Falls , the upper limit of commercial navigation on the Mississippi , until two dams and a series of locks were built between 1948 and 1963 . The steamboat journey began to attract the attention of tourists , and in 1835 well known artist of American Indian life George Catlin made a trip by steamboat up the Mississippi from St. Louis to the Falls of St. Anthony and Fort Snelling . Impressed with the scenery , Catlin proposed a " Fashionable Tour " of the upper Mississippi , saying : 
 This Tour would comprehend but a small part of the great " Far West " ; but it will furnish to the traveller a fair sample , and being apart of it which is now made so easily accessible to the world , and the only part of it to which ladies can have access , I would recommend to all who have time and inclination to devote to the enjoyment of so splendid a Tour , to wait not , but make it while the subject is new , and capable of producing the greatest degree of pleasure . 
 Following Catlin 's visit , each ensuing year saw an increasing number of <unk> , artists , and photographers . Hundreds of Stereoscopic View cards of the falls exist . The visitors were mainly men but a few women took the journey , most notably 80 @-@ year @-@ old Elizabeth Schuyler Hamilton , the widow of Alexander Hamilton . The beauty of the area was also spread through moving panoramas , artistic panoramic creations that were shown much like today 's travel documentaries . Quoting from a 1939 paper written by the Minnesota Historical Society : 
 Crowds of people went to see these travel movies of <unk> 's and 1850 's and thus toured the great river vicariously . The throngs that wished to view <unk> 's panorama were so great when it was displayed in Boston and New York that railroads ran special excursions to accommodate them . In these two cities alone more than four hundred thousand people saw the exhibition . " The river comes to me instead of my going to the river , " wrote Longfellow . Whittier , after seeing a panorama , sang of the " new Canaan of our Israel , " and Thoreau , who not only viewed a panorama but also made the tour itself , envisaged a coming heroic age in which simple and obscure men , the real heroes of history , would build the foundations of new castles [ i ] n the West and throw bridges across a " Rhine stream of a different kind . " 
 According to an account written in 1852 , passengers disembarked at Minneapolis or St. Paul and " [ from there traveled by ] stagecoach for what was called the ' grand tour . ' It consisted of a drive from St. Paul to St. Anthony , then out to Lakes Harriet and Calhoun , thence to the Minnehaha Falls and Fort Snelling , and by the Spring Cave [ probably " Fountain Cave " ] to St. Paul , arriving in time for the visitors , if in haste , to return with the boat down the river . " 
 By the 1870s the railroads had extended their rails to Minneapolis / St. Paul and they began to actively advertise northern Minnesota as a tourist destination . The 1878 Chicago , Burlington & Quincy railway promotional booklet , A Guide to the Summer Resorts of Minnesota , told of the delights and health benefits of travel to the upper Minnesota region : " The scenery is unequaled and the invigorating air is so rich in oxygen and ozone that it is unsurpassed anywhere in the world and is sure to offer to the tourist and the invalid a hearty welcome , confident that the one will surely find rest and enjoyment , and the other that much coveted of earthly blessings — health . " The booklet describes the coach ride from Minneapolis to Minnehaha Falls : " One of the famous trips that few tourists miss taking is that from Minneapolis to St. Paul by carriage . Starting from the former place on the west side of the river , a pleasant drive of four miles over a level prairie , brings the traveler to Where the Falls of Minnehaha Flash and gleam among the oak trees . Laugh and leap into the valley . The round trip fare from St. Louis to Minneapolis was $ 30 and it featured Pullman sleeping cars . The booklet lists the population of Minneapolis as 40 @,@ 000 at that time . 
 = = = Grand Rounds National Scenic Byway = = = 
 Fortunately for the generations to come , the state legislature began in 1883 acquiring land immediately adjoining its lakes and the Mississippi River in order to turn them into public parks rather than allowing them to be privately developed . The choice of noted landscape architect Horace Cleveland was fortunate as well ; he was hired by the Minneapolis Board of Park Commissioners to create a series of parks and interconnected parkways to connect and preserve existing natural features in and near the city . Cleveland was a preservationist by nature , respecting the natural landscape features and using the existing topography and vegetation to keep his designs as natural as possible . When the park board considered building a photographic stand in the lower glen near the falls in 1884 , he responded saying : 
 " I learn that the park commission are seriously thinking of a building at Minnehaha for the express purpose of taking photographs — on the site heretofore profaned by a shanty for that purpose . I cannot remain silent in view of this proposed vandalism which I am sure you cannot sanction — and which I am equally sure will forever be a stigma upon Minneapolis and elicit the anathema of every man of sense and taste who visits the place . If erected it will simply be pandering to the tastes of the army of boobies who think to boost themselves into notoriety by connecting their own stupid features with the representation of one of the most beautiful of God ’ s works . ” 
 The result of Cleveland 's vision is the famous " Grand Rounds " , an interconnected series of parkways and parks centered on the Mississippi River . This vision was expanded by subsequent park commissioners and superintendents to encircle a series of lakes , now known as the " Chain of Lakes " , and to follow Minnehaha Creek to Minnehaha Falls . The area was designated as a National Scenic Byway in 1998 , and the Minneapolis Grand Rounds is known today as one of the best urban park systems in the world . 
 = = = Acquisition and development = = = 
 When Minnesota purchased Minnehaha Falls and surrounding land in 1889 , it became one of the first state parks in the United States ; only New York had created a state park by that time . The next summer the park board began to furnish the park with tables , seating , and lavatories . By 1893 a pavilion had been built and the park approved funding for two bridges " of a rustic nature " , one above the falls and the other below . A refectory designed by noted architect Harry Wild Jones was built in 1905 to serve " refreshments of a clean and wholesome nature at a reasonable cost . " In 1926 the park board designated the park to be a center for winter sports activities ; plans were made to build a ski jump and the board purchased toboggans for rental . Major improvements including retaining walls , bridges , and stairs were made by federal Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) crews from 1932 to 1940 . 
 While on the campaign trail in 1964 , Lyndon B. Johnson and Minnesota Senator Hubert H. Humphrey visited the park . Johnson would go on to win the presidential election that year with Humphrey as his running mate . Their visit is commemorated with a plaque which reads : 
 President Lyndon B. Johnson , Senator Hubert H. Humphrey and Governor Karl Rolvaag enjoy the spray from Minnehaha Falls . On that day , however , Minneapolis was experiencing a drought . In order to create the beautiful spray of the falls pictured here the city had to open many fire hydrants upstream and out of sight , to feed water to the creek . " 
 The park saw conflict in the 1960s when the highway department planned an elevated freeway between Minnehaha Park and Longfellow Gardens over Minnehaha Creek . The park board challenged the plan and brought the case all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court . Fortunately for the park a similar case was decided in favor of the preservation of park land , thus setting a precedent , and the elevated freeway was never built . Eventually a highway was built in the late 1990s that routed the road through a tunnel over the creek and covered by a " land bridge " . A new garden , the Longfellow Garden , was established on top of the land bridge . 
 Major improvements were also made in the 1990s . The Pergola Garden was created , featuring native wildflowers and grasses . The parking lot that once overlooked the falls was removed , and replaced by a garden and fountain inscribed with Longfellow 's words . The old refectory was given a veranda and a bandshell was added . In 2007 a new river overlook was built in the <unk> picnic area and included a children 's playground . 
 In 2011 major restoration work on the park was completed . The crumbling historic retaining walls built by the WPA in the 1930s were reinforced , eroded stream banks were restored , natural seating areas made of limestone were added , and trails and paths were improved . Landscape improvements were also done ; invasive plants were removed and replaced with native plantings with deeper roots to stabilize the stream banks and prevent erosion . 
 Currently more than 850 @,@ 000 people visit Minnehaha Falls each year , and it continues to be one of the most photographed sites in Minnesota . 
 = = Description = = 
 Minnehaha Park is situated on the banks of the Mississippi River within the Minnehaha Historic District . Located between Hiawatha Avenue and the Minnehaha Parkway , the park includes Minnehaha Creek with its falls and glen . The 167 @-@ acre park is divided into two main portions : an upper section above the falls , which is kept trimmed and maintained like many other city parks , and the lower 54 @-@ acre section which is for the most part allowed to maintain its natural state . The creek runs through the upper section and after it drops at the falls , it flows through the lower glen for another three @-@ fourths of a mile . 
 Minnehaha Park is a popular site for cultural festivities and weddings . Minnesota is well known for its large population of Swedish immigrants . Since 1934 Swedes have celebrated <unk> Dag ( Swedish Heritage Day ) at the park in June of each year . The park has a bandstand with free music concerts in the summer . Besides the main trail which follows the falls down to the Mississippi River , there are numerous trails that crisscross the park , including a path leading to the Fort Snelling State Park . Bikes are available for rent , and there is an off @-@ leash dog park area . Also located within the park are several outdoor picnic sites , and a picnic shelter with cooking and restroom facilities , as well as playgrounds and a summer wading pool for children . The falls freeze in the winter , making the park a popular year @-@ round attraction . 
 At one time the park also featured a zoo , pony rides , and a refectory . In 1893 the park board gave permission for a Shetland pony concession and began to accept gifts of animals for a zoo in the lower glen . The zoo grew in size , and by 1899 a bear pit and an alligator tank had been added . Although very popular , when Theodore Wirth became the new park superintendent in 1906 , the zoo was removed at his urging . The animals were donated to Longfellow Gardens , however a fenced area containing deer and elk remained until 1923 . To this day the area is sometimes referred to as " the deer pen " . 
 Between the 1930s and the 1950s there was also an " Auto Tourist Camp " where large numbers of tourists tented or stayed in small cabins . A park historian states that in those years " the camp was intended to appeal to the many tourists who were traveling the country in their new automobiles " . At one time there were several grist mills located on Minnehaha Creek . The remains of a stone and earth dam of a mill , built in the lower glen in 1853 or 1854 , is still visible beside the creek . 
 Gardens in the upper park area include Longfellow Gardens , Minnehaha Falls Pergola Garden , and the Song of Hiawatha Garden . The lower glen area offers examples of a surprisingly large number of trees that are native to Minnesota including basswood , black ash , maples , oaks , willows , and cottonwoods . Unusual plants include the first spring @-@ blooming plant , skunk cabbage , often blooming so early that temperatures are still freezing and snow may still be on the ground . As the name implies , they have a disagreeable odor except to the various insects that prefer to feed on rotting flesh or dung . By consuming carbohydrates stored in its fleshy roots , skunk cabbages can maintain a temperature inside the spathe that is 15 – 35 degrees warmer than the surrounding air temperature . The warmth helps attract cold @-@ blooded , early @-@ emerging pollinating insects during early spring when temperatures are still chilly . As the spathe dies back the large , showy leaves emerge which die back by mid @-@ August , making the plant difficult to find in late summer . Other wild flowers include wild ginger , trout lilies , anemones , marsh marigold and various ferns and sedges . The Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board is working to remove invasive species that have been introduced into the park in order to promote a healthy environment so that native species may survive and grow . 
 The central feature of the park , Minnehaha Falls , lies several hundred feet upstream from its original mouth where it emptied into the Mississippi River 10 @,@ 000 years ago at the end of the last Great Ice Age . Erosion below the falls has exposed Minnesota 's geologic past from the present day back to over 450 million years ago , when Minnesota was covered with shallow seas . 
 Statues on the grounds include a bronze statue of Hiawatha carrying Minnehaha created by Jacob <unk> . It was created for the Columbian Exposition in 1893 and moved to the park in 1912 . Other statues commemorate several notable figures including John H. Stevens , the first authorized resident on the west bank of the Mississippi River in what would become Minneapolis . He was granted permission to occupy the site , then part of the Fort Snelling military reservation , in exchange for providing ferry service to St. Anthony across the river . A statue of Swedish musician and poet Gunnar <unk> has been in the park since it was created in 1915 . A mask of Dakota leader <unk> ( Little Crow ) was placed overlooking the falls in 1992 . 
 While the name Minnehaha is often translated as " Laughing Water " , the correct translation is " curling water " or " waterfall " . The name comes from the Dakota language elements mni , meaning water , and <unk> , meaning waterfall . Thus the expression " Minnehaha Falls " translates as " Waterfall Falls " . The " Laughing Water " translation comes from Mary H. Eastman 's book <unk> – Life and Legends of the Sioux Around Fort Snelling , published in 1849 . The Dakota called Minnehaha Creek " <unk> <unk> " , meaning " Little River " . According to information provided by the National Park Service , an early missionary who had learned the Dakota language wrote : " The Indian name , ' Little Waterfall , ' is given . . . in speaking of the falls now called by white people ' Minnehaha ' . The Indians never knew it by the latter name , bestowed upon it by the whites . " 
 = = = Minnehaha Creek and Falls = = = 
 Minnehaha Creek extends from Lake Minnetonka in the west and flows east for 22 miles ( 35 km ) through several suburbs west of Minneapolis , and continuing through south Minneapolis . The watershed for the creek covers 181 square miles ( 470 km2 ) . Along the creek is a 53 @-@ foot ( 16 @-@ meter ) waterfall , Minnehaha Falls , which is situated 3 / 4 of a mile from where the stream empties into the Mississippi River . 
 Minnehaha Falls is geologically linked to Saint Anthony Falls , which was the only natural major waterfall on the Upper Mississippi River until being replaced by a concrete overflow spillway in 1869 , and then by a series of locks and dams in the 1950s and 1960s . St. Anthony Falls first appeared roughly 10 @,@ 000 years ago several miles downstream of the Mississippi River at the confluence of the glacial River Warren ( at present @-@ day Ft . Snelling ) . The water churning at the bottom of the falls ate away at the soft underlying sandstone eventually breaking off the hard limestone cap in chunks and the falls receded , moving upstream at a rate of about 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) per year . As the falls on the Mississippi River moved past Minnehaha Creek a second falls was created , Minnehaha Falls , which also continued to move upstream to its present site in the park . 
 An island in the Mississippi River near Minnehaha Creek once existed ; the receding St. Anthony Falls divided into two as it passed around the island . The falls in the channel farthest from Minnehaha Creek reached the upstream end of the island first , cutting off water to the west channel and resulting in an " abandoned waterfall " at the north end of the channel . The abandoned west channel is now a grassy cul @-@ de @-@ sac known as the " Deer Pen " . Locating the abandoned waterfall was made difficult in recent years since the Deer Pen was partially filled with tons of fill dirt from nearby construction projects . The lower portion of Minnehaha Creek now flows through a wide and deep channel once belonging to the larger stream that was still receiving glacial runoff . The mouth of Minnehaha Creek where it joins the Mississippi River is the lowest surface point in the city of Minneapolis at 686 ft ( 209 m ) above sea level . 
 Erosion within the last century has resulted in a falls that is fairly narrowly channeled and vigorous , notably after a heavy rain . Photographs of the waterfall from the 19th century show a much wider , curtain like character to the falls . When the creek is dry , the older , much @-@ broader ledge can be observed . If there were sufficient interest and funding , some remedial work could theoretically restore the 19th century appearance of the falls . 
 Due to the extremely cold temperatures in the area during the winter months , the falls freeze , creating a dramatic cascade of ice that can last well into the spring . If there is a rain shortage in the autumn , the falls may virtually dry up . In the summer , especially in the rainy months of June and July , the flow can be surprisingly forceful . 
 On June 19 , 2014 , professional kayaker Hunt Jennings descended the waterfall in a kayak when it was at record height due to several days of heavy rain . The only injury sustained by Jennings was a small cut above his upper lip . A spokesperson for the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board commented , " We are deeply concerned that this act and subsequent publicity will inspire others to attempt the same feat . The impact of the drop , the large boulders at the base of the Falls , the deep water and fast current could easily injure or kill a kayaker . " 
 = = Park geology = = 
 Visitors to the park can view the ancient geological history of Minnesota as they walk the path leading from the falls down to the Mississippi River . The uppermost layer of soils and gravels of Minnesota were deposited by the most recent Ice Age , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Four great ice ages have swept away all traces of the more recent Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras in the Twin Cities area , however standing at the upper falls , one is standing directly on the Platteville Limestone Formation laid down during the Ordovician Period of the Paleozoic Era . During the Ordovician Period , about 450 million years ago , the North American continent was situated along the equator and a warm shallow sea covered much of Minnesota . Sea life was abundant and a large number of marine fossils including corals , bryozoans , brachiopods , clams , snails , cephalopods , and trilobites can be found in the limestone and shale sediments at several areas in the Twin Cities and along the Mississippi River in the park . 
 Walking from the upper falls to the base of the falls one passes through the layered Platteville Limestone Formation and a thin layer of Glenwood Shale . Just below the base of the falls one enters the level of the Saint Peter Sandstone Formation of pure white quartz sandstone . The Minnesota St. Peter Sandstone is " famous the world over as the example of a well @-@ rounded , well @-@ sorted , pure quartz sand . It is the Ivory Snow of sediments , because it is close to 99 @.@ 44 % pure " . This sand was first deposited as beach sand , probably eroded from earlier Cambrian sandstones , along the shores of the Ordovician sea . 
 Walking along the creek to the area at which a foot bridge crosses the creek the Glenwood Shale Formation , a thin layer of grey @-@ green rock probably deposited in deeper @-@ water offshore from the beaches , can be seen where it has been exposed by erosion . Together , the three formations that are visible as one walks from the upper falls to the river represent a sequence of sea @-@ level rise which occurred during the Ordovician period . 
 = = Historical buildings = = 
 = = = Minnehaha Depot = = = 
 A small train station officially named Minnehaha Depot but also known as " the Princess Depot " was built in 1875 ; it was a stop on the Milwaukee Road railroad and provided easy access to the park from Fort Snelling , downtown Minneapolis , and downtown St. Paul . The depot handled as many as 39 round trips per day , and was once integrated into the region 's streetcar system . The interior is complete and well @-@ preserved , containing an iron heating stove , waiting room benches and a ticket window . In 1964 , the title was transferred to the Minnesota Historical Society . The Minnesota Transportation Museum has assisted in the restoration of the building . The depot is open on Sundays from 1 : 30 to 4 : 30 . The 50th Street / Minnehaha Park light rail station of the METRO Blue Line currently serves the park . 
 = = = Longfellow House = = = 
 Despite its name , the Longfellow House was never home to the American poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ; it was instead the home of Robert F. Jones , a Minneapolis philanthropist and entrepreneur . Built in 1907 , the house is a two @-@ thirds scale replica of Longfellow 's home in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Originally the home was part of Jones ' private 4 @.@ 6 @-@ acre botanical garden and zoological park near Minnehaha Falls . After Jones died , the home fell into disrepair . He had deeded the property to the city which used the house as part of the Minneapolis public library from 1936 to 1967 . The house was moved in 1994 and renovated . It opened as an information center in 2001 . Today the home serves as the public information center at Minnehaha Park . Photos of the home 's previous owner can be seen inside . The most popular photos are shots taken of him in his private " zoo " with lions , bears and birds . The Longfellow House Hospitality Center provide information about the falls and Minneapolis Grand Rounds , a 50 @-@ mile recreation loop which includes Minnehaha Falls . The Longfellow House and John H. Stevens House also co @-@ sponsor 90 @-@ minute historic nature walks around the park . 
 = = = John Harrington Stevens House = = = 
 The John Harrington Stevens House , built in 1849 or 1850 near St. Anthony Falls ( on the site where the Minneapolis Post Office now sits ) , was moved to Minnehaha Park in 1896 . According to the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board , the home has the distinction of being the first wood @-@ frame dwelling built west of the Mississippi . John H. Stevens was granted permission to build his house on land controlled by Fort Snelling in exchange for providing ferry service across the Mississippi River . In subsequent years it became a hub of civic and social activity . Dubbed the " Birthplace of Minneapolis " , both Hennepin County and Minneapolis were organized in Stevens ' home ; it was in this home that the name Minneapolis was suggested . 
 In 1896 over 10 @,@ 000 school children helped pull the house to its present location in Minnehaha Park . The children were divided into seven relay teams , each consisting of around 1 @,@ 000 pupils . As teams finished their designated distance , they dropped the ropes and boarded trolley cars for the park . All went well until " the lads from the South Side High School " refused to give up the ropes to the next relay team . The Minneapolis Tribune reported the event : 
 At this point there was something of unexpected interest . Waving their school flag in triumph from the gable window of the old building the lads from the South Side High School shouted their school yell and BAD <unk> TO ALL <unk> . At this point the Central High School scholars were billed to relieve the South Siders , and consequently surrounded the building . The spirit of school rivalry broke out , strong and bitter . The South Siders refused to surrender the fortress and flaunted their banner from the window in spite of all entreaties and orders . Contractor Pratt could not oust them . Supt. Jordan could not oust them , and finally Sergeant Martinson called for a detail of police and made a rush for the house . But the South Side lads were still game , and did not give up until several had been made to feel the force of police authority . Then they made a break . As they dashed from one door the Centrals entered by the other , and their banner was soon flying from the gable amid vociferous cheers . The South Siders were chased up the street by a detachment of Centrals , and for a moment it looked as if the rush would result in some bruised heads . However , good nature was restored and again the house started on its way . 
 The house arrived in the park at 3 pm along with the last relay team of children , a distance of four miles . In the evening , 1 @,@ 000 Japanese lanterns were placed about the park and the festivities included fireworks and a falls light show . The Tribune reported that some people complained about the children having a day out of school and " ... the park commissioners and the park policemen objected to the way in which the children took possession of the park and everything in it . There was no such thing as controlling them , and they ran over everything in sight . It would have taken a small regiment of policemen to have kept that throng in check . " 
 = = Image gallery = = 
 = Eric A. Havelock = 
 Eric Alfred Havelock ( / <unk> / ; 3 June 1903 – 4 April 1988 ) was a British classicist who spent most of his life in Canada and the United States . He was a professor at the University of Toronto and was active in the Canadian socialist movement during the 1930s . In the 1960s and 1970s , he served as chair of the classics departments at both Harvard and Yale . Although he was trained in the turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ 20th @-@ century Oxbridge tradition of classical studies , which saw Greek intellectual history as an unbroken chain of related ideas , Havelock broke radically with his own teachers and proposed an entirely new model for understanding the classical world , based on a sharp division between literature of the 6th and 5th centuries BC on the one hand , and that of the 4th on the other . 
 Much of Havelock 's work was devoted to addressing a single thesis : that all of Western thought is informed by a profound shift in the kinds of ideas available to the human mind at the point that Greek philosophy converted from an oral to a literate form . The idea has been very controversial in classical studies , and has been rejected outright both by many of Havelock 's contemporaries and modern classicists . Havelock and his ideas have nonetheless had far @-@ reaching influence , both in classical studies and other academic areas . He and Walter J. Ong ( who was himself strongly influenced by Havelock ) essentially founded the field that studies transitions from orality to literacy , and Havelock has been one of the most frequently cited theorists in that field ; as an account of communication , his work profoundly affected the media theories of Harold Innis and Marshall McLuhan . Havelock 's influence has spread beyond the study of the classical world to that of analogous transitions in other times and places . 
 = = Education and early academic career = = 
 Born in London , Havelock grew up in Scotland where he attended Greenock Academy before enrolment at The Leys School in Cambridge at the age of 14 . He studied there with W. H. <unk> , a classicist to whom Havelock gives considerable credit . In 1922 , Havelock started at Emmanuel College , Cambridge . 
 While studying under F. M. Cornford at Cambridge , Havelock began to question the received wisdom about the nature of pre @-@ Socratic philosophy and , in particular , about its relationship with Socratic thought . In The Literate Revolution in Greece , his penultimate book , Havelock recalls being struck by a discrepancy between the language used by the philosophers he was studying and the heavily Platonic idiom with which it was interpreted in the standard texts . It was well known that some of these philosophical texts ( Parmenides , Empedocles ) were written not only in verse but in the metre of Homer , who had recently been identified ( still controversially at the time ) by Milman Parry as an oral poet , but Cornford and other scholars of these early philosophers saw the practice as a fairly insignificant convention leftover from Hesiod . Havelock eventually came to the conclusion that the poetic aspects of early philosophy " were matters not of style but of substance , " and that such thinkers as Heraclitus and Empedocles actually have more in common even on an intellectual level with Homer than they do with Plato and Aristotle . However , he did not publicly break from Cornford until many years later . 
 In 1926 Havelock took his first academic job at Acadia University in Nova Scotia , Canada . He married Ellen Parkinson in 1927 , and moved on to Victoria College at the University of Toronto in 1929 . Havelock 's scholarly work during this period focused on Latin poetry , particularly Catullus , far from the early Greek philosophy he had worked on at Cambridge . While in Canada Havelock became increasingly involved in politics . With his fellow academics Frank Underhill and Eugene Forsey , Havelock was a cofounder of the League for Social Reconstruction , an organisation of politically active socialist intellectuals . He and Underhill were also the most outspoken of a group of dissident faculty members at the University . 
 Havelock 's political engagement deepened rapidly . In 1931 , after Toronto police had blocked a public meeting by an organisation the police claimed was associated with communists , he and Underhill wrote a public letter of protest , calling the action " short @-@ sighted , inexpedient , and intolerable . " The letter led to considerable tension between the leadership of the university and the activist professors led by Havelock and Underhill , as well as a sharply critical public reaction . All of the major newspapers in Toronto , along with a number of prominent business leaders , denounced the professors as radical leftists and their behaviour as unbecoming of academics . 
 Though the League for Social Reconstruction began as more of a discussion group than a political party , it became a force in Canadian politics by the mid @-@ 1930s . After Havelock joined the Co @-@ operative Commonwealth Federation , along with several other members of the League , he was pressured by his superiors at the University to curtail his political activity . He did not , continuing to act as an ally and occasional spokesman for Underhill and other leftist professors . He found himself in trouble again in 1937 after criticising both the government 's and industry 's handling of an automotive workers ' strike . Despite calls from Ontario officials for his ouster , he was able to remain at Victoria College , but his public reputation was badly damaged . 
 While at Toronto , Havelock began formulating his theory of orality and literacy , establishing the context of a later movement at the University interested in the critical study of communication , which Donald F. <unk> has called the " Toronto School of Communications . " Havelock 's work was complemented by that of Harold Innis , who was working on the history of media . The work Havelock and Innis began in the 1930s was the preliminary basis for the influential theories of communication developed by Marshall McLuhan and Edmund Snow Carpenter in the 1950s . 
 During World War II , Havelock moved away from the socialist organisations he had been associated with , and in 1944 was elected founding president of the Ontario Classical Association . One of the association 's first activities was organising a relief effort for Greece , which had just been liberated from Nazi control . Havelock continued to write about politics , however , and his political and academic work came together in his ideas about education ; he argued for the necessity of an understanding of rhetoric for the resistance to corporate persuasiveness . 
 = = Toward a new theory of Greek intellectual history = = 
 At the same time that he was becoming increasingly vocal and visible in politics , Havelock 's scholarly work was moving toward the concerns that would occupy him for the bulk of his career . The first questions he raised about the relationship between literacy and orality in Greece concerned the nature of the historical Socrates , which was a long @-@ debated issue . Havelock 's position , drawn from analyses of Xenophon and Aristophanes as well as Plato himself , was that Plato 's presentation of his teacher was largely a fiction , and intended to be a transparent one , whose purpose was to represent indirectly Plato 's own ideas . He argued vociferously against the idea associated with John Burnet , which still had currency at the time , that the basic model for the theory of forms originated with Socrates . Havelock 's argument drew on evidence for a historical change in Greek philosophy ; Plato , he argued , was fundamentally writing about the ideas of his present , not of the past . Most earlier work in the field had assumed that , since Plato uses Socrates as his mouthpiece , his own philosophical concerns must have been similar to those debated in the Athens of his youth , when Socrates was his teacher . Havelock 's contention that Socrates and Plato belonged to different philosophical eras was the first instance of one that would become central to his work : that a basic shift in the kinds of ideas being discussed by intellectuals , and the methods of discussing them , happened at some point between the end of the fifth century BC and the middle of the fourth . 
 In 1947 , Havelock moved to Cambridge , Massachusetts , to take a position at Harvard University , where he remained until 1963 . He was active in a number of aspects of the University and of the department , of which he became chair ; he undertook a translation of and commentary on Aeschylus ' Prometheus Bound for the benefit of his students . He published this translation , with an extended commentary on Prometheus and the myth 's implications for history , under the title The Crucifixion of Intellectual Man ( and then changed it back to Prometheus when the book was republished in the 1960s , saying that the earlier title had " come to seem a bit pretentious " ) . During this time he began his first major attempt to argue for a division between Platonic or Aristotelian philosophy and what came before . His focus was on political philosophy and , in particular , the beginnings of Greek liberalism as introduced by Democritus . In his book The Liberal Temper in Greek Politics , he argued that for Democritus and the liberals , political theory was based on an understanding of " the behaviour of man in a cosmic and historical setting " : that is , humanity defined as the poets would define it — measured through its individual actions . Plato and Aristotle were interested in the nature of humanity and , in particular , the idea that human actions might be rooted in inherent qualities rather than consisting of individual choices . 
 In arguing for a basic heuristic split between Plato and the contemporaries of Democritus , Havelock was directly contradicting a very long tradition in philosophy that had painstakingly assembled innumerable connections between Plato and the pre @-@ Socratics , to reinforce the position that Plato , as his own dialogues imply , was primarily informed by his teacher Socrates , and that Socrates in turn was a willing participant in a philosophical conversation already several hundred years old ( again , with a seeming endorsement from Plato , who shows a young Socrates conversing with and learning from the pre @-@ Socratics Parmenides and Zeno in his dialogue the Parmenides — a historical impossibility that might represent figuratively an intellectual rather than direct conversation ) . The book was intriguing to some philosophers but was poorly received among classicists , with one reviewer calling Havelock 's argument for basic difference between Plato and the pre @-@ Socratics " a failure " and his analysis of Plato and Aristotle " distortion . " 
 = = Preface to Plato = = 
 The Liberal Temper makes the argument for the division between Plato and early Greek philosophy without a fully realised account of Havelock 's theory of Greek literacy , which he was still developing throughout this period . Rather than attempting once again to explain his distinction between 5th- and 4th @-@ century BC thought in terms of a dissection of the earlier school , Havelock turned , in his 1963 Preface to Plato , to 4th @-@ century BC philosophy itself . He was interested principally in Plato 's much debated rejection of poetry in the Republic , in which his fictionalised Socrates argues that poetic mimesis — the representation of life in art — is bad for the soul . Havelock 's claim was that the Republic can be used to understand the position of poetry in the " history of the Greek mind . " The book is divided into two parts , the first an exploration of oral culture ( and what Havelock thinks of as oral thought ) , and the second an argument for what Havelock calls " The Necessity of Platonism " ( the title of Part 2 ) : the intimate relationship between Platonic thought and the development of literacy . Instead of concentrating on the philosophical definitions of key terms , as he had in his book on Democritus , Havelock turned to the Greek language itself , arguing that the meaning of words changed after the full development of written literature to admit a self @-@ reflective subject ; even pronouns , he said , had different functions . The result was a universal shift in what the Greek mind could imagine : 
 We confront here a change in the Greek language and in the syntax of linguistic usage and in the overtones of certain key words which is part of a larger intellectual revolution , which affected the whole range of the Greek cultural experience . . . Our present business is to connect this discovery with that crisis in Greek culture which saw the replacement of an orally memorised tradition by a quite different system of instruction and education , and which therefore saw the Homeric state of mind give way to the Platonic . 
 For Havelock , Plato 's rejection of poetry was merely the realisation of a cultural shift in which he was a participant . 
 Two distinct phenomena are covered by the shift he observed in Greek culture at the end of the 5th century : the content of thought ( in particular the concept of man or of the soul ) , and the organisation of thought . In Homer , Havelock argues , the order of ideas is associative and temporal . The epic 's " units of meaning ... are linked <unk> to form an episode , but the parts of the episode are greater than the whole . " For Plato , on the other hand , the purpose of thought is to arrive at the significance of the whole , to move from the specific to the general . Havelock points out that Plato 's syntax , which he shares with other 4th @-@ century writers , reflects that organisation , making smaller ideas subordinate to bigger ideas . Thus , the Platonic theory of forms in itself , Havelock claims , derives from a shift in the organisation of the Greek language , and ultimately comes down to a different function for and conception of the noun . 
 Preface to Plato had a profound impact almost immediately after publication , but an impact that was complex and inconsistent . The book 's claims refer to the ideas of a number of different fields : the study ( then fairly new ) of oral literature as well as Greek philosophy and Greek philology ; the book also acknowledges the influence of literary theory , particularly structuralism . The 1960s were a period in which those fields were growing further apart , and the reaction to Preface from each of them was starkly different . Among classicists the response ranged from indifference to derision , with the majority simply questioning the details of Havelock 's history of literacy , pointing both to earlier instances of writing than Havelock thinks possible or to later instances of oral influence . Philosophy , particularly Platonic scholarship , was moving in a different direction at the time , and Havelock neither engages nor was cited by the principal movers in that field . However , the book was embraced by literary theorists , students of the transition to literacy , and others in fields as diverse as psychology and anthropology . 
 Ultimately , the book 's utility as textual scholarship is limited by Havelock 's methods . His account of orality is based almost entirely on Homer , but the history of the Homeric text is not known , which forces Havelock to make claims based on assumptions that cannot fully be tested . Later classicists argue that the poetic nature of Homer 's language works against the very arguments Havelock makes about the intellectual nature of oral poetry . What he asserts as a definitive use of language can never be conclusively demonstrated not to be an accident of " metrical convenience . " <unk> , like Platonists , found the book to be less than useful for the precise work of their own discipline ; many classicists rejected outright Havelock 's essential thesis that oral culture predominated through the 5th century . At the same time , though , Havelock 's influence , particularly in literary theory , was growing enormously . He is the most cited writer in Walter J. Ong 's influential <unk> and Literacy other than Ong himself . His work has been cited in studies of orality and literacy in African culture and the implications of modern literacy theory for library science . Preface to Plato has remained continuously in print since its initial publication . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Shortly after publication of Preface to Plato , Havelock accepted a position as chair of the Classics Department at Yale University . He remained in New Haven for eight years , and then taught briefly as Raymond Distinguished Professor of Classics at the State University of New York at Buffalo . He retired in 1973 and moved to Poughkeepsie , New York , where his wife Christine Mitchell , whom he had married in 1962 , taught at Vassar College . He was a productive scholar after his retirement , writing three books as well as numerous essays and talks expanding the arguments of Preface to Plato to a generalised argument about the effect of literacy on Greek thought , literature , culture , society , and law . 
 Increasingly central to Havelock 's account of Greek culture in general was his conception of the Greek alphabet as a unique entity . He wrote in 1977 : 
 The invention of the Greek alphabet , as opposed to all previous systems , including the Phoenician , constituted an event in the history of human culture , the importance of which has not as yet been fully grasped . Its appearance divides all pre @-@ Greek civilisations from those that are post @-@ Greek . 
 But his philological concerns now were only a small part of a much larger project to make sense of the nature of the Greek culture itself . His work in this period shows a theoretical sophistication far beyond his earlier efforts , extending his theory of literacy toward a theory of culture itself . He said of the <unk> inscription , a poetic line scratched into a vase and the earliest Greek writing known at the time , " Here in this casual act by an unknown hand there is announced a revolution which was destined to change the nature of human culture . " It is this larger point about the differences between oral and literate culture that represents Havelock 's most influential contribution . Walter J. Ong , for example , in assessing the significance of non @-@ oral communication in an oral culture , cites Havelock 's observation that scientific categories , which are necessary not only for the natural sciences but also for historical and philosophical analysis , depend on writing . These ideas were sketched out in Preface to Plato but became central to Havelock 's work from Prologue to Greek Literacy ( 1971 ) onward . 
 In the latter part of his career , Havelock 's relentless pursuit of his unvarying thesis led to a lack of interest in addressing opposing viewpoints . In a review of Havelock 's The Greek Concept of Justice , a book that attempts to ascribe the most significant ideas in Greek philosophy to his linguistic research , the philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre accuses Havelock of a " brusque refusal to recognize the substance of the case he has to defeat . " As a result of this refusal , Havelock seems to have been caught in a conflict of mere contradiction with his opponents , in which without attempt at refutation , he simply asserts repeatedly that philosophy is fundamentally literate in nature , and is countered only with a reminder that , as MacIntyre says , " Socrates wrote no books . " 
 In his last public lecture , which was published posthumously , Havelock addressed the political implications of his own scholarly work . Delivered at Harvard on 16 March 1988 , less than three weeks before his death , the lecture is framed principally in opposition to the University of Chicago philosopher Leo Strauss . Strauss had published a detailed and extensive critique of Havelock 's The Liberal Temper in Greek Politics in March 1959 , as " The Liberalism of Classical Political Philosophy " in the journal Review of Metaphysics . ( Strauss died 14 years later in 1973 , the same year in which Havelock retired . ) Havelock 's 1988 lecture claims to contain a systematic account of Plato 's politics ; Havelock argues that Plato 's idealism applies a mathematical strictness to politics , countering his old teacher Cornford 's assertion that Platonic arguments that morality must be <unk> in arithmetical terms cannot be serious . This way of thinking about politics , Havelock concluded , could not be used as a model for understanding or shaping inherently <unk> interactions : " The stuff of human politics is conflict and compromise . " 
 = = Major works = = 
 The Lyric Genius of Catullus . Oxford : Blackwell , 1939 . 
 The Crucifixion of Intellectual Man , Incorporating a Fresh Translation into English Verse of the Prometheus Bound of Aeschylus . Boston : Beacon Press , 1950 . Reprinted as Prometheus . Seattle : University of Washington Press , 1968 . 
 The Liberal Temper in Greek Politics . New Haven : Yale University Press , 1957 . 
 Preface to Plato . Cambridge : Harvard University Press , 1963 . 
 Prologue to Greek Literacy . Cincinnati : University of Cincinnati Press , 1971 . 
 The Greek Concept of Justice : From its Shadow in Homer to its Substance in Plato . Cambridge : Harvard University Press , 1978 . 
 The Literate Revolution in Greece and its Cultural Consequences . Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press , 1981 . 
 The Muse Learns to Write : Reflections on <unk> and Literacy from Antiquity to the Present . New Haven : Yale University Press , 1986 . 
 = Jon Pollock = 
 Jon Pollock ( born 11 May 1977 ) is a British wheelchair basketball player . He was selected to train with the British wheelchair basketball squad in 1992 . Pollock has played at four Paralympic games : the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney , the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing and the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . He won a bronze medal at the 2004 Paralympics and the 2008 Paralympic Games . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pollock was born on 11 May 1977 in Liverpool , England with Spina bifida , a developmental congenital disorder caused by the incomplete closing of the embryonic neural tube . He currently lives in Wigan , Greater Manchester in north west England . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 Pollock is a class 2 @.@ 5 wheelchair basketball player and currently plays for the <unk> <unk> Rhinos of Wolverhampton . He has been competing in wheelchair basketball for over twenty years . In his twenty @-@ year career , he has represented Team GB and Paralympics GB four times at various Summer Paralympic Games . 
 Pollock first competed at the 1997 European Wheelchair Basketball Championship in Madrid , Spain winning silver . Two years later , he played in the 1999 European Championships in Roermond , Netherlands . He ended in fourth place with his team . In 2000 , he was a member of Team GB in the 2000 Summer Paralympic Games , held in Sydney , Australia . Along with his team , they finished in fourth place ; out of the medals . In 2001 – 02 , he finished in fourth place at the 2001 / 2002 European championships in Amsterdam , Netherlands . In the 2002 World Championships , he won silver , in Kitakyushu , Japan . He participated in the 2003 European Championships , in Sassari , Italy . He won bronze in this event . In the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , Greece , he was in medal position . He finished , along with his team , in the bronze medal position . Two years after the Paralympics , he was at the 2006 World Championships in Amsterdam . He finished in fifth position . The following year , Pollock was at the 2007 European Championships , in Wetzlar , Netherlands . Along with his team , he finished in silver medal position . The following year , he was a member of the squad in the 2008 Summer Paralympic Games in Beijing . Here , he won his second Paralympic bronze . In 2009 he won bronze in the European championships in Adana , southern Turkey . In 2010 , he finished fifth , along with his team , in the World Wheelchair Basketball Championships , held in Birmingham . At the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , Pollock and the GB team got through to the semi @-@ finals after beating Turkey , but lost against Canada 52 — 69 , keeping them out of medal position . 
 = Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes = 
 Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes ( Hebrew : בֵּית <unk> <unk> <unk> , " House of Israel – People of Truth " ) , more commonly known as the Kane Street Synagogue , is an egalitarian Conservative synagogue located at 236 Kane Street in Cobble Hill , Brooklyn , New York City , United States . It is currently the oldest continuously operating synagogue in Brooklyn . 
 Founded as Baith Israel in 1856 , the congregation constructed the first synagogue on Long Island , and hired Aaron Wise for his first rabbinical position in the United States . Early tensions between traditionalists and reformers led to the latter forming Congregation Beth Elohim , a Reform synagogue , in 1861 . 
 The synagogue nearly failed in the early 20th century , but the 1905 hiring of Israel Goldfarb as rabbi , the purchase of its current buildings , and the 1908 merger with Talmud Torah Anshei Emes re @-@ invigorated the congregation . The famous composer Aaron Copland celebrated his Bar Mitzvah there in 1913 , and long @-@ time Goldman Sachs head Sidney Weinberg was married there in 1920 . 
 Membership peaked in the 1920s , but with the onset of the Great Depression declined steadily , and by the 1970s the congregation could no longer afford to heat the sanctuary . Membership has recovered since that low point ; the congregation renovated its school / community center in 2004 , and in 2008 embarked on a million @-@ dollar capital campaign to renovate the sanctuary . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Twelve Bavarian , Dutch , and Portuguese Jews gathered at a private home on January 22 , 1856 to discuss their " earnest desire [ to ] effect the incorporation of a synagogue and congregation for divine service " , and in March that year they founded Congregation Baith Israel . The group had originally organized in 1855 as the United Brethren Society , a benefit society that provided members with medical and burial assistance . Hiring the Reverend M. Gershon as cantor ( the person who leads the prayers ) , they first met in various homes , then rented space at 155 Atlantic Street , now Atlantic Avenue . 
 Gershon 's appointment was controversial ; after a background check , the board decided by a 10 – 9 vote on April 6 , 1856 , that he had never held the position of cantor in any other congregation , and was therefore not " sufficiently acquainted with the actual requirements to fill said office " , and was furthermore not " a competent reader enough to read the Sepher Torah " . As a result , services were led by laymen , except during the Jewish holidays , when a professional cantor would be brought in from Manhattan . 
 An 1886 Brooklyn Eagle article states that until the founding of Baith Israel " [ h ] <unk> the Hebrew residents in Brooklyn had been under the necessity of finding their way across the East River in all kinds of weather , when they wished to go to their place of worship " . According to synagogue legend , the founders had grown tired of rowing across the East River each Friday to celebrate Shabbat in Manhattan . Carol Levin , however , writes that a ferry service from Whitehall Street in Manhattan to South Ferry , Brooklyn ( at the foot of Atlantic Street ) had existed since 1836 ( see South Ferry ( ferry ) ) , that the Atlantic Street synagogue 's location , so close to the ferry terminus , " must have seemed convenient to many " , and that " [ f ] <unk> service was fast , frequent and inexpensive ... In the year 1869 there were almost 52 million passengers . " Thus , in her view , the story of the founders growing tired of rowing across the East River is a " folk tale " . 
 = = = Attempts at reform and amalgamation , construction of first synagogue = = = 
 In the congregation 's early years , tensions existed between traditionalists and reformers , and in 1861 , 41 of the latter left Baith Israel to form the Congregation Beth Elohim , a Reform synagogue . That year Baith Israel hired the Reverend Joel Alexander as its religious leader . Alexander , the synagogue 's first full @-@ time rabbi , was a graduate of the Jews Seminary in Münster , and had been ordained both in Posen and by Hermann Adler , the Chief Rabbi of the United Kingdom . 
 In 1862 , the remaining 35 members purchased two lots at the corner of State Street and Boerum Place in Boerum Hill for $ 3 @,@ 000 ( today $ 71 @,@ 000 ) , and on January 12 laid the cornerstone for a new building , the first synagogue built on Long Island . The building was completed on August 12 , at a cost of $ 10 @,@ 000 ( today $ 237 @,@ 000 ) , and was consecrated on August 31 by Alexander and assembled dignitaries . The synagogue , which came to be known as the Boerum Schule , created a Sunday school soon afterwards , the first in Brooklyn , and at the time , an innovation . The school was free , and run by volunteers , with separate classes for boys and girls . By 1890 the school had 160 students , and at its peak the school had 500 pupils . 
 In 1869 reformers again left Baith Israel , and , joining with dissenters from Kahal Kodesh Beth Elohim of Williamsburg , founded Temple Israel . Though many reformers had left the congregation , several reforms in the service were nonetheless introduced : the congregation abolished most piyyutim and the Priestly Blessing , and , in 1873 , introduced a confirmation ceremony for girls , led by the Reverend Dr. <unk> . The confirmation ceremonies , which had initially been held during the holiday of Sukkot , were eventually moved to the holiday of Shavuot ( the holiday during which the Reform movement held these ceremonies ) , and continued for both boys and girls ( in place of Bar and Bat Mitzvah celebrations ) until the 1940s . 
 Aaron Wise , father of Stephen Samuel Wise , was one of the synagogue 's earliest rabbis , from 1874 to 1875 . This was his first rabbinical position in the United States , before moving to Congregation Rodeph Sholom in Manhattan . 
 = = = Building renovations , failed mergers , traditionalism = = = 
 In 1876 , the congregation voted by a margin of over two to one to re @-@ orient the synagogue pews in the manner of Christian churches , and introduce mixed seating . However , nothing was done about this until 1879 , when the renovations were carried out : the front pews were removed , the side pews extended to the walls , and the vestibule moved outside the sanctuary . Led by rabbi Dr. E. M. Myers , the synagogue was re @-@ dedicated on September 7 . 
 In April 1883 , Baith Israel , Beth Elohim , and Temple Israel , Brooklyn 's three leading synagogues , tried to merge ; Beth Elohim and Temple Israel had both been formed in the 1860s by dissenters from Baith Israel . This was the third such attempt ; the previous two had failed when the members could not agree on synagogue ritual . The combined congregation , which would purchase new premises , would have 150 members ( only heads of households were considered members at that time ) . Members would be refunded half the purchase price of the pews in their existing buildings . The rabbis of Beth Elohim and Temple Israel were to split the offices of rabbi and cantor : Baith Israel , at the time , had no rabbi . Though this attempt also failed , in the following year the three congregations carried out combined activities , including a picnic and a celebration of the 100th birthday of Sir Moses Montefiore . 
 Baith Israel hired Marcus Friedlander as rabbi in 1887 . Born in Congress Poland in 1862 , he left Russia for England before he was twenty . Though speaking little English at the time , he graduated there from the London Theological Seminary , before emigrating to the United States . He was 24 years old when he assumed the post at Baith Israel , at the time the youngest man in New York state to be appointed to so significant a position of Jewish leadership . Friedlander served until 1893 , when he resigned to take a more lucrative position in California at the First Hebrew Congregation of Oakland . After Friedlander left , his name was , for reasons unknown , deleted from the synagogue histories , and the financial records and minute books dating from his tenure were removed from Baith Israel 's archives . He was succeeded by Joseph Taubenhaus , the brother of Dr. Gottheil / Godfrey Taubenhaus , the rabbi of Congregation Beth Elohim ; another brother , Jacob / Jean Taubenhaus was a famous French chess master . 
 In 1889 , the congregation again renovated the synagogue building , repairing it and replacing the roof , increasing the seating capacity , adding a new vestibule and double entrance way , and redecorating the interior . At that time over half of the congregants still spoke German as their native language . The congregation had 50 members — defined as " heads of families who own seats " — by 1891 , and 300 congregants in total . By 1900 , the congregation had 160 members , and the congregational school , which held classes for two hours once a week , had ten teachers and 150 students . 
 Though the synagogue had undertaken innovations in some areas of Jewish law , it still insisted on strict adherence in others . In 1878 <unk> was dismissed for officiating at the marriage of a Jewish woman and Christian man , and Baith Israel was , for a time , the only congregation in Brooklyn that celebrated Jewish holidays for the traditional two days . In 1889 Baith Israel asserted it was " the only orthodox congregation in the city " , and that year the board forced the resignation of a Mr. J. <unk> , for transgressing the laws of Yom Kippur . In 1892 , when Hyman Rosenberg was expelled as rabbi of Brooklyn 's Beth Jacob synagogue for eating ham , the Brooklyn Eagle canvassed local rabbis for their views on the matter . While George Taubenhaus , rabbi of Beth Elohim stated , " I do not believe my congregation would expel me if I ate ham " , Baith Israel 's rabbi Friedlander responded , " While there are some differences between the reform and orthodox Jews , I do not think it is the place for any Jewish minister to eat ham . The reformers do not so strictly observe the old Mosaic law , but it does not seem to me a good example for a rabbi to set to his congregation . " 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Decline and reinvigoration = = = 
 By 1904 , membership had fallen to 30 , and the synagogue nearly failed : mass transit had allowed Jews to migrate away from downtown Brooklyn , and a fire had nearly destroyed the Boerum synagogue building . Further innovations were attempted , including a pipe organ and a mixed @-@ sex choir , but these were removed after objections from Orthodox members . The congregation decided that the Boerum location was part of the problem , and made the bold decision to sell it , buy new premises , and hire a rabbi ( the synagogue had , for many years , run without one ) . In 1905 , they hired Israel Goldfarb , a 1902 graduate of the Jewish Theological Seminary , as " Hazan [ cantor ] and Teacher " , his first and only pulpit . The following year Goldfarb was appointed rabbi , a position he would hold for over 50 years . 
 In 1905 , the congregation also purchased for $ 30 @,@ 000 ( today $ 790 @,@ 000 ) its current building at Tompkins Place and Harrison Street ( renamed Kane Street in 1928 ) , along with an adjacent school building and a connecting two @-@ story arcade . The Romanesque revival church building , erected in 1855 , had originally housed the Middle Dutch Reformed Church , and , from 1887 , the Trinity German Lutheran Church . The hiring of Goldfarb and purchase of a new building helped revive the congregation , and by 1906 ( its 50th anniversary ) membership had doubled . 
 Goldfarb was a talented musician , known to this day as composer of popular tunes for the songs " Shalom <unk> " and " <unk> Avot " used in most Ashkenazi synagogues . With his brother Samuel E. Goldfarb , he compiled The Jewish <unk> for schoolchildren , the first American collection of Jewish songs . Israel Goldfarb also served as Professor of Liturgical Music at the Jewish Theological Seminary from 1920 to 1944 , and in 1949 founded the School of Sacred Music at Hebrew Union College . 
 In his Kol <unk> sermon of 1905 , Goldfarb emphasized the need for a Talmud Torah ( providing inexpensive Jewish education for primary school children ) , and it was immediately founded . Talmud Torahs helped synagogues in neighborhoods with small Jewish populations to attract young Jewish families , and were common in " second @-@ settlement areas of New York City such as Harlem and Brooklyn " . By 1907 – 1908 the congregation had grown to 85 member families . The Talmud Torah , which held classes four days a week , had three teachers and 75 students . 
 = = = Merger with Talmud Torah Anshei Emes and growth = = = 
 In 1908 , Baith Israel merged with <unk> Street 's Talmud Torah Anshei Emes Synagogue , a growing congregation which had become too large for the row house in which it held services . Talmud Torah Anshei Emes 's membership was mostly made up of Eastern European Jews , who were stricter in their observances than Baith Israel 's mostly German @-@ origin membership ; to accommodate them , a special all @-@ men section of pews was designated at the front left of the sanctuary . 
 The merged congregations adopted the current name , a combination of the two previous names , and , with the assistance and encouragement of Goldfarb and synagogue president Harris Copland founded a sisterhood . Nevertheless , the combined membership was still not large ; in 1911 , the year the congregation renovated the recently acquired synagogue building , the Talmud Torah had only 45 students , 10 of them the children of non @-@ members . 
 The sisterhood had grown to 42 members by 1913 ; that year 11 men were accepted as new congregants , including " a dentist , an optician , a druggist , a lawyer , a butler and two store owners and a roofer " — in general , middle class occupations . Baith Israel Anshei Emes also became one of the charter members of the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism in 1913 , with Michael <unk> , who had been synagogue president in 1906 , serving as the congregation 's delegate , and he , Rabbi Goldfarb and another synagogue member , Isaac Applebaum , were among the 22 individuals who initially founded the organization . 
 Aaron Copland celebrated his Bar Mitzvah at Baith Israel Anshei Emes in 1913 . The Copland family was active in the synagogue ; his father Harris became treasurer and chairman of the Talmud Torah in 1905 , had helped purchase the current building , served as president of the congregation from 1907 to 1910 , and was made a life trustee in 1936 . Aaron 's brother Ralph served as superintendent of the Sunday School . Goldfarb was instrumental in assisting Aaron Copland in his early musical career . While still in high school , Aaron had approached Goldfarb for his support in studying music : Aaron 's father wanted him to enter the legal profession . Goldfarb engineered an agreement whereby Aaron would study music for two or three years , and , if that did not work out , then study law . In his memoirs , Copland would later describe Goldfarb as " a composer of liturgical music and the possessor of a fine baritone voice ... a sensitive human being and an effective leader of the congregation " . 
 By 1916 , the congregation had installed 10 stained glass windows , electric lighting , a new pulpit , and two large bronze menorahs , and employed six people . Dues were $ 12 ( today $ 260 ) per year , and Sunday school fees were $ 0 @.@ 02 ( today $ 0 @.@ 430 ) per session . Membership had grown to 140 families by 1919 . The congregational school held classes daily , and had 400 students and 20 teachers . 
 Sidney Weinberg , who rose from the job of assistant porter to head Goldman Sachs from 1930 to 1969 , was married at Baith Israel Anshei Emes in 1920 . The Weinberg family , which had joined the synagogue when it was still on <unk> Place , was also very active in the synagogue ; Sidney 's mother , Sophie , was sisterhood president from 1912 to 1913 , and his father , Pincus , served as president from 1919 to 1921 , and the children all attended the Sunday school and Talmud Torah . The <unk> subsequently moved to Flatbush , where in 1924 Pincus became the first president of the East Midwood Jewish Center . 
 In 1924 , a fire almost destroyed the upper level of the school building , but the congregation repaired the damage . Another renovation was begun in 1928 , and included installing illuminated stained glass over the ark and bronze memorial tablets at the rear of the sanctuary , and repainting the sanctuary walls and columns in a trompe @-@ l 'œil manner imitating Jerusalem stone and marble . 
 = = = Great Depression and post @-@ World War II decline = = = 
 On its 75th anniversary in 1931 , the congregation received a congratulatory message from President Herbert Hoover . Additional congratulatory messages arrived from Governor ( later President ) Franklin D. Roosevelt , Lieutenant Governor Herbert H. Lehman , Mayor Jimmy Walker , and Felix M. Warburg . Nevertheless , the Great Depression brought difficult times ; officers were no longer paid their salaries , and were informed in 1932 that they would have to " wait indefinitely " to receive their back wages . In 1933 , the synagogue abolished fixed wages entirely for its employees , and instead paid them on a " month @-@ to @-@ month basis " , depending on what the congregation could afford . 
 In 1932 women were allowed to join the choir . In deference to traditionalists , however , the choir was moved to the organ loft , so that the women would be less visible . 
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s , Herman <unk> raised $ 20 @,@ 000 ( today $ 200 @,@ 000 ) and contributed another $ 20 @,@ 000 for another renovation of the synagogue . The building was fortified , the interior ( except the front wall ) repainted , and the exterior brick walls , which had been clad in " blue @-@ veined white stone " , were refinished with " brownstone type stuccoed slabs " . When the renovations were complete , the synagogue was re @-@ dedicated in January 1953 . Despite <unk> 's efforts , membership continued to decline , as congregants moved to the suburbs . Though the Centennial Celebrations of 1956 " provided a brief burst of energy for the Congregation and produced funds to maintain the Synagogue " , during this period the choir was disbanded , the Sunday School and Talmud Torah closed , and paid staff reduced . 
 In the 1960s , following Goldfarb 's retirement , the synagogue hired a series of part @-@ time rabbis , including Goldfarb 's grandson , Henry D. Michelman , who served as rabbi from 1967 to 1971 . Michelman , who would later become the Executive Vice President of the Synagogue Council of America , was , like his grandfather , a talented musician , composing music for synagogues and churches , writing scores for television films for ABC , A & E , CNBC , and PBS , and serving as Chairman of the American Society of Jewish Music . 
 The membership decline continued in the late 1960s and early 1970s , as older congregants died and moved away , and dwindled to the point where the congregation could no longer afford to heat the sanctuary , and thought they would have to disband . Nevertheless , in 1972 the congregation established a nursery school and <unk> ( high school ) . 
 = = = Rebirth : 1980s and 1990s = = = 
 Changing demographics and new synagogue programs helped the congregation recover from its low point in the 1970s . In 1979 , Raymond Scheindlin , a Ph.D. in Arabic literature from Columbia University , and professor of medieval Hebrew poetry at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America ( JTSA ) , became the part @-@ time rabbi of the congregation , replacing Howard Gorin , who had served since 1976 . Scheindlin had become a member in 1974 , after joining the faculty of the JTSA and moving to Brooklyn Heights , and from that point on read the Torah every week and served as cantor . He also encouraged the re @-@ constitution of a choir , which called itself " the <unk> Singers " after <unk> <unk> , the leading Jewish composer of the late Italian Renaissance , whose works the choir sang . 
 In 1982 Scheindlin stated that the membership had grown to the point where it again required the services of a full @-@ time rabbi , and the congregation hired Jonathan Ginsburg as its first full @-@ time rabbi since Israel Goldfarb 's retirement . Ginsburg developed adult education and young singles programs , and improved standards in the synagogue 's children 's education programs . Geoffrey Goldberg followed him as rabbi from 1987 to 1988 . 
 In 1994 the buildings ' stained glass windows , parapet tower , and brownstone were repaired , landscaping redone , and , with a grant from the Sol Goldman Charitable trust , the bimah and vestibule were refurbished . Membership had increased to almost 200 families by 1995 , and in 1996 Samuel H. Weintraub was hired as rabbi . 
 = = = Increasing involvement of women = = = 
 In 1961 the synagogue began granting women some pulpit honors , giving the Sisterhood President <unk> , and in 1966 granting married couples <unk> and <unk> ( the honors of lifting and re @-@ wrapping the Torah after it has been read ) . In the 1970s , women became more involved in the synagogue 's political and religious activities : in 1972 , the first woman was elected to the board of trustees , and in 1975 , the congregation began calling women to the Torah and counting women in the minyan , the latter just two years after the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of the Rabbinical Assembly voted nine to four in favor of this innovation . 
 In 1980 , Nancy Fink , a Brooklyn Law School professor , was elected as the congregation 's first female president . Fink called a full membership meeting in 1982 to decide whether women could lead the services , blow the shofar ( the rams @-@ horn trumpet blown on the High Holidays ) , and whether daughters of <unk> ( hereditary priests ) could give the priestly blessing . Advised by Scheindlin , the congregation decided to make the services fully egalitarian , allowing women to perform all three functions . 
 Baith Israel Anshei Emes 's move to egalitarianism culminated in August 1988 , when Debra Cantor was hired as its first female rabbi , making it the first synagogue in the Northeastern United States to be led by a woman . Cantor , who was 33 at the time , had been valedictorian of that year 's graduating class at the Jewish Theological Seminary . The decision was not accepted by all congregants ; the Conservative movement had ordained its first female rabbi , Amy <unk> , only three years before , in 1985 , and following Cantor 's appointment a number of families left the synagogue to form B 'nai Avraham , an Orthodox congregation in Brooklyn Heights . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 In 2002 Baith Israel Anshei Emes received a $ 1 million grant for building renovations from Lillian Goldman , just weeks before her death ; she had previously donated $ 20 million for the reconstruction and expansion of Yale Law School 's library , and $ 5 million to Manhattan 's 92nd Street Y for a family center there . After raising over $ 2 million more , including a $ 54 @,@ 000 grant from the Jewish Communal Fund , in 2003 the congregation began re @-@ building the three story school / community center from the ground up , leaving only the historic facade . In 2004 the building was re @-@ opened as the " Sol and Lillian Goldman Education Center " , and a day @-@ time pre @-@ school launched . Though the sanctuary also needed extensive repairs , the renovations of the school / community center were undertaken first because the congregation decided " a venue for social functions is at the heart of every cohesive religious group " . The following year , the school received a $ 25 @,@ 000 grant from the Edith Glick <unk> Children 's Foundation " [ t ] o assist in the development of the Kane Street Kids program for pre @-@ school age children housed in the Congregation 's Early Childhood Center " . 
 Nearly 300 households were members by 2006 , and in the same year , the New York State Office of Parks , Recreation and Historic Preservation awarded the synagogue a grant of $ 350 @,@ 000 for exterior restoration of the sanctuary . The grant was part of a million @-@ dollar capital campaign that the membership intended to carry out in 2008 , as the synagogue building still required extensive repairs : the roof leaked , causing interior damage , and ( along with the gutters ) needed to be replaced ; interior columns were taped to prevent plaster from falling off them ; the sanctuary doors needed to be replaced ; and the stained glass windows needed to be removed , the metal holding them repaired , and their wooden framing replaced . In 2007 the New York Landmarks Conservancy 's Sacred Sites Program awarded Baith Israel Anshei Emes grants totaling $ 17 @,@ 500 , for copper roof and masonry restoration . 
 The congregation had been supportive of gays since at least the early 1990s , and following the late 2006 decision by the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards to allow same @-@ sex commitment ceremonies , in 2007 Baith Israel Anshei Emes voted to follow suit . The day before Yom Kippur , 2009 , the synagogue was picketed by members of the Westboro Baptist Church , who shouted antisemitic and anti @-@ gay slogans . 
 Led by Rabbi Samuel H. Weintraub since 1996 , Baith Israel Anshei Emes is the oldest continuously operating synagogue in Brooklyn . 
 = Somerset County Cricket Club in 1882 = 
 Somerset County Cricket Club made their debut in first @-@ class cricket in the 1882 English cricket season . They were captained by Stephen Newton , and played eight first @-@ class matches , five against county opposition , two against the Marylebone Cricket Club and one against the touring Australian team . They only won one of the eight contests , that against Hampshire at Taunton . Of the other matches , one was drawn and the other six were all losses for Somerset . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack described the season as " disastrous " , but the publication qualified this statement with mild optimism for 1883 . 
 Part of the reason for Somerset 's poor performances was their inability to consistently field their best players ; at least four of their better cricketers were unable to commit to the full fixture list , and in all the county played 30 different people in their eight matches . Faint praise was offered to the batting of William Herbert Fowler , Newton and Edward Sainsbury in The Sportsman , but the bowling was considered by Wisden to be sub @-@ standard , particularly that of Arnold Fothergill . 
 = = Background = = 
 Somerset County Cricket Club was formed in 1875 , and played irregular county fixtures in the years after that , during which time they struggled to remain financially solvent . Upon their formation , the club had no fixed home ground , and it was declared that they would play " on any ground in the county that may be selected by the committee . " However , in 1881 , they moved into the newly built Athletic Grounds in Taunton . Although it is widely accepted that Somerset 's debut first @-@ class match came in 1882 , some records do include earlier matches in 1879 and 1881 against Gloucestershire as being of first @-@ class status . 
 = = Squad = = 
 In their eight first @-@ class matches in 1882 , Somerset fielded 30 different players . Only three appeared in all eight matches : Arnold Fothergill , William Herbert Fowler , and Edward Sainsbury , while fourteen players appeared in only one match that season . The club captain , Stephen Newton , missed the first three matches of the season as he was a schoolmaster in London , and was not available until the summer holidays . Newton was not the only talented player to only make limited appearances for the side ; in their review of the season , the Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack explained that Alfred Evans , Robert Ramsay and Bill Roe were all unavailable at various points , and that these absences were among " many good reasons to account for a disastrous season . " 
 The following players made at least one appearance for Somerset in first @-@ class cricket in 1882 . Age given is at the start of Somerset 's first match of the season ( 8 June 1882 ) . 
 Key 
 denotes that the player appeared as a wicket @-@ keeper for Somerset in 1882 
 Apps denotes the number of appearances made by the player for Somerset in 1882 
 Ref denotes the reference for the player details 
 = = County cricket = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 = = = = First half of the season : away matches = = = = 
 Somerset made their debut in first @-@ class cricket against Lancashire on 8 June 1882 . The Western Daily Press noted that Somerset were not able to field a full @-@ strength team in the match , missing Evans , Ramsay and Roe . However , the Lancashire team which faced them was described by the same paper as being " very second @-@ rate " . The weather was showery most of the day , and play was abandoned at half five because of the rain , with Lancashire on 231 for 8 having won the toss and batted first . Heavy rain overnight made the ground unplayable on the second day , so play resumed the following day , although rain continued to threaten . The original wicket was badly damaged , being described in the York Herald as " a puddle " , and so the stumps were moved to enable play to begin . Somerset took the final two Lancashire wickets in the first ten minutes , bowling them out for 237 . Fowler and Sainsbury opened the batting for Somerset , and put on eighteen runs together before being dismissed in quick succession . The Western Daily Press recorded that " after this disaster waited on the visitors . " Only two other batsmen scored any runs for Somerset , and they were all out for 29 runs , the second lowest first @-@ class total at the time . Somerset followed @-@ on , and their second innings proceeded in much the same fashion as the first ; the pair scored 35 runs , while the rest of the team only added a further 6 . Somerset lost the match by an innings and 157 runs . The Bath Chronicle and Weekly Gazette defended Somerset 's performance on the third day slightly , noting that the poor condition of the pitch favoured the Lancashire bowlers . Lancashire 's George Nash took eight wickets in the first innings , including four in one four @-@ ball over , while fellow spin bowler Jack Crossland collected six in the second innings . 
 In Somerset 's second match , they faced their nearest opposition , Gloucestershire . Once again , the weather was poor , and the Spa Ground in Gloucester , which was hosting the match , was specially looked after during the heavy rain preceding the match to ensure that it would be in a good condition for the game . As it was , the Bristol Mercury described the wicket as being " in fairly good order " , and play started just over half @-@ an @-@ hour late on the first day . Somerset 's batting failed to make a significant total ; Fowler was the only batsman to reach double figures , totalling more than half of his team 's runs with 39 . W. G. Grace took eight wickets for Gloucestershire to bowl Somerset out for 62 . In Gloucestershire 's reply , E. M. Grace and Billy Midwinter scored centuries to help them establish a lead of 286 runs . In their response , Somerset scored 109 , including a partnership of 61 between Sainsbury and Fred <unk> which was praised in the Birmingham Daily Post . Despite an improved batting performance , Somerset lost the match by an innings and 177 runs . 
 Facing Hampshire in Southampton for the third match , Somerset won the toss and opted to bat first . The pitch was soft , due to the heavy rainfall through the morning , and play started shortly after midday . Sainsbury was yet again one of few Somerset players to reach double figures , and they were bowled out for 101 . Cecil Currie , a spin bowler for Hampshire , collected eight of the wickets . Somerset managed to restrict Hampshire 's lead to 46 runs ; Francis Reed took four wickets , and Fothergill three . Fowler and Fothergill were Somerset 's most successful batsmen in their second innings , played mostly in light rain , helping the county to reach 118 runs . That left Hampshire requiring 73 runs to win , which the hosts achieved without losing any wickets , to beat Somerset with ten wickets to spare . 
 The Somerset team travelled to Lord 's in London in early August to face the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . Somerset batted first after winning the toss , but lost three batsmen for ducks early in the innings . Somerset 's captain , Newton – playing his first match of the season for the county , batted for the rest of the innings to score 57 runs , and shared a large partnership with Francis Reed . The MCC started well in their innings , but the introduction of Fowler into the bowling attack brought their batting to a quick conclusion ; Fowler took four wickets while only conceding eight runs , and claimed a hat @-@ trick by bowling Edward Hawtrey , Charles Burke and Thomas Mycroft in successive deliveries . Somerset had a 25 @-@ run lead going into the second innings , in which Newton once again top @-@ scored . In addition to his total of 67 , <unk> <unk> made an unbeaten 59 , and Fowler scored 23 runs from just six scoring shots , including a six which went out of the ground . The Western Daily Press described Fowler as " possibly the hardest hitter amongst English cricketers " , while his history of the county , David Foot suggests that Fowler was " perhaps the earliest Somerset batsman to parade the fundamental skills of slogging . " Somerset totalled 219 , to leave the MCC needing to score 245 runs to win . Principally due to the batting of John Russel , the MCC reached the target , but only had one wicket remaining ; Fothergill having taken five wickets and Charles Winter four . 
 = = = = Second half of the season : home matches = = = = 
 A few days later , Somerset played their first home fixture , at the Taunton Athletic Grounds , hosting Hampshire . In contrast to many of their previous game , the weather was good , and on winning the toss , Hampshire decided to bat first . Charles Seymour batted well for the visitors , accruing 57 out of Hampshire 's 146 runs , but Fowler was again the best of the Somerset bowlers , collecting four wickets for nine runs to help restrict the Hampshire total . Ramsay top @-@ scored for Somerset in their reply , accumulating 71 runs before being bowled , while a number of other batsmen made useful scores to help Somerset to their total of 214 . Edward Western , the Somerset secretary batted in his only innings of the season for the county , coming in as the last man , but he failed to score a run . Somerset struggled to collect wickets when Hampshire batted again , and tried eight different bowlers without much success . Their fielding was described by the Bristol Mercury as being " loose " , but when the sixth wicket was taken , with 232 runs scored , the rest followed reasonably quickly , and Hampshire finished on 290 . Fowler was dismissed early in Somerset 's chase , but Newton and Sainsbury put on 118 runs together to help their towards victory . Sainsbury was dismissed for 63 , but Newton continued to bat , putting on 80 runs before being dismissed . Somerset eventually reached the required total with five wickets remaining to achieve their first win of the season . 
 The next day after defeating Hampshire , Somerset faced the MCC at Taunton . The MCC had brought a strong team , including eight professionals , and on winning the toss they elected to bat . After a cautious start , the second @-@ wicket partnership of Billy Gunn and William Hearn put on 173 runs together , and according to the Western Daily Press , " the Somerset bowling was completely mastered . " Somerset tried eight different bowlers to try to get a wicket , but the partnership was eventually broken when Hearn was run out for 91 . Frank Hearne then joined Gunn at the crease , and the pair continued the MCC 's dominance , adding a further 130 runs . Another run out , again due to the fielding of Newton , brought Gunn 's innings to an end , after the MCC batsman had scored 188 runs . Wickets then began to fall more frequently ; Roe collected three , while Fothergill and Winter had two apiece , and the MCC were eventually all out for 506 on the second morning . In their response , Somerset lost the early wickets of Sainsbury and Newton , but then a partnership between Fowler and Roe took the score up to 181 , during which Fowler reached his century , coming in just 55 minutes . Once that partnership was ended with the dismissal of Roe , Somerset regularly lost wickets . Fowler was caught in the slips for 139 , which had included three sixes , and Somerset ended their innings on 286 . They followed on , and lost five early wickets before a partnership between Francis Terry , who scored 77 runs , and Fothergill steadied the innings and help Somerset secure a draw . 
 Somerset 's final county match of the season came against the same opposition as their first , Lancashire . The low attendance at the match was criticised in the press , and the Western Daily Press in particular described that " it was painfully obvious that <unk> , as a body , take no interest in first @-@ class cricket . " Six wickets from Evans helped Somerset to limit Lancashire to 178 runs in their first innings , but Somerset failed to capitalise ; Fowler and Newton scored 24 and 23 runs respectively , but no other batsman reached double figures . Somerset were dismissed for 74 runs , more than 100 behind , and were asked to follow on by Lancashire . Batting again , the Somerset players put in an improved performance , and reached 157 runs , of which Roe scored 45 . Lancashire were required to bat again , but reached the winning target of 53 runs for the loss of only one wicket . 
 Towards the end of August , the touring Australian team visited Taunton , attracting the largest crowd of the season , roughly 1 @,@ 500 people . Somerset were not considered to have much chance in the match , though Australia were missing three of their better players . The Leeds Mercury offered Somerset faint praise , suggesting that they had " no great cause to be dissatisfied with their performances . " The Australians batted first , and were restricted to 245 by Somerset . Alick Bannerman was the highest scorer for the tourists , with 50 runs , while Evans and Fothergill took three wickets each . In their response , Somerset 's batsmen struggled against the bowling of Fred Spofforth , who was known as the " Demon " . Spofforth took nine wickets , while conceding only 51 runs , and Somerset were forced to follow @-@ on ; no batsman scored more than 17 runs in the first innings for the county . In the second @-@ innings , Somerset performed slightly better ; Newton scored 32 runs , and five other batsmen reached double figures . The Australian bowling once again proved too much though , and Somerset lost the match by an innings and 19 runs . The Western Daily Press praised the accurate bowling of both Spofforth and Harry Boyle during the match . 
 = = = Season record = = = 
 = = = Match log and statistics = = = 
 = Henry Garnet = 
 Henry Garnet ( July 1555 – 3 May 1606 ) , sometimes Henry Garnett , was an English Jesuit priest executed for his complicity in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . Born in <unk> , Derbyshire , he was educated in Nottingham and later at Winchester College , before he moved to London in 1571 , to work for a publisher . There he professed an interest in legal studies , and in 1575 he travelled to the continent and joined the Society of Jesus . He was ordained in Rome some time around 1582 . 
 In 1586 Garnet returned to England as part of the Jesuit mission , soon succeeding Father William Weston as Jesuit superior , following the latter 's capture by the English authorities . Garnet established a secret press , which lasted until late 1588 , and in 1594 he interceded in the Wisbech Stirs , a dispute between secular and regular clergy . He preferred a passive approach to the problems Catholics faced in England , approving of the disclosure by Catholic priests of the existence of the 1603 Bye Plot , and exhorting English Catholics not to engage in violent rebellion . 
 In summer 1605 Garnet met with Robert Catesby , a religious zealot who , unknown to him , planned to kill the Protestant King James I. The existence of Catesby 's Gunpowder Plot was revealed to him by Father Oswald Tesimond on 24 July 1605 , but as the information was received under the seal of the confessional , he felt that Canon law prevented him from speaking out . Instead , without telling anyone of what Catesby planned , he wrote to his superiors in Rome , urging them to warn English Catholics against the use of force . 
 When the plot failed Garnet went into hiding , but he was eventually arrested on 27 January 1606 . He was taken to London and interrogated by the Privy Council , whose members included John Popham , Edward Coke and Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury . Imprisoned in the Tower of London , his conversations with fellow prisoner Edward Oldcorne were monitored by eavesdroppers , and his letters to friends such as Anne Vaux were intercepted . His guilt , announced at the end of his trial on 28 March 1606 , was a foregone conclusion . Criticised for his use of equivocation , which Coke called " open and broad lying and forswearing " , and attacked for not warning the authorities of what Catesby planned , he was sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered . He was executed on 3 May 1606 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry Garnet ( or Garnett ) was born some time around July 1555 at <unk> in Derbyshire , son of Brian Garnet ( or Garnett ) and Alice ( née Jay ) . He had at least five siblings : two brothers , Richard and John , and three sisters , Margaret , Eleanor and Anne , all of whom became nuns at Louvain . Henry studied at the grammar school in Nottingham where , from 1565 , his father was master . Following his election as a scholar on 24 August 1567 , in 1568 he entered Winchester College , where he apparently excelled . His love of music and " rare and delightful " voice were complemented by an ability to perform songs without preparation , and he was reportedly also skilled with the lute . Father Thomas <unk> wrote that Garnet was " the prime scholar of Winchester College , very skilful in music and in playing upon the instruments , very modest in his countenance and in all his actions , so much that the schoolmasters and wardens offered him very great friendship , to be placed by their means in New College , Oxford . " 
 = = Rome = = 
 Garnet did not enter New College ; instead , late in 1571 , he left Winchester for London . There he worked for a legal publisher , Richard <unk> , as a proof @-@ reader and corrector . He often dined with Sir John Popham , who as Lord Chief Justice was to preside over the trial of the Gunpowder Plotters , men whose association with Garnet would eventually prove so fateful . Although Garnet professed to Popham an interest in legal studies , in 1575 he sailed for Portugal with Giles Gallop , to enter the Society of Jesus . 
 The two men travelled to Rome and on 11 September 1575 were accepted into the church at Sant 'Andrea della Valle . Garnet studied under the theologian Father Robert Bellarmine . Two of his professors , Christopher Clavius and Robert Bellarmine , praised his abilities . He was ordained sometime around 1582 and stayed in Rome as a Professor of Hebrew , lecturing also on metaphysics and mathematics . He was also an English confessor at St Peter 's , but in May 1584 his academic career was curtailed when , perhaps as a consequence of a petition from the Jesuit superior for England William Weston , Father Robert Persons asked that he be sent to England . The Superior General Claudio Acquaviva , who saw Garnet as his successor , refused this request . He thought Garnet more suited to " the quiet life " than that which awaited him in England , but on 2 May 1586 he relented and allowed him to leave . Appointed superior for the journey , Garnet travelled with Robert Southwell , leaving for Calais on 8 May . He landed near Folkestone early in July 1586 . 
 = = England = = 
 After meeting the Jesuit superior for England William Weston at a London inn , Garnet , Southwell and Weston travelled to <unk> , near Marlow , Buckinghamshire . Spending just over a week at the home of Richard Bold , they engaged in prayer and masses , and also took confessions . They discussed their mission in England , deciding to meet each year in February and August ( later changed to Easter and autumn ) . Weston also gave the two men details of Catholic houses that would shelter them . 
 Acquaviva had instructed that should anything happen to Weston , Garnet was to succeed him as superior in England , which he did when only days after leaving <unk> , Weston was captured en route to London . Acquaviva had also given Garnet permission to print pro @-@ Catholic literature , and so early the next year he met Southwell in London to discuss the establishment of a secret press , which was probably located somewhere around a former Augustinian hospital near Spitalfields . It lasted until late 1588 and was responsible for A <unk> Letter to All the Afflicted <unk> in England , author unknown , and An Epistle of Comfort , by Southwell . From a friend 's window in Ludgate Hill , Garnet witnessed the November 1588 procession to a thanksgiving service at Old St Paul 's Cathedral , celebrating the failed Spanish invasion . Spain 's actions gave Garnet much cause for concern , " For when we thought that there was an end to these disasters by which we are already nearly destroyed , our hope was suddenly turned to sorrow , and now with redoubled effort the overseers are pressing upon us " . People were allowed to spectate from windows only if their loyalty to Queen Elizabeth I was guaranteed by the householder . In a letter to Acquaviva , Garnet said that many of his supporters thought that he was more concerned for the Queen than her Calvinist ministers . In light of the Armada 's destruction , he also wrote to the general to ask for advice on two versions of a proposed oath to allow Roman Catholics to swear their allegiance to the Queen . The government 's version required that Catholics reject the pope 's authority over Elizabeth , whereas the Catholic version proposed that they recognise her authority and " would wish with every effort to struggle to thwart and to fight to the death all those who will in any way endanger the life of her Highness " . The Privy Council rejected the latter . 
 Garnet 's first few years in England were spent meeting new priests in London , including John Gerard and Edward Oldcorne . Jesuits had been banished from England since 1585 , and if discovered they risked being charged with high treason . Avoiding pursuers was therefore a recurrent problem , and Garnet was almost caught on several occasions . As a result of an almost disastrous meeting at Baddesley Clinton in 1591 , when he and many others were almost captured together while renewing their vows , he reorganised the mission into eleven smaller groups , each assigned two weeks annually . Following Southwell 's capture in June 1592 , and the search of Anne Vaux and Eleanor Brooksby 's rented house in Warwickshire , he wrote to Acquaviva to ask for an assistant who could succeed him as superior . Henry Walpole was thus dispatched , but was captured on his arrival in December 1593 , and executed in York in April 1595 . Garnet believed that it was his duty to observe ( in disguise ) the executions of his fellow priests , so as to secretly administer the last rites , and he may have been present at Southwell 's execution at Tyburn in 1595 . The latter 's death was a significant blow for Garnet , who later wrote of the " intolerable burden of loneliness " he carried while in England . 
 In November 1593 Garnet travelled to the decrepit and decayed Wisbech Castle , requisitioned by the government in 1579 for the internment of Catholic priests . William Weston was held there . The castle 's inhabitants were supported by Catholic alms and lived a relatively comfortable existence ; Garnet was complimentary about Wisbech , calling it a " college of venerable confessors " . The following year he mediated in a dispute there between secular and regular clergy ( the latter represented by the Jesuits ) , which became known as the Wisbech Stirs . The argument was settled by the end of the year , but Garnet was concerned that reports of discontent at the Jesuit @-@ administered English College in Rome and tension between some Catholic English exiles in Brussels might undermine his efforts to stabilise the situation . 
 = = Gunpowder Plot = = 
 = = = Introduction to Catesby = = = 
 Garnet spent much of 1604 on the move , although few details of his travels exist . At Easter he reportedly gave a mass at <unk> Hall , the house of John Wright . In November he was with Anne Vaux ( whose family he had been introduced to in summer 1586 ) at White Webbs near Enfield , renewing the vows given on the Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady . On 9 June 1605 , he was to be found in a room on Thames Street in London , with Robert Catesby . In the midst of what Garnet later recalled was a seemingly casual conversation , Catesby asked the priest about the morality of " killing innocents " . Garnet replied according to Catholic theology , that often , during war , innocents were killed alongside the enemy . According to Antonia Fraser , Garnet may have thought that Catesby 's request was to do with him possibly raising a regiment in Flanders . 
 Garnet was not at all like Catesby , described by Fraser as possessing the mentality " of the crusader who does not hesitate to employ the sword in the cause of values which he considers are spiritual " . In contrast , Garnet believed that " things were best settled by submission to the will of God . " He was ebullient over King James 's succession to the English throne , and hoped there would be no foreign interference . Of the 1603 Bye Plot , revealed ( with his blessing ) to the Privy Council by two Catholic priests , he wrote that it was " a piece of impudent folly , for we know that it is by peaceful means that his Holiness and other princes are prepared to help us . " He exhorted that Pope Clement VIII instruct all English Catholics not to engage in violent rebellion , " <unk> et <unk> " . It was a message echoed by Archpriest George Blackwell , who commanded his priests never to attempt any such thing , but it proved controversial ; early in summer 1605 Garnet reported to Rome that English Catholics had reached " a stage of desperation " . 
 The two met again in July at <unk> in Essex . Garnet told Catesby that he " wished him to look what he did if he intended anything . That he must first look to the lawfulness of the act itself , and then he must not have so little regard of Innocents that he spare not friends and necessary persons for the Commonwealth . " When Catesby offered to tell the priest more , Garnet declined : " I told him what charge we all had of quietness and to procure the like in others . " Garnet also spoke with William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , asking him " if Catholics were able to make their part good by arms against the King " , but Monteagle 's reply was vague . Author Alan Haynes suggests that Garnet may at that point have become marginalised . 
 = = = Seal of the confessional = = = 
 Garnet later claimed to have been ignorant of Catesby 's designs until 24 July , when he was approached by Father Oswald Tesimond . " An intelligent and thoughtful man " , Tesimond wanted his superior 's advice as Catesby had recently told him of his plan . As Garnet viewed Tesimond 's information as having been imparted under the seal of the confessional , he later claimed to have felt unable to warn anyone of Catesby 's plan . According to his own account , the two had a third meeting around 24 July . He read to Catesby a letter he had received from Persons , urging him to speak to the Pope before attempting any scheme , but fearful of being discovered , Catesby declined . So Garnet wrote to <unk> , claiming to have prevented several outbreaks of violence , and of his suspicion that there was " a risk that some private endeavour may commit treason or use force against the King " . As he had done following the failed Bye Plot , he urged the pope to publicly warn against the use of force , attempting to hide his knowledge of the plot by suggesting that the warning be aimed at recusants in Wales . He also sent Sir Edmund Baynham to deliver the same message , and when Parliament was prorogued on 28 July , Garnet satisfied himself that the danger had been averted . 
 On 24 August he was at White Webbs near Enfield , with Anne Vaux , her sister Eleanor Brooksby , her nephew William Brooksby and his wife Dorothy . A few days later the group set out on a pilgrimage to St Winefride 's Well at Holywell in Wales . They travelled to John Grant 's home at Norbrook , then Huddington Court near Worcester , through Shrewsbury , and finally to Wales . About 30 people made the journey west , including Everard Digby and his wife , and their secret chaplain Edward Oldcorne , and Nicholas Owen . On his return from Wales , Garnet travelled with Anne Vaux to Rushton Hall , home of the recently deceased Thomas Tresham ( father to Francis Tresham ) . From there they travelled to Digby 's home at Gayhurst House in Buckinghamshire . Vaux was suspicious that so many horses were being collected at the homes of her friends and family , and confessed to Garnet her fear that " these wild heads had something in hand " . She asked him to speak with Catesby , but Garnet reassured her that Catesby was instead seeking a commission in Flanders . Garnet wrote a letter of recommendation for Catesby for that very purpose . When in October Vaux raised the issue once more , claiming that several women had asked her where they should retreat to once " the brunt was passed in the beginning of Parliament " , Garnet again mentioned Flanders , although Fraser suggests that Vaux 's questioning must have concerned him deeply . 
 = = = Arrest and imprisonment = = = 
 Garnet was at Coughton Court on 6 November when Thomas Bates brought news of the plot 's failure . Catesby wanted him to help raise support in Wales , where it was thought Catholic support would be more likely , but Garnet was horrified . In a letter to Catesby and Digby , he urged them to abandon their " wicked actions " and follow the pope 's advice . He spent weeks on the run but was eventually arrested on 27 January 1606 , at Hindlip Hall . There , for eight days , he and Fr . Edward Oldcorne ( later beatified as the Blessed Edward Oldcorne ) secreted themselves in a small , cramped space , unable even to stand or stretch their legs . They received sustenance from their protectors through a small drinking straw hidden within the building 's structure , but with no commode or drainage they were eventually forced by " customs of nature which must of necessity be done " to emerge from hiding , and were immediately captured . They were taken first to Holt Castle in Worcestershire , and a few days later to London . Garnet was still weak from his ordeal , and Salisbury therefore ordered that he be given a good mount ; his supplies were paid for by the king . The group was accompanied by a Puritan minister who " ranted at length without interruption " , but Garnet 's replies remained erudite , brief and clear — much to the minister 's disappointment . On his arrival in London he was taken to the Gatehouse Prison in Westminster , already home to many Catholic prisoners , including his nephew , Father Thomas Garnet . 
 Garnet first appeared in front of the Privy Council on 13 February 1606 . Present were John Popham , Edward Coke , Sir William Waad , and the Earls of Worcester , Northampton , Nottingham and Salisbury . Superficially , they treated him with respect , removing their hats and addressing him as " Mr Garnet " , although they made fun of his relationship with Anne Vaux , claiming he was her lover , not her confessor . During his questioning he admitted some of his movements , and that he had received Catesby 's letter on 6 November , but he denied being involved in the plot , whose members he did not name . Garnet was convinced that his captors were interested only in the failed scheme and believed he might be able to clear his name , but the councillors also asked him about the doctrine of equivocation . His own treatise on this topic , one of the " heretical , treasonable and damnable books " found amongst Francis Tresham 's possessions , was laid on the council table before him . Although it condemned lying , Garnet 's treatise supported the notion that when questioned , for instance , on the presence of a priest in his house , a Catholic might " securely in conscience " answer " No " if he had a " secret meaning reserved in his mind " . The occasions on which a Catholic might legitimately use equivocation , he supposed , were limited , but such replies could be taken as an example of insincerity or deviousness — especially to the king 's council , who may not have wanted to see Garnet prove his case . The council 's view of equivocation was very different from Garnet 's . In their eyes , it was simple deceit . 
 The next day , Garnet was moved to the Tower of London , into what he described as " a very fine chamber " . He was afforded claret with his meals , though it took him some time to get bedding and coal for the fireplace . He claimed that Lieutenant of the Tower William Waad treated him well , although on the subject of religion his speeches became " violent and impotent " . 
 Garnet 's recent interrogation was only the first of many . Generally , his answers were carefully considered and demonstrated a passive resistance to his questioners ; the use of the rack was a distinct possibility , one which he answered with " <unk> ista <unk> [ Threats are only for boys ] " . What information he did give up was of limited interest only . His jailer , a man named Carey , was employed by Waad to gain the priest 's trust , offering to relay letters to his nephew in the Gatehouse Prison . Carey then placed Garnet into a cell containing a hole through which he was able to converse with Oldcorne , who was in a neighbouring cell . From " a place which was made for this precise purpose " , two government eavesdroppers were therefore able to record details of conversations between the two priests . Their communications were mostly innocent , although Garnet 's admission that on one occasion he drank too much wine was later used against him , along with other incriminating evidence recorded during their stay . His communications with his nephew , and Anne Vaux , were also intercepted . Most of these letters found their intended recipient , but not before they had first been read by Waad , who also kept Salisbury informed . Although Garnet told Vaux that the Council 's evidence constituted nothing but " presumptions " , insufficient for a state trial , early in March he confessed , possibly as a result of torture . Vaux too was arrested and interrogated twice , just as further questions were being asked of Garnet by the council and the king , the latter interested in his opinion on theological matters . 
 Despite his claims to have been horrified by Catesby 's plan , his declaration , which admitted that he had " dealt very reservedly with your Lordships in the case of the late powder action " , gave the government proof that he had prior knowledge of the plot , and in their view , he was therefore guilty of misprision of treason . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Garnet 's trial took place on Friday 28 March 1606 . He was taken to the Guildhall by closed coach ; an unusual method , considering prisoners were usually walked to trial , though the authorities may have had some concern about support from a sympathetic crowd . The trial began at about 9 : 30 am and lasted all day . In attendance were King James ( hidden from public view ) and several courtiers including Lady Arbella Stuart and Catherine Howard , Countess of Suffolk . Garnet was introduced with his various aliases , which included " Whalley , otherwise Darcy , otherwise Roberts , otherwise Farmer , otherwise Philips " . He was accused of having conspired with Catesby on 9 June 1605 to kill the king , his son , and to " alter and subvert the government of the kingdom and the true worship of God established in England " . He was also accused of having conspired with several others to blow up the House of Lords with gunpowder . He pleaded " not guilty " . 
 Speaking for the government , Edward Coke accused him of involvement in every treason since 1586 , the year he returned to England . According to Coke , the provincial superior was involved in the Main and Bye Plots of 1603 . He had sent Edmund Baynham to Rome to gain papal approval for the 1605 plot , and while at Coughton in November , had prayed " for the success of the great action " . Coke called Garnet " a doctor of five Ds , namely , of dissimulation , of deposing of princes , of disposing of kingdoms , of daunting and deterring of subjects , and of destruction " . His supposed inappropriate relationship with Anne Vaux was mentioned , but his adherence to the doctrine of equivocation proved extremely damaging . Francis Tresham 's deathbed letter , which claimed that Garnet had played no part in the so @-@ called Spanish Treason , was read aloud . Tresham claimed not to have seen Garnet " for fifteen or sixteen years before " , despite government evidence that the two had met more recently . Garnet had not seen the letter and did not know that it referred to events before 1602 , not 1605 . He was unable to explain it , except by saying " it may be , my Lord , that he meant to <unk> . " 
 Statements regarding Jesuit @-@ encouraged plots against Queen Elizabeth were read to the court , as well as some of the plotters ' confessions . Garnet defended his use of equivocation with his own treatise on the doctrine . He had denied his conversation with Oldcorne as it was a secret , but said that in matters of faith , equivocation could never be lawful . When asked by Salisbury what he would do if the pope excommunicated King James , he " denied to answer " . His defence of equivocation was scorned by Coke , who called it " open and broad lying and forswearing " . As for Tesimond 's confession , the planned assassination had not at that point happened and so Salisbury said that Garnet could easily have alerted the government . Salisbury attacked the idea that it had ever been made under the seal of the confessional , and claimed anyway that Garnet could have warned the authorities after his more ordinary conversation with Catesby about the death of innocents ; the priest replied by saying that at the time , he did not understand the relevance of Catesby 's questions . The Earl of Northampton said , in Latin , " quod non <unk> cum potest , <unk> " ( what a man does not forbid when he can , he orders ) . Garnet 's defence , that he had forbidden Catesby from proceeding , was futile . 
 The jury took fifteen minutes to decide that Garnet was guilty of treason . He was sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered . 
 = = = Execution = = = 
 The day after his trial Garnet made a new statement , which he hoped would clarify his dealings with Tresham . He also wrote to the king , reiterating his stance on violence against a rightful monarch . When the government lied and told him they had captured Tesimond , he wrote an apologetic letter to the priest regarding the nature of their conversation the previous year . He also wrote a final letter to Anne Vaux , on 21 April , relating his lack of fortune over the previous few months . 
 After about three months spent in the Tower , on Saturday 3 May 1606 Garnet was strapped to a wooden hurdle and taken by three horses to the churchyard of St Paul 's . He wore a black cloak over his clothes and hat , and spent much of the journey with his hands together and eyes closed . Present in the churchyard were the Sheriff of London , Sir Henry Montague , George Abbot and John <unk> . When asked if he had knowledge of any further treasons , Garnet replied that he had nothing to say . He rejected any <unk> to abandon his faith for Protestantism , and said that he had committed no offence against the king . The only thing he thought he might be condemned for was for abiding by the terms of the confessional , and if by that action he had offended the king or state , he asked for forgiveness . The recorder announced that this was an admission of guilt , but Garnet reiterated his not guilty plea and continued to argue the point . 
 Garnet highlighted the date of his execution , 3 May , the Feast of the Cross , and reaffirmed his innocence . He defended Anne Vaux against claims that their relationship had been inappropriate . He then prayed at the base of the ladder , disrobed down to his long , sewn @-@ up shirt , " that the wind might not blow it up " , and mounted the ladder . He ignored a Protestant minister who came forward , replying to an objectionable member of the audience that he " ever meant to die a true but perfect Catholic " . Bishop <unk> protested that " we are all Catholics " , although Garnet disagreed with this . He once again said his prayers , and was then thrown off the ladder . Before the executioner could cut him down alive , many in the crowd pulled on his legs , and as a result , Garnet did not suffer the remainder of his grim sentence . There was no applause when the executioner held Garnet 's heart aloft and said the traditional words , " Behold the heart of a traitor " . His head was set on a pole on London Bridge , but crowds of onlookers fascinated by its pallid appearance eventually forced the government to turn the head upwards , so its face was no longer visible . 
 A bloodstained straw husk saved from the scene of the execution and said to bear Garnet 's image became an object of curiosity . It was smuggled out of the country into the possession of the Society of Jesus , before being lost during the French Revolution . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Garnet 's writings include An Apology Against the Defence of <unk> ( 1593 ) , an attack against church <unk> in which he scolded Thomas Bell for supporting the occasional taking of Communion in the Church of England . This was followed by A Treatise of Christian Renunciation ( 1593 ) , which comprised a selection of quotations on what Catholics should be prepared to renounce for their faith , and The <unk> of the Rosary ( 1593 – 1594 ) 
 His defence of the practice of equivocation was published in A Treatise of Equivocation ( c . 1598 ) , originally titled A Treatise against lying and fraudulent dissimulation . Equivocation was condemned by most of his contemporaries as outright lying , including William Shakespeare , who may have alluded to Garnet in Macbeth with the following line : " who committed treason enough for God 's sake , yet could not <unk> to heaven " . 
 = Halotus = 
 Halotus ( c . 20 – 30 AD – c . 70 – 80 AD ) was a servant to the Roman Emperor Claudius , the fourth member of the Julio @-@ Claudian dynasty . He served Claudius as a taster and as a chief steward ; it was because of his occupation , which entailed close contact with Claudius , that he is and was a suspect in the murder of the latter by poison . Along with Agrippina the Younger , the wife of Claudius , Halotus was considered one of the most likely to have committed the murder , although speculation by ancient historians suggest that he may have been working under orders of Agrippina . 
 Following the death of Claudius , much public outrage ensued , and there was a clear desire in the general public that Halotus and several other suspects ( such as Tigellinus , another servant who served Claudius ) , be executed . Nero , who acceded to the throne , allowed Halotus to continue as chief steward and taster ; Halotus served Nero until the latter 's death in 68 , and Galba 's assumption of the throne . 
 Shortly after Galba became Emperor , he bestowed upon Halotus an " important procuratorship " . This new occupation of procurator resulted in Halotus ' becoming a very wealthy man in Roman society . Galba 's reason for allowing Halotus such a well @-@ paying job when he was generally unpopular in the Roman society could not fairly be predicted ; Galba often made decisions that were not well liked by the public but which Galba often claimed were " for the economic good " . 
 Halotus died close to the end of the century , his public reputation somewhat restored after his rise in stature and wealth . His date of death is not mentioned by ancient historians of the time , such as Tacitus or Suetonius , who were also some of the main recorders of the events around Claudius ' death and the political trauma that followed . Whether Halotus was involved in the murder of Claudius and to what extent remains an unresolved point , as do many other aspects related to Claudius ' passing . 
 = = Servant = = 
 Halotus worked as a servant for Claudius and also held the position of official taster , an occupation which entailed his tasting of a portion of every meal Claudius ate each day for poison . <unk> also worked to detect less sinister problems with the Emperor 's meal , such as whether the food was fit to be consumed . 
 As the Emperor 's personal taster , Halotus would accompany Claudius to every banquet and dinner and as chief steward , he would have been with Claudius and his family for the majority of the time . Thus he could have formed a relationship with Agrippina the Younger , suggesting the possibility of their collaboration in poisoning Claudius . It also meant that he would have been aware of details such as the Emperor 's food preferences , his meal times and his schedule , making it easier for him to commit the murder . 
 Halotus was also known to have been a eunuch . There are many possible reasons for this but the most likely is related to the possibility of sexual contact between servant and master ; a prohibition against sexual contact between royalty and servants , guards and slaves was not uncommon in many parts of the world during Halotus ' era and it was thought that male castration would prevent this . Halotus may have been required to submit to castration in order to hold his position . 
 = = Poisoning of Claudius = = 
 Halotus is primarily remembered for his suspected involvement in the conspiracy and poisoning of Emperor Claudius on 13 October ( times of death are in dispute ; see below ) 54 AD . It is possible that Claudius died of natural causes , and the actual manner of the poisoning , in regards to which poison may have been used , in which food it could have been hidden , etc . , remains unclear . It is considered most likely , considering the writings of various ancient historians , that the poison was concealed in mushrooms ( as Claudius was known to have been particularly fond of them ) , and Agrippina the Younger , Claudius ' wife , is thought to have been the most likely to have instigated the murder or to have been the lead conspirator in the plot to overthrow Claudius . 
 Halotus , as the Emperor 's official taster , would probably have had a role in the plot , deceiving Claudius into believing the food was safe to consume . He is a prime suspect because he would have had access to everything eaten by the Emperor on the night of his death . It has been suggested that Halotus may have been the murderer but was working under orders of Agrippina . While it is uncertain whether Halotus would have had anything to gain from the death of the Emperor , Agrippina 's political and personal advantage gained by the death of her husband was evident ; with Claudius dead , Nero , Agrippina 's biological son , would be able to claim the throne . It was also known that the animosity between Agrippina and Claudius had grown during the months preceding the homicide . Other notable suspects included Locusta , a professional poisoner , and Xenophon , Claudius ' royal physician , who , in line with the suggestion that the poison was not immediately fatal , is said to have carried an ailing Claudius out of the banquet , taken him to his room and forced a poisoned feather into his mouth on the pretence of encouraging him to regurgitate . Others say Xenophon used poisoned gruel . 
 Other details about the poisoning have always been in dispute . While some argue that Claudius was in Rome , others claim he was in <unk> on the night he was poisoned . Whether one ingestion of poison was only enough to cause Claudius to fall ill and whether a second dose was given to kill him is also debated . 
 The time of death is also much discussed ; one version claims that the poison was so potent that he died instantly , while another says that he endured agony until dawn of the following day . It has been suggested that Claudius may have died as late as noon on 13 October . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Halotus = = = 
 Much public outrage resulted from the mystery <unk> Claudius ' death and the death itself ; there was a clear desire among the people of Rome that anyone suspected in Claudius ' murder be executed and this included Halotus ; he was not killed , and Nero allowed him to retain his position throughout his reign . 
 In 68 AD , , Nero 's successor Galba , despite public feeling , rewarded Halotus with a procuratorship . Galba ordered an edict relating to Tigellinus , another servant who had possibly been involved in the murder of Claudius and whose death was also being called for among the Romans , rebuking the public for their harshness and outrage . 
 Galba may have chosen to award Halotus the lucrative procuratorship for any number of reasons ; during his reign , Galba was known for making often unpopular political and economical actions , supposedly for what was , at least in Galba 's mind , the financial health of the city . Halotus ' great rise in status , and his subsequent prosperity , may have been in some way beneficial in Galba 's eyes . Less specifically , the move would certainly have had some degree of benefit for Galba in some way , whether indirectly , or directly , economically or financially . 
 The office was described by Suetonius as " an important procuratorship " but few other details relating to the actual occupation were specified . Mentions of Halotus ' receiving of the procuratorship include : 
 This person [ Halotus ] also survived Nero , and was promoted by Galba to a wealthy procuratorship 
 Why , when the Roman people called for the execution of Tigellinus and Halotus , he [ Galba ] saved these two alone out of all Nero 's agents , even though they were perhaps the worst of the lot . What is more , he gave Halotus an important procuratorship .... 
 Why Halotus in particular was chosen for such a high @-@ paid position is unclear . Why Halotus was even spared is also unclear , as almost all of Nero 's former servants were killed on Galba 's assumption of the throne , as Suetonius notes above . 
 As noted in the first quote above , the procuratorship was a " wealthy " one , leading to the possibility that the job involved tax collection . 
 = = = Public and political reaction = = = 
 For a while , it was pretended that Claudius was still alive , with all of those involved in the plot ( including Halotus ) undertaking their normal duties . This was done so that arrangements for Nero 's accession could be secure . The news that Claudius was merely sick rather than dead spread widely and Agrippina making requests " on Claudius ' behalf " further fooled the people into believing the Emperor lived . After all of the preparations for Nero 's accession had been made , the death was revealed to the Roman people . 
 Claudius was cremated , and his ashes were interred in the Mausoleum of Augustus on 24 October , 54 AD , ten days after his death . Despite the great political tumult Claudius ' passing caused , Nero and the Senate very quickly deified Claudius and Nero took the throne , just as Agrippina had <unk> at the young age of sixteen . The usurpation was politically easy for Nero ; Claudius ' will had specified that either Nero or Britannicus should take the throne following his death . Nero swiftly took firm control over an unsettled public ; all but Claudius ' most rigid and unmoving supporters became Nero 's men after only a short period . This can be at least partially attributed to Nero 's very well known opinions of Claudius , who was his adoptive father ; Nero often politically and publicly criticised and even insulted the late Claudius and many Claudian laws and policies were disregarded and abandoned under Nero 's reasoning that Claudius was simply too stupid and senile to be given any consideration . Nero responded to allegations of poisoned mushrooms being used to kill Claudius , by naming the fungus " the food of the gods " , lending further credence to the idea that mushrooms were used . 
 = = Death = = 
 Halotus died sometime in the latter part of the 1st century . At the time of his death , he still held the procuratorship that he had been granted by Galba . He kept this position despite Galba 's unseating very soon after it was bestowed and the political <unk> of The Year of the Four Emperors . At the time of his death , Halotus ' public reputation had been at least partially restored and he had accumulated some degree of wealth after he had been cleared by Galba . Details relating to his death are not recorded in any of the writings of ancient historians , and neither are any specific dates . 
 = A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant = 
 A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant is a satirical musical about Scientology and L. Ron Hubbard , written by Kyle Jarrow from a concept by Alex Timbers , the show 's original director . Jarrow based the story of the one @-@ act , one @-@ hour musical on Hubbard 's writings and Church of Scientology literature . The musical follows the life of Hubbard as he develops Dianetics and then Scientology . Though the musical pokes fun at Hubbard 's science fiction writing and personal beliefs , it has been called a " deadpan presentation " of his life story . Topics explored in the piece include Dianetics , the E @-@ meter , Thetans , and the story of Xenu . The show was originally presented in 2003 in New York City by Les Freres Corbusier , an experimental theater troupe , enjoying sold @-@ out Off @-@ Off @-@ Broadway and Off @-@ Broadway productions . Later productions have included Los Angeles , New York , Boston , Atlanta , Philadelphia and Washington , D.C. 
 Early in the production of the musical , the president of the Church of Scientology in New York sent a letter to the producer pointing out the Church 's history of litigation . This led Timbers and Jarrow to insert the word " Unauthorized " into the title , upon the advice of legal counsel . During the Los Angeles production , representatives of the Church of Scientology visited the production staff in the midst of rehearsals and handed out documentation of successful litigation against critics of Scientology . Parents of some of the Los Angeles cast members also received phone calls from Scientologists in the entertainment industry , asking them not to allow their children to perform in the musical . 
 A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant has been well received . The 2003 New York production received an Obie Award , and director Alex Timbers received a Garland Award for the 2004 Los Angeles production . The musical also received positive reviews in the press . The New York Times characterized it as a " cult @-@ hit " , and The Village Voice , The Los Angeles Times and The Guardian all gave it favorable reviews . Variety and The Boston Globe had kind words for the updated 2006 edition . A 2004 cast recording released by Sh @-@ K @-@ Boom Records received four out of five stars from Allmusic and plaudits from The Los Angeles Daily News . 
 = = Background = = 
 Alex Timbers developed the concept and directed the play , while Kyle Jarrow wrote the accompanying book , music , and lyrics . Timbers and Jarrow were classmates together at Yale University . The script for the play is published by Samuel French , Inc . Jarrow was motivated to write the script by what he saw as a shift in religious teachings – from an old model involving hell and retribution , to a new system of thought promising money or peace . Jarrow commented on Timbers ' idea of using children to tell a story about Scientology : " I did a lot of work on cults in college , and what I learned is that they sort of turn you into a child by appealing to that part of you that wants to be taken care of and given answers . And so it all began to make sense to me . " He said Scientology would be " an especially interesting topic for a theater piece " because of its criticism of psychiatry , relative newness compared to Buddhism , Islam , Judaism , and Christianity , and practice of requiring " that the follower take courses which cost significant amounts of money . " 
 Jarrow 's script was " almost entirely based on Hubbard 's own writings and the church 's literature " , though Jarrow was also influenced by critical journalistic accounts . He also drew on the " awkward woodenness of Christmas pageants — the fact that children are often made to say large words that don 't sound natural coming out of their mouths . " Timbers said they chose to stick to Church of Scientology primary source material for background on the script because " We thought that the best way to satirize the Church of Scientology was to let the Church speak for itself . " During production , the creative team worked with cast members to educate them about the play 's background . " Kids shouldn 't just be saying things that they don 't understand . That 's what we 're criticizing ... people who just parrot behavior and language . We wanted to have an honest conversation with them , " Jarrow said . The published version of the script says that the musical should not be performed by adults ; Jarrow said adults are " too jaded " , and would not be able to portray the " unwinking satire " of the piece . 
 The producers wanted the musical to appear like a " corny and low @-@ rent production " . The ensemble includes 10 actors from ages eight to twelve . Though professionals , the child actors perform with a " realistic lack of polish " , as they are playing non @-@ professional children of Scientologists , performing in a holiday pageant . The chorus portrays Thetans , and the reactive and analytical portions of the mind are depicted by two children who share a conjoined right brain costume . During the Xenu story , the narrator is outfitted in a cardboard robot suit , and the actor portraying Xenu wears a " tacky headdress " . Staging , costumes and set design are all made to appear to be the " earnest work of schoolteachers and supportive parents trying to provide a colorful and cheery atmosphere on a small budget . " The stage design includes a " colorful , crayon @-@ colored backdrop of space age @-@ like , semi @-@ circular set pieces . " Costumes include white robes , rainbow @-@ striped socks and tinsel halos . Props used to denote locations include " a waving cardboard palm frond for Hawaii , a street sign and cell phones for New York . " The musical ends with a tableau vivant , where the audience sees the cast standing at the back of the theater holding candles and singing cheerfully as a door closes and they are blocked from view . 
 Early in the production of the play , John Carmichael , president of the Church of Scientology in New York , found out that a theatrical production involving Scientology was in the works . After showing up unannounced to a rehearsal , Carmichael sent a letter to the play 's New York producer , Aaron Lemon @-@ Strauss , citing his concerns at the possibility of being ridiculed . In the letter , Carmichael also pointed out the church 's many past lawsuits . Alex Timbers was quoted as saying : " We 've been told that the letter is a precursor to a lawsuit . " Carmichael visited the artistic staff a total of three times to voice his concerns before the play 's debut . After this occurrence , Jarrow and Timbers ' attorneys advised them to insert the word " Unauthorized " into the title of the play . This was done to avoid potential litigation from the Church of Scientology . In an interview with The New York Times , Carmichael later stated : " These folks have a right to write whatever play they want ... but they 've sunk to clichés . " 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The characters gather on a cold winter night to rejoice in telling the story of L. Ron Hubbard . " Hey ! It 's a Happy Day ! " A narrator notes : " Today we relate the life of L. Ron Hubbard : Teacher , author , explorer , atomic physicist , nautical engineer , choreographer , horticulturist , and father of Scientology ! " Hubbard is born in a nativity scene , surrounded by parents and barnyard animals , as an angel proclaims , " Billions of years of evolution had climaxed with his birth . " He begins to question the nature of his existence . He is adrift on a boat in the Pacific Ocean during his service in World War II , when he begins to think about starting a religion . Hubbard tells his followers about what he has learned through his travels in " Science of the Mind " , singing about " the key to being free , the way to be happy " . He tells his followers that during the War " I saw how emotion can make you blind " , and he begins to teach his followers about the reactive mind . 
 Hubbard thanks the analytical mind ( portrayed by two characters ) for helping him to find the answers he was searching for , and proclaims : " Thinking rationally is the way to be happy and the key to learning more . " He announces to his followers , " You 'll operate with your analytical mind only .... There won 't be any emotions to stand in the way of your success . " As Hubbard tells his followers about his new ideas , they each proclaim to him : " You 're right ! " Hubbard answers : " Of course I 'm right ! " Hubbard 's followers thank him for teaching them his new ideas : " Now the sun will shine / And the world is fine / We have got the science of the mind . " A Church of Scientology Auditor explains some technical Scientology jargon to new recruits , and the E @-@ meter is described in a puppet show . 
 As Hubbard 's followers progress in their Scientology teachings , they learn of the story of evil alien prince Xenu . Celebrity actor characters describe their relationships with Scientology : John Travolta explains how Scientology " fueled his cool " ; Kirstie Alley says that it helped her conquer drug addiction " enabling me to star in the fine television series Fat Actress and to promote the quality products of weight loss expert Jenny Craig " ; and Tom Cruise interacts with sock @-@ puppet incarnations of his new wife and daughter . The Internal Revenue Service brings a case against Hubbard , but he is able to defeat the tax charges by brainwashing his accuser . Celebrities Cruise , Alley and Travolta testify on Hubbard 's behalf during the trial . Skeptics question Hubbard about the Church of Scientology 's finances and methods of recruiting and retaining members . One young boy , left alone on the stage , sings about profound alienation . The entire company finally comes together to sing the " chilling finale " , which includes the refrain : " Just don 't ask questions / And everything is clear . " 
 = = Musical analysis = = 
 Jarrow incorporated musical themes from The Road to Freedom , a 1986 pop album with lyrics by Hubbard and performances by John Travolta , Leif Garrett , Frank Stallone , Chick Corea , and Karen Black . Jarrow also incorporated musical themes from 1980s pop , saying " the liturgical music of Scientology is 1980s pop , which seems strangely appropriate because of the science fiction books . So that 's what we did [ in the show ] . It 's a pastiche of synth @-@ pop and pageant choir music . " Jarrow said he tried " to capture the feel of kiddie rock " such as Free to Be … You and Me and Kids Incorporated . 
 The song , " Hey ! It 's a Happy Day ! " quotes Hubbard 's Scientology : A New Slant On Life . Songs are set to " cheesy synth @-@ keyboard backing " and feature " sublimely clunky dance breaks " . An electronic score emphasizes the musical 's " loony conviction " , while sleigh bells give the play a feeling of a " jazzed @-@ up saint 's play " . The songs incorporate video game music , and " beats from a child 's keyboard synthesizer . " The music in the show has been compared with the symphonic band Polyphonic Spree , and with the educational short films of Schoolhouse Rock . 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = 2003 – 2004 = = = 
 A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant debuted in November 2003 , and had sold @-@ out Off @-@ Off @-@ Broadway and Off @-@ Broadway runs that winter , both directed by Alex Timbers . The musical was initially shown at The Tank theatre on 42nd Street where it ran for three weeks , and later moved to The John Houseman Theatre , where it was performed for an additional three weeks . The show opened in Los Angeles at the Powerhouse Theatre , in October 2004 , again directed by Timbers . The run was initially scheduled for October 15 through November 21 , 2004 , but was extended through December 21 , 2004 . Timbers said that he was excited to take the production to Los Angeles , commenting : " Since the whole goal of the show is to imagine how the Scientologists might stage a nativity pageant , there 's no better place to try than in their Jerusalem . " 
 When the production company first arrived in Los Angeles , the cast and crew were " intimidated " by Scientologists . Scientology officials had previously visited the New York City production in the midst of rehearsals and handed out " documentation of court cases where the Church of Scientology had successfully prosecuted those seeking to disparage the Church 's methods . " Director / creator Alex Timbers characterized these events as " terrifically wonderful and intimidating " . Editors from the Los Angeles Times received phone calls from Scientologists urging them not to write about the play . In addition , the parents of one of the children from the cast received phone calls from members of the entertainment industry who were Scientologists . The parents of these cast members were told that if their children performed in the play , " it might be bad for their future career . " The parents politely informed these callers " We read the script , and we don 't think it is mean @-@ spirited ... We understand your concerns , but we don 't share your concerns . " When asked by Variety magazine for the Church 's official take on the play , a Los Angeles Church of Scientology spokeswoman was quoted as saying : " This is not litigation material . This is nothing . " In a 2007 interview , Jarrow commented on the Church of Scientology 's history of responses to productions of the play : " It 's clear the Church doesn 't like the show — but in my opinion that kind of controversy is evidence that the show 's hitting a nerve and dealing with pertinent issues . So I take a certain pride in that . " 
 = = = 2006 – present = = = 
 In late 2006 , the musical was performed at New York Theatre Workshop 's 4th Street Theatre in New York City , with Alex Timbers reprising his role as director and Gabriel Kahane as musical director . That same year , the show was also presented at the Boston Center for the Arts in Boston by Boston Theatre Works , and at Dad 's Garage Theatre in Atlanta . The Boston production was directed by Jason <unk> . When contacted by The Boston Globe for a statement on the Boston production , Boston Church of Scientology president Gerard Renna stated that the musical : " is not something we 're addressing " and that they were instead focused on antidrug education . 
 Dad 's Garage Theatre presented the musical again in 2007 , from November 30 to December 23 , 2007 . The entire cast from the 2006 production returned , and director Mary Claire Dunn emphasized that she educated the cast about Scientology on the first day of rehearsal . Theatre company Brat Productions in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania also put on a 2007 production , with performances from December 13 through December 30 , 2007 at St. Stephen 's Theater . The production was directed by Lee Ann <unk> . <unk> Theatre Company in Washington , D.C. also presented the musical from December 20 , 2007 through January 13 , 2008 at the District of Columbia Arts Center in Adams Morgan . Andrew Lloyd Baughman was the director and music director . 
 Rarely Done Productions in Syracuse , New York put on a production of the play , which ran from October 3 to October 18 , 2008 . Circle Theatre in Fort Worth , Texas has announced a 2008 production , which ran November 20 to December 20 , 2008 . Know Theatre of Cincinnati , Ohio planned a 2008 production December 6 through January , 2008 . Ron May , artistic director of Stray Cat Theatre in Phoenix , Arizona , also planned a production of the play for the 2008 season , and A Red Orchid Theatre in Chicago , Illinois planned a production to run from November 17 to December 28 , 2008 . Representatives for the Church of Scientology did not respond to repeated requests for comment from the Chicago Tribune about the 2008 Chicago production . 
 The 2008 Chicago production was well received , and A Red Orchid Theatre again put on a production of the play in its 2009 – 2010 season . The Chicago production was directed by Steve Wilson , and ran from November 12 , 2009 through January 3 , 2010 . The play 's artistic director , Kirsten Fitzgerald spoke positively of rehearsals for the Chicago production : " The energy that explodes into the theatre with the start of each rehearsal is palpable and impossible to deny , even from the office next door . I am ecstatic and so very grateful to bring last year 's smash @-@ hit to audiences old and new . The heart of last year 's joyous and hilarious Chicago Premiere returns with plenty of surprises and new fun up our sleeves . " Crain 's Chicago Business ranked the production as one of the top ten things to do for the weekend in the city . Another Illinois production ran from December 7 , 2009 to January 3 , 2010 , by Next Theatre in Evanston . On December 2 , 2009 , performers sang songs from the play in a production called The Songs of Kyle Jarrow at the <unk> in Manhattan , New York . Performers included Jeb Brown , Tony Award @-@ nominee Alison Fraser , Susan Goodwillie , Caesar <unk> , Libby Winters , and Lauren <unk> . 
 A 2010 production was planned in Clearwater , Florida , for showings December 2 through December 22 . The play in Clearwater is produced by American Stage for the After Hours series . A representative for the theater , Andy Orrell , told the St. Petersburg Times , " The After Hours series does shows that are more avant garde , more risque , shows that we couldn 't really do on the main stage . In a lot of ways , this show fits perfectly into that criteria . " Clearwater is a spiritual headquarters for the Scientology organization ; when contacted for a statement by St. Petersburg Times , Kyle Jarrow responded , " Wow ! – I had no idea they were doing the show down there . Clearwater is almost ground zero for Scientology . That 's sure to be extra controversial . " The American Stage Theatre Company performs out of the Raymond James Theatre in St. Petersburg , Florida . The Actors Guild of Lexington in Lexington , Kentucky planned a production to run from April 7 – 17 , 2011 , directed by the group 's artistic director Eric Seale . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant received a 2004 Obie Award for its 2003 production in New York City . Kyle Jarrow and Alex Timbers were given " Special Citations " from The Village Voice for developing the piece . Timbers and Jarrow were honored with the award at the May 17 , 2004 Obie Award presentation , at New York 's Webster Hall . Alex Timbers also received a Back Stage West Garland Award for best director , for the 2004 Los Angeles production of the play . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 A Very Merry Unauthorized Children 's Scientology Pageant received positive reviews from the press . A review in The New York Times described the musical as having a " crude , faux @-@ <unk> sensibility " , and stated that it " provides a cult @-@ hit blueprint for a young generation that prefers its irony delivered with not a wink but a blank stare . " A 2003 review in New York City 's The Village Voice compared the show to The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui , stating : " Just as Ui doesn 't explain the complex phenomenon of the Third Reich , Scientology Pageant doesn 't probe the psychology of cults ; instead , both demystify subjects whose appeal stems in no small part from the mystique their acolytes have attributed to them . " Though most of the media reception of the musical was positive , New York Church of Scientology President John Carmichael did not have kind words for the production . Carmichael asserted that L. Ron Hubbard was portrayed in the play as " an authoritarian demagogue whose methods create emotionless followers . " Other critics complained that the young members of the cast were portraying characters and depicting content that they could not understand . 
 The Los Angeles Times review in 2004 stated that : " The show found a New York audience willing to move from the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek children 's pageant concept to something that became startlingly adult . " In a 2004 review in The Guardian , the article cited notable quotes from other reviews , including The New York Times , The Village Voice , and The New York Observer . The review stated that audiences " have a chance to witness a wide @-@ eyed , straight @-@ faced , scrappy and touching telling of the story of L Ron set to a cheesy electro @-@ pop score . See the great man , clad in a white <unk> [ sic ] Spree @-@ style gown , wander from inquisitive soul to wounded war veteran to writer of pulp science fiction to leader of world religion . Sort of . " 
 Of the updated 2006 version , Variety stated that " .. the breezy one @-@ hour show is equal parts adorable and creepy , hilarious and unsettling , making it way more compelling than your average holiday entertainment . " The Boston Globe also reviewed the 2006 edition of the play , and its review spent more time giving background on some of the cast and crew , particularly writer Kyle Jarrow , stating that " .. Jarrow has created a musical about L. Ron Hubbard that is , in its own sardonic way , much more funny and touching than any of Cruise 's diatribes against Ritalin . " The New York Sun described the production as an : " ingenious musical account of L. Ron Hubbard 's life and times " , and compared the discomfort produced by watching the piece to that produced by the 2006 documentary Jesus Camp . 
 The 2007 Philadelphia production also received favorable reviews , and critic Wendy Rosenfield of The Philadelphia Inquirer wrote " .. somehow the production emerges triumphant , retaining its innocent sense of inquiry and buoyant good humor while making some pretty serious philosophical points . " A review in The Washington Post of the 2007 Washington , D.C. production was more critical . Peter Marks wrote that " .. aside from a weird sci @-@ fi back story involving Prince Xenu , a figure from Scientology lore , the incidents the playwright relates that shape Hubbard 's belief system unfold choppily and dryly . " The production received a positive review in by Bob Anthony in <unk> , who wrote " This is so charming that it rates a " must see " status . The show should be extended at another venue . " Manya <unk> reviewed the 2008 Chicago production for the Chicago Tribune , and highlighted the play 's " trilling tunes " , including " Hey ! It 's a Happy Day ! " and " The Science of the Mind " . The two Chicago productions in 2009 also received favorable reviews in the Chicago Tribune ; the reviewer noted , " this show manages to simultaneously skewer Scientology and showcase the young performers in an upbeat , fun way . " 
 = = Cast recording = = 
 A cast recording of the musical was released by Kurt Deutsch 's Sh @-@ K @-@ Boom Records , on November 2 , 2004 . " Hey ! It 's a Happy Day ! " , " Science of the Mind " , " Rain " , and " Finale " are tracks from the original 2004 production . The other songs on the album were written by Jarrow " .. to further explore the subjects and themes of the stage production . " The first track on the album is entitled " <unk> " , and is a general announcement to the audience . The Los Angeles Daily News surmised that this disclaimer served to " keep the creators of this acidic little send @-@ up from getting hauled into court " : 
 Ladies and gentlemen : Before we go any further , I would just like to inform you , that Scientology , Scientologist , Dianetics , and the name L. Ron Hubbard , are registered trademarks – owned exclusively by the Church of Scientology . Thank you . Now let 's get on with the show ! 
 The CD release received four out of five stars from Allmusic , where it was described as " Funny , weird and wonderful " , and " the offbeat theater offering of the year " . Specific tracks highlighted by Allmusic included " L. Ron Hubbard " , in which the chorus centers on the question : " What does the ' L. ' stand for ? " , and " The Way It Began " [ sic ] , which begins with the preface statement : " The following is completely secret and absolutely serious . It is the story of the universe as described in the most sacred literature of the Church of Scientology . " In the song " Mister Auditor " , the children actually sing some of the typical questions asked in Scientology auditing , and in the song " Something Special " , allegations that the Church of Scientology " preys on the weak and confused " are discussed , but the narrator states that none of these allegations are true . 
 2004 Cast recording 
