 = = = Demographics = = = 
 The town 's population , including the surrounding district , was reported in 1877 as approximately 1000 .. Chudleigh had a population of 162 in 1901 and 200 in 2000 . There were around 150 people living in 40 houses just within the town 's boundaries in 2002 . As of the 2011 census 335 people lived in the town and surrounding 92 @.@ 4 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 35 @.@ 7 sq mi ) area . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Tasmania has an oceanic temperate climate characterised by cool summer and mild winters , with a small maximum temperature variation during the year . <unk> lies in the rain shadow of the Great Western Tiers ; rainfall in parts of the tiers exceeds 2 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 79 in ) . Since the 1950s average temperatures in the surrounding Meander Valley have steadily risen and since the 1970s average rainfall has declined . 
 = Pssst = 
 Pssst is an action video game developed and published by Ultimate Play the Game that was released for the ZX Spectrum in June 1983 . In the game , Robbie the Robot has to protect his plant ( a <unk> <unk> <unk> ) as it is attacked by various insects , each of which needs a different repellent to neutralise it . Pssst was the second game to be released by Ultimate , after Jetpac . 
 The game was written by Chris Stamper and graphics were designed by his brother , Tim Stamper . Pssst was one of the very few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game ( the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes ) . The game received positive reviews from two publications upon release , with critics mainly praising its presentation and gameplay . It was placed 40th on the " Best Selling Software " list by Personal Computer Games in December 1983 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented from a single , 2D perspective , and revolves around Robbie the Robot 's objective to defend his plant from interstellar space slugs . The plant grows from a pot at the bottom centre of the screen , and spray cans containing three different pesticides are located on ledges on each side of the screen . Bonus items such as fertiliser and spades appear on unoccupied ledges which will increase both the players score and the plant 's growth rate . 
 There are three types of coloured insect , and three types of pesticide , which will either kill , stun , or have no effect on the insects . The player can only carry one type of pesticide at a time ; during the early stages of the game the lethal pesticide can be carried at all times , but later stages have more than one type of insect on screen at once , making the choice of pesticide more tactical . 
 As the plant grows , it will sprout leaves ; these both increase the growth rate and increase its vulnerability to the insects . Once the plant reaches a predetermined height , the player will be able to advance to the next level . A life will be deducted whenever the plant dies or the player makes contact with an insect . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play the Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . Prior to founding Ultimate , the Stamper brothers had backgrounds in designing arcade machines , but failed to market their games successfully . The company were known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " ; one team would work on development whilst the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or graphics . 
 Pssst was one of the few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game when the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes . The game used the common technique of placing planar sprites with image sprites atop another , which often created graphical errors and overlapped colours on the console . Pssst was also able to run on the 16K version of the Spectrum . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Paul <unk> of Home Computing Weekly praised the graphics , stating them as overall " smooth @-@ moving " and colourful , as well as praising the " addictive " gameplay . In the second issue of Personal Computer Games , the game was placed 40th on the its best selling software list . In the fourth issue of Personal Computing Games , Pssst was nominated for a 1983 game of the year list on account of Ultimate 's " famous graphics " . According to the reviewer , other attributes of the game included its " originality " and " fun " in comparison to other Ultimate titles that were released in 1983 . In a retrospective review , a reviewer of Retro Games ! Now summarised that the game " was not the best " of Ultimate 's releases for the ZX Spectrum , despite considering it to be " less lauded " than the others . However , they considered Pssst to be a " taste of things to come " and a significant improvement over the " clunky " and " jumpy " animation of previous games for the ZX Spectrum . 
 = Love the Way You Lie = 
 " Love the Way You Lie " is a song recorded by the American rapper Eminem , featuring the Barbadian singer Rihanna , from Eminem 's seventh studio album Recovery ( 2010 ) . The singer and songwriter Skylar Grey wrote and recorded a demo of the song alongside the producer Alex da Kid when she felt she was in an abusive romantic relationship with the music industry . Eminem wrote the verses and chose Rihanna to sing the chorus , resulting in a collaboration influenced by their past experiences in difficult relationships . Recording sessions were held in Ferndale , Michigan , and Dublin , Ireland . Backed by guitar , piano and violin , the track is a midtempo hip hop ballad with a pop refrain and describes two lovers who refuse to separate despite being in a dangerous love – hate relationship . 
 Interscope Records released the song in August 2010 as the second single from Recovery . Critics praised its melody but were divided on thematic aspects such as poignancy and accuracy . Eminem promoted the single with performances at the 2010 Electronic Entertainment Expo , the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards and festivals . The music video , directed by Joseph Kahn , stars Dominic Monaghan and Megan Fox in a violent relationship and shows Eminem and Rihanna in front of a burning house . The clip had a mixed reception due to scenes of domestic violence . Reporters suggested that the song and its accompanying video were influenced by Eminem 's and Rihanna 's relationships with their respective ex @-@ lovers Kimberly Scott and Chris Brown . 
 Critics listed " Love the Way You Lie " among the best tracks of 2010 and of Eminem 's career . The song won many awards and received five Grammy nominations . It is Eminem 's best @-@ selling single and ranked number one on several record charts , including the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 for seven weeks . The single sold six million copies in the US and was the best @-@ selling song of 2010 in the United Kingdom . Musical acts such as Cher Lloyd and The Band Perry have performed cover versions . Rihanna has said that the theme of domestic violence , a topic on which she claims many people do not have insight , is what makes the song effective . She later recorded " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , narrated mostly from her perspective . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Development of " Love the Way You Lie " began with the backing track and hook melody , which were created by the British hip hop producer Alex da Kid . When making a track , he said he spends hours making loops and produces an electronic drum rhythm before adding live instrumentation . The drums are sampled from live recordings he saves . Alex da Kid recorded an acoustic guitar for the verses with a Georg Neumann U87 microphone and an Avid <unk> audio interface . He told Sound on Sound magazine that this song had given him an opportunity to reintroduce live guitar in hip hop music . During the session , he used Waves <unk> and <unk> equalization on his main kick track and a <unk> plug @-@ in on two others . 
 Writing began in late 2009 , when the American singer Holly <unk> resided at the <unk> Retreat in Bandon , Oregon , and composed songs . Later , in New York , under her new stage name Skylar Grey , she visited her Universal Music publisher , Jennifer Blakeman , to seek help presenting her work ; Blakeman suggested she collaborate with Alex da Kid . The producer emailed Grey his track , which suggested a theme of abusive romantic relationships to her as she spontaneously sang lyrics to the melody . She told the Los Angeles Times that she was in an abusive relationship with the music industry : " I love it so much , and I give it all that I have , yet it beats me down . " This idea inspired her writing , a process she found came naturally , as if she were creating an alternative pop song for herself . She wrote the chorus to " Love the Way You Lie " in fifteen minutes and recorded vocals for Alex da Kid 's demo . 
 In early 2010 , Alex da Kid offered the Shady Records Senior Director Rigo " Riggs " Morales some backing tracks . Morales enjoyed the tracks and sent them to Eminem , who was seeking a different musical approach for his next album . Impressed with Alex da Kid 's work , Eminem asked for more tracks and subsequently heard " Love the Way You Lie " . He chose it and told his manager Paul Rosenberg he wanted to collaborate with the Barbadian singer Rihanna . Eminem told <unk> FM , " It 's one of those tracks that I felt like only she could pull it off . " Rosenberg sent the track to Rihanna , who accepted Eminem 's request " at the last moment . " Eminem then wrote the rapped verses . 
 Rihanna said she joined the collaboration because she could relate to the theme of the song , as she and Eminem had been in difficult relationships on " different ends of the table " . Eminem had released the songs " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " ( 1998 ) and " Kim " ( 2000 ) , in which he fantasizes , respectively , about murdering and verbally abusing his then @-@ wife Kimberly Scott . They had divorced in 2001 and again in 2006 after a remarriage . In February 2009 , Rihanna 's relationship with the American singer Chris Brown had ended following his felony assault on her . Rihanna described " Love the Way You Lie " as unique , realistic and deep , saying that it " broke down the cycle of domestic violence " because few people had insight on the topic . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Mike Strange recorded and mixed Eminem 's vocals at Effigy Studios in Ferndale , Michigan . The sessions took two days . Strange edited the vocals with D @-@ Verb — a reverberation software — and an Extra Long Delay plug @-@ in . He preferred to make few changes ; for " Love the Way You Lie " he almost exclusively used board compression and console equalization . Strange used the <unk> and Eventide Reverb 2016 mixing tools for " brighter " reverberation . Detroit musician Luis Resto has contributed to the arrangement on many of Eminem 's songs , but did not do so for " Love the Way You Lie " . According to Strange , " Everything we needed was already in the track , apart from the vocals . " Two to three weeks after the sessions , Alex da Kid arrived to help mix and master the track . He wanted to replace the acoustic guitar on the demo , but Eminem chose to keep it . Strange said , " It was simply a matter of trying to match and then to improve on the demo [ Alex da Kid ] ' d sent us . " Strange 's brother Joe engineered the track . 
 Rihanna 's recording sessions took place at Sun Studios in Dublin , Ireland . Marcos Tovar mixed her vocals , which were engineered by Spike Lindsey and mastered from Detroit over the Internet . The American songwriter Makeba Riddick provided additional vocal production . Strange used equalization , compression and reverberation but left the vocal balance . He assumed that Rihanna was satisfied with her recorded vocals and did not make major changes on her seven stereo vocal tracks . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Love the Way You Lie " is a midtempo hip hop ballad . The lyrics describe a couple 's refusal to separate despite having an abusive relationship . According to the sheet music from Universal Music Publishing Group , the song is in the key of B ♭ major with a common time signature and a tempo of 84 beats per minute . The vocal range spans from B ♭ 3 to D5 . " Love the Way You Lie " opens as Rihanna sings the pop refrain over a piano : 
 Just gonna stand there and watch me burn 
 But that 's alright , because I like the way it hurts . 
 Just gonna stand there and hear me cry 
 But that 's alright , because I love the way you lie . 
 The refrain is based on a Gm – E ♭ ( <unk> ) – B ♭ – F / A chord progression . Fraser McAlphine of the BBC wrote that Rihanna feels confined " in a cell of [ her ] own creation " . She sings without vibrato , a pulsating musical effect used to add expression . One commentator , The New York Times ' David Brownie , wrote that despite this , her voice subtly shows grief and regret . Eminem then " zap [ s ] out into a ballady rap " : " I can 't tell you what it really is / I can only tell you what it feels like . " The verses follow a Gm – E ♭ ( <unk> ) B ♭ – <unk> / A chord progression . Eminem regrets an end to an abusive , failed relationship , describing mutual violence and expressing both fondness and anger . The two artists ' characters are portrayed in a romantic relationship when he responds to Rihanna by concluding the verse : " I laid hands on her . I 'll never stoop so low again / I guess I don 't know my own strength . " Rihanna sings the chorus again , backed by an electric guitar and a piano . 
 Acoustic guitar , violin and drums accompany Eminem 's verses . The lyrics transition from discussing positive aspects of love to describing violent events . Eminem raps , " It 's the rage that took over , it controls you both , so they say it 's best to go your separate ways . Guess that they don 't know ya , cause today that was yesterday . " Sady Doyle of The Atlantic interpreted these lyrics as the rapper 's confession to having abused Scott , as he " turns the anger and accusations toward himself " . In the second verse , Eminem accepts the outcome after feeling sorry , admitting , " Yesterday is over , it 's a different day . " His frustration increases and he raps that two personalities can clash and devastate : " maybe that 's what happens when a tornado meets a volcano " . The described love – hate relationship worsens and leads to domestic violence . Eminem admits to lying about promises he makes and says late in the song , " If she ever tries to fuckin ' leave again , I 'ma tie her to the bed and set this house on fire " , a reference to Rihanna 's lyrics . 
 = = Release and response = = 
 On May 27 , 2010 , Eminem revealed the title of " Love the Way You Lie " as part of the track list of his seventh studio album Recovery , which came out on June 21 . Initially a radio single , the song was released later by Polydor Records as a CD in the United Kingdom on August 9 , 2010 . Interscope Records distributed it in Germany on August 20 . 
 " Love the Way You Lie " received generally favorable reviews . An editor for Rap @-@ Up listed it among the four best tracks from the album . New York Times writer Jon Caramanica considered it " one of the album 's most engaging songs " and praised Eminem 's ability to assess issues from the perspectives of both sexes . MTV 's Rodriguez wrote that the song echoes content from Eminem 's earlier albums , but finds him " sober " and " more mature " . He added that the lyrics allude to Eminem 's relationship with Scott and that " Love the Way You Lie " is his closest approach to a love song . Editors of The A.V. Club compared the single with " Kim " and " ' 97 Bonnie & Clyde " ; they found he is more tempered in " Love the Way You Lie " when discussing a " mutually destructive relationship " and that Rihanna 's involvement creates an eerie mood . 
 Critics especially praised Rihanna 's contribution . Michael Menachem of Billboard complimented her " exquisitely melodic and surprisingly hopeful " vocal performance and " Eminem 's dark , introspective " rapping . He noted that the percussion complements both artists and that Alex da Kid gave the classical arrangement a mainstream touch . Kyle Anderson , writing for MTV , remarked that the song showcases Rihanna 's emotional vocals and Eminem 's " most intense rhymes about his tumultuous relationships " . He regarded " Love the Way You Lie " as an honest , " well @-@ constructed pop song with a killer hook " and likened the " slow @-@ burning " music to that of " Someone Like You " , a 2011 single by the British singer Adele . The Houston Chronicle pop critic Joey Guerra commented that Rihanna brought a " sandpaper and silk sheen " to the track . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Critics have commented on the message in the lyrics . Anderson noted a dark theme , while Nick Levine of Digital Spy , Allie Townsend of Time magazine and Jocelyn Noveck of The Associated Press suggested the previous relationships of both artists influenced the song . Levine gave it four stars out of five . According to Eric Hayden of The Atlantic Wire , the song refers to an alcoholic couple , possibly inspired by Rihanna 's relationship with Brown . McAlphine awarded " Love the Way You Lie " four stars out of five . According to him , the song would not have been effective if it had featured only Eminem 's point of view and feelings of regret ; he wrote that Rihanna 's representing the opposite side of the relationship shows " proper storytelling " and " sends a message " because of her breakup with Brown . McAlphine wrote that as a result the song depicts a more realistic abusive relationship and could be featured in a campaign for women 's shelters . He praised Eminem 's accuracy and understanding of the topic . Winston Robbins from the music website Consequence of Sound attributed the song 's poignancy to Rihanna 's past abusive relationship , and a theme of infidelity and abuse . 
 On the critical side , The Daily Telegraph 's Jenny McCartney dismissed the metaphors in the chorus and thought the song 's topic was over @-@ hyped . She disagreed with the critical praise , arguing that women accept abusive relationships for deeper reasons than sexual and emotional pleasure , such as family and financial issues and helplessness . In an NPR article , the writer Maura Johnston commented that the lyrics portray Rihanna as the subject of Eminem 's violence . Jay Smooth , a New York radio personality , responded that " while Eminem explores the psyche of the abuser with an almost disturbing amount of depth and detail , " Rihanna 's perspective is downplayed and not explained fully . Johnston and Smooth wrote that such imbalances are a prevalent issue in popular music duets . To Sady Doyle , although " Love the Way You Lie " is one of Eminem 's most affecting tracks and finds him remorseful , it does not make up for his past misogynistic actions and hateful songs . Noveck questioned whether the lyrics are " a treatise against ( or apology for ) domestic violence , or an irresponsible glorification of it ? Or , is it something uncomfortable in between ? " 
 Marjorie <unk> , executive director of the anti @-@ teenage violence group Break the Cycle , commented that " Love the Way You Lie " can teach listeners about the dangers of abusive relationships if interpreted correctly . She believed that because popular culture often depicts what is socially acceptable , people may accept such violence more easily . She added , " One problem , though , ... is that the song reflects myths about domestic violence — myths that lead to blaming the victim . " <unk> said the victim is often accused of being as guilty as the partner but wants to be loved , not abused . Terry O 'Neill , a feminist and the president of the National Organization for Women , criticized the lyric , " But your temper 's just as bad as mine is / You 're the same as me " , saying it is a typical excuse used by abusive men for aggression and that " it 's only 2 @-@ year @-@ olds and violent men who use violence to get what they want . " She added that Rihanna unintentionally glorifies domestic violence in the song despite attempting to fight it . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 " Love the Way You Lie " ranked in various best @-@ of @-@ 2010 lists . Claire Suddath of Time placed it at number five on her top @-@ ten list and wrote , " That this song didn 't come across sounding clichéd or tasteless is a testament to both artists ' skill . " AOL Radio considered the song the best of 2010 hip hop music , regarding Eminem as imaginative and passionate . It ranked ninth on MTV News ' top @-@ twenty @-@ five list . Its editor James Montgomery attributed the song 's success to its theme and relation to the artists ' past abusive relationships . He concluded , " You cannot write a song any better than that , because that 's how this kind of thing happens in real life . " The New York Post placed the song at second place on their " top 210 songs from 2010 " list and regarded it as a " comeback club anthem . " In April 2011 , Gabriel Alvarez of Complex magazine ranked it at number 100 on their " 100 Best Eminem Songs " list , calling it a love song and praising Rihanna 's vocals as beautiful . " Love the Way You Lie " and its accompanying music video were nominated for five Grammy Awards at the 2011 ceremony , including " Record of the Year " , " Song of the Year " and " Best Short Form Music Video " . It won the People 's Choice Awards for " Favorite Music Video " and " Favorite Song " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Love the Way You Lie " reached number one on several record charts worldwide . It entered the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 at number two in the issue dated July 10 , 2010 . The single debuted at number one on the US Digital Songs after selling 338 @,@ 000 digital copies in its first week . From July 31 to September 11 , 2010 , it had a seven @-@ week run at the top of the Hot 100 , giving Eminem his fourth , and Rihanna her seventh , number @-@ one US hit . The single sold more than 300 @,@ 000 digital copies in the week of August 14 , 2010 , rising to number two on the Pop Songs and Radio Songs charts . In the Billboard issue for August 21 , 2010 , Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems recognized the single with the BDS Certified Award for 50 @,@ 000 radio spins . It topped the Pop Songs chart in the same issue , giving Eminem his third number @-@ one track on the chart and Rihanna her sixth . " Love the Way You Lie " was the first number @-@ one hit on the Rap Songs chart with Eminem as the lead artist since his 2000 single " The Real Slim Shady " . With sales of 4 @,@ 245 @,@ 000 copies , " Love the Way You Lie " was the third @-@ best @-@ selling single of 2010 in the US . There , it sold 6 million copies by October 2013 and 6 @.@ 5 million copies by October 2015 . 
 The song entered the Australian Singles Chart on July 4 , 2010 , at number fourteen . It rose to the top three weeks later , occupying the position for six weeks and staying on the chart for 38 weeks in total . In Austria , " Love the Way You Lie " debuted at number 31 , on July 2 , 2010 , and ascended to number one on September 4 . After making a final consecutive appearance on March 4 , 2011 , it reappeared at number 75 on August 26 . The song spent 47 weeks on the chart . " Love the Way You Lie " charted for 30 weeks in France , where debuted and peaked at number three on July 2 , 2010 . It was South Korea 's third @-@ best @-@ selling song in 2010 by a foreign artist , with 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 653 downloads . 
 On the UK Singles Chart , the song debuted at number seven on June 27 , 2010 , and peaked at number two four weeks later . By the end of 2010 , " Love the Way You Lie " had sold 854 @,@ 000 copies in the UK , making it the country 's biggest @-@ selling song of the year . In October 2011 , it became the 109th song to reach 1 million sales there . By November 2012 , the single had sold 1 @.@ 05 million copies in the UK , placing at number 100 on the Official Charts Company 's " The Million Sellers " list . As of June 2015 , it is the 17th best @-@ selling single of the 2010s in the UK . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , " Love the Way You Lie " sold 9 @.@ 3 million copies worldwide in 2010 . In December 2011 , it was certified as Eminem 's best @-@ selling single . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The music video for " Love the Way You Lie " was Eminem 's third to be directed by the American filmmaker Joseph Kahn . Despite having planned to shoot a feature film and stop directing pop videos , Kahn chose to work on " Love the Way You Lie " because , according to him , the song discusses an important topic . This was an opportunity for him to direct a video for Eminem without the comedic themes of their previous collaborations . For the video , Kahn considered the British actor Dominic Monaghan as a co @-@ star for his versatility , which he thought would help him play an antagonist . Kahn cast the American actress Megan Fox , which he had presumed would be almost impossible because of her popularity with directors . Fox , a fan of Eminem , accepted the role unhesitatingly . 
 Rosenberg gave Kahn one day to write a treatment , which Kahn finished in 45 minutes . He filmed Eminem 's and Rihanna 's parts on July 20 , 2010 ; scenes with Fox and Monaghan were shot three days later . By July 24 , 2010 , they finished the shoot . Kahn confirmed the completion of the director 's cut the next day . He said Fox 's involvement made the video powerful , commenting for Vibe : 
 We wanted to make a specific story about two people — Meg and Dom — not a video that was representative of all couples or all domestic violence situations . I 'm not saying that all couples fight this way . I just want people just to be able to identify with the characters and recognize that they 've seen relationships like this where two people are together that are completely wrong for each other and things spiral out of control . ... Megan was the key to this video . ... I 'll tell you as a director the reason why [ Fox and Monaghan 's ] scenes in the video feel so real is because in the moment they were real . 
 Monaghan told MTV he thought the couple represents Eminem and Scott . The clip was produced by Kathy <unk> and Maryann <unk> of HSI Productions . Shortly before its release , Eminem reported in a press statement : " Joseph and I worked pretty closely together to make sure we got this right " . He said the difficult topic resulted in a powerful video because of the contributions of Rihanna , Fox and Monaghan . Fox donated her appearance fee to the <unk> House , a battered women 's shelter . On August 5 , 2010 , the video premiered on MTV and the music video website Vevo . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 Rihanna sings the chorus in front of a burning house , while an interspersing scene shows fire on a woman 's ( Fox ) palms . In another scene , the woman is asleep with her lover ( Monaghan ) and wakes up . As Eminem begins to rap in an open field , the woman attacks her lover after seeing the name " Cindy " and a phone number written on his hand . He unsuccessfully tries to kiss the woman and brings her back after she attempts to leave him . The man then pushes her onto the wall and aims his fist at her , puncturing the wall instead . After Rihanna sings again , the video flashes back to when the couple first meet " at a seedy dive bar next door " to a liquor store . The man steals a bottle of vodka and they kiss on the rooftop . 
 During the present , the man apologizes to his lover and they are reconciled . In another flashback , he attacks someone who plays pool with his lover . Eminem joins Rihanna in front of the burning house for the final verse . Meanwhile , after the flashback , the woman comes home and locks herself in the bathroom to stop her abusive lover from entering . In another scene , the fire on her palms vanishes as she clasps her hands . Flames later engulf Eminem and the couple , who are then shown fighting in front of the burning house . In the end , the couple stays together and the video returns to their first scene , in which they sleep . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The clip broke what was a YouTube record at the time of its release for the most hits in one day , with 6 @.@ 6 million . It had a mixed reception from critics , most of whom commented on scenes of domestic violence . NPR 's Zoe Chace deemed the video sickening , while AOL Music listed it at number five on their list of the " Top 10 Most Controversial Music Videos in Pop " . Stephanie <unk> — the executive director of trauma resource center Day One — told MTV News that it mainly raises " the topic of dating violence among young people " . <unk> praised the clip 's accurate depiction of patterns in an abusive relationship and thought the video 's potency came from Eminem 's history of violence @-@ themed songs and Brown 's assault on Rihanna . 
 A writer for Rap @-@ Up considered the video realistic , as " art imitates life " . Conor <unk> of The Atlantic called it an inaccurate portrayal of domestic violence due to insufficient violence , as evidenced by the lack of injuries after punching through a wall . Mariel Concepcion of Billboard suggested the video was inspired by the lyric , " Just gonna stand there and watch me burn , but that 's alright because I like the way it hurts . " Rihanna 's appearance was criticized . Writing for Rolling Stone magazine , Daniel Kreps called it " especially striking " and noted her relationship with Brown . An editor from The Boston Globe commented that although the video is realistic , it hinders Rihanna 's ability to set an example for women in abusive relationships . Billy Johnson Jr. from Yahoo ! Music wrote that Fox 's character alternated between vulnerable and confrontational personalities , while Monaghan 's character is similar to Eminem . Kahn , who understood why viewers thought Eminem 's and Rihanna 's relationships influenced the video , asked that they realize this is untrue . He said the team had been conscious of such personal matters and Fox 's and Monaghan 's characters are only significant to each other . 
 Reviewers discussed the acting . Peter Gicas of E ! News noted that Fox and Monaghan portray " combustible behavior the tune is hellbent on describing . " The New York Post 's Jarett Wieselman wrote that they play their roles perfectly and help make the video powerful . Entertainment Weekly 's Whitney Pastorek found the violent acting sexually appealing , while Willa Paskin of New York magazine wrote that the cast 's appeal " hypnotize [ s ] " viewers . Paskin noted the use of sepia toning in the burning @-@ house scenes . Matthew Wilkening of AOL Radio commented that the video leaves viewers to decide " if it 's a good thing or a bad thing that the pair always end up reconciling . " Mikey Fresh of Vibe commented that Fox 's natural reaction when Monaghan pierces the wall and almost hits her is an " incredible act of vulnerability " . L Magazine 's Benjamin Sutton likened the scene in which the characters burn to the Marvel Comics character Chris Bradley , whom Monaghan portrays in the 2009 action film X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . As of July 2016 , the video is the site 's 24th most viewed video , with more than 1 @.@ 1 billion views . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Eminem has promoted " Love the Way You Lie " at concerts . On June 15 , 2010 , he and Rihanna performed the song at Los Angeles ' Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 , accompanied by the drummer Travis Barker and D12 's Mr. Porter . Eminem sang " Love the Way You Lie " at the Scottish festival T in the Park on July 10 , 2010 , dedicating it to " everybody who ' [ d ] been in a fucked @-@ up relationship . " He then performed the song at Ireland 's annual Oxegen festival on July 11 , 2010 . James <unk> from State wrote that the rapper 's personality " fill [ ed ] the stage " and that his vocals were sharp and packed " plenty of punch " . He criticized the use of a pre @-@ recorded backing track and noted the lack of live music and female vocals . Eamon Sweeney from the Irish Independent called Eminem 's performance only " mildly impressive " . 
 On July 21 , 2010 , the rapper joined Rihanna on her Last Girl on Earth Tour to perform in Los Angeles . He then performed at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards and was voted the best performer of the ceremony in an MTV poll , earning 34 percent of votes . Rihanna made a surprise appearance despite having said she could not perform because of her schedule . Suddath of Time called their duet dull . Eminem sang " Love the Way You Lie " without Rihanna at the 2011 Bonnaroo Music Festival for almost 80 @,@ 000 people . According to MTV News ' Montgomery , the " sheer tenacity with which he attacked " was his strength . Patrick Doyle of Rolling Stone felt Eminem delivered a triumphal act by " constantly bouncing across the stage " and singing energetically . 
 Eminem performed " Love the Way You Lie " on the second day of Chicago 's annual Lollapalooza festival on August 6 , 2011 . Members of the audience sang the chorus to compensate for Rihanna 's absence . Piet Levy of USA Today named the show a " tragic stunner " , while Katie Hasty of HitFix added that it displayed competition between the sexes . Eminem and Rihanna performed in Staffordshire on the first day of <unk> ( V Festival ) , on August 20 , 2011 . James Lachno of The Daily Telegraph considered it an " affecting " rendition . The Guardian called their performance thrilling and an editor for the British newspaper Metro felt that it was the best part of the evening . Eminem closed the festival on the night of August 21 in Chelmsford , Essex , for an audience of 120 @,@ 000 . A reporter for the International Business Times thought that Eminem 's duet with Rihanna was the highlight of the show . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Various musical acts have performed cover versions of " Love the Way You Lie " . Eric Stanley , an American violinist , remixed the song on the violin . The country music group The Band Perry sang the song at the June 2010 CMT Music Awards . Two months later , Taylor Momsen — the lead singer of the American rock band The Pretty Reckless — performed a cover version for BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge as part of a mashup with the song " Islands " by the English pop band The xx . Assisted by a guitarist from her band , she began with a section of " Islands " and transitioned into the chorus of " Love the Way You Lie " . Cher Lloyd , a British singer , performed the song in the final five of The X Factor UK 's seventh season . A writer from The Sun called the performance " stripped @-@ back " and " without any of her usual stage gimmicks . " <unk> Gilmore of the Daily Express commented that the song is " a duet for a reason " as Lloyd performed both Eminem 's and Rihanna 's parts . In 2010 , the Russian guitarist Alex Feather <unk> , released " Love The Way You Lie ( Heavy Remix ) " , a recording that was recognized by Billboard.biz ( Web Trends ) . The American post @-@ hardcore band A <unk> Drive recorded a cover of the single for Punk Goes Pop 4 , the 2011 release of the Punk Goes ... series . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On November 3 , 2010 , an alternative version titled " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " leaked onto the Internet . Rihanna is the lead vocalist and Eminem is a featured guest . The song mainly views matters from Rihanna 's perspective and is based on Grey 's demo . Rihanna agreed to record a sequel despite initially thinking " the original couldn 't be beaten " . She said that the sequel involved less production , with only piano and drums . It is the eleventh and final track on her 2010 studio album Loud . Grey 's version appears on her 2012 extended play The Buried Sessions of Skylar Grey and her 2013 studio album Don 't Look Down as " Love the Way You Lie ( Part III ) " . 
 Rihanna performed a short medley that comprised " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , " What 's My Name ? " and " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at the American Music Awards of 2010 . Another medley , consisting of " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " and " I Need a Doctor " , was performed at the 2011 Grammy Awards . While the Chicago Sun @-@ Times considered the track an unnecessary sequel , the BBC reviewer James Skinner wrote , " ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) ' even bests the original , Eminem 's verse exuding the kind of volatile , simmering menace that got everyone so excited about him in the first place . But it is Rihanna 's vocal — at once commanding , soulful and vulnerable — that anchors the song " . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single 
 " Love the Way You Lie " ( featuring Rihanna ) – 4 : 15 
 " Not Afraid " ( Live at T in the Park ) – 6 : 54 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The credits for " Love the Way You Lie " are adapted from the liner notes of Recovery . 
 Eminem – mixing engineer , writer , vocalist 
 Rihanna – vocalist 
 Skylar Grey – writer 
 Alex da Kid – mastering engineer , mixing engineer , producer , writer 
 Mike Strange – mixing engineer , recording engineer 
 Marcos Tovar – recording engineer 
 Joe Strange – engineering assistant 
 Spike Lindsey – engineering assistant 
 Makeba Riddick – producer ( vocals ) 
 J. Brow – guitarist 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 9 , 2013 , RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = Nitrogen narcosis = 
 Narcosis while diving ( also known as nitrogen narcosis , inert gas narcosis , raptures of the deep , Martini effect ) , is a reversible alteration in consciousness that occurs while diving at depth . It is caused by the anesthetic effect of certain gases at high pressure . The Greek word <unk> ( narcosis ) is derived from <unk> , " temporary decline or loss of senses and movement , numbness " , a term used by Homer and Hippocrates . Narcosis produces a state similar to drunkenness ( alcohol intoxication ) , or nitrous oxide inhalation . It can occur during shallow dives , but does not usually become noticeable at depths less than 30 meters ( 100 ft ) . 
 Except for helium and probably neon , all gases that can be breathed have a narcotic effect , although widely varying in degree . The effect is consistently greater for gases with a higher lipid solubility , and there is good evidence that the two properties are mechanistically related . As depth increases , the mental impairment may become hazardous . Divers can learn to cope with some of the effects of narcosis , but it is impossible to develop a tolerance . Narcosis affects all divers , although susceptibility varies widely from dive to dive , and between individuals . 
 Narcosis may be completely reversed in a few minutes by ascending to a shallower depth , with no long @-@ term effects . Thus narcosis while diving in open water rarely develops into a serious problem as long as the divers are aware of its symptoms , and are able to ascend to manage it . Diving beyond 40 m ( 130 ft ) is generally considered outside the scope of recreational diving . Below these depths , as narcosis and oxygen toxicity become critical risk factors , specialist training is required in the use of various helium @-@ containing gas mixtures such as trimix or heliox . These mixtures prevent narcosis by replacing some of the breathing gas with non @-@ narcotic helium . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Narcosis results from breathing gases under elevated pressure , and may be classified by the principal gas involved . The noble gases , except helium and probably neon , as well as nitrogen , oxygen and hydrogen cause a decrement in mental function , but their effect on psychomotor function ( processes affecting the coordination of sensory or cognitive processes and motor activity ) varies widely . The effects of carbon dioxide consistently result in a diminution of mental and psychomotor function . The noble gases argon , krypton , and xenon are more narcotic than nitrogen at a given pressure , and xenon has so much anesthetic activity that it is a usable anesthetic at 80 % concentration and normal atmospheric pressure . Xenon has historically been too expensive to be used very much in practice , but it has been successfully used for surgical operations , and xenon anesthesia systems are still being proposed and designed . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Due to its perception @-@ altering effects , the onset of narcosis may be hard to recognize . At its most benign , narcosis results in relief of anxiety – a feeling of tranquility and mastery of the environment . These effects are essentially identical to various concentrations of nitrous oxide . They also resemble ( though not as closely ) the effects of alcohol or marijuana and the familiar benzodiazepine drugs such as diazepam and alprazolam . Such effects are not harmful unless they cause some immediate danger to go unrecognized and unaddressed . Once stabilized , the effects generally remain the same at a given depth , only worsening if the diver ventures deeper . 
 The most dangerous aspects of narcosis are the impairment of judgement , multi @-@ tasking and coordination , and the loss of decision @-@ making ability and focus . Other effects include vertigo and visual or auditory disturbances . The syndrome may cause exhilaration , giddiness , extreme anxiety , depression , or paranoia , depending on the individual diver and the diver 's medical or personal history . When more serious , the diver may feel overconfident , disregarding normal safe diving practices . 
 The relation of depth to narcosis is sometimes informally known as " Martini 's law " , the idea that narcosis results in the feeling of one martini for every 10 m ( 33 ft ) below 20 m ( 66 ft ) depth . Professional divers use such a calculation only as a rough guide to give new divers a metaphor , comparing a situation they may be more familiar with . 
 Reported signs and symptoms are summarized against typical depths in meters and feet of sea water in the following table : 
 = = Causes = = 
 The cause of narcosis is related to the increased solubility of gases in body tissues , as a result of the elevated pressures at depth ( Henry 's law ) . Modern theories have suggested that inert gases dissolving in the lipid bilayer of cell membranes cause narcosis . More recently , researchers have been looking at neurotransmitter receptor protein mechanisms as a possible cause of narcosis . The breathing gas mix entering the diver 's lungs will have the same pressure as the surrounding water , known as the ambient pressure . After any change of depth , the pressure of gases in the blood passing through the brain catches up with ambient pressure within a minute or two , which results in a delayed narcotic effect after descending to a new depth . Rapid compression potentiates narcosis owing to carbon dioxide retention . 
 A divers ' cognition may be affected on dives as shallow as 10 m ( 33 ft ) , but the changes are not usually noticeable . There is no reliable method to predict the depth at which narcosis becomes noticeable , or the severity of the effect on an individual diver , as it may vary from dive to dive even on the same day . 
 Significant impairment due to narcosis is an increasing risk below depths of about 30 m ( 100 ft ) , corresponding to an ambient pressure of about 4 bar ( 400 kPa ) . Most sport scuba training organizations recommend depths of no more than 40 m ( 130 ft ) because of the risk of narcosis . When breathing air at depths of 90 m ( 300 ft ) – an ambient pressure of about 10 bar ( 1 @,@ 000 kPa ) – narcosis in most divers leads to hallucinations , loss of memory , and unconsciousness . A number of divers have died in attempts to set air depth records below 120 m ( 400 ft ) . Because of these incidents , Guinness World Records no longer reports on this figure . 
 Narcosis has been compared with altitude sickness insofar as its variability ( though not its symptoms ) ; its effects depend on many factors , with variations between individuals . Thermal cold , stress , heavy work , fatigue , and carbon dioxide retention all increase the risk and severity of narcosis . Carbon dioxide has a high narcotic potential and also causes increased blood flow to the brain , increasing the effects of other gases . Increased risk of narcosis results from increasing the amount of carbon dioxide retained through heavy exercise , shallow or skip breathing , or because of poor gas exchange in the lungs . 
 Narcosis is known to be additive to even minimal alcohol intoxication , and also to the effects of other drugs such as marijuana ( which is more likely than alcohol to have effects that last into a day of abstinence from use ) . Other sedative and analgesic drugs , such as opiate narcotics and benzodiazepines , add to narcosis . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The precise mechanism is not well understood , but it appears to be the direct effect of gas dissolving into nerve membranes and causing temporary disruption in nerve transmissions . While the effect was first observed with air , other gases including argon , krypton and hydrogen cause very similar effects at higher than atmospheric pressure . Some of these effects may be due to antagonism at NMDA receptors and potentiation of GABAA receptors , similar to the mechanism of nonpolar anesthetics such diethyl ether or ethylene . However , their reproduction by the very chemically inactive gas argon makes them unlikely to be a strictly chemical bonding to receptors in the usual sense of a chemical bond . An indirect physical effect – such as a change in membrane volume – would therefore be needed to affect the ligand @-@ gated ion channels of nerve cells . <unk> et al. have suggested non @-@ chemical binding due to the attractive van der Waals force between proteins and inert gases . 
 Similar to the mechanism of ethanol 's effect , the increase of gas dissolved in nerve cell membranes may cause altered ion permeability properties of the neural cells ' lipid bilayers . The partial pressure of a gas required to cause a measured degree of impairment correlates well with the lipid solubility of the gas : the greater the solubility , the less partial pressure is needed . 
 An early theory , the Meyer @-@ Overton hypothesis , suggested that narcosis happens when the gas penetrates the lipids of the brain 's nerve cells , causing direct mechanical interference with the transmission of signals from one nerve cell to another . More recently , specific types of chemically gated receptors in nerve cells have been identified as being involved with anesthesia and narcosis . However , the basic and most general underlying idea , that nerve transmission is altered in many diffuse areas of the brain as a result of gas molecules dissolved in the nerve cells ' fatty membranes , remains largely unchallenged . 
 = = Management and diagnosis = = 
 The management of narcosis is simply to ascend to shallower depths ; the effects then disappear within minutes . In the event of complications or other conditions being present , ascending is always the correct initial response . Should problems remain , then it is necessary to abort the dive . The decompression schedule can still be followed unless other conditions require emergency assistance . 
 The symptoms of narcosis may be caused by other factors during a dive : ear problems causing disorientation or nausea ; early signs of oxygen toxicity causing visual disturbances ; or hypothermia causing rapid breathing and shivering . Nevertheless , the presence of any of these symptoms should imply narcosis . Alleviation of the effects upon ascending to a shallower depth will confirm the diagnosis . Given the setting , other likely conditions do not produce reversible effects . In the rare event of misdiagnosis when another condition is causing the symptoms , the initial management – ascending closer to the surface – is still essential . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The most straightforward way to avoid nitrogen narcosis is for a diver to limit the depth of dives . Since narcosis becomes more severe as depth increases , a diver keeping to shallower depths can avoid serious narcosis . Most recreational dive schools will only certify basic divers to depths of 18 m ( 60 ft ) , and at these depths narcosis does not present a significant risk . Further training is normally required for certification up to 30 m ( 100 ft ) on air , and this training should include a discussion of narcosis , its effects , and cure . Some diver training agencies offer specialized training to prepare recreational divers to go to depths of 40 m ( 130 ft ) , often consisting of further theory and some practice in deep dives under close supervision . Scuba organizations that train for diving beyond recreational depths , may forbid diving with gases that cause too much narcosis at depth in the average diver , and strongly encourage the use of other breathing gas mixes containing helium in place of some or all of the nitrogen in air – such as trimix and heliox – because helium has no narcotic potential . The use of these gases forms part of technical diving and requires further training and certification . 
 While the individual diver cannot predict exactly at what depth the onset of narcosis will occur on a given day , the first symptoms of narcosis for any given diver are often more predictable and personal . For example , one diver may have trouble with eye focus ( close accommodation for middle @-@ aged divers ) , another may experience feelings of euphoria , and another feelings of claustrophobia . Some divers report that they have hearing changes , and that the sound their exhaled bubbles make becomes different . Specialist training may help divers to identify these personal onset signs , which may then be used as a signal to ascend to avoid the narcosis , although severe narcosis may interfere with the judgement necessary to take preventive action . 
 Deep dives should be made only after a gradual training to test the individual diver 's sensitivity to increasing depths , with careful supervision and logging of reactions . Diving organizations such as Global Underwater Explorers ( <unk> ) emphasize that such sessions are for the purpose of gaining experience in recognizing the onset symptoms of narcosis for an individual , which are somewhat more repeatable than for the average group of divers . Scientific evidence does not show that a diver can train to overcome any measure of narcosis at a given depth or become tolerant of it . 
 Equivalent narcotic depth ( END ) is a commonly used way of expressing the narcotic effect of different breathing gases . The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Diving Manual now states that oxygen and nitrogen should be considered equally narcotic . Standard tables , based on relative lipid solubilities , list conversion factors for narcotic effect of other gases . For example , hydrogen at a given pressure has a narcotic effect equivalent to nitrogen at 0 @.@ 55 times that pressure , so in principle it should be usable at more than twice the depth . Argon , however , has 2 @.@ 33 times the narcotic effect of nitrogen , and is a poor choice as a breathing gas for diving ( it is used as a drysuit inflation gas , owing to its low thermal conductivity ) . Some gases have other dangerous effects when breathed at pressure ; for example , high @-@ pressure oxygen can lead to oxygen toxicity . Although helium is the least intoxicating of the breathing gases , at greater depths it can cause high pressure nervous syndrome , a still mysterious but apparently unrelated phenomenon . Inert gas narcosis is only one factor influencing the choice of gas mixture ; the risks of decompression sickness and oxygen toxicity , cost , and other factors are also important . 
 Because of similar and additive effects , divers should avoid sedating medications and drugs , such as marijuana and alcohol before any dive . A hangover , combined with the reduced physical capacity that goes with it , makes nitrogen narcosis more likely . Experts recommend total abstinence from alcohol for at least 12 hours before diving , and longer for other drugs . Abstinence time needed for marijuana is unknown , but owing to the much longer half @-@ life of the active agent of this drug in the body , it is likely to be longer than for alcohol . 
 = = Prognosis and epidemiology = = 
 Narcosis is potentially one of the most dangerous conditions to affect the scuba diver below about 30 m ( 100 ft ) . Except for occasional amnesia of events at depth , the effects of narcosis are entirely removed on ascent and therefore pose no problem in themselves , even for repeated , chronic or acute exposure . Nevertheless , the severity of narcosis is unpredictable and it can be fatal while diving , as the result of illogical behavior in a dangerous environment . 
 Tests have shown that all divers are affected by nitrogen narcosis , though some experience lesser effects than others . Even though it is possible that some divers can manage better than others because of learning to cope with the subjective impairment , the underlying behavioral effects remain . These effects are particularly dangerous because a diver may feel they are not experiencing narcosis , yet still be affected by it . 
 = = History = = 
 French researcher Victor T. Junod was the first to describe symptoms of narcosis in 1834 , noting " the functions of the brain are activated , imagination is lively , thoughts have a peculiar charm and , in some persons , symptoms of intoxication are present . " Junod suggested that narcosis resulted from pressure causing increased blood flow and hence stimulating nerve centers . Walter Moxon ( 1836 – 1886 ) , a prominent Victorian physician , hypothesized in 1881 that pressure forced blood to inaccessible parts of the body and the stagnant blood then resulted in emotional changes . The first report of anesthetic potency being related to lipid solubility was published by Hans H. Meyer in 1899 , entitled Zur Theorie der <unk> . Two years later a similar theory was published independently by Charles Ernest Overton . What became known as the Meyer @-@ Overton Hypothesis may be illustrated by a graph comparing narcotic potency with solubility in oil . 
 In 1939 , Albert R. Behnke and O. D. Yarborough demonstrated that gases other than nitrogen also could cause narcosis . For an inert gas the narcotic potency was found to be proportional to its lipid solubility . As hydrogen has only 0 @.@ 55 the solubility of nitrogen , deep diving experiments using <unk> were conducted by Arne <unk> between 1943 and 1945 . Jacques @-@ Yves Cousteau in 1953 famously described it as " l ’ <unk> des grandes <unk> " or the " rapture of the deep " . 
 Further research into the possible mechanisms of narcosis by anesthetic action led to the " minimum alveolar concentration " concept in 1965 . This measures the relative concentration of different gases required to prevent motor response in 50 % of subjects in response to stimulus , and shows similar results for anesthetic potency as the measurements of lipid solubility . The ( NOAA ) Diving Manual was revised to recommend treating oxygen as if it were as narcotic as nitrogen , following research by Christian J. Lambertsen et al. in 1977 and 1978 . 
 = Beit Al Quran = 
 Beit Al Qur 'an ( Arabic : بيت <unk> , meaning : the House of Qur 'an ) is a multi @-@ purpose complex dedicated to the Islamic arts and is located in <unk> , Bahrain . Established in 1990 , the complex is most famous for its Islamic museum , which has been acknowledged as being one of the most renowned Islamic museums in the world . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 Construction of the complex began in 1984 and the museum was officially opened in March 1990 by Abdul Latif Jassim Kanoo . It was built to " accommodate a comprehensive and valuable collection of the Qur 'an and other rare manuscripts " , a concept which , according to a regional magazine , is unique in the Persian Gulf region . The core of the museum 's holdings is Kanoo 's own collection of Qur 'anic manuscripts and Islamic art , since he was reportedly said to have been an avid collector . As his collection grew , he reportedly came to feel a strong sense of responsibility toward the rare manuscripts he had acquired . In 1990 , he donated his collection to the museum he established to operate a first @-@ of @-@ its @-@ kind institution dedicated to the service of the Qur 'an and the preservation of historic manuscripts . 
 The establishment of the institute was funded completely by public donations , with added help from a variety of people from all walks of life in Bahrain , ranging from heads of state to school children . The facilities at Beit Al Qur 'an are free to the general public . 
 The institution and its museum house an internationally celebrated collection of historic Quranic manuscripts from various parts of the Islamic world , from China in the East and to Spain in the West , representing a progression of calligraphic traditions from the first Hijri century ( 622 – 722 AD ) and of the Islamic Golden Age , to the present day . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The Beit al Qur 'an complex is open to the public on Saturdays to Wednesdays from 9am to 12pm and 4pm to 6pm respectively . The complex 's exterior designs are based on an old fashioned 12th @-@ century mosque . The entire complex itself comprises a mosque , a library , an auditorium , a madrasa , and a museum that consists of ten exhibition halls . A large stained glass dome covers the grand hall and mosque . The Mihrab , the sign indicating the direction to Mecca , is covered in blue ceramic tiles with engraved Al <unk> Qur 'anic verse . 
 The library consists of over 50 @,@ 000 books and manuscripts in three languages – Arabic , English and French – that are mostly on Islam . The institute does specialise in Islamic art , and many of the reference books have international importance . The library and its reading rooms are open to the public during working hours with internet access available , as well as providing individual rooms for researchers and specialists . 
 There is also an auditorium – named the Mohammed Bin Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa Lecture Hall – which can accommodate up to 150 people , and is mainly used for lectures and conferences . Guest speakers are brought to Bahrain from many countries , including the US , UK , and France . The conference hall is often made available for general use for public lectures in cooperation with different societies and institutions in Bahrain . 
 The Yousuf Bin Ahmad Kanoo School for Qur 'anic Studies is located within the site . The school offers seven study areas fully equipped with computers and modern aids , with separate classes for women and children learning the Qur 'an . 
 = = Museum = = 
 The Al Hayat Museum is the complex 's most recognized establishments ; it consists of ten halls spread over two floors , exhibiting rare Qur 'anic manuscripts from different periods , starting from the first century Hijra ( 700 AD ) . Manuscripts on parchments that originate from Saudi Arabia ( Mecca and Medina ) , Damascus and Baghdad , are present in the museum . The manuscripts undergo special procedures for the preservation of these artifacts , in order to protect them from damages . Some of the artifacts present in the museum include a rare manuscript of the Qur 'an , dating to 1694 AD and was printed in Germany . The museum also houses the world 's oldest translated copy of the Qur 'an , which was translated to Latin in Switzerland and dates to 955 AD . The first copy of the Qur 'an , written during the reign of Caliph Uthman ibn Affan , is on display in the museum alongside a number of small copies of the Qur 'an , which could only be read using optical instruments . 
 Grains , peas and rice , dating from the 14th century in present @-@ day Pakistan , which contain <unk> engraved into them , are displayed in the museum . The exhibits include a rare number of gold and copper pottery and glass from different eras of Iraq , Turkey , Iran and Egypt , respectively . 
 The works of Islamic scholars , such as Ibn <unk> are preserved in the museum . It has been claimed to have been " the only institute in the world dedicated to the Qur 'an and Qur 'anic studies " . 
 = Dartmouth College Greek organizations = 
 Dartmouth College is host to many Greek organizations , and a significant percentage of the undergraduate student body is active in Greek life . In 2005 , the school stated that 1 @,@ 785 students were members of a fraternity , sorority , or coeducational Greek house , comprising about 43 percent of all students , or about 60 percent of the eligible student body . Greek organizations at Dartmouth provide both social and residential opportunities for students , and are the only single @-@ sex residential option on campus . Greek organizations at Dartmouth do not provide dining options , as regular meals service has been banned in Greek houses since 1909 . 
 Social fraternities at Dartmouth College grew out of a tradition of student literary societies that began in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries . The first social fraternities were founded in 1842 and rapidly expanded to include the active participation of over half of the student body . Fraternities at Dartmouth built dedicated residence and meeting halls in the early 1900s and in the 1920s , and then struggled to survive the lean years of the 1930s . Dartmouth College was among the first institutions of higher education to desegregate fraternity houses in the 1950s , and was involved in the movement to create coeducational Greek houses in the 1970s . Sororities were introduced to campus in 1977 . In the early 2000s , campus @-@ wide debate focused on whether or not the Greek system at Dartmouth would become " substantially coeducational " , but most houses retain single @-@ sex membership policies . 
 Currently , Dartmouth College extends official recognition to sixteen all @-@ male fraternities , nine all @-@ female sororities , and three coeducational fraternities . The Greek houses are largely governed through three independent councils , the Interfraternity Council , the Panhellenic Council , and the Coed Council . Dartmouth College has two cultural interest fraternities , and two cultural interest sororities , which do not participate in the major governing councils , but are member organizations of national associations . A chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society is active , but there are no professional fraternities with active chapters at Dartmouth College . 
 = = History = = 
 Social fraternities at Dartmouth College grew out of a tradition of student literary societies that began in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries . The first such society at Dartmouth , the Social Friends , was formed in 1783 . A rival organization , called the United Fraternity , was founded in 1786 . A chapter of Phi Beta Kappa was established at Dartmouth in 1787 , and counted among its members Daniel Webster , class of 1801 . These organizations were , in large part , the only social life available to students at the college . The organizations hosted debates on a variety of topics not encountered in the curriculum of the day , and amassed large libraries of titles not found in the official College library . Both the Social Friends and the United Fraternity created libraries in Dartmouth Hall , and met in a room called Society Hall inside Dartmouth Hall . In 1815 , the college decided to intervene in the hotly contested recruitment battle between the Social Friends and the United Fraternity by restricting each society to recruit only from separate halves of the new student class . In 1825 , the college began simply assigning new students to one society or the other . Interest in the literary societies declined in the 1830s and 1840s . The College library and instructional curriculum had expanded to include much of what the literary societies had supported , and new Greek letter societies began to appear on campus . 
 In 1841 , two factions of the United Fraternity split off from the literary society . One of the new societies called itself Omega Phi and on May 10 , 1842 , obtained a charter as the Zeta chapter of Psi Upsilon . The other faction to split from the United Fraternity organized itself on July 13 , 1842 , as Kappa Kappa Kappa , a local fraternity . More Greek organizations were founded , and by 1855 , 64 % of students , mostly upperclassmen , were members of the Greek letter societies on campus . Initially , the original Greek letter societies would not extend invitations of membership to first year students . Two separate Greek letter organizations were created exclusively for freshmen : Kappa Sigma Epsilon and Delta Kappa . These societies would dissolve in 1883 , when the fraternities of the upper classes began to pledge freshmen . A chapter of Phi Beta Kappa survived at Dartmouth , but by the 1830s had established its role as a strictly literary society by dropping requirements of secrecy for membership and activities . The new , social Greek organizations distinguished themselves from Phi Beta Kappa and the previous literary societies in several ways . The new fraternities were self @-@ selective and exclusive . Each organization developed its own secret rituals and procedures . Most of the societies began to invest in creating their own meeting halls , either upstairs rooms in buildings on Main Street , or free @-@ standing structures near campus . There were 11 active Greek organizations at Dartmouth College in 1900 . [ a ] 
 = = = Expansion of the fraternity system = = = 
 The fortunes of the fraternity system at Dartmouth followed a boom and bust pattern in the early twentieth century . Several organizations purchased frame houses or built their own between 1898 and 1907 , including Beta Theta Pi , Kappa Kappa Kappa , Phi Delta Alpha , and Psi Upsilon . The economic expansion of the 1920s created a boom in the fortunes of the fraternities , allowing many to build new brick residences near campus , including Zeta Psi , Kappa Kappa Kappa , Phi Sigma Kappa , Sigma Nu , Sigma Alpha Epsilon , Chi Phi , Theta Delta Chi , Phi Gamma Delta , Sigma Chi , Gamma Delta Chi , and Delta Tau Delta . It was during this period that Webster Avenue developed as " fraternity row " . The new residences were built without significant dining facilities , as the Trustees of the college had banned fraternities from serving regular meals in their chapter houses and had limited the number of resident brothers by the fall semester of 1909 . College administrators also challenged the fraternities to become more engaged in College life and less focused on their fraternity life during this time . College President Ernest Martin Hopkins personally decided to abolish freshman rush in 1924 . 
 As did the nation , fraternities at Dartmouth went through difficult times during the Great Depression . The decade of the 1930s saw almost no building projects at all in the fraternity system , and many houses could no longer afford regular maintenance . One of the great tragedies at Dartmouth College occurred on a winter night in 1934 , when nine members of Theta Chi died from carbon monoxide poisoning after a metal chimney on a dilapidated coal furnace in the basement of the chapter house broke in the night . In 1935 , Dartmouth historian and professor Leon Burr Richardson asserted in a survey that , in light of the national suffering , the fraternity chapters should ask themselves if they had " any excuse for existence . " Four fraternities dissolved during the Great Depression ( Alpha Sigma Phi , Alpha Tau Omega , Lambda Chi Alpha , and Sigma Alpha Mu ) , and two ( Phi Kappa Sigma and Alpha Chi Rho ) merged to pool scarce resources in order to survive . All of the surviving fraternities closed for the duration of World War II , as the campus was largely ( although not exclusively ) used to educate , train , and house Navy sailors and Marines in the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program . 
 The fraternities of Dartmouth College were directly involved in the African @-@ American Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s . In 1952 , the Dartmouth chapter of Theta Chi was derecognized by its national over a dispute regarding minority membership . The Dartmouth chapter reorganized as a local fraternity named Alpha Theta . A campus @-@ wide referendum held in 1954 on the issue of desegregation of fraternities resulted in a majority in favor of requiring fraternities on campus to eliminate racially discriminatory membership policies by the year 1960 , and to secede from national groups that retained such policies in their charters . This became a binding obligation imposed on the fraternities by the college administration , and several fraternities at Dartmouth dissociated from their national organizations , including the chapters of Phi Sigma Kappa ( 1956 ) , Delta Tau Delta ( 1960 ) , Phi Delta Theta ( 1960 ) , Sigma Chi ( 1960 ) , and Sigma Nu ( 1963 ) . 
 National social changes also affected Greek societies at Dartmouth in the 1960s and 1970s . Many began to question the value of belonging to a national fraternal organization . The Dartmouth chapters of Chi Alpha Rho , Chi Phi , Delta Upsilon , Phi Gamma Delta , Phi Kappa Psi , and Sigma Phi Epsilon all disaffiliated from their national fraternities in the 1960s . As political activism increased , fraternities were increasingly seen as anachronistic , and in 1967 , the faculty voted 67 @-@ 16 to adopt a proposal to abolish fraternities at Dartmouth . The proposal was rejected by the Board of Trustees . 
 = = = Coeducation to the present = = = 
 Coeducation would dramatically change all social life at Dartmouth College , including the fraternity system . The college first began admitting women as full @-@ time students in 1972 . By the fall of 1973 , five local fraternities ( Alpha Theta , Foley House , The Tabard , Phi Tau , and Phi Sigma Psi ) had all decided to adopt a coeducational membership policy and admit women as full members . The first sorority on campus , Sigma Kappa , was founded in 1977 . Many alumni expressed strong concerns that the need for housing for new sororities would inevitably lead to financial pressure and the possible dissolution of existing fraternities at the college . In response , the Trustees imposed a moratorium limiting the campus to no more than six recognized sororities . Converting from an all @-@ male to a coeducational membership policy was not enough to save at least one Greek organization on campus . In 1981 , the Harold Parmington Foundation reorganized itself as a new coeducational fraternity Delta Psi Delta , but the organization never attracted many new members and was finally forced to dissolve in the spring of 1991 . In addition , Foley House disassociated from the Greek system in fall 1984 , transitioning into an affinity house as part of the college 's residential living programs . It moved off Webster Avenue to a new location on West Street ( where it is still in operation as of the 2013 @-@ 14 academic year ) . 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , College administrators introduced new initiatives to hold the Greek organizations on campus more accountable for their actions and to offer more social alternatives to the predominantly single @-@ sex Greek system . In 1982 , the administration announced that Greek organizations would have to comply with a set of " minimum standards " , enforced through annual reviews , in order to remain in good standing with the college . These standards included not only health and safety regulations regarding the conditions of the Greek houses , but requirements for Greek @-@ sponsored activities deemed beneficial to the college community at large . The College introduced Undergraduate Societies to campus in 1993 , as a residential and social alternative to Greek organizations . Similar to the Greek houses in many respects , Undergraduate Societies were required to have open , coeducational membership policies . Panarchy voted to change its status to an undergraduate society and was joined the following year by a newly formed society , called Amarna . In the fall of 1993 , Student Assembly President Andrew Beebe , class of 1993 , argued in favor of the coeducation of the entire Greek system in his remarks at fall Convocation . During that same academic term , College President James O. Freedman predicted that the Greek system at Dartmouth would be coeducational within 10 years . 
 In 1999 , the college administration announced a " Residential and Social Life Initiative " to improve campus life . Speculation that all single @-@ sex fraternities and sororities would be required to adopt coeducational membership policies led to intense campus debate . In a survey conducted by The Dartmouth newspaper , 49 % of the student body responded , and 83 % of those respondents were in favor of retaining a single @-@ sex Greek system at Dartmouth . In a December , 2006 interview , College President Jim Wright admitted that it had been " a serious mistake " to announce the Student Life Initiative in the manner in which it was presented to the campus , but expressed that in his opinion , " the Greek system at Dartmouth now is stronger than it 's ever been . " 
 = = Fraternities = = 
 The single @-@ sex male @-@ only fraternities at Dartmouth College are largely organized and represented to the college through the Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) . The Interfraternity Council is a student @-@ led governance organization that assists the member Greek organizations with finances , public relations , programming , judicial administration , recruitment , and academic achievement . Alpha Phi Alpha is not a member of the IFC , but is a member of the National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council . Lambda Upsilon Lambda is also not a member of the IFC , but is a member of the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations . 
 = = = Alpha Phi Alpha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Theta Zeta chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha was founded as the first historically African @-@ American fraternity at Dartmouth College in 1972 . The first members of the fraternity traveled to Boston , Massachusetts on the weekends of the 1971 spring academic term to attend pledge events at the Sigma chapter . The Dartmouth chapter was chartered as the <unk> chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha on May 12 , 1972 . Early chapter meetings on campus were held in both the <unk> dormitories and Cutter @-@ Shabazz Hall . The fraternity secured their own house in 1982 , a duplex structure that , since renovated , today houses the Delta Delta Delta sorority . Facing smaller membership , the fraternity decided to relocate to a smaller house near the western end of Webster Avenue in the late 1980s , and in 1992 , the fraternity again relocated to College @-@ owned apartment housing . The Dartmouth chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha sponsors an annual step performance known as the Green Key <unk> . Notable alumni of the chapter include National Football League all @-@ star Reggie Williams , class of 1976 , and current Executive Vice President of Baseball Operations in Major League Baseball , Jimmie Lee Solomon , class of 1978 . 
 = = = Alpha Chi Alpha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Chi Alpha ( " Alpha Chi " ) was founded in 1956 as the Phi Nu chapter of Alpha Chi Rho , a national fraternal organization . A previous Phi Nu chapter of Alpha Chi Rho at Dartmouth had merged with the Kappa chapter of Phi Kappa Sigma in 1935 to become Gamma Delta Chi , a local fraternity still in existence at Dartmouth . The second Phi Nu chapter of Alpha Chi Rho is unrelated to the first chapter . The men of Alpha Chi Rho again broke away from the national group in 1963 and became a local fraternity named Alpha Chi Alpha . The Dartmouth chapter objected to a clause in the national fraternity organization 's constitution that required all Alpha Chi Rho brothers to " accept Jesus as their lord and savior . " The land and house used by the Alpha Chi Alpha fraternity are owned by the college . Dartmouth invested $ 1 @.@ 3 Million in renovations completed in the fall of 2004 , which included the razing of the " Barn " structure that was used as social space by the brothers of Alpha Chi Alpha to make way for a new expanded basement and main floor area . Renovations on the Alpha Chi Alpha physical plant were completed in 2005 . 
 = = = Dartmouth Beta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Dartmouth Beta ( " Beta " ) was founded in 1858 as a local fraternity at Dartmouth 's Chandler Scientific School named Sigma Delta Pi . This was the second Chandler fraternity and the seventh fraternity founded at the college . The fraternity changed its name to Vitruvian ( a tribute to the Roman architect Vitruvius ) in 1871 and later established two short @-@ lived chapters at other schools . In 1889 , the local brotherhood decided to join a national fraternity and the organization soon became the Alpha Omega chapter of Beta Theta Pi . It built a house ( now South Fairbanks Hall ) designed by Beta graduate Charles A. Rich of Lamb & Rich in 1904 , and it built its second house on Webster Avenue in 1933 . 
 Notable alumni of the organization include but are not limited to : former US Representative from New Hampshire Frank G. Clarke , author Norman Maclean , former Governor of New Hampshire Walter R. Peterson ' 47 , businessman Alan Reich ' 52 , former Dartmouth President David T. McLaughlin ' 54 , owner of the Cincinnati Bengals Mike Brown ' 57 , founder of the Big East Conference Dave Gavitt ' 59 , former Athletic Director of Syracuse University Jake <unk> ' 60 , member of College Football Hall of Fame and Chief Executive Officer of the Hanover Company Murry Bowden ' 71 , professional poker player Chip Reese ' 73 , Politician Joel Hyatt ' 72 , US Congressman John Carney ' 78 , college football coach Buddy <unk> ' 78 , former NFL football coach Dave Shula ' 81 , former NFL quarterback Jeff Kemp ' 81 , Olympic skier Tiger Shaw ' 85 , former NFL quarterback Jay Fiedler ' 94 , and actor Brian J. White ' 96 . 
 Beta Theta Pi was suspended by the college on three occasions in the 1990s . An incident of hazing in 1994 led to a year @-@ long period of derecognition . In the summer of 1995 , a member of Beta Theta Pi read a poem aloud during a house meeting that was deemed to be racist and sexist , and resulted in many calling for derecognition of the fraternity . In 1996 , a Coed Fraternity Sorority Council judiciary committee found Beta Theta Pi guilty of six violations of college and fraternity policies . The College derecognized Beta Theta Pi permanently on December 6 , 1996 . The Hanover Police Department reported that the brothers of Beta Theta Pi did an estimated $ 15 @,@ 000 in damage to the property soon after hearing of the permanent derecognition decision . It returned to campus as a local fraternity , Beta Alpha Omega , in the fall of 2008 . 
 = = = Bones Gate ( BG ) = = = 
 Bones Gate ( " BG " ) was founded in 1901 as the Gamma Gamma Chapter of the Delta Tau Delta fraternity . In 1960 the Gamma Gamma chapter dissociated from Delta Tau Delta when the national organization sought to officially bar minorities from membership . The new local fraternity at Dartmouth went unnamed until 1962 , when the brothers adopted the name " Bones Gate " after an English tavern well @-@ known to the members . Well known television director and BG alumnus Tucker Gates founded the Earl Anthony Appreciation Society in the basement tube room during the winter of 1982 , combining two of his favorite activities ; watching the Pro Bowlers Tour on TV and drinking Budweiser from a quart bottle . In the summer of 2005 , the Bones Gate residence underwent significant structural renovations to bring the building up to the college 's minimum standards . Improvements included an enclosed fire escape running from the basement to the third floor , a new bathroom on the ground floor , and the rehabilitation of all other bathrooms . The brothers of Bones Gate strive to live by their credo of welcoming friends to their house : " This Gate <unk> High and <unk> None . Refresh , Enjoy and Travel On . " 
 = = = Gamma Delta Chi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Gamma Delta Chi ( " <unk> " ) can trace its history to two fraternities on the Dartmouth College campus , Phi Kappa Sigma and Alpha Chi Rho . Gamma Delta Epsilon , a local fraternity , was founded in 1908 , disbanded in 1912 , but was reformed in 1921 . In 1928 , the Gamma Delta Epsilon house sought to establish itself as a chapter of a national fraternity and obtained a charter from the Phi Kappa Sigma national fraternity , becoming its Kappa Chapter . Epsilon Kappa Alpha , was established as a local fraternity on the Dartmouth campus in 1915 . As with Gamma Delta Epsilon , Epsilon Kappa Alpha sought to become a chapter of a national fraternity and was granted a charter as the Phi Nu chapter of Alpha Chi Rho in 1918 . The Dartmouth chapters of Alpha Chi Rho and Phi Kappa Sigma found themselves in similar financial situations in 1934 . Both chapters owned prime lots near campus that lacked adequate residential structures . The two fraternities decided to share their resources and in 1935 merged to become a new local fraternity , Gamma Delta Chi . The lot formerly owned by Alpha Chi Rho was sold to the Church of Christ at Dartmouth where a new church building was constructed , and the revenue from the land sale supported the construction of a new house at Gamma Delta Chi 's current location . ( The Alpha Chi Rho national fraternity would later re @-@ establish a Phi Nu chapter at Dartmouth in 1956 as a separate fraternity from Gamma Delta Chi . This second Phi Nu chapter would dissociate from the Alpha Chi Rho national in 1963 to become a local fraternity named Alpha Chi Alpha . ) In the 1960s Gamma Delta Chi was especially well known for its antique fire engine , which transported brothers and their dates to football games ; and for its Sunday morning <unk> parties , open to all who had survived the previous night 's activities . 
 = = = Theta Delta Chi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Theta Delta Chi ( " Theta Delt , <unk> " ) was founded at Dartmouth College in 1869 as the Omicron Deuteron chapter of the national fraternity , and was the eighth fraternity founded at Dartmouth . Theta Delta Chi was the scene of a famous murder in June , 1920 . Henry Maroney , class of 1920 , was shot to death in his room at Theta Delta Chi by Robert Meads , class of 1919 . Meads was reportedly the central figure in a large @-@ scale bootlegging operation at the college during the early years of Prohibition . An already intoxicated Maroney reportedly stole a quart of Canadian whisky from Meads . Later that same night , Meads found Maroney in his room at the fraternity and shot him through the heart . Meads was convicted of a lesser charge of manslaughter and given a sentence of 15 to 20 years hard labor . The sensational murder is reportedly the source of the nickname given to the Theta Delta Chi residence : the " Boom Boom Lodge " . Theta Delta Chi has several distinguished alumni , including Robert Frost , who attended Dartmouth for a time in 1892 . 
 = = = Kappa Kappa Kappa ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Kappa Kappa Kappa ( " Tri @-@ Kap " ) is a local fraternity founded on July 13 , 1842 . Currently , it is the oldest local fraternity in the nation and the second permanent Greek @-@ letter fraternal society established at Dartmouth College . The organization has no affiliation with the Ku Klux Klan , which was founded after Kappa Kappa Kappa was founded and unfortunately adopted the Latin initials " KKK " , similar to the Greek alphabet letters Kappa Kappa Kappa . According to legend , Kappa Kappa Kappa sued the Ku Klux Klan for defamation of name , but lost because the judge ruled that the similarity in the initials of the organizations was sheer coincidence . Kappa Kappa Kappa was the first society at Dartmouth to have a freestanding fraternity building in Hanover and one of the first in the country . Some prominent alumni include Channing Cox ( 1901 ) , Dr. Bob , ( 1902 ) Nick Lowery ( 1978 ) , Paul Donnelly <unk> ( 1953 ) , and Peter Robinson ( 1979 ) . 
 = = = Lambda Upsilon Lambda ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Lambda Upsilon Lambda , known more formally as La Unidad Latina , Lambda Upsilon Lambda Fraternity , Inc. was established at Dartmouth in 1997 . The Psi Chapter of Lambda Upsilon Lambda is the college 's first historically Latino fraternity . The fraternity has no physical plant . Lambda Upsilon Lambda sponsors Noche Dorada , an annual semi @-@ formal dinner that features a guest speaker invited to the campus to address issues of Latino culture . The fraternity also supports the Brazil Project , in conjunction with the Sigma chapter at Wesleyan University , which supports thirteen families in Brazil . 
 = = = Sigma Phi Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Phi Epsilon ( " Sig Ep " ) at Dartmouth College was founded on April 22 , 1908 , as the local fraternity Omicron Pi Sigma . In 1909 , the local fraternity became New Hampshire Alpha Chapter of Sigma Phi Epsilon . By the late 1960s , the house had become disenchanted with the national organization and felt that the Dartmouth membership would be better served as a local fraternity . The brothers voted to dissociate from the national organization on January 18 , 1967 . A vote of the alumni of the New Hampshire Alpha chapter on February 1 , 1967 , supported the decision . The new local fraternity adopted the name Sigma Theta Epsilon ( which was also used by an unrelated national fraternity ) . The Sigma Phi Epsilon national continued to communicate with the local Sigma Theta Epsilon fraternity at Dartmouth , and by 1981 was willing to offer significant financial support for building renovations in exchange for <unk> . Convinced that the national organization had reformed in its commitment to the individual chapters , the local fraternity voted to rejoin Sigma Phi Epsilon on February 18 , 1981 . The national Sigma Phi Epsilon organization is known for its Balanced Man Program , an ongoing program of development through which members challenge themselves and to use their different talents and backgrounds to help each other become balanced men ( having a Sound Mind in a Sound Body ) and balanced servant leaders for the world 's communities . Members of Sigma Phi Epsilon become members the moment they join the fraternity , without having to endure a traditional pledge period . However , they commit to taking on a series of personal and leadership development challenges for the rest of their time as an undergraduate . The New Hampshire Alpha Chapter of Sigma Phi Epsilon was actually the first chapter to adopt the Balanced Man Program . Prominent alumni of the New Hampshire Alpha chapter include Theodor S. Geisel , class of 1925 , better known as " Dr. Seuss " and former Chairman of Dartmouth 's Board of Trustees and CEO of Freddie Mac , Charles E. Haldeman . 
 = = = Sigma Nu ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Nu ( " Sig Nu " ) at Dartmouth College was originally formed in 1903 as the Pukwana Club , an organization that was created as a reaction to the perceived elitism of Greek organizations at the time . The club ’ s concept was based on the love for the traditions of Dartmouth , faithful friendship , and honorable dealings . In 1907 , the Pukwana Club joined the national fraternity system after it received a charter to become the Delta Beta chapter of Sigma Nu . Sigma Nu ’ s " Way of Honor " principle was very similar to the principles expressed in the Pukwana Club ’ s original charter . The first residence for Sigma Nu at Dartmouth was purchased and refurbished in 1911 . Known as the Green Castle , it served as chapter headquarters until the current house was built in 1925 . In response to the national fraternity ’ s segregationist membership policies , the fraternity went local in 1963 , becoming Sigma Nu Delta . In 1984 , after the national fraternity 's policies were changed , the fraternity reaffiliated with the national . In the summer of 2007 , the Sigma Nu residence underwent significant structural renovations to bring the building up to the college 's minimum standards and improve living facilities . Improvements included an enclosed fire escape running from the first floor to the third floor , a redone kitchen and bathroom , new flooring , a new study room , and alterations to bedrooms . Prominent alumni include acting Solicitor General of the United States Neal Katyal ' 91 . 
 = = = Phi Delta Alpha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Phi Delta Alpha ( " Phi Delt " ) was founded in 1884 as the New Hampshire Alpha chapter of Phi Delta Theta , a national fraternity . Early meetings of the fraternity were held in the Tontine Building on Main Street . The meeting location moved to the Currier Building in 1887 when the Tontine Building burned down . Phi Delta Theta began construction on a new house in 1898 , and the building was completed in 1902 , designed by Charles Rich of Lamb & Rich . In January 1960 , the Dartmouth chapter broke away from the national because the national would not allow minorities to pledge the house . The new , local fraternity replaced the last letter in its name with Alpha . In March 2000 , the fraternity was derecognized by the college . One of the primary reasons for the punishment was that four members of Phi Delta Alpha started a fire in the Chi Gamma Epsilon basement next door . Rig . Under the leadership of Gig Faux , class of 1984 , Phi Delta Alpha applied to the college for <unk> in fall 2002 . The first rush class was formed in the winter of 2003 . Current General Electric Chief Executive Officer , Jeffrey <unk> , class of 1978 , is a former president of Phi Delta Alpha . Other influential alumni include current Dartmouth trustees R. Bradford Evans ' 64 and William W. Helman IV ' 80 , former Dartmouth trustee Peter Fahey ' 68 , billionaire oilman Trevor Rees @-@ Jones ' 74 , and Pulitzer winners Nigel Jaquiss ' 84 and Joseph <unk> ' 05 . In January 2010 , a fire damaged the fraternity 's physical plant . No one was harmed , but the house was closed for renovations until June 2010 . 
 = = = Chi Gamma Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Chi Gamma Epsilon ( " Chi Gam " ) was founded in 1905 as the Gamma Epsilon chapter of Kappa Sigma , a national fraternity . The Dartmouth chapter dissociated from the national fraternity in 1987 . The disputes with the national organization were primarily over the amount of loans the national organization could offer the local chapter . Initially , the new local fraternity adopted the name Kappa Sigma Gamma , but the national fraternity took offense to the likeness of the names . After a period simply being known by its address , 7 Webster Avenue , the fraternity came upon the name by which it is now known . Chi Gamma Epsilon made national headlines in 1998 for co @-@ sponsoring a " ghetto " theme party with the sisters of Alpha Xi Delta sorority that many found to be offensive for its racial stereotypes of African @-@ Americans . Several Chi Gamma Epsilon / Kappa Sigma alumni brothers found fame in Major League Baseball careers , including all @-@ star players Brad Ausmus , class of 1991 , and Mike Remlinger , class of 1987 , and former Baltimore Orioles General Manager Jim Beattie , class of 1976 . Other prominent brothers include Vivid Entertainment President William Asher , class of 1984 @.@ and eBay Inc . CEO John Donahoe . 
 = = = Chi Heorot ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Chi Heorot ( " Heorot " , " XH " ) was founded in 1897 as a local fraternity named Alpha Alpha Omega , and in 1902 was granted a charter as the Chi chapter of the Chi Phi Fraternity . In 1903 , the fraternity moved to its present location , and in 1927 it sold off its eighteenth @-@ century house and built the house that stands today . In 1968 , the house dissociated from the national fraternity , and adopted the name Chi Phi Heorot . The " Heorot " in Chi Phi Heorot comes from the medieval poem Beowulf , in which Heorot is the great hall where warriors converge to tell their stories . After several suspensions by the college in the early 1980s , it re @-@ joined the Chi Phi national in 1981 . This was short @-@ lived ; in 1987 , because of damage done to the house that the college insisted upon having repaired for safety reasons but the Chi Phi national refused to help finance , the Dartmouth brotherhood again opted to become a local fraternity . In exchange for financing renovations to the structure , the college assumed ownership of the property and house . In its second incarnation as a local fraternity , the brotherhood chose the name Chi Heorot . Notable alumni include Gerry <unk> ' 18 , Adam Nelson ' 97 , and Andrew <unk> ' 09 , all Olympic medalists . 
 = = = Psi Upsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Zeta Chapter of Psi Upsilon International Fraternity ( " Psi U " ) was founded at Dartmouth in 1842 , the first fraternity at Dartmouth College . In 1907 , Psi Upsilon built the wood frame house it still occupies , designed by noted New Jersey theater architect and Dartmouth alumnus Fred Wesley Wentworth . Several additions during the latter half of the twentieth century greatly improved the structure , which houses around twenty brothers each year . The house most recently underwent substantial renovations during the spring of 2006 . F. Scott Fitzgerald famously enjoyed the 1938 Winter Carnival in the Psi Upsilon chapter house . The Zeta chapter creates an ice pond in its yard every winter and is known as the " keg jumping fraternity " for its most @-@ popular Winter Carnival activity . Prominent alumni of the Zeta chapter of Psi Upsilon includes former United States Vice President Nelson Rockefeller ' 30 , and billionaire hedge fund manager of Lone Pine Capital , Steve Mandel ' 78 . 
 = = = Zeta Psi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Zeta Psi ( " Zete " ) at Dartmouth College was founded in 1853 as the Psi Epsilon chapter of the national fraternity , and was the fifth fraternity founded at the college . The fraternity became inactive in 1863 , but was revived from 1871 through 1873 after which it again became inactive . The current Psi Epsilon Chapter of Zeta Psi at Dartmouth was established in 1920 . In 2001 , the Dartmouth chapter was derecognized by the college because " the fraternity harassed specific fellow students and violated ethical standards that Dartmouth student organizations agree to uphold , by periodically creating and circulating among Zeta Psi members ' newsletters ' that purported to describe situations , some of them of a sexual nature , of various members of the fraternity and other students . " Zeta Psi , meanwhile , countered that " nothing could be further from the truth ... Dartmouth College lacks jurisdiction to punish Psi Epsilon of Zeta Psi 's for alleged violations of its own rules or regulations , " . From 2001 to 2006 , Zeta Psi continued to operate as an independent fraternity , not officially recognized by Dartmouth College . In January 2007 , Dartmouth College announced an agreement that would allow Zeta Psi to reorganize on campus as early as 2009 . Part of the agreement dictated that the organization " go dark " , with no activities or recruiting , for a period of two years . During these two years , alumni raised millions of dollars and the physical plant was entirely gutted and renovated , with a three @-@ story addition being constructed on the west @-@ side of the house . Also , the basement was enlarged . On October 12 , 2009 , the Psi Epsilon Association of Zeta Psi Fraternity ( Dartmouth Zete 's alumni association ) announced that 35 undergraduates had joined the newly re @-@ recognized fraternity . As of January 2011 , after only little more than a year , Zete has around 60 brothers and counting . 
 = = Sororities = = 
 The single @-@ sex female @-@ only sororities at Dartmouth College are largely organized and represented to the college through the Panhellenic Council . The Panhellenic Council is a student @-@ led governance organization that assists the member Greek organizations by promoting values , education , leadership , friendships , cooperation and citizenship . Alpha Pi Omega and Sigma Lambda Upsilon are not members of the Panhellenic Council , but are members of the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations . 
 = = = Alpha Xi Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Theta Psi chapter of Alpha Xi Delta ( " <unk> " ) was founded as Delta Pi Omega in 1997 . On January 6 , 1997 , the local sorority was officially recognized by the college , and on July 2 , 1997 , the sisters voted to affiliate with the Alpha Xi Delta national sorority . On February 21 , 1998 , the local organization 's petition was approved by the national with a charter as the Theta Psi chapter . Alpha Xi Delta initially occupied the house currently home to Beta Theta Pi , until it was announced in 2008 that Beta was repossessing the house and that the sorority would have to relocate elsewhere . In the fall of 2009 , they moved into a newly renovated house . Since the Theta Psi chapter 's founding in 1997 , Alpha Xi Delta has graduated multiple Rhodes Scholars . The Dartmouth chapter of Alpha Xi Delta sorority 's national philanthropy is " Autism Speaks " . They also volunteer for The Upper Valley Haven , a local group that provides shelter and education to families . 
 = = = Alpha Pi Omega ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Pi Omega was established by women at Dartmouth College in May 2001 . The organization was chartered as the Epsilon Chapter of the national historically Native American sorority in 2006 , and was officially recognized by the college as a full chapter beginning with the fall 2006 academic term . The sorority has college @-@ owned housing on campus . Alpha Pi Omega has a six @-@ week @-@ long pledge period known as the Honey Process . For college governance purposes , the Epsilon Chapter associates locally with the local member societies of the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations . 
 = = = Alpha Phi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Phi was recognized on March 3 , 2006 , as the Dartmouth College colony of the international sorority . The colony officially became a chapter on April 28 , 2007 . Alpha Phi first participated in formal recruitment in September 2007 . Philanthropy is important to the sisters at Alpha Phi , who host an annual campus @-@ wide Red Dress Gala to raise money for women 's cardiac care . Sisters also volunteer in various local community service events . Alpha Phi has a close @-@ knit sisterhood , and sisters participate in termly bonding events , like apple @-@ picking and jewelry studio workshops , as well as weekly events , such as chapter meetings and sisterhood dinners . Mixers , semi @-@ formal and formal events are also a part of Alpha Phi 's programming calendar . 
 = = = Epsilon Kappa Theta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Epsilon Kappa Theta ( " <unk> , " " Theta " ) at Dartmouth College was founded in January 1982 as the Epsilon Kappa colony of the Kappa Alpha Theta national sorority . Epsilon Kappa was the 100th colony of the sorority . The sorority initially met in a wide variety of locations , including the basement of the college president 's house . In 1984 , the sorority moved into Brewster Hall , a College @-@ owned house that had previously been used as an International House and later as temporary housing for the Alpha Chi Omega sorority . In 1992 , the sisters of the Epsilon Kappa chapter of Kappa Alpha Theta found the strict national rules and the primarily Christian religious readings and rituals of the organization to be antithetical to the spirit of feminism and inclusivity that the chapter desired . The national organization was unhappy with the colony 's decision to disobey their rules and their failure to follow the sorority 's rituals . On May 4 , 1992 , the Dartmouth chapter notified the Kappa Alpha Theta national organization of its unanimous vote to disaffiliate and become a local sorority . The national organization revoked the charter of Epsilon Kappa . The Dartmouth women chose the new name Epsilon Kappa Theta . The current Epsilon Kappa Theta residence is a Victorian house over 100 years old . 
 = = = Kappa Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Kappa Delta ( " KD " ) , a national sorority , colonized the Eta Xi chapter on the Dartmouth campus in 2009 . The Dartmouth Panhellenic Council approved the sorority on May 25 , 2009 . The Council considered the large pledge classes at other sororities on campus in deciding to authorize another sorority . The sorority recruited its first members in the summer of 2009 , and Kappa Delta held its first formal rush during the fall 2009 academic term , offering membership bids to 37 women . Kappa Delta 's new 23 @-@ bedroom house at 1 Occom Ridge was built over the 2013 – 2014 school year and was completed in the fall of 2014 . It contains a formal room , gourmet kitchen , a library , and two bedrooms on the first floor , in addition to 21 more single bedrooms located on the second and third floors . K ∆ has one of the strongest <unk> on Dartmouth College campus , and the sisterhood is involved in numerous philanthropic endeavors , including working with the Girl Scouts of United States of America , Prevent Child Abuse America , The New Hampshire Children 's Trust , and the Confidence Coalition . Each term , <unk> also participates in a " You Make Me Smile " campaign where sisters write encouraging messages on balloons and hand them out across campus to raise spirits before finals week . Along with weekly sisterhood meetings and events , like movie and spa nights , sisters attend formal and semi @-@ formal dances , barbecues , and sisterhood retreats . 
 = = = Kappa Delta Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Kappa Delta Epsilon ( " KDE " ) is a local sorority founded in the fall of 1993 by the Panhellenic Council at Dartmouth . After the dissolution of the Xi Kappa Chi local sorority in the spring of 1993 , the Panhellenic Council decided that there was a need for a new sorority to replace it . Fifty women joined the new sorority in the first rush in the fall of 1993 . The Kappa Delta Epsilon physical plant was extensively remodeled by the college during the summer of 2003 . The remodeled building contains a main meetings room , kitchen , two bedrooms and a back porch on the first floor . The second and third floors contain all bedrooms which house about thirteen more resident sisters . The basement consists of the fireplace room , the pub room , and the sisters @-@ only room . 
 = = = Kappa Kappa Gamma ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Epsilon Chi chapter of Kappa Kappa Gamma ( " <unk> " , " Kappa " ) was founded at Dartmouth on December 30 , 1978 , and was the second sorority at Dartmouth College . The sisters of Kappa Kappa Gamma sponsor events for the campus , go on sister retreats , hold barbecues , and have formal and semi @-@ formal dances . They have weekly house meetings in order to communicate news and issues about the house , to catch up on the week ’ s events , and to spend time with their fellow sisters . Philanthropy is an important part of the Epsilon Chi chapter ’ s activities . The sisters cook dinners on a regular basis for David ’ s House , an institution that supports and houses families of sick children at a local hospital , in a joint effort with the brothers of Sigma Alpha Epsilon . Kirsten Gillibrand , class of 1988 and the first Dartmouth alumna elected to the United States House of Representatives , was an officer of Kappa Kappa Gamma as an undergraduate . 
 = = = Sigma Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Delta ( " Sigma Delt " ) was the first sorority at Dartmouth College , founded in May 1977 as a chapter of the national sorority Sigma Kappa . In April 1981 , Sigma Kappa moved into a residence formerly inhabited by the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity . The local chapter at Dartmouth began to have differences with the national organization concerning religion in sorority rituals and an emphasis on men in national sorority songs . The Dartmouth chapter dissociated from the national organization in the fall of 1988 , becoming Sigma Delta . The classes of 1989 , 1990 , and 1991 that formed the new local sorority dedicated the new organization to principles of " strength , friendship , and acceptance of difference " . Since reorganizing as a local sorority , Sigma Delta has hosted at least one open party each term in addition to service events . Actress Connie Britton ( 89 ' ) was a member of the first local class and served as Sisterhood Chair during her sophomore summer . 
 = = = Sigma Lambda Upsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Lambda Upsilon , more formally known as Sigma Lambda Upsilon / <unk> Latinas <unk> Sorority , Inc . , was established by four women at Dartmouth College in 2003 , as the Alpha Beta chapter of the national , historically @-@ Latina sorority . The sorority has no physical plant or designated College @-@ owned housing . The Dartmouth chapter supports several activities including philanthropic events , formal dinners , and a Summer Book Club . 
 = = = Chi Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Chi Delta ( " Chi Delt " ) at Dartmouth College was founded as the Gamma Gamma chapter of Delta Delta Delta sorority in 1984 . The house was the first Greek organization to secede from the Co @-@ ed Fraternity Sorority Council in the spring of 2000 , a move that eventually precipitated the dissolution of that organizing body as other Greek organization on campus followed suit . Chi Delta remains a member of the Panhellenic Council , which represents the interests of the sororities on campus . On May 29 , 2015 , the Dartmouth chapter of Delta Delta Delta unanimously voted to disaffiliate from its national organization and become a local sorority . 
 = = <unk> fraternities = = 
 The three coeducational fraternities at Dartmouth College are organized and represented to the college through the Coed Council . The Coed Council is a student @-@ led governance organization that assists the member Greek organizations with public relations , programming , recruitment , and academic achievement . All three coeducational fraternities at Dartmouth own the land and residence buildings they occupy . 
 = = = Alpha Theta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Theta was founded as a local fraternity named Iota Sigma Upsilon on March 3 , 1920 , by a group of seven students . In 1921 the fraternity received a charter as the Alpha Theta chapter of Theta Chi . John Sloan Dickey , later president of the college , joined the fraternity in 1928 and was elected house president only two weeks later , while still a pledge . Nine brothers of Theta Chi died in a tragic accident on the morning of February 25 , 1934 , when the metal chimney of the building 's old coal furnace blew out in the night and the residence filled with poisonous carbon monoxide gas . Alpha Theta was one of the first collegiate fraternities in the United States to break from its national organization over civil rights issues . In 1951 , while Dickey served as president of the college , the student body passed a resolution calling on all fraternities to eliminate racial discrimination from their constitutions . The Theta Chi national organization 's constitution contained a clause limiting membership in fraternity to " Caucasians " only . On April 24 , 1952 , the members of the Dartmouth chapter voted unanimously to stop recognizing the racial clause in Theta Chi 's constitution . Upon learning that the Dartmouth delegation to Theta Chi 's national convention later that year planned to raise questions about the clause , the Alpha Theta chapter was derecognized by the national organization on July 25 , 1952 . The house reincorporated as a local fraternity and adopted the name Alpha Theta . Alpha Theta was also one of the first all @-@ male fraternities to admit female members . In 1972 , Dartmouth admitted the first class of female students and officially became a coeducational institution . Alpha Theta also voted to become coeducational . After a few years , most of the women in the fraternity had become inactive and the house voted to become single @-@ sex male @-@ only again on November 10 , 1976 . The house returned to a coeducational membership policy in 1980 . 
 = = = The Tabard ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Tabard at Dartmouth College was founded in 1857 as a local fraternity for students in the Chandler Scientific School named Phi Zeta Mu . In 1893 , as the Chandler School was absorbed by Dartmouth , the house sought to associate itself with a national fraternity and was granted a charter as the Eta Eta chapter of Sigma Chi national fraternity . In April 1960 , the Dartmouth chapter of Sigma Chi became the third fraternity on campus to dissociate from its national organization , following the 1954 Undergraduate Council referendum requiring fraternities to amend its national charters to end discrimination against minorities or go " local " . [ 92 ] The fraternity officially chose to use the name The Tabard , but retained use of the Greek letters <unk> for its local corporation use to include all living and deceased members of both the chapter 's national affiliation and the new local independent organization . The new name was inspired by The Tabard , a fictitious London inn described in the General Prologue of The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer . The Tabard was one of five Greek organizations at Dartmouth to become coeducational and admit women pledges when the college began admitting women students in 1972 . The organization unofficially uses the Greek letters Sigma Epsilon Chi ( <unk> ) , having inserted an " E " between the Sigma and Chi on a wrought iron railing above the front door of their residence . Prominent alumni of the Tabard include : its first president Stephen W. Bosworth , class of 1961 - U.S. Ambassador to South Korea , the Philippines , and Tunisia , as well as Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Dartmouth College ; Gordon Campbell , class of 1970 - the 34th Premier of British Columbia ; and Aisha Tyler , class of 1992 - an American actress , comedian , and author . 
 = = = Phi Tau ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Phi Tau was founded at Dartmouth College in 1905 as the Tau Chapter of Phi Sigma Kappa . While the national fraternity proved to be an early leader among its peers in the area of non @-@ discrimination , mid @-@ 1950s Tau Chapter leaders led the demand for such post @-@ war era changes . The pace of change was contentious : Phi Sigma Kappa had previously had occasional foreign student members at many chapters . Unlike other fraternities , it had also welcomed Catholics and Jews at a time when most fraternity members were Protestant . But it did not yet welcome Blacks . In a reactionary response to a short @-@ lived policy that limited pledging of Black students between 1952 – 56 , and in a move that allowed it to avoid unpaid debts to the national , Tau broke with Phi Sigma Kappa and reformed itself as Phi Tau on March 7 , 1956 , naming the national fraternity as racist . Yet ironically , the Dartmouth chapter won the debate over the issue : the same discriminatory policy that caused Tau to withdraw was itself rescinded by the national fraternity at its Summer Convention just two months later , leaving Phi Sigma Kappa chapters free to pledge Black members . There has been no reconciliation , even though both groups remain progressive . Today , Phi Tau prides itself on its progressiveness ; when the house constitution was rewritten in 1956 , references to gender were deliberately excluded , making the house officially coeducational even before Dartmouth College accepted women as students . Phi Tau is the only coeducational Greek organization at Dartmouth that has always had female members since first admitting them , and was the first Greek house at Dartmouth to add sexual orientation to its non @-@ discrimination clause . Members of Phi Tau refer to one another as " brothers " regardless of gender . The fraternity is known for its quarterly " <unk> and Cookies " party , featuring thousands of homemade cookies and milkshakes . Phi Tau completely replaced their residence hall in 2002 , at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 8 million , funded in part by the sale of 1 @,@ 675 square metres ( 0 @.@ 4 acres ) of land to the college . 
 = = <unk> Greek organizations = = 
 As of 2008 , three derecognized or otherwise inactive Greek organizations are in the process of returning to campus . 
 = = = Alpha Kappa Alpha ( ΑΚΑ ) = = = 
 Alpha Kappa Alpha ( AKA ) at Dartmouth College was founded in 1983 as the Xi Lambda chapter of the national sorority . Alpha Kappa Alpha was the first historically African @-@ American sorority at Dartmouth College . The College supported the sorority with dedicated apartment housing until it became defunct in the spring of 2003 . The sorority had no members of the class of 2004 and was unable to recruit new members for subsequent classes because of a national moratorium on recruitment related to a hazing incident at another chapter . In February 2008 , it was announced that Alpha Kappa Alpha would return to campus and resume activity in the spring or fall of 2008 . 
 = = Defunct Greek organizations = = 
 Greek organizations at Dartmouth College that dissolved over the years have largely done so as a result of financial difficulties or critically low membership and interest . 
 = = = Acacia = = = 
 The <unk> chapter of Acacia , a national fraternity , was founded at Dartmouth on March 31 , 1906 . The Acacia national organization never heard from the Dartmouth chapter again , and lacks records of any student members or activities that the chapter might have pursued . The national declared the chapter dissolved in 1908 . Acacia was the first fraternity at Dartmouth to dissolve , and the <unk> chapter was the first Acacia chapter at any campus to close . 
 = = = Alpha Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Delta ( " AD " ) was initially founded by members of the Gamma Sigma Society . In 1847 , the society became the Dartmouth chapter of Alpha Delta Phi , a national fraternity . The house dissociated from its parent corporation in 1969 and renamed itself The Alpha Delta Fraternity . Alpha Delta is well known for being part of the inspiration behind the movie National Lampoon 's Animal House . The screenplay , co @-@ written by Chris Miller , class of 1963 , was inspired by a pair of short stories Miller wrote in National Lampoon in 1974 and 1975 ( " The Night of the Seven Fires " and " Pinto 's First Lay " ) about his experiences as a member of Alpha Delta . In November 2006 , Miller published a 336 page memoir of his experiences in the fraternity under the title The Real Animal House : The Awesomely <unk> Saga of the Fraternity That Inspired the Movie . Alpha Delta was derecognized by Dartmouth College on April 13 , 2015 . 
 = = = Alpha Sigma Phi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Sigma Phi at Dartmouth College was originally founded in 1925 , as a local fraternity named Sigma Alpha , The local fraternity became the Alpha Eta chapter of Alpha Sigma Phi , a national fraternity , in 1928 . Faced with financial difficulties during the Great Depression , the Dartmouth chapter dissolved in 1936 . C. Everett Koop , class of 1937 and Surgeon General of the United States from 1982 to 1989 , was a member of one of the final Alpha Sigma Phi pledge classes at Dartmouth . 
 = = = Alpha Tau Omega ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Alpha Tau Omega was founded at Dartmouth College in 1915 as the local fraternity Sigma Tau Omega . In 1924 , the local fraternity was granted a charter to become the Delta Sigma chapter of national fraternity Alpha Tau Omega . The Dartmouth chapter dissolved in 1936 , at the height of the Great Depression . 
 = = = Delta Kappa Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Pi Chapter of Delta Kappa Epsilon ( " Deke " ) was founded in 1853 . It was the fourth social fraternity at Dartmouth College . Eight brothers of Delta Kappa Epsilon were famously involved in a 1949 murder of a fellow Dartmouth student . The men , after heavy drinking at three different fraternities , sought out a former member of the freshman football team . Finding him asleep in his dormitory room , but wearing a letter sweater that the eight men felt he did not deserve to be wearing , they beat him and he soon thereafter died of the injuries . Two Delta Kappa Epsilon brothers were brought to trial , fined , and given suspended sentences for the crime . In response to the murder , College President John Sloan Dickey announced that he felt it was important to reduce the influence of the fraternity system on campus . The organization was renamed Storrs House in 1970 before dissolving entirely . 
 = = = Delta Sigma Theta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Delta Sigma Theta is an historically African @-@ American sorority at Dartmouth College that was founded in 1982 as the Che @-@ <unk> Interest Group . At the time , the college had imposed a moratorium on the founding on new sororities , but when the moratorium was lifted , the group was recognized by the college as a sorority in the fall of 1984 . The women contacted the Delta Sigma Theta national sorority and were granted a charter as the Pi Theta chapter in the spring of 1985 . Delta Sigma Theta provided an extensive array of public service through the Five @-@ Point Thrust program . Until the chapter 's dissolution , the sisters of Delta Sigma Theta had cosponsored the Step Show , an annual cultural dance performance , with the brothers of Alpha Phi Alpha . The sorority had occupied dedicated College @-@ owned apartment housing until June , 2004 , when all but one member of the Dartmouth chapter graduated . An attempt was made to recruit new members in the summer , and it succeeded , but not for long , as the chapter currently has no members at Dartmouth . 
 = = = Delta Upsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Delta Upsilon at Dartmouth College was originally founded as Epsilon Kappa Phi , a local fraternity , at Dartmouth College in 1920 . In 1926 , the local fraternity became the Dartmouth chapter of Delta Upsilon , a national fraternity . The fraternity dissociated from the national in 1966 , and adopted the name Foley House . Foley House was one of the six local Greek organizations that became coeducational in 1972 . In 1984 , the organization decided to drop its association with the Greek system entirely and became one of the Affinity Housing programs offered by the college , available to any student interested in cooperative housing . 
 = = = Delta Phi Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Delta Phi Epsilon was founded at Dartmouth College in 1984 as the Epsilon Alpha chapter of the national sorority . The sorority was derecognized by the college in June , 1989 , when it failed to maintain an active membership of at least 35 students . The Dartmouth chapter made an effort to revive itself by separating from the national in 1990 to become Pi Sigma Psi , a local sorority , but dissolved soon thereafter . 
 = = = Delta Psi Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Delta Psi Delta was established at Dartmouth College in 1950 as the Dartmouth chapter of Tau Epsilon Phi , a national fraternity . The Dartmouth chapter dissociated from the national in 1969 , and reformed itself as the Harold Parmington Foundation . Faced with falling membership in 1981 , the fraternity reformed itself with a more traditional Greek letter name , Delta Psi Delta , and opened its membership to women as well as men . Faced with critically low enrollment , Delta Psi Delta finally dissolved in 1991 . The local , coeducational fraternity at Dartmouth was not associated with either the Canadian sorority or the local fraternities at California State University , Chico and Linfield College also named Delta Psi Delta . 
 = = = Zeta Beta Chi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Zeta Beta Chi was founded in 1984 as a local sorority named Alpha Beta . In 1986 , the sorority gained a charter as the Dartmouth chapter of Delta Gamma , a national sorority . In 1997 , the sorority voted to go local again , and reformed as Zeta Beta Chi . Plagued with low membership , the sorority was already on a marginal financial footing in 1998 , when a College inspection during the summer discovered mercury contamination in the sorority 's basement , the former house of Arthur Sherburne Hardy . The College closed the building for the remainder of the year , negatively impacting fall rush . The sorority announced its dissolution in December 1998 . 
 = = = Harold Parmington Foundation ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Harold Parmington Foundation was a local fraternity founded in 1970 after the Dartmouth chapter of Tau Epsilon Phi dissociated from its national organization . The new local fraternity continued to reside in 15 Webster Avenue , the house now occupied by the Epsilon Kappa Theta sorority . With only one member each from the classes of 1983 and 1984 , the fraternity reorganized itself as a coeducational fraternity named Delta Psi Delta . A past president of the fraternity , Brian Dale , class of 1980 , was one of the passengers on American Airlines Flight 11 that was hijacked and flown into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City during the September 11 , 2001 attacks . 
 = = = Kappa Alpha Psi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Kappa Alpha Psi at Dartmouth College was founded in 1987 as the Mu Chi chapter of the national fraternity . Kappa Alpha Psi was the second historically African @-@ American fraternity at Dartmouth College . Its membership was active through at least the end of the 1990s . The Kappa Alpha Psi national currently lists the Mu Chi chapter as inactive . 
 = = = Lambda Chi Alpha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Lambda Chi Alpha was founded at Dartmouth College in 1914 as the Theta Zeta chapter of the national fraternity . Faced with insurmountable financial stress during the Great Depression , the Dartmouth chapter dissolved in 1932 . 
 = = = Xi Kappa Chi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Xi Kappa Chi was originally established at Dartmouth in 1980 as the Zeta Mu chapter of Alpha Chi Omega , a national sorority . The sorority dissociated from the national organization in 1990 and became a local sorority named Xi Kappa Chi . Faced with low membership in 1993 , the local sorority considered an affiliation with Phi Mu , a national sorority , as a possibility of attracting more new members hesitant to rush a small local sorority . The Phi Mu national organization sent representatives to Dartmouth in April , 1993 , but based on their report , the Phi Mu national council voted against a Dartmouth chapter . Xi Kappa Chi was dissolved by the Dartmouth Panhellenic Council in 1993 . 
 = = = Pi Lambda Phi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The Pi chapter of the national fraternity Pi Lambda Phi was established at Dartmouth College in 1924 . The membership of the Dartmouth chapter was predominantly Jewish . About half of the college 's fraternities at the time had national constitutions that explicitly forbade membership to Jews , and for many of the other chapters , it was an informal policy to exclude membership to Jewish students . The national constitution of Pi Lambda Phi expressly accepted members of all religions . Pi Lambda Phi was not initially accepted by the Dartmouth Greek community , and efforts in 1924 and 1925 to gain formal admission into the Interfraternity Council failed . The fraternity was finally recognized in the spring of 1927 . The fraternity 's first residence , purchased in 1924 , was a building on South Street originally occupied by a Roman Catholic church . The fraternity would reside there until 1961 , when it moved to a house north of Webster Avenue on Occom Ridge . The chapter dissolved in 1971 . 
 = = = Sigma Alpha Mu ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Alpha Mu was established at Dartmouth College in 1930 as the Sigma Upsilon chapter of the national fraternity . At the time , the Sigma Alpha Mu national limited membership in the organization to Jewish men . Sigma Alpha Mu placed more emphasis on the observances of Judaism than did the other predominantly Jewish fraternity on campus , Pi Lambda Phi , and had difficulty attracting the interest of most mainstream Jewish students on campus . The Dartmouth chapter dissolved in 1935 , during the Great Depression . 
 = = = Sigma Alpha Epsilon ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Sigma Alpha Epsilon ( " SAE " ) at Dartmouth College was founded in 1903 as a local fraternity named Chi Tau Kappa . In 1908 , the fraternity sought to associate itself with a national fraternity and was granted a charter from Sigma Alpha Epsilon to become the New Hampshire Alpha chapter . With funding support from the national organization , the fraternity acquired a house on School Street that had previously been the residence of a College professor . By 1916 , the fraternity had moved to a wood house on College Street north of the Green . The fraternity would replace the structure entirely with a new brick residence built between 1928 and 1931 , one of the final fraternity building projects started on campus before the Great Depression . Sigma Alpha Epsilon members are encouraged by their national organization to emulate the tenets of The True Gentleman , a statement written by John Walter Wayland . Notable alumni of the chapter include the United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Paulson , Jr . , class of 1968 , and benefactor to Dartmouth College Barry MacLean , class of 1960 . Sigma Alpha Epsilon was derecognized by Dartmouth College on Feb. 4 , 2016 . 
 = = = Tau Epsilon Phi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Tau Epsilon Phi was established at Dartmouth College in 1950 as the Epsilon Delta chapter of the national fraternity . The Dartmouth chapter dissociated from the national in 1969 , and voted to call itself the Harold Parmington Foundation . 
 = = = Phi Gamma Delta ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Phi Gamma Delta was founded at Dartmouth College as the Delta Upsilon chapter of the national fraternity in 1901 . The Dartmouth chapter seceded from the national fraternity in 1965 , and adopted the new name of Phoenix . The new local fraternity dissolved in 1971 . The fraternity has no association with the Phoenix all @-@ female senior society founded at Dartmouth in 1984 . 
 = = = Phi Kappa Psi ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Phi Kappa Psi ( " Phi Psi " ) traces its heritage at Dartmouth College to the Beta Psi local fraternity , founded in 1895 . Beta Psi became the New Hampshire Alpha chapter of Phi Kappa Psi in 1896 . The Dartmouth chapter dissociated from the national in 1967 as a result of the national 's reaction to the chapter 's pledging of a black pledge , adopting the new name Phi Sigma Psi . Phi Sigma Psi was one of the six fraternities that adopted a formal coeducational membership policy in 1972 . In the late 1980s , the membership began referring to the organization as " Phi Psi / Panarchy " . The fraternity changed its name to The Panarchy in 1991 . In 1993 , the college began a program for " undergraduate societies " as open @-@ membership alternatives to the Greek system . In September 1993 , the members of Panarchy voted to disaffiliate from the Greek system and became the first of two Undergraduate Societies . 
 = Sheldon Manor = 
 Sheldon Manor near Chippenham , Wiltshire , England , is Wiltshire 's oldest inhabited manor house and dates back to Saxon times . Its structure is mostly 17th @-@ century and it is a Grade I listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 The medieval settlement of Sheldon , first mentioned in 803 , no longer exists , having been deserted by 1582 ; a 1976 survey confirmed its remains to lie to the rear of the Manor , which itself stands on the site of an older habitation known as " The Holloway " . 
 The manor of Sheldon was granted to Sir William de <unk> in about 1180 ; on his death , as a Norman , it was forfeit to The Crown as an escheat and then granted to the de <unk> family in 1231 by Henry III . In 1250 it passed to Sir Geoffrey <unk> on his marriage to Joan de <unk> . In 1424 the Manor was sold to Sir Walter Hungerford , and after some time was eventually granted to Catherine Parr temporarily until the Hungerford heir achieved majority . 
 For many years , the property was tenanted until Sir Edward Hungerford sold the Manor in 1684 and in 1711 it was bought by William Norris , whose last survivor died in 1828 . In 1854 it was bought by Sir Gabriel Goldney , whose son lived there until 1911 , followed by the Bailey family . 
 From 1917 the Manor was owned by the Gibbs family being Major Martin Anthony Gibbs ( 1916 – 1994 ) , a former High Sheriff of Wiltshire , his wife Elsie Margaret Mary ( 1922 @-@ 2012 , née Hamilton @-@ Dalrymple ) and their six children . In 1982 , Mrs Gibbs published a historical and architectural account of the Manor . 
 The Manor is now within the civil parish of Chippenham Without ; unbroken occupation since 1282 makes Sheldon Manor Wiltshire 's longest continuously inhabited manor house . It was granted Grade I listed building status by the Historic Building and Monuments Commission for England in 1960 . 
 = = Architecture and antiques = = 
 The earliest parts of the structure are thought to be a window on the west side and the porch , dating back to the late 13th century . Pevsner considered the porch to be " astounding , but much too big for the present house " . Most of the main structure , consisting of two and a half storeys , and of rubble stone and stone @-@ tiled roofs , dates to c . 1659 when it was built for a Mr Forster , although some parts are earlier . Later additions date to post @-@ 1711 and improvements to c . 1911 . 
 External features 
 There is a small stone chapel in the grounds , believed to date to about 1450 and built by the Hungerford family for use by themselves and their servants . It has an east window with Perpendicular tracery . After a long period of use as stables , it was restored in the twentieth century . There is also a brick @-@ built storehouse mounted on <unk> stones to prevent incursion by rats . 
 Antiques 
 The Manor has collections of Nailsea glass , Persian saddlebags , porcelain and oak furniture , including an Elizabethan refectory table and chairs . There are paintings by Tissot , David Teniers and Bassano , vases by William de Morgan and " an unusual collection of glass walking sticks . " 
 = = Modern times = = 
 The Manor was the first winner of AA / <unk> Historic House Awards , for its " architectural integrity and warm welcome " ; its gardens , which are open to the public although the house itself is not , include a notable rose garden , ancient yews , an arboretum and mulberry bushes . 
 It is a licensed venue for weddings and hosts summer productions of Shakespeare and operas in its grounds . It is also home to the Cleveland Bay Endeavour , a project to " conserve and promote " the Cleveland Bay horse , an endangered breed . 
 The owners of the house were described in 1988 by the New York Times as " ... provid [ ing ] that essential ingredient so many historic buildings lack : a sense of continuity with the past and the feeling that Sheldon Manor is still a living organism , not an ancient relic . " 
 In 1995 , the Manor was used as the location for Uppercross in the BBC production Persuasion and in 2008 for BBC One 's <unk> . 
 = Bart After Dark = 
 " Bart After Dark " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 24 , 1996 . After accidentally breaking a stone gargoyle at a local house , Bart is forced to work there as punishment . He assumes it will be boring work , but is pleasantly surprised when he learns that it is actually a burlesque house . Marge is horrified to find out about the burlesque house , and resolves to have it shut down . The episode was directed by Dominic Polcino and was written by Richard Appel . It won an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Music and Lyrics " for the song " We Put the Spring in Springfield " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An Itchy & Scratchy cartoon is interrupted with a news report that an oil tanker has crashed and spilled millions of gallons of oil on " Baby Seal Beach " . Lisa sees the report and asks Marge if she can go and help save the wildlife . After some begging , Marge agrees and the two go to help out , leaving Bart and Homer home alone . The house quickly becomes a mess and Bart goes out to play with his friends . Milhouse 's toy airplane crashes into a house after Nelson tampers with the remote control and Bart , despite warnings that the house is inhabited by a witch , goes to retrieve it . While doing so , he accidentally knocks down a stone gargoyle and Belle , the owner of the house , goes to Homer and says she will not press charges but demands he be punished . Homer originally dismisses this , but Belle threatens to come back and speak with Marge , leading Homer to force Bart to do chores for Belle . Fearing the worst , Bart soon discovers that the house is actually a burlesque house called the Maison Derrière ( the " back house " as Belle translates it to Bart ) and quickly takes a new enthusiasm to his job . 
 Meanwhile , Marge and Lisa arrive at the beach , but discover that the ability to help the animals is reserved for celebrities , who are already doing the job . The two are put to work cleaning rocks , and soon abandon the job and drive home . 
 While picking up Bart , Homer learns about the true nature of the burlesque house , but does nothing about Bart working there . Principal Skinner visits the house and sees Bart as the door greeter . He reports it to the Lovejoys and the Flanders who confront Homer about the matter . Homer declares that he has no problem with Bart working there just as Marge returns home unexpectedly . 
 Marge asks Belle to close down the burlesque house , but Belle refuses saying that the house is a part of Springfield . At a town meeting , Marge brings up the matter of the house and shows pictures of several prominent citizens leaving . They form a mob so they can go destroy the burlesque house . The mob arrives at the house and immediately start destroying things . Bart and Homer arrive and Homer decides to try to convince the mob to stop . He does so by singing a musical number accompanied by Belle and some of her dancers . The town soon joins in and are convinced to let the house stay . However , Marge arrives with a bulldozer , having missed the song . The town announces their intentions to let the house stay , but Marge tries to sing her own song about her views . During the opening lines , she accidentally puts the bulldozer into drive and destroys a wing of the burlesque house . Marge now finds that the tables have turned , and loses any support she once had . She apologizes profusely and , to pay for the damage , she starts a ventriloquist act at the house , but when Homer yells " Take it off ! " , Bart ( now a bouncer ) kicks him out of the house . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Richard Appel and directed by Dominic Polcino . Appel who was looking for new locales to put Bart and thought it would be funny to have him work at a burlesque house . The problem was to find a way to put such a house in Springfield , which was solved with the bit with the toy airplane . There were a dozen different possible names for the Burlesque house , some of which were raunchy . 
 Josh Weinstein has said that there are so many sleazy characters in The Simpsons that it was easy to find people for the scenes in the burlesque house . A character modeled after John Swartzwelder can also be seen . 
 Belle was not modeled after anyone in particular and she was redesigned several times . Belle was voiced by Tress MacNeille but there had been previous efforts to cast a guest voice for the role . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 A lot of the episode 's plot is based on the film The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas . The oil spill is a reference to the Exxon Valdez oil spill . The Sea Captain was shown to be drunk at the helm , which is a reference to Joseph Hazelwood , who was the captain of the Exxon Valdez and was accused of being drunk . Reverend Lovejoy says " This house is a very , very , very fine house " , a reference to the Crosby , Stills , Nash , & Young song " Our House " . The vehicle driven by the environmentalist on the beach is called the " Begley 2000 " after environmentalist Ed Begley Jr . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart After Dark " finished 57th in ratings for the week of November 18 – 24 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 2 million viewing households . It was the fourth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Melrose Place and Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 Ken Keeler and Alf Clausen won a Primetime Emmy Award for " Outstanding Music and Lyrics " for " We Put the Spring in Springfield " . The song was also a part of the album Go Simpsonic with The Simpsons . 
 = Mark Matthews = 
 Mark Matthews ( August 7 , 1894 ? – September 6 , 2005 ) was an American veteran of the Second World War and a Buffalo Soldier . Born in Alabama and growing up in Ohio , Matthews joined the 10th Cavalry Regiment when he was only 15 years old , after having been recruited at a Lexington , Kentucky racetrack and having documents forged so that he appeared to meet the minimum age of 17 . While stationed in Arizona , he joined General John J. Pershing 's Mexico expedition to hunt down Mexican general Pancho Villa . He was later transferred to Virginia , where he took care of President Roosevelt and First Lady Eleanor 's horses and was a member of the Buffalo Soldiers ' drum and bugle corps . In his late 40s , he served in combat operations in the South Pacific during World War II and achieved the rank of First Sergeant . He was noted as an excellent marksman and horse showman . 
 Leaving the United States Army a few years before it was integrated , Matthews then took a job as a security guard in Maryland , rising to the rank of chief of the guards and then retiring in 1970 . After the war , he told stories of military experiences and grew to become a symbol of the Buffalo Soldiers . He met with Bill Clinton and Colin Powell in his later years , and dedicated a barracks in Virginia in honor of the Buffalo Soldiers . Having experienced excellent health for most of his life , Matthews died of pneumonia at the age of 111 and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery . At the time of his death , he was recognized as the oldest living Buffalo Soldier as well as the oldest man , and the second @-@ oldest person , in the District of Columbia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Matthews was born in Greenville , Alabama and grew up in Mansfield , Ohio . His horse riding career began early , when he would deliver newspapers on the back of a pony . When he was only 15 years old , he met members of the 10th Cavalry , the original Buffalo Soldier unit , while tending to horses on a racetrack in Lexington , Kentucky . Although there is disagreement as to the origins of the name " Buffalo Soldiers , " it referred to several segregated units within the United States army . Although the legal age of recruitment was 17 at the time , documents were forged and Matthews signed up to join the army in Columbus , Ohio . 
 = = Military career = = 
 After his training , Matthews was first stationed in Fort Huachuca in Arizona . At the time , the army was still using Native Americans as guides in the western United States . During his tenure in the state , he was regarded as an excellent marksman . Next , he joined General John J. Pershing 's campaign into Mexico in 1916 to hunt for Pancho Villa . Although Matthews admitted to never having met Villa , he would claim that " I knew where he was at . " When the United States turned its attention to World War I , Europe had no use for American cavalry , therefore Matthews and the 10th Regiment remained in the United States for the duration of the conflict . 
 In 1931 , he was transferred to Fort Myer in Virginia . While stationed there , Matthews and some of his troops were escorts for King George VI and his wife Queen Elizabeth when they came to visit President Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House . He earned acclaim for his horse shows , which helped sell war bonds during World War II and he tended to First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt 's personal horses . He also played on the polo team while stationed in the state . 
 He was also a member of the Buffalo Soldiers ' drum and bugle corps , and performed at funerals in Arlington National Cemetery , where he himself would later be buried . Since the Army would not allow colored soldiers to be seen at white funerals at this time , he was forced to hide in the woods while playing " Taps " . A decade later , he fought in World War II and saw combat action at the Battle of Saipan in the South Pacific . During the conflict , he rose to the rank of First Sergeant . He had originally been sent to train with the Tuskegee Airmen , but was deemed to be too old at the time . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Although there were conflicting reports on whether he retired from the Army in 1947 , 1949 or 1950 , he left the army only shortly before the Buffalo Soldiers were disbanded as part of President Harry S. Truman 's initiative to integrate the Army . His next job was at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda where he worked as a security guard . By the time he retired for a second time , in 1970 , he had become the chief of the guards at the institution . He spent much of his spare time fishing , reading the Bible , and recounting tales of his extensive military experiences , which made him a popular and respected figure within the community . His wife of 57 years , Genevieve Hill Matthews , died in 1986 and one of his daughters , Shirley Ann , died two years later . 
 In his old age , he became a symbol for the Buffalo Soldiers . In 1994 , he met with President Bill Clinton at the White House . In 1997 , at the age of 103 , Matthews was present at Arlington National Cemetery for a service honoring the Buffalo Soldiers , where he unveiled a plaque that dedicated his former barracks in honor of the soldiers . For his 108th birthday in 2002 , he met with then @-@ United States Secretary of State Colin Powell , where Powell was presented with a portrait of Matthews . He was a member of his local church , a Prince Hall Masonic Temple and the Washington chapter of the 9th and 10th Cavalry Association until his death . 
 Although partially blind from glaucoma by the age of 109 and completely blind from cataracts by 111 , he nevertheless retained his memory and good health until his final days ; his medical history showed no signs of high blood pressure , heart or kidney trouble or diabetes . He was able to walk without a cane or walker , preferring not to use one , and was able to feed himself , including Cheerios for breakfast , his favorite vanilla ice cream with his other meals and a daily can of Ensure for energy . While he enjoyed recounting tales from his military experience , he never complained about the segregated nature of his unit , preferring instead to focus on his own exploits on the job . 
 Matthews died at the claimed age of 111 of pneumonia in Washington , D.C. At the time of his death , he was recognized as the oldest living former Buffalo Soldier , the oldest man in Washington and the second oldest person in Washington overall behind then oldest American Corinne Dixon Taylor . He was survived by three of his four daughters , his son , nine grandchildren and seventeen great @-@ grandchildren . He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery in September 2005 and Washington , D.C. Mayor Anthony A. Williams spoke at his funeral , which was also attended by councilman and future mayor Adrian Fenty . 
 = Capcom Five = 
 The Capcom Five are five video games unveiled by Capcom in late 2002 and published from March 2003 . At a time when Nintendo 's GameCube console had failed to capture market share , Capcom announced five new GameCube titles with the apparent goal of boosting hardware sales and showing off third @-@ party developer support . Capcom USA followed up with confirmation that they would be exclusive to the GameCube . The five games were P.N.03 , a futuristic third @-@ person shooter ; Viewtiful Joe , a side @-@ scrolling action @-@ platformer ; Dead Phoenix , a shoot ' em up ; Resident Evil 4 , a survival horror third @-@ person shooter ; and Killer7 , an action @-@ adventure game with first @-@ person shooter elements . Though not directly related to each other , they were all overseen by Resident Evil creator Shinji Mikami and , except Killer7 , developed by Capcom 's Production Studio 4 . Capcom USA later clarified that only Resident Evil 4 was intended to be exclusive ; the initial announcement was due to a miscommunication with their parent company . 
 Of the five games , Dead Phoenix was canceled and only P.N.03 retained its status as a GameCube exclusive , though it was a critical and commercial failure . Both Viewtiful Joe and Killer7 sold modestly , the former despite critical acclaim and the latter owing to polarized reviews . Even so , Killer7 gained a significant cult following , effectively launching the career of creator Suda51 . Resident Evil 4 was the runaway success of the five , though its GameCube sales were undercut by the announcement of a Sony PlayStation 2 port to be released later in 2005 . Viewtiful Joe also saw a PlayStation 2 version with expanded features , and Killer7 debuted on multiple platforms simultaneously . Since the release of the Nintendo 64 , Nintendo has struggled to attract third @-@ party developers like Capcom to produce games for its systems . Industry analysts see the Capcom Five case , particularly the loss of GameCube exclusivity for Resident Evil 4 , as a major blow to Nintendo – Capcom relations and is emblematic of Nintendo 's failure to attract third @-@ party support during the GameCube era . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) and Super NES ( SNES ) eras , Nintendo and Capcom enjoyed a close relationship , with Mega Man as one of the NES ' most prominent franchises . This closeness was partially due to Nintendo 's monopoly of the video game console market , which allowed the company to compel third @-@ party developers to release exclusive content according to Nintendo 's schedule . Sega 's rival Genesis system forced Nintendo to relax some of its restrictions on third parties with respect to the SNES . However , relations with third @-@ party developers reached a turning point when Nintendo decided to retain a proprietary cartridge @-@ based format for the Nintendo 64 , in the face of Sony 's disc @-@ based PlayStation . Due to increased manufacturing costs and severely limited cartridge memory capacity , many third parties — Capcom included — moved to the PlayStation to start new franchises , such as Resident Evil . On this new platform , developers could create bigger games while avoiding the restriction of ordering the manufacture of expensive proprietary cartridges through Nintendo , which could lead to under- or over @-@ stocking inventory which might eat into revenue . This third @-@ party abandonment allowed the PlayStation to outsell the Nintendo 64 during that console generation . 
 With the GameCube , Nintendo tried to reclaim third @-@ party developers and catch up to Sony 's PlayStation 2 by featuring disc @-@ based media and powerful system hardware . However , in the first year after its launch , Nintendo only sold 4 @.@ 7 million consoles . In this climate of flagging sales , Capcom held a surprise press conference in Japan in November 2002 , announcing five new titles for the GameCube : P.N.03 , Viewtiful Joe , Dead Phoenix , Resident Evil 4 , and Killer7 . The games would be developed in @-@ house by Capcom 's Production Studio 4 with Resident Evil series creator Shinji Mikami as supervisor . The lone exception was Killer7 , to be produced at Grasshopper Manufacture , with Mikami as co @-@ writer alongside director Suda51 . When pressed for comment on console exclusivity , a Capcom USA representative confirmed the claim , generating the perception that Capcom was hoping to boost the GameCube 's sales and reputation . A statement on their website echoed this support for GameCube . However , Capcom USA soon rescinded their confirmation , blaming it on a miscommunication with the parent company . They clarified that only Resident Evil 4 would definitely be exclusive . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = P.N.03 = = = 
 P.N.03 is a science fiction @-@ themed third @-@ person shooter , released in Japan on March 27 , 2003 . The game features a dexterous protagonist named Vanessa Z. Schneider who battles an army of maverick robots . The game earned the name Jaguar during development due to Vanessa 's fluid motions and agility . Acting as director , Mikami attempted to differentiate it from Devil May Cry by adding defensive and evasive maneuvers . This desire , combined with the limited development time , also led to the replacement of Vanessa 's guns with energy bolts . Upon its release , reviewers criticized the game 's short length and sluggish controls , with an average score of 63 out of 100 on Metacritic . Mikami was unsatisfied with the finished product , stating he had hoped to put " a lot more " time into its development . P.N.03 was the only game of the five that remained a GameCube exclusive . 
 = = = Viewtiful Joe = = = 
 Viewtiful Joe is a 2.5D side @-@ scrolling action @-@ platformer , released on June 26 , 2003 . The title character is a parody of tokusatsu superheroes and is trying to save his girlfriend , who has been trapped in " Movieland " by a group of supervillains known as Jadow . To complete his quest , Joe must use his Viewtiful Effects Powers , which are based on camera tricks and special effects used in films . These include " Slow " , which simulates bullet time ; " Mach Speed " , allowing Joe to attack all enemies with his <unk> ; and " Zoom In " , which triggers a camera close @-@ up and unlocks special attacks . Internally , Capcom treated the game as a " staff @-@ focused project " with the goal of increasing the skills of director Hideki Kamiya . The game achieved a Metacritic score of 93 and won GameCube Game of the Year awards from numerous publications including IGN , GMR , and USA Today . The game sold out its initial shipment of 100 @,@ 000 to achieve a lifetime total of 275 @,@ 000 units . Producer Atsushi Inaba considered the game a success , achieving his goals of training staff , keeping a small budget , and selling well . However , these numbers were lower than Capcom expected , prompting the publisher to port Viewtiful Joe to PlayStation 2 in 2004 , with expanded features . This version sold 46 @,@ 000 copies with a slightly lower Metacritic score of 90 owing to the lack of progressive scan and frame rate slowdown generated by the porting process . 
 = = = Dead Phoenix = = = 
 Dead Phoenix was going to be a 3D shoot ' em up featuring a winged man named Phoenix . Based on trailer footage , IGN compared the gameplay to Panzer Dragoon . Players would take control of a winged man as he flies around shooting massive enemies , with the aid of allies on foot . Capcom 's announcement described the setting as a mythical floating city , full of monsters and dragons . Game Informer announced that a Japanese release was planned in mid @-@ 2003 . The game was believed to be canceled by May 2003 , but Capcom stated at a press conference prior to the 2003 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) that it was still in development . IGN speculated that the game may have been retooled as a new Kid Icarus title , based on Nintendo 's trend in the early 2000s of licensing properties to third parties . It was canceled in August 2003 after failing to appear at E3 . 
 = = = Resident Evil 4 = = = 
 Resident Evil 4 , a survival horror third @-@ person shooter , had its North American premiere on January 11 , 2005 , and its Japanese release on January 27 . Players take on the role of Leon S. Kennedy , a United States Secret Service agent who has been ordered to rescue the daughter of the President of the United States from a cult in rural <unk> Europe . The cult has been using a mind @-@ controlling parasite to turn local villagers into violent drones . The game went through numerous changes during its long development — the team created and discarded four prototypes before settling on the final product . Among these was a version directed by Hideki Kamiya that would be turned into the first Devil May Cry game . Taking over directorial duties , Mikami made the fifth and final version very different compared to previous Resident Evil games , with an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder perspective and an increased emphasis on action and combat . Resident Evil 4 was the only game of the five to remain confirmed as a GameCube exclusive ; Mikami claimed that he would " cut his own head off " ( a Japanese colloquialism for quitting his job ) if it were to be released on another platform . However , just two months before the game 's January 2005 release , Capcom revealed that a PlayStation 2 port would be published nine months after the GameCube version in response to pressure from users and shareholders . This surprise announcement undercut the title 's GameCube sales , which totaled 1 @.@ 6 million , compared to the sales of the PlayStation 2 version , which exceeded 2 million . Mikami apologized to GameCube fans for failing to uphold his promise of console exclusivity . Despite these corporate conflicts , the game received an overwhelmingly positive critical response with Metacritic scores of 96 for both versions . It went on to sweep many Game of the Year awards for 2005 and is consistently listed among the greatest games of all time . 
 = = = Killer7 = = = 
 Killer7 , released on June 9 , 2005 , is an action @-@ adventure game with first @-@ person shooter elements and an unconventional " on rails " control scheme . Unlike other members of the five , Killer7 was developed at Grasshopper Manufacture under the direction of Suda51 . Players control the members of an elite group of assassins who are actually physical manifestations of a god @-@ like being named Harman Smith . The game restricts the player 's movement to specific branching paths through the environment and combat is only available while stationary in first @-@ person view . This stripped @-@ down control scheme was implemented as a deconstruction of conventional control mechanics . Gameplay was not finalized until late in development as Suda51 concentrated most resources on story and visual work . This back @-@ loading of development resulted in several delays , the last of which was due to an artistic desire to release the game on July 7 ( 7 / 7 ) in North America . Killer7 debuted as a multi @-@ console release , the only one of the five to do so , to polarized reviews . Some reviewers praised the game for its complex noir plot involving a political conflict between Japan and the US , while others panned it as confusing and incomprehensible . Similarly , the control scheme had both critics and proponents , the latter comparing it to Myst , Snatcher , and other " old @-@ school " adventure games . Although it received a lukewarm 74 Metacritic score , Killer7 was honored by many video game publications in their year @-@ end awards . Common nominations included " Best Story " , " Best Artistic Design " , and " Most Innovative Design " . However , the central theme was a recognition of Killer7 's status as a cult game with limited appeal . IGN named it " Best Game No One Played " and Kristan Reed of Eurogamer called it " a concept game , an arthouse game , a simple game , an often beautiful game , but most certainly never an everyman 's game " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Capcom Five announcement came at a time when Nintendo had been struggling with its new console , with the apparent goal of supporting the fledgling system . However , each successive game 's release reinforced Capcom 's view that the GameCube was unprofitable ; they ported the games one @-@ by @-@ one to Sony 's PlayStation 2 . These ports were generally inferior in quality : many reviewers noted slowdown issues and lower resolution graphics . Ultimately , four games were released and only one remained exclusive to GameCube . This lone GameCube exclusive was P.N.03 and not Resident Evil 4 , as Capcom had repeatedly emphasized in press releases . GameCube owners and Nintendo fans were disappointed by the Capcom Five 's failure to improve the GameCube 's reputation and sales . Luke Plunkett of Kotaku noted that despite best intentions , Capcom 's five even at their full potential could not have made up for the GameCube 's failings in that generation 's console wars . The dramatic reversal of the five is representative of the attitudes of third @-@ party developers toward Nintendo 's platform . 
 Capcom discovered a few business principles through their experience with development and release of the five . The first was to focus on multi @-@ platform releases . Second , Capcom needed to streamline development . Prior to the five , the company had announced expected losses of US $ 103 million for fiscal year 2002 , largely due to poor sales and extended development times , and ultimately posted over US $ 163 million in losses . Resident Evil 4 was a case in point , beginning development in 1999 and going through four discarded versions by the time of its 2005 release . The third lesson was to focus on old franchises rather than create new ones ; Resident Evil 4 was the only unmitigated commercial success of the five and also the only game based on an existing property . To wit , Viewtiful Joe 2 started development shortly after the release of Viewtiful Joe and was completed just a year later . However , the brisk schedule meant that the team was not given time to implement all the features they had wanted , including a cooperative gameplay mode . Viewtiful Joe 2 debuted on both GameCube and PlayStation 2 to reach a wider audience and maximize profitability . 
 To facilitate Viewtiful Joe 2 's development , Capcom turned " Team Viewtiful " into Clover Studio , a semi @-@ autonomous production company with a focus on developing new intellectual properties ( IPs ) . The separation was also in part due to Resident Evil 4 's PlayStation 2 release , which caused significant tensions between Capcom and Mikami , who had touted the game 's console exclusivity . However , the studio only produced two new IPs before Capcom closed it in late 2006 , following the resignations of Atsushi Inaba , Hideki Kamiya , and Shinji Mikami . These resignations were part of a series of high @-@ profile departures from Capcom , including Yoshiki Okamoto in 2003 and Keiji Inafune in 2010 . The former Clover developers charged that Capcom 's corporate management was reluctant or actively opposed to risky new ideas , a complaint shared by Inafune . They would go on to found PlatinumGames with members of their old studio . In 2008 , they announced the " Platinum Three " , referring to MadWorld , Infinite Space , and Bayonetta , which would attempt to carry on the Capcom Five 's ambitious and creative original spirit . 
 Outside of Capcom , Killer7 served as a turning point for Suda51 and his studio , Grasshopper Manufacture , effectively launching his career . With Capcom as publisher , Killer7 was his first game to be released outside Japan . While its sales were not up to Capcom 's standards , the game 's cult success encouraged the director to remake two of his older Japan @-@ only games , The Silver Case and Flower , Sun , and Rain , for Western release . It also allowed his next major title , No More Heroes , to be released to critical and commercial success . The game also cemented Suda51 's status as an auteur video game director . He would later work with Shinji Mikami again on Shadows of the Damned . 
 Despite the relative failure of the project as a whole , the individual games of the Capcom Five had a lasting impact on game design . After experimenting with action gameplay in P.N.03 , Mikami was able to apply his experience to Vanquish , which serves as an evolution and refinement of the former 's gameplay . On the other hand , Adam <unk> of Nintendojo suggested that P.N.03 's stereotypically sexy all @-@ female cast had unfortunate implications for gender equality in gaming . He also opined that the commercial failure of such a women @-@ driven game made Capcom reluctant to feature female leads in future games for a number of years . Beyond its critical success , Resident Evil 4 became one of the most influential games of the decade . Its " over @-@ the @-@ shoulder " perspective has inspired third @-@ person shooters and action games as diverse as Gears of War and Batman : Arkham Asylum . Leon 's precision @-@ aiming laser sight has also found its way into Dead Space and Grand Theft Auto , as an alternative to " lock @-@ on " targeting . On a broader scale , Resident Evil 4 deconstructed the survival horror conventions the first Resident Evil games established . Some reviewers accused the game of abandoning the genre 's essence by adopting an increased emphasis on action and combat . Following Resident Evil 4 's lead , many " horror " games in the next few years would shift toward more combat @-@ heavy gameplay , including Silent Hill : Homecoming and Alone in the Dark . 
 According to industry sources , Capcom 's reversal on GameCube exclusivity , particularly with Resident Evil 4 , was a betrayal that soured relations between Capcom and Nintendo for several years . After this early pulling of Capcom support , the GameCube went on to sell 22 million units , less than the Nintendo 64 's 33 million units and only a fraction of the PlayStation 2 's 155 million units . Though Resident Evil 4 was eventually ported to Nintendo 's Wii in 2007 , it also received a high @-@ definition re @-@ release for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in 2011 . The 2002 GameCube remake of Resident Evil and Resident Evil Zero also received remasters for newer consoles in 2015 and 2016 respectively . Super Smash Bros. Brawl was released in 2008 , featuring third party characters like Solid Snake from Konami and Sonic the Hedgehog from Sega as a selling point . Kotaku reported on a rumor that Nintendo refused to include a character from Capcom as a direct result of Resident Evil 4 's multi @-@ platform release . Years later , Capcom 's own Mega Man appeared as a playable character in the next game in the series , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 Ultimately , the GameCube failed to reinvigorate flagging support from third parties , a trend continued from the Nintendo 64 through its successor , the Wii . The Wii had mostly relied on first @-@ party titles to sell systems until 2009 when in @-@ house development could not keep up with demand for new material . This caused sales to drop and prompted a shift toward more aggressive courting of third @-@ party developers . Despite this , the Wii would go on to become one of the most commercially successful home video game consoles of all time . For the Wii U and Nintendo 3DS , Nintendo has attempted to recruit outside developers early on to avoid a repeat of what happened to the Wii and reclaim the third @-@ party support it enjoyed in the NES and SNES eras , though its success in this regard has been mixed . 
 = Final Destination ( film ) = 
 Final Destination is a 2000 American supernatural horror film directed by James Wong , and is the first installment of the Final Destination film series . The screenplay was written by James Wong , Glen Morgan , and Jeffrey Reddick , based on a story by Reddick . The film stars Devon Sawa , Ali Larter , Kerr Smith , and Tony Todd . Sawa portrays a teenager who cheats death after having a premonition of a catastrophic plane explosion . He and several of his classmates leave the plane before the explosion occurs , but Death later takes the lives of those who were meant to die on the plane . 
 The film began as a spec script written by Reddick for an episode of The X @-@ Files , in order for Reddick to get a TV agent , however , he never submitted it to The X @-@ Files after a colleague at New Line Cinema persuaded him to write it as a feature @-@ length film . Later , Wong and Morgan , The X @-@ Files writing partners , became interested in the script and agreed to rewrite and direct the film , marking Wong 's film directing debut . Filming took place in New York and Vancouver , with additional scenes filmed in Toronto and San Francisco . It was released on March 17 , 2000 , and became a financial success , making $ 10 million on its opening weekend . The DVD release of the film , released on September 26 , 2000 , in the United States and Canada , includes commentaries , deleted scenes , and documentaries . 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . Negative reviews described the film as " dramatically flat " and " aimed at the teen dating crowd , " while positive reviews praised the film for " generating a respectable amount of suspense , " " playful and energized enough to keep an audience guessing , " and " an unexpectedly alert teen @-@ scream disaster chiller " . It received the Saturn Award for Best Horror Film and Best Performance by a Younger Actor for Sawa 's performance . The film 's success spawned a media franchise , encompassing four additional installments , as well as a series of novels and comic books . 
 = = Plot = = 
 High school student Alex Browning boards <unk> Airlines Flight 180 with his classmates for their senior trip to Paris , France . Before take @-@ off , Alex has a premonition that the plane will suffer a catastrophic engine failure , causing the plane to explode in mid @-@ air , and killing everyone on board . When the events from his vision begin to repeat themselves in reality , he panics and a fight breaks out between Alex and his rival , Carter Horton . This leads to several passengers being removed from the plane , including Alex ; Carter ; Alex 's best friend , Tod Waggner ; Carter 's girlfriend , Terry Chaney ; teacher Valerie Lewton ; and students Billy Hitchcock and Clear Rivers . None of the passengers , except for Clear , believe Alex about his vision until the plane explodes on take @-@ off , killing the remaining passengers on board . Afterwards , the survivors are interrogated by two FBI agents , who believe that Alex had something to do with the explosion . 
 Thirty @-@ nine days later , the survivors attend a memorial service for the victims . That night , Tod is killed when a chain reaction causes him to be strangled in his bathtub . His death is deemed a suicide ; however , Alex does not believe that Tod killed himself . He and Clear sneak into the funeral home to see Tod 's body , where they meet mortician William Bludworth , who tells them that they have ruined Death 's plan , and Death is now claiming the lives of those who were meant to die on the plane . The next day , Alex and Clear discuss what the mortician said at a cafe . Alex believes that if they look out for omens they can cheat Death again , although Clear is skeptical . They encounter the rest of the survivors ; and when Carter provokes Alex , Terry storms off in anger and is suddenly killed by a speeding bus . 
 After watching a news report on the cause of the explosion , Alex realizes that the survivors are dying in the order they were meant to die on the plane . He deduces that Ms. Lewton is next and rushes to her house to ensure her safety . Thinking Alex is up to no good , Ms. Lewton calls the FBI agents , who take him in for questioning . Although Alex is unable to convince the agents of what is happening they decide to let him go . Nonetheless , he is too late to save Ms. Lewton , whose house explodes after she is impaled by a falling kitchen knife . 
 The remaining survivors reunite and discuss what to do while driving through town . During the discussion Carter learns that he is next on Death 's list . Frustrated over having no control over his life , Carter parks his car on railroad tracks , wanting to die on his own terms . He changes his mind at the last minute ; but cannot get out when his seat belt jams . Alex manages to save Carter when his seat belt rips , just before his car is smashed by an oncoming train . As Billy warns the others to stay away from Carter he is suddenly decapitated by flying shrapnel from the car wreckage . 
 Alex deduces that since he intervened Death skipped Carter and moved onto Billy , and realizes that he is next on Death 's list . While hiding out in a fortified cabin Alex recalls switching seats with two girls in his premonition , meaning Clear is actually next , and he rushes to save her while being chased by agents . Meanwhile , Clear is trapped inside her car with a leaking gas tank , surrounded by loose live wires . Alex arrives in time to save Clear and grabs the wire , allowing her to escape from the car seconds before it explodes , leaving Alex incapacitated . 
 Six months later , Alex , Clear , and Carter travel to Paris to celebrate their survival . While discussing their ordeal , Alex explains that Death never skipped him . After seeing more omens he leaves the table , and is almost hit by a bus , which swerves and crashes into a large neon sign that swings down towards Alex . Carter pushes Alex out of the way at the last second , and Alex says that Death has skipped him . When Carter asks who is next the sign suddenly swings back down towards Carter , implying that Death 's plan is still in action . 
 = = Cast = = 
 For more details on the characters , see List of Final Destination characters . 
 Devon Sawa as Alex Browning 
 Ali Larter as Clear Rivers 
 Kerr Smith as Carter Horton 
 Kristen Cloke as Valerie Lewton 
 Daniel Roebuck as Agent <unk> 
 Roger <unk> Smith as Agent Schreck 
 Chad E. Donella as Tod Waggner 
 Seann William Scott as Billy Hitchcock 
 Tony Todd as William Bludworth 
 Amanda Detmer as Terry Chaney 
 Brendan Fehr as George Waggner 
 Lisa Marie <unk> as Christa Marsh 
 Christine Chatelain as Blake Dreyer 
 Forbes Angus as Larry Murnau 
 Barbara Tyson as Barbara Browning 
 Robert Wisden as Ken Browning 
 Numerous film characters are named after famous Horror film directors , actors and producers : Billy Hitchcock is named after Alfred Hitchcock , the Browning family and Tod Waggner are named after Tod Browning , Larry Murnau is a reference to Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau , Agent Schreck quotes Max Schreck and George Waggner is directly named after Universal Horror film producer George Waggner . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The original idea was written by Jeffrey Reddick as a spec script for The X @-@ Files in order to get a TV agent . " I was actually flying home to Kentucky and I read a story about a woman who was on vacation and her mom called her and said , ' Don ’ t take the flight tomorrow , I have a really bad feeling about it . ’ She switched flights and the plane that she would have been on crashed , " said Reddick . " I thought , that ’ s creepy — what if she was supposed to die on that flight ? " Building on his idea , Reddick wrote script and got an agent , but never submitted the script to The X @-@ Files after a colleague at New Line Cinema suggested he write it as a feature film . One of the biggest misconceptions about the project is that it was based on the real @-@ life disaster of TWA Flight 800 that occurred in 1996 . Like in the movie , the TWA disaster involved a Boeing 747 that exploded after take @-@ off from JFK International Airport in New York en route to Paris . The TV spec script for The X @-@ Files however , was actually written in 1994 . 
 New Line Cinema bought Jeffrey 's treatment and hired him to write the original draft of the script , which featured Death as an unseen force . After the script was finished , New Line Cinema submitted the script to directors , including writing partners James Wong and Glen Morgan . Both writers were willing to make it into a film , although they rewrote the script to comply with their standards . " I believe that at one time or another we 've all experienced a sense of prescience . We have a hunch , a feeling , and then that hunch proves true , " Wong said . " We want to do for planes and air travel what Jaws did for sharks and swimming " . 
 Morgain said , " The main thing they wanted about Death coming to get people is that you never saw a kind of a Michael Myers figure . You never saw a killer . And they liked that idea and they said , ' Okay . Go write it . ' Once we had a basic story , I started cataloging the strange coincidences in my own life . For example , I was in the Vancouver airport waiting for a flight when John Denver came on over the loudspeaker . I remember saying to myself , ' Hey , he just died in a plane crash – that 's a little weird . ' We wrote that version of that experience into the script . " 
 Producers Craig Perry and Warren Zide from Zide / Perry Productions helped with the film 's budget , because both were similarly fascinated about the idea of an invisible force executing its victims . Perry , a fan of The X @-@ Files , claimed that he " responded to Wong and Morgan 's work for one specific reason : dread " . New Line Cinema accepted financing and distributing rights for the film after Reddick came to them personally . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " One of the most important things we were looking for in casting was the actors ' ability to play the subtleties – the little things that a character doesn 't say or do that create the edge , the things that get under your skin and spook you , " Morgan said about the auditions . 
 Alex Browning , the last role cast , went to Canadian actor Devon Sawa , who previously starred in the 1999 film Idle Hands . Sawa said that when " [ he ] read the script on a plane , [ he ] found [ himself ] peeking out the window at the engine every couple of minutes " and " [ he ] went down and met Glen and Jim and [ he ] thought they were amazing and already had some great ideas " . However , Morgan and Wong were undecided about casting him for the part , so they requested him to perform again as they reviewed his previous works . Morgan was astounded by Sawa 's performance in Idle Hands , and Sawa was hired . 
 Sawa described his role as " in the beginning , [ Alex ] was kinda loopy and cotter , and you know , probably not the most popular guy in school . I think he might have been a dork , you know , doing their stuff and they had their own thing going and they 're after the two beautiful girls in school , but there 's no chance of that happening . I guess after the plane goes down , his world completely changes " . " Devon has an every man quality that makes him accessible , " Wong said . " He doesn 't appear as if he 's supremely self @-@ assured . He 's more of a regular kid who can take on the complexities of the role and become a hero " . Perry was amazed by Sawa 's vulnerability in acting , describing him as " a very distinctive actor . He 's very loose and he 's kind of a cut @-@ up when he 's not on camera , but the moment the camera 's on , I 'd never seen anybody to completely slide right through the moment " . 
 Ali Larter , who starred in the 1999 film Varsity Blues , was cast as female lead Claire Rivers . " The film shows how easy it is to turn on someone , to blame someone when you 're scared , " Larter said . " It 's also about trusting your intuitions and yourself " . She defined her part as " that girl who has a lot of loss in her life and has fallen for herself , and had made a life within that . She 's an artist , she lives by herself , and she 's kinda holding to her grip for what the world has given her " . 
 Seann William Scott , famous for portraying Steve Stifler in the 1999 film American Pie , was hired as class clown Billy Hitchcock . Scott admired the film , and felt that " it 's [ as ] dark and eerie as any Twilight Zone " . He laughed at his role , saying that " [ he ] is lacking some social skills , he doesn 't have quite a few friends , and he 's like the tag @-@ along " . Scott was surprised when in the script his character was written as fat . The writers eventually changed it for Scott . 
 Dawson 's Creek star Kerr Smith was cast as jock Carter Horton . Smith identified Carter as " your typical high school bully whose life depends on anger " and mentioned the fact that Carter feared Alex not having control of his own life . 
 Kristen Cloke , Morgan 's wife , was cast as teacher Valerie Lewton . " I have incredible respect for them , " said Cloke . " Jim 's the kind of director who knows exactly what he wants . As an actor , I can find a way to get there if I know specifically what I 'm going for , and Jim gives me that . The fact that he won 't move on until he 's got exactly what he wants creates a safe environment , which allows me to experiment and try different things " . Cloke described her part as " strong and sassy – in control . After the crash she comes unglued , probably more than any of the kids , and it 's a quick , drastic change . I had to understand the psychology of a person who can turn on a dime like that " . 
 Newcomers Amanda Detmer and Chad E. Donella were cast as students Terry Chaney and Tod Waggner , respectively . " When I first read the script , the thing that struck me most was that the characters were well @-@ written and the relationships between them were strong and believable , " Detmer said . " That 's important , because you have to care about these people in order to be worried about what might happen to them " . Detmer defined Terry as " very put @-@ together [ and ] seems content to defer to [ Carter ] – to not make waves . But the stress of what happens affects their relationship and interestingly enough brings out a certain strength in her " . On the other hand , Donella observed how similar his role was to himself . " I believe in fate . I think you come into this life with some things to accomplish and you 're taken out earlier or later depending on the game plan " . 
 Tony Todd , who played Candyman in the 1992 film Candyman , was cast as mortician William Bludworth . Morgan initially wanted Todd for the role because he felt his deep voice would give the film an eerie tone . 
 Additional cast members included Daniel Roebuck and Roger <unk> Smith as FBI agents Agent <unk> and Agent Schreck ; Brendan Fehr , Christine Chatelain and Lisa Marie <unk> as students George Waggner , Blake Dreyer and Christa Marsh ; Barbara Tyson and Robert Wisden as Barbara and Ken Browning , Alex ' parents ; and Forbes Angus as teacher Larry Murnau . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 With Final Destination cast , filming took place on Long Island for the plane scene and Vancouver Island for the additional scenes . Unfortunately , the cast members were filming other projects during production , so filming schedules had to be moved repeatedly in order for all of the cast to appear . Sawa restrained his appearance in The Guilty during production , and even commented that " [ he ] had to share a trailer with Bill Pullman because it was bigger and would make him look more famous " . Smith , who was a regular in Dawson 's Creek , had to hold episodes for the film . 
 According to Detmer , her death scene ( being rammed by a speeding bus ) was filmed first because " it was easy but much anticipated " . All death scenes were filmed using <unk> of the actual actors . The death scenes , the memorial , the forest scene and the scenes in Paris were all filmed in Victoria . Additional scenes were filmed in Toronto and San Francisco . For the airport , the crew used Vancouver International Airport as a stand @-@ in for John F. Kennedy International Airport , the airport mentioned in the film . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The plan behind the scenes was to create an intriguing visual signature . To serve the subtleties of the script and to help personify death , production designer John Willet developed the concept of " skewing " the sets . " What I 've tried to do with the sets themselves , with their design and with various color choices , is to make things just a little unnatural , " Willet explained . " Nothing that calls attention to itself , but instead creates a sense of uneasiness — the unsettling feeling that something 's not quite right " . To achieve this mystique , Willet designed two versions of virtually every set — one version was used before the crash and the other sets were used for scenes after the jet explodes . 
 " On the skewed sets I force the perspective either vertically or horizontally , " Willet explained . " Nothing is square and , although you can 't put your finger on it , it just makes you feel like something is not right " . <unk> was also part of the overall design for the color palette used in set decoration and costume design . " In the real world , the colors are bright and rich , " Willet said . " In the skewed world , they 're washed out and faded . Nothing is obvious , and it 's only in the overall effect that these subtle differences will work their magic " . 
 The plane scene during which passengers die in mid @-@ air was created inside a very large sound stage . The three @-@ ton hydraulic gimbal was operated automatically . " We spent two months building this central set piece that weighs about 45 @,@ 000 pounds and holds 89 people , " special effects supervisor Terry <unk> explained . Used for filming the on @-@ board sequences , it could be shifted on the gimbal to create a pitching movement of up to 45 degrees side @-@ to @-@ side and 60 degrees front @-@ to @-@ back , realistically conveying the horror of airborne engine failure . Sawa said that " the screams of the cast inside the gimbal made it appear more real " . Wong said , " You walk into the studio and there 's a huge gimbal with a plane on top and you think , ' What have I done ? ' I was afraid we were gonna have 40 extras vomiting . " 
 A miniature model of the Boeing 747 airplane was created for the explosion scene . The model , one of the most detailed miniature scenes in the film , was about 10 feet long and 7 feet wide , and the landing gear was made from all machined metals . According to visual effects supervisor Ariel Velasco Shaw , the miniature had to be launched about 40 feet up into the air to make it look like a real Boeing 747 exploded into a fireball . If blowing up a four @-@ foot plane , the explosion must be a minimum of eight feet in the air . To film the explosion in detail , the crew used three cameras running 120 frames per second and one camera running 300 frames per second ( if they had filmed using a real @-@ time camera , the succession of the explosion would not be filmed in a particular order ) . 
 The train scene ( in which Carter 's car is smashed by the train ) was one of the most difficult scenes to shoot . The car used for the crash was a replica of the original , severed in half prior to filming . According to <unk> , in order to ensure the safety of the actors , they had to make sure that there was no real sheet metal in the car . 
 For the death scenes , the crew used several <unk> of the actors and chocolate syrup for fake blood . Creating the Rube Goldberg effect for Ms. Lewton 's death scene was the most difficult to plan according to the crew . Perry said that " it was very hard to generate an atmosphere of dread , to create suspense out of scenes that are common " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = Soundtrack = = = = 
 No official album accompanied the motion picture . However , six songs are featured in the film , the most prominent of which is " Rocky Mountain High " by John Denver , which is heavily highlighted throughout the film , reminding the survivors that Denver died in a plane crash . The song is heard either before an accident or a character 's demise , and is also played by a street performer ( Alessandro Juliani ) in French . Other songs featured in the film include " Hundred Grand " by Pete Atherton ( during the Flight 180 memorial scene ) , " Into the Void " by Nine Inch Nails ( during the café scene ) , " All the Candles in the World " by Jane <unk> ( during Carter 's car scene ) , and " And When I Die " by Joe 90 ( during the end credits ) . 
 = = = = Score = = = = 
 Final Destination : The Complete Original Motion Picture Score was released on March 17 , 2000 . The film 's score was conducted by Daytime Emmy Award @-@ winning composer Shirley Walker . Wong and Morgan initially wanted Walker to score the film after having previously worked with her on their sci @-@ fi television series Space : Above and Beyond . Walker said , " [ Morgan and Wong ] are great believers in melody and having music for the characters and situations they find themselves in . Of course , the atmosphere had to be there also , especially for a film with as much suspense building as this film has " . 
 The score is mostly low @-@ key , with the exception of the suspense and death scenes . It was performed by a union orchestra , obliging New Line Cinema to grant the film its own score . Walker described her score as " very theme @-@ driven , conservative music that covers the range from bizarre animal noises with stronger visceral impact to stirring emotional music with well @-@ defined melodies that evolve through the storytelling " . The " Main Title " piece , used for the opening credits , was rare for opening a film aimed at a youth audience at the time . " What a treat for me to get to write a piece that calls you into the movie and lets you know something bad is going to happen from the get go " , Walker said . According to Walker , " Main Title " consumed most of her time , due to its " dark theme and counter melody which carries throughout the score " . 
 The score was positively received by critics . Judge Harold <unk> of DVD Verdict wrote how " [ the sound effects , dialogue and ] Walker 's wonderfully creepy and effective score are mixed together to form a very pleasing , almost organic @-@ like whole " . Mike Long of DVD Review said that " Shirley Walker ’ s eerie score comes across powerfully with a wide spatial integration " . Derek Germano of The Cinema Laser wrote that " Walker 's creepy musical score is really a winner , and is one of the things that will help to make Final Destination a minor genre classic a few years down the road " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film premiered on March 17 , 2000 , in 2 @,@ 587 theaters across the United States and Canada , earning $ 10 @,@ 015 @,@ 822 on its opening weekend , with an average of $ 3 @,@ 871 per theater . Final Destination placed at No. 3 in the United States box office on its opening weekend , behind biography film Erin Brockovich and the science fiction film Mission to Mars . The film remained at No. 3 during the second weekend , before dropping to No. 7 on its third weekend . Final Destination continuously dropped across subsequent weekends until it fell from the top @-@ 10 list on its eighth weekend . The film lasted in theaters for 22 weekends , its last screening airing in 105 theaters and grossing $ 52 @,@ 675 , placing at No. 56 . Final Destination grossed $ 53 @,@ 331 @,@ 147 in the United States and Canada on its total screening , and earned $ 59 @,@ 549 @,@ 147 in other territories , earning an overall gross of $ 112 @,@ 880 @,@ 294 internationally . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Final Destination was released on DVD on September 26 , 2000 , in the United States and Canada . The DVD bonus features include three audio commentaries , three deleted scenes , and two documentaries . The first commentary features Wong , Morgan , Reddick , and editor James Coblentz describing the minute subtleties included by the creative team throughout the film , which either allude to death or foreshadow the deaths in the film invisible upon initial airing . They also discuss how the film was made and how they fought the executives of New Line Cinema over various factors . 
 The second commentary includes Sawa , Smith , Cloke , and Donella discussing what was involved in certain scenes and how they each were cast . The third commentary is the isolated music score of Walker included in the film 's score . 
 Deleted scenes cover two subplots of Alex and Clear , an alternate ending where Alex dies after rescuing Clear from the live wires , Clear bearing a baby which she names Alex , and Clear and Carter finishing as the only survivors of the film . 
 The first documentary entitled A Look at Test Screenings runs for 13 minutes and outlines the test screening process , giving an overview of how those screenings were conducted and scored . The featurette shows video footage of the test screening audience and specific comments regarding why the deleted scenes were either cut or reshot . The second documentary , titled <unk> , explores real @-@ life intuitive investigator Pam Coronado , who has helped police solve many murders and missing person cases with her psychic abilities . The featurette runs for 20 minutes . Some DVDs contain two non DVD @-@ ROM games — Death Clock and Psychic Test — in addition to the film 's theatrical trailer and filmographies of the cast and crew . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported 34 % of critics gave the film positive write @-@ ups based on 101 reviews , with an average rating of 4 @.@ 7 / 10 . The site 's consensus of opinion is that " despite a panel of X @-@ Files alums at the helm and a promising premise , flighty performances and poor execution keep Final Destination from ever taking off " . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film holds a mixed / average score of 36 based on 28 reviews . On June 14 , 2010 , Nick Hyman of Metacritic included Final Destination in the website 's editorial 15 Movies the Critics Got Wrong , noting that " the elaborate suspense / action set pieces from the first two films are more impressive than most " . 
 On the negative side , Stephen Holden of The New York Times said that " even by the crude standards of teenage horror , Final Destination is dramatically flat " . Lou Lumenick of the New York Post commented that " the film 's premise quickly deteriorates into a silly , badly acted slasher movie — minus the slasher " . Kevin Maynard of Mr. Showbiz described the film as " crude and witless " , while Rita Kempley of The Washington Post wrote that " your own final destination just might be the box office , to demand your money back " . 
 Robert <unk> of Newsweek remarked that the film " should be in video store bins " , and Jay Carr of The Boston Globe commented that it " starts by cheating death and ends by cheating us " . Phoebe Flowers of Miami Herald felt the film " stoops well below substituting style for substance " , whereas Lisa Alspector of the Chicago Reader described the film as " disturbing — if less sophisticated than the best SF ( science fiction ) <unk> TV " . Luke Thompson of the Dallas Observer found it " a waste of a decent premise " ; Ernest Hardy of LA Weekly said that the film " fails because it takes itself both too seriously and not seriously enough " . Although Barbara <unk> of the Chicago Tribune said that it " met the low standards of a mediocre TV movie " , Desmond Ryan of the Philadelphia Inquirer commented that it was " as full of terrible acting as it is devoid of suspense " . Both Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today and Walter <unk> of the San Francisco Examiner thought it was " stupid , silly and gory " . 
 In contrast , the film gathered positive reviews from top critics . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times enjoyed the film and gave it three out of four stars , stating that " Final Destination will no doubt be a hit and inspire the obligatory sequels . Like the original Scream , this movie is too good to be the end of the road . I have visions of my own " . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle praised the film , saying " [ it ] was playful and energized enough to keep an audience guessing " . Joe Leydon of Variety praised the film , saying " [ it ] generates a respectable amount of suspense and takes a few unexpected turns while covering familiar territory " , while Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times said it was " a terrific theatrical feature debut for television veterans Glen Morgan and James Wong " . Chris Kaltenbach of The Baltimore Sun found the film " fitfully thrilling " , while Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide defined the film as " serviceable enough , if you come to it with sufficiently modest expectations " . 
 Despite the film 's generally mixed reception , critics praised Sawa 's performance as Alex . Holden of The New York Times commented that " The disaster and Alex 's premonitions set up a heavy @-@ handed fable about death and teenage illusions of invulnerability " . David Nusair of Reel Film Reviews remarked " Sawa 's personable turn as the hero is matched by a uniformly effective supporting cast rife with familiar faces ( i.e. Seann William Scott , Brendan Fehr , Tony Todd , etc ) ... , " while Leydon of Variety pointed out that " Sawa is credible as the second @-@ sighted Alex — unlike many other actors cast a teen protagonists , he actually looks like he might still be attending high school — but the supporting players are an uneven bunch " . LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle praised Sawa and Ali Larter 's pairing , saying that " Larter and Sawa , who becomes more scruffy and wild @-@ eyed as the film progresses , make an appealing pair " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film had a major impact on the horror film audience , earning the Saturn Award for Best Horror Film in 2000 . Sawa won the Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor the same year , and Larter won the Young Hollywood Award for a Breakthrough Performance by a Female . At the 2001 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards , both Sawa and Larter were nominated for Favorite Actor in Horror ( Internet Only ) and Favorite Actress in Horror ( Internet Only ) , respectively . Both actors lost the awards to Scream 3 actors David Arquette and Neve Campbell . Additionally , cinematographer Robert McLachlan was nominated for Best Cinematography in a Theatrical Feature at the Canadian Society of Cinematographers Awards in 2001 , but lost to Pierre Gill for his work on The Art of War . 
 The film 's concept was listed at No. 46 in Bravo 's 100 Greatest Scary Moments , in which Smith represented the film . The Flight 180 explosion scene was included in the lists of best fictional plane crashes or disaster scenes by Break Studios , Unreality Magazine , New <unk> , The <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> Filmsite.org also included the plane scene and the deaths of three characters ( Tod , Terry , and Ms. Lewton ) in its Scariest Movie Moments and Scenes , and all fatalities in its Best Film Deaths Scenes . The demise of Detmer 's character entered the listings of the most shocking deaths on film of George Wales and Simon Kinnear of Total Film ( No. 29 and No. 10 , respectively ) , Simon Hill of Eat Horror ( No. 10 ) , and Dirk <unk> of Mania ( No. 10 ) . 
 = Thierry Henry = 
 Thierry Daniel Henry ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ɑ ̃ <unk> ] ; born 17 August 1977 ) is a retired French professional footballer who played as a forward . He played for Monaco , Juventus , Barcelona , New York Red Bulls and spent eight years at Arsenal where he is the club 's all @-@ time record goalscorer . At international level he represented France and is his country 's record goalscorer . 
 Henry made his professional debut with Monaco in 1994 . Good form led to an international call @-@ up in 1998 , after which he signed for the Serie A defending champions Juventus . A year later he signed for Premier League club Arsenal for £ 11 million . It was at Arsenal that Henry made his name as a world @-@ class player . Under long @-@ time mentor and coach Arsène Wenger , Henry became a prolific striker and Arsenal 's all @-@ time leading scorer with 228 goals in all competitions . He won two league titles and three FA Cups at the club . In 2003 and 2004 Henry was runner @-@ up for the FIFA World Player of the Year . He was also named the PFA Players ' Player of the Year twice , and the FWA Footballer of the Year three times . Henry spent his final two seasons with Arsenal as club captain , leading them to the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final . 
 In June 2007 , after eight years with Arsenal , he transferred to Barcelona for a fee of € 24 million . In 2009 , he was an integral part of the club 's historic treble when they won La Liga , the Copa del Rey and the UEFA Champions League . He went on to achieve an unprecedented sextuple by also winning the Supercopa de España , the UEFA Super Cup and the FIFA Club World Cup . In total , Henry has been named in the UEFA Team of the Year five times . In 2010 , he joined the New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer , winning the Eastern Conference title with the team in 2010 . He returned to Arsenal on loan for two months in 2012 . In 2013 , Henry with the New York Red Bulls won the MLS Supporters ' Shield . 
 Henry enjoyed success with the French national team , winning the 1998 FIFA World Cup , UEFA Euro 2000 and 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup . In October 2007 , he surpassed Michel Platini 's record to become France 's top goalscorer of all time . Henry retired from international football after the 2010 FIFA World Cup . Henry was also one of the top commercially marketed footballers ; he was ranked ninth in the world in 2006 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Henry is of Antillean heritage : his father , Antoine , is from Guadeloupe ( La Désirade island ) , and his mother , Maryse , is from Martinique . He was born and raised in Les Ulis suburb of Paris which , despite sometimes being seen as a tough neighbourhood , provided good footballing facilities . As a seven @-@ year @-@ old , Henry showed great potential , prompting Claude <unk> to recruit him to the local club CO Les Ulis . His father pressured him to attend training , although the youngster was not particularly drawn to football . He joined US Palaiseau in 1989 , but after a year his father fell out with the club , so Henry moved to ES <unk> @-@ Châtillon and played there for two years . US Palaiseau coach Jean @-@ Marie Panza , Henry 's future mentor , followed him there . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Monaco ( 1992 – 1999 ) and Juventus ( 1999 ) = = = 
 In 1990 , Monaco sent scout Arnold Catalano to watch Henry , then at the age of 13 in a match . Henry scored all six goals as his side won 6 – 0 . Catalano asked him to join Monaco without even attending a trial first . Catalano requested that Henry complete a course at the elite Clairefontaine academy , and despite the director 's reluctance to admit Henry due to his poor school results , he was allowed to complete the course and joined Arsène Wenger 's Monaco as a youth player . Subsequently , Henry signed professional forms with Monaco , and made his professional debut on 31 August 1994 , in a 2 – 0 loss against Nice . Although Wenger suspected that Henry should be deployed as a striker , he put Henry on the left wing because he believed that his pace , natural ball control and skill would be more effective against full @-@ backs than centre @-@ backs . 
 After a tentative start to his Monaco career , Henry was named the French Young Footballer of the Year in 1996 , and in the 1996 – 97 season , his solid performances helped the club win the Ligue 1 title . During the 1997 – 98 season , he was instrumental in leading his club to the UEFA Champions League semi @-@ final , setting a French record by scoring seven goals in the competition . By his third season , he had received his first cap for the national team , and was part of the winning team in the 1998 FIFA World Cup . He continued to impress at his tenure with Monaco , and in his five seasons with the French club , the young winger scored 20 league goals in 105 appearances . 
 Henry left Monaco in January 1999 , one year before his intimate and closest teammate David Trezeguet , and moved to Italian Serie A club Juventus for £ 10 @.@ 5 million . He played on the wing , but he was ineffective against the Serie A defensive discipline in a position uncharacteristic for him , and scored just three goals in 16 appearances . 
 = = = Arsenal ( 1999 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Unsettled in Italy , Henry transferred from Juventus on 3 August 1999 to Arsenal for an estimated fee of £ 11 million , reuniting with his former manager Arsène Wenger . It was at Arsenal that Henry made his name as a world @-@ class footballer , and although his transfer was not without controversy , Wenger was convinced he was worth the transfer fee . Brought in as a replacement for fellow French forward Nicolas Anelka , Henry was immediately moulded into a striker by Wenger , a move that would pay rich dividends in years to come . However , doubts were raised about his ability to adapt to the quick and physical English game when he failed to score in his first eight games . After several difficult months in England , Henry even conceded that he had to " be re @-@ taught everything about the art of striking . " These doubts were dispelled when he ended his first season at Arsenal with an impressive goal tally of 26 . Arsenal finished second in the Premier League behind Manchester United , and lost in the UEFA Cup Final against Turkish club Galatasaray . 
 Coming off the back of a victorious UEFA Euro 2000 campaign with the national team , Henry was ready to make an impact in the 2000 – 01 season . Despite recording fewer goals and assists than his first season , Henry 's second season with Arsenal proved to be a breakthrough , as he became the club 's top goalscorer . Armed with one of the league 's best attacks , Arsenal finished runner @-@ up to perennial rivals Manchester United in the Premier League . The team also reached the final of the FA Cup , losing 2 – 1 to Liverpool . Henry remained frustrated , however , by the fact that he had yet to help the club win honours , and frequently expressed his desire to establish Arsenal as a powerhouse . 
 Success finally arrived during the 2001 – 02 season . Arsenal finished seven points above Liverpool to win the Premier League title , and defeated Chelsea 2 – 0 in the FA Cup Final . Henry became the league 's top goalscorer and netted 32 goals in all competitions as he led Arsenal to a double and his first silverware with the club . There was much expectation that Henry would replicate his club form for France during the 2002 FIFA World Cup , but the defending champions suffered a shock exit at the group stage . 
 2002 – 03 proved to be another productive season for Henry , as he scored 32 goals in all competitions while contributing 23 assists — remarkable returns for a striker . In doing so , he led Arsenal to another FA Cup triumph ( where he was man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match in the Final ) , although Arsenal failed to retain their Premier League title . Throughout the season , he competed with Manchester United 's Ruud van Nistelrooy for the league scoring title , but the Dutchman edged Henry to the Golden Boot by a single goal . Nonetheless , Henry was named both the PFA Players ' Player of the Year and FWA Footballer of the Year . His rising status as one of the world 's best footballers was affirmed when he emerged runner @-@ up for the 2003 FIFA World Player of the Year award . 
 Entering the 2003 – 04 season , Arsenal were determined to reclaim the Premier League crown . Henry was again instrumental in Arsenal 's exceptionally successful campaign ; together with the likes of Dennis Bergkamp , Patrick Vieira and Robert Pirès , Henry ensured that the Gunners became the first team in more than a century to go through the entire domestic league season unbeaten , claiming the league title in the process . Apart from being named for the second year running as the PFA Players ' Player of the Year and FWA Footballer of the Year , Henry emerged once again as the runner @-@ up for 2004 FIFA World Player of the Year award . With 39 goals scored in all competitions , the Frenchman led the league in goals scored and won the European Golden Boot . However , as was the case in 2002 , Henry was unable to lead the national side to honours during UEFA Euro 2004 . 
 This dip in success was compounded when Arsenal failed again to secure back @-@ to @-@ back league titles when they lost out to Chelsea in the 2004 – 05 season , although Arsenal did win the FA Cup ( the Final of which Henry missed through injury ) . Henry maintained his reputation as one of Europe 's most feared strikers as he led the league in scoring , and with 31 goals in all competitions , he was the co @-@ recipient ( with Diego Forlán ) of the European Golden Boot , and is currently the only player to have officially won the award twice in a row ( Ally McCoist also had two Golden Boots in a row , but both were deemed unofficial ) . The unexpected departure of Arsenal 's captain Patrick Vieira in the 2005 close season led to Henry being awarded club captaincy , a role which many felt was not naturally suited for him ; the captaincy is more commonly given to defenders or midfielders , who are better @-@ placed on the pitch to read the game . Along with being chief goalscorer , he was responsible for leading a very young team which had yet to gel fully . 
 The 2005 – 06 season proved to be one of remarkable personal achievements for Henry . On 17 October 2005 , Henry became the club 's top goalscorer of all time ; two goals against Sparta Prague in the Champions League meant he broke Ian Wright 's record of 185 goals . On 1 February 2006 , he scored a goal against West Ham United , bringing his league goal tally up to 151 , breaking Arsenal legend Cliff Bastin 's league goals record . Henry scored his 100th league goal at Highbury , a feat unparalleled in the history of the club , and a unique achievement in the Premier League . On the final day of the Premier League season , Henry scored a hat @-@ trick against Wigan Athletic in the last ever match played at Highbury . He completed the season as the league 's top goalscorer , was voted the FWA Footballer of the Year for the third time in his career , and was selected in the FIFA World XI . 
 Nevertheless , Arsenal failed to win the Premier League title again , but hopes of a trophy were revived when Arsenal reached the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final . The Gunners eventually lost 2 – 1 to Barcelona , and Arsenal 's inability to win the league title for two consecutive seasons combined with the relative inexperience of the Arsenal squad caused much speculation that Henry would leave for another club . However , he declared his love for the club and accepted a four @-@ year contract , and said he would stay at Arsenal for life . Arsenal vice @-@ chairman David Dein later claimed the club had turned down two bids of £ 50 million from Spanish clubs for Henry before the signing of the new contract . Had the transfer materialised , it would have surpassed the then @-@ world record £ 47 million paid for Zinedine Zidane . 
 Henry 's 2006 – 07 season was marred by injuries . Although he scored 10 goals in 17 domestic appearances for Arsenal , Henry 's season was cut short in February . Having missed games due to hamstring , foot , and back problems , he was deemed fit enough to come on as a late substitute against PSV in a Champions League match , but began limping shortly after coming on . Scans the next day revealed that he would need at least three months to heal from new groin and stomach injuries , missing the rest of the 2006 – 07 season . Wenger attributed Henry 's injuries to a protracted 2005 – 06 campaign , and reiterated that Henry was keen on staying with the Gunners to rebuild for the 2007 – 08 season . 
 = = = Barcelona ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = 
 On 25 June 2007 , in an unexpected turn of events , Henry was transferred to Barcelona for € 24 million . He signed a four @-@ year deal for a reported € 6 @.@ 8 ( £ 4 @.@ 6 ) million per season . It was revealed that the contract included a release clause of € 125 ( £ 84 @.@ 9 ) million . Henry cited the departure of Dein and continued uncertainty over Wenger 's future as reasons for leaving , and maintained that " I always said that if I ever left Arsenal it would be to play for Barcelona . " Despite their captain 's departure , Arsenal got off to an impressive start for the 2007 – 08 campaign , and Henry admitted that his presence in the team might have been more of a hindrance than a help . He stated , " Because of my seniority , the fact that I was captain and my habit of screaming for the ball , they would sometimes give it to me even when I was not in the best position . So in that sense it was good for the team that I moved on . " Henry left Arsenal as the club 's leading all @-@ time league goalscorer with 174 goals and leading all @-@ time goalscorer in European competitions with 42 goals ; in July 2008 , Arsenal fans voted him as Arsenal 's greatest player ever in <unk> 's Gunners ' Greatest 50 Players poll . 
 At Barcelona , Henry was given the number 14 jersey , the same as he had worn at Arsenal . He scored his first goal for his new club on 19 September 2007 in a 3 – 0 Champions League group stage win over Lyon , and he recorded his first hat @-@ trick for Barça in a Primera División match against Levante ten days later . But with Henry mostly deployed on the wing throughout the season , he was unable to reproduce the goal @-@ scoring form he achieved with Arsenal . He expressed dissatisfaction with the move to Barcelona in the initial year , amidst widespread speculation of a return to the Premier League . In an interview with Garth Crooks on BBC Football Focus , Henry described missing life " back home " and even " the English press . " However , Henry concluded his debut season as the club 's top scorer with 19 goals in addition to nine league assists , second behind Lionel Messi 's ten . 
 Henry went on to surpass this tally in a more integrated 2008 – 09 campaign , winning the first trophy of his Barcelona career on 13 May 2009 when Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final . Barcelona won the Primera División and UEFA Champions League soon after , completing a treble for the Frenchman , who had combined with Messi and Samuel Eto 'o to score 100 goals between them that season . The trio was also the most prolific trio in Spanish league history , scoring 72 goals and surpassing the 66 goals of Real Madrid 's Ferenc Puskás , Alfredo Di Stéfano and Luis del Sol of the 1960 – 61 season ( this was later surpassed by Real Madrid trio Cristiano Ronaldo , Karim Benzema and Gonzalo Higuaín who scored 89 goals in 2011 – 12 ) . Later in 2009 , Henry helped Barcelona win an unprecedented sextuple , consisting of the aforementioned treble , the Supercopa de España , the UEFA Super Cup , and the FIFA Club World Cup . 
 The following season , the emergence of Pedro meant that Henry only started 15 league games . Before the La Liga season ended , and with a year still left on his contract , club president Joan Laporta stated on 5 May 2010 that Henry " may go away in the summer transfer window if that 's what he wants . " After Henry returned from the 2010 World Cup , Barcelona confirmed that they had agreed to the sale of Henry to an unnamed club , with the player still to agree terms with the new club . 
 = = = New York Red Bulls ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 In July 2010 , Henry signed a multi @-@ year contract with Major League Soccer ( MLS ) club New York Red Bulls for the 2010 season as its second designated player . He made his full MLS debut on 31 July in a 2 – 2 draw against Houston Dynamo , assisting both goals to Juan Pablo Ángel . His first MLS goal came on 28 August in a 2 – 0 victory against San Jose Earthquakes . The Red Bulls eventually topped the MLS Eastern Conference by one point over Columbus Crew before losing 3 – 2 on aggregate against San Jose Earthquakes in the quarter @-@ finals of the 2010 MLS Cup Playoffs . The next season , the Red Bulls were 10th overall in the league , and bowed out in the Conference semi @-@ finals of the 2011 MLS Cup Playoffs . 
 = = = = Return to Arsenal ( loan ) = = = = 
 After training with Arsenal during the MLS off @-@ season , Henry re @-@ signed for the club on a two @-@ month loan deal on 6 January 2012 . This was to provide cover for Gervinho and Marouane Chamakh , who were unavailable due to their participation in the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations . Henry made his second Arsenal debut as a substitute against Leeds United in the FA Cup third round and scored the only goal . In his last league game on loan , he scored the winning goal in stoppage time in a 2 – 1 win against Sunderland . 
 = = = = Return to New York Red Bulls = = = = 
 On 17 February 2012 , Henry returned to Red Bulls to prepare for the 2012 season . His base salary of $ 5 million ( $ 5 @.@ 6 million guaranteed ) made him the highest @-@ paid player in the MLS — surpassing David Beckham , who had taken a salary cut for his last year with the Los Angeles Galaxy . In 2013 , Henry 's base salary dropped to $ 3 @.@ 75 million setting him behind Robbie Keane 's $ 4 million base salary . With bonuses , however , Henry remained the highest @-@ paid player with $ 4 @.@ 35 million compared to Keane 's $ 4 @.@ 33 million . 
 On 31 March 2012 , Henry scored his first MLS hat @-@ trick in a 5 – 2 Red Bulls win over the Montreal Impact . He was named MLS Player of the Month that same month . On 27 October 2013 , Henry scored once and provided two assists in the last game of the season against the Chicago Fire at Red Bull Arena to help his team win 5 – 2 and become champions of the regular season . It was the club 's first major trophy in their 17 @-@ year history . 
 On 12 July 2014 , Henry provided a goal and three assists in a 4 – 1 Red Bulls win over the Columbus Crew . With that effort he became the all @-@ time assist leader for the New York Red Bulls with 37 , surpassing Amado Guevara and Tab Ramos . 
 On 1 December 2014 , it was announced that Henry had left the Red Bulls after four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years at the club . On 16 December , he announced his retirement as a player and stated that he would begin working for Sky Sports as a pundit . 
 = = International career = = 
 Henry enjoyed a successful career with the France national team , winning the first of his 123 caps in June 1997 , when his good form for Monaco was rewarded with a call @-@ up to the Under @-@ 20 French national team , where he played in the 1997 FIFA World Youth Championship alongside future teammates William Gallas and David Trezeguet . Within four months , France head coach Aimé Jacquet called Henry up to the senior team . The 20 @-@ year @-@ old made his senior international debut on 11 October 1997 in a 2 – 1 win against South Africa . Jacquet was so impressed with Henry that he took him to the 1998 FIFA World Cup . Although Henry was a largely unknown quantity at international level , he ended the tournament as France 's top scorer with three goals . He was scheduled to appear as a substitute in the final , where France beat Brazil 3 – 0 , but Marcel Desailly 's sending off forced a defensive change instead . In 1998 , he was made Chevalier ( Knight ) of the Légion d 'honneur , France 's highest decoration . 
 Henry was a member of France 's UEFA Euro 2000 squad , again scoring three goals in the tournament , including the equaliser against Portugal in the semi @-@ final , and finishing as the country 's top scorer . France later won the game in extra time following a converted penalty kick by Zinedine Zidane . France went on to defeat Italy in extra @-@ time in the final , earning Henry his second major international medal . During the tournament , Henry was voted man of the match in three games , including the final against Italy . 
 The 2002 FIFA World Cup featured a stunning early exit for both Henry and France as the defending champions were eliminated in the group stage after failing to score a goal in all three games . France lost against Senegal in their first group match and Henry was red carded for a dangerous sliding challenge in their next match against Uruguay . In that game , France played to a 0 – 0 draw , but Henry was forced to miss the final group match due to suspension ; France lost 2 – 0 to Denmark . 
 Henry returned to form for his country at the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup . Despite playing without team stalwarts Zidane and Patrick Vieira , France won , in large part owing to Henry 's outstanding play , for which he was named Man of the Match by FIFA 's Technical Study Group in three of France 's five matches . In the final , he scored the golden goal in extra time to lift the title for the host country after a 1 – 0 victory over Cameroon . Henry was awarded both the Adidas Golden Ball as the outstanding player of the competition and the Adidas Golden Shoe as the tournament 's top goalscorer with four goals . 
 In UEFA Euro 2004 , Henry played in all of France 's matches and scored two goals . France beat England in the group stage but lost to the eventual winners Greece 1 – 0 in the quarter @-@ finals . During the 2006 FIFA World Cup Henry remained as one of the automatic starters in the squad . He played as a lone striker , but despite an indifferent start to the tournament , became one of the top players of the World Cup . He scored three goals , including the winning goal from Zidane 's free kick against defending champions Brazil in the quarter @-@ final . However , France subsequently lost to Italy on penalties ( 5 – 3 ) in the final . Henry did not take part in the penalty shoot @-@ out , having been substituted in extra time after his legs had cramped . Henry was one of ten nominees for the Golden Ball award for Player of the Tournament , an award which was ultimately presented to his teammate , Zidane and was named a starting striker on the 2006 FIFPro World XI team . 
 On 13 October 2007 , Henry scored his 41st goal against the Faroe Islands , joining Michel Platini as the country 's top goalscorer of all time . Four days later at the Stade de la Beaujoire , he scored a late double against Lithuania , thereby setting a new record as France 's top goalscorer . On 3 June 2008 , Henry made his 100th appearance for national team in match against Colombia , becoming the sixth French player ever to reach that milestone . 
 Henry missed the opening game of France 's short @-@ lived UEFA Euro 2008 campaign , where they were eliminated in the group stages after being drawn in the same group as Italy , the Netherlands and Romania . He scored France 's only goal in the competition in a 4 – 1 loss to the Netherlands . 
 The French team struggled during the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifiers and finished second in their group behind Serbia . During the play @-@ offs against the Republic of Ireland , Henry was involved in a controversy in the second leg of the game at the Stade de France on 18 November 2009 . With the aggregate score tied at 1 – 1 and the game in extra time , he used his hand twice to control the ball before delivering a cross to William Gallas who scored the winner . This sparked a barrage of criticism against the Frenchman , while national team coach Raymond Domenech and Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger defended him . The Football Association of Ireland lodged a formal complaint with FIFA , seeking a replay of the game , which FIFA declined . Henry said that he contemplated retiring from international football after the reactions to the incident , but maintained that he was not a " cheat " ; hours after FIFA had ruled out a replay , he stated that " the fairest solution would be to replay the game " . FIFA President Sepp Blatter described the incident as " blatant unfair play " and announced an inquiry into how such incidents could be avoided in future , and added that the incident would be investigated by the Disciplinary Committee . Blatter also said Henry told him that his family had been threatened in the aftermath of the incident . In January 2010 , FIFA announced that there was no legal basis to sanction Henry . 
 Henry did not feature in the starting line @-@ up for France at the 2010 FIFA World Cup . France drew in their first game against Uruguay , and lost 2 – 0 in their second against Mexico . The team was thrown into disarray when Nicolas Anelka was expelled from the team , and captain Patrice Evra led a team protest by refusing to train . In the final group game against host @-@ nation South Africa in which Henry came on as a second @-@ half substitute , France lost 2 – 1 and were eliminated from the tournament . He then announced his retirement from international football , having won 123 caps and scored 51 goals for Les Bleus , thus finishing his international career as France 's all @-@ time top scorer , and second most capped player after Lilian Thuram . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Although Henry played up front as a striker during his youth , he spent his time at Monaco and Juventus playing on the wing . When Henry joined Arsenal in 1999 , Wenger immediately changed this , switching Henry to his childhood position , often pairing him with Dutch veteran Dennis Bergkamp . During the 2004 – 05 season , Wenger switched Arsenal 's formation to 4 – 5 – 1 . This change forced Henry to adapt again to fit into the Arsenal team , and he played many games as a lone striker . Still , Henry remained Arsenal 's main offensive threat , on many occasions conjuring spectacular goals . Wenger said of his fellow Frenchman : " Thierry Henry could take the ball in the middle of the park and score a goal that no one else in the world could score " . 
 One of the reasons cited for Henry 's impressive play up front is his ability to calmly score from one @-@ on @-@ ones . According to his father Antoine , Henry picked up his precision shooting from watching his idol Marco van Basten . He was also influenced by Romário , Ronaldo and African star George Weah , a new breed of strikers in the 1990s who would also operate outside the penalty area before running with the ball towards goal . At his physical peak from the late 1990s to the mid 2000s , Henry 's ability to dribble past opponents with exceptional pace , skill and composure , meant that he could get in behind defenders regularly enough to score . In 2004 , former Arsenal striker Alan Smith commented on Henry : " I have to say I haven 't seen a player like him . He 's an athlete with great technical ability and a tremendous desire to be the best . " 
 When up front , Henry is occasionally known to move out wide to the left wing position , something which enables him to contribute heavily in assists : between 2002 – 03 and 2004 – 05 , the striker managed almost 50 assists in total and this was attributed to his unselfish play and creativity . Henry would also drift offside to fool the defence then run back onside before the ball is played and beat the offside trap , although he never provided Arsenal a distinct aerial threat . Given his versatility in being able to operate as both a winger and a striker , the Frenchman is not a prototypical " out @-@ and @-@ out striker " , but he has emerged consistently as one of Europe 's most prolific strikers . In set pieces , Henry was the first @-@ choice penalty and free kick taker for Arsenal , having scored regularly from those positions . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Monaco 
 Ligue 1 : 1996 – 97 
 Trophée des Champions : 1997 
 Arsenal 
 Premier League ( 2 ) : 2001 – 02 , 2003 – 04 
 FA Cup ( 3 ) : 2001 – 02 , 2002 – 03 , 2004 – 05 
 FA Community Shield ( 2 ) : 2002 , 2004 
 Barcelona 
 La Liga ( 2 ) : 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 Copa del Rey : 2008 – 09 
 Supercopa de España : 2009 
 UEFA Champions League : 2008 – 09 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2009 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2009 
 New York Red Bulls 
 Supporters ' Shield : 2013 
 MLS Eastern Conference ( Regular season ) : 2010 , 2013 
 = = = National = = = 
 France 
 FIFA World Cup 
 Winner : France 1998 
 Runners @-@ up : Germany 2006 
 UEFA European Football Championship 
 Winner : Belgium & Netherlands 2000 
 FIFA Confederations Cup 
 Winner : France 2003 
 King Hassan II International Cup Tournament 
 Winner : Morocco 2000 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Henry has received many plaudits and awards in his football career . He was runner @-@ up for the 2003 and 2004 FIFA World Player of the Year awards ; in those two seasons , he also won back @-@ to @-@ back PFA Players ' Player of the Year titles . Henry is the only player ever to have won the FWA Footballer of the Year three times ( 2003 , 2004 , 2006 ) , and the French Player of the Year on a record four occasions . Henry was voted into the Premier League Overseas Team of the Decade in the 10 Seasons Awards poll in 2003 , and in 2004 he was named by football legend Pelé on the FIFA 100 list of the world 's greatest living players . 
 In terms of goal @-@ scoring awards , Henry was the European Golden Boot winner in 2004 and 2005 ( sharing it with Villarreal 's Diego Forlán in 2005 ) . Henry was also the top goalscorer in the Premier League for a record four seasons ( 2002 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 ) . In 2006 , he became the first player to score more than 20 goals in the league for five consecutive seasons ( 2002 to 2006 ) . With 175 , Henry is currently fifth in the list of all @-@ time Premier League goalscorers , behind Alan Shearer , Andy Cole , Wayne Rooney and Frank Lampard . All of his Premier League goals were for Arsenal , giving him the record for most goals in the competition for one club , until it was broken by Rooney in 2016 . France 's all @-@ time record goalscorer was , in his prime in the mid 2000s , regarded by many coaches , footballers and journalists as one of the best players in the world . In November 2007 , he was ranked 33rd on the Association of Football Statisticians ' compendium for " Greatest Ever Footballers . " 
 Arsenal fans honoured their former player in 2008 , declaring Henry the greatest Arsenal player . In two other 2008 surveys , Henry emerged as the favourite Premier League player of all time among 32 @,@ 000 people surveyed in the Barclays 2008 Global Fan Report . In 2009 , Henry was voted the best Premier League player of the 2000s . Arsenal fan and The Who lead singer Roger Daltrey mentions Henry in the tribute song " Highbury Highs " , which he performed at Arsenal 's last ever game at Highbury on 7 May 2006 . On 10 December 2011 , Arsenal unveiled a bronze statue of Henry at the Emirates Stadium as part of its 125th anniversary celebrations . 
 A summary of Henry 's individual awards is as follows : 
 Ballon d 'Or – Runner @-@ up : 2003 ; Third @-@ place : 2006 
 FIFA World Player of the Year – Silver Award : 2003 , 2004 
 UNFP Ligue 1 Young Player of the Year : 1996 – 97 
 PFA Players ' Player of the Year : 2002 – 03 , 2003 – 04 
 PFA Team of the Year : 2000 – 01 , 2001 – 02 , 2002 – 03 , 2003 – 04 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 
 PFA Team of the Century ( 1907 – 2007 ) : 
 Team of the Century 1997 @-@ 2007 
 Overall Team of the Century 
 FWA Footballer of the Year : 2002 – 03 , 2003 – 04 , 2005 – 06 
 Premier League Golden Boot : 2001 – 02 , 2003 – 04 , 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 . 
 Golden Boot Landmark Award 10 : 2004 – 05 
 Golden Boot Landmark Award 20 : 2004 – 05 
 Premier League Player of the Month : April 2000 , September 2002 , January 2004 , April 2004 
 BBC Goal of the Season : 2002 – 03 
 UEFA Team of the Year : 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2006 
 MLS Best XI : 2011 , 2012 , 2014 
 MLS Player of the Month : March 2012 
 Best MLS Player ESPY Award : 2013 
 MLS All @-@ Star : 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 
 Onze d 'Or : 2003 , 2006 
 European Golden Boot : 2003 – 04 , 2004 – 05 
 French Player of the Year : 2000 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 
 IFFHS World 's Top Goal Scorer of the Year : 2003 
 FIFA FIFPro World XI : 2006 
 FIFA World Cup All @-@ Star Team : Germany 2006 
 FIFA Confederations Cup Golden Ball : France 2003 
 FIFA Confederations Cup Golden Shoe : France 2003 
 UEFA European Football Championship Team of the Tournament : 2000 
 FIFA 100 : 2004 
 Time 100 Heroes & Pioneers <unk> : 2007 
 English Football Hall of Fame : 2008 
 Premier League 10 Seasons Awards ( 1992 – 93 – 2001 – 02 ) 
 Overseas Team of the Decade 
 Premier League 20 Seasons Awards 
 Fantasy Team ( Panel choice ) 
 Fantasy Team ( Public choice ) 
 Légion d 'Honneur : 1998 
 UEFA Ultimate Team of the Year ( published 2015 ) 
 UEFA Euro All @-@ time XI ( published 2016 ) 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 10 November 2014 
 <unk> of Henry 's goals in Arsenal 's 7 – 1 win over Blackburn Rovers was given as an own goal to Scott Dann , which took his club figure down to 228 goals . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 23 December 2011 . 
 Note 
 = = Outside football = = 
 = = = Personal and family life = = = 
 Henry married English model Nicole Merry , real name Claire , on 5 July 2003 . The ceremony was held at <unk> Castle , and on 27 May 2005 the couple celebrated the birth of their first child , Téa . Henry dedicated his first goal following Téa 's birth to her by holding his fingers in a " T " shape and kissing them after scoring in a match against Newcastle United . When Henry was still at Arsenal , he also purchased a home in Hampstead , North London . However , shortly after his transfer to Barcelona , it was announced that Henry and his wife would divorce ; the decree nisi was granted in September 2007 . Their separation concluded in December 2008 when Henry paid Merry a divorce settlement close to her requested sum of £ 10 million . Henry is now dating Bosnian model Andrea <unk> . 
 As a fan of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , Henry is often seen with his friend Tony Parker at games when not playing football . Henry stated in an interview that he admires basketball , as it is similar to football in pace and excitement . Having made regular trips to the NBA Finals in the past , he went to watch Parker and the San Antonio Spurs in the 2007 NBA Finals ; and in the 2001 NBA Finals , he went to Philadelphia to help with French television coverage of the Finals as well as to watch Allen Iverson , whom he named as one of his favourite players . 
 = = = Social causes = = = 
 = = = = UNICEF = = = = 
 Henry is a member of the UNICEF @-@ FIFA squad , where together with other professional footballers he appeared in a series of TV spots seen by hundreds of millions of fans around the world during the 2002 and 2006 FIFA World Cups . In these spots , the players promote football as a game that must be played on behalf of children . 
 = = = = Stand Up Speak Up = = = = 
 Having been subjected to racism in the past , Henry is an active spokesperson against racism in football . The most prominent incident of racism against Henry was during a training session with the Spanish national team in 2004 , when a Spanish TV crew caught coach Luis Aragonés referring to Henry as " black shit " to José Antonio Reyes , Henry 's teammate at Arsenal . The incident caused an uproar in the British media , and there were calls for Aragonés to be sacked . Henry and Nike started the Stand Up Speak Up campaign against racism in football as a result of the incident . Subsequently , in 2007 , Time featured him as one of the " Heroes & Pioneers " on the Time 100 list . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 Along with 45 other football players , Henry took part in FIFA 's " Live for Love United " in 2002 . The single was released in tandem with the 2002 FIFA World Cup and its proceeds went towards AIDS research . Henry also supports the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Cystic Fibrosis Trust . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 In 2006 , Henry was valued as the ninth @-@ most commercially marketable footballer in the world , and throughout his career he has signed many endorsements and appeared in commercials . 
 = = = = Renault = = = = 
 Henry featured in the Renault Clio advertisements in which he popularised the term va @-@ va @-@ voom , meaning " life " or " passion . " His romantic interest in the commercial was his then @-@ girlfriend , later his wife ( now divorced ) , Claire Merry . " Va @-@ va @-@ voom " was subsequently added to the Concise Oxford English Dictionary . 
 = = = = Nike = = = = 
 At the beginning of his career , Henry signed with sportswear giant Nike . In the buildup to the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan , Henry featured in Nike 's " Secret Tournament " advertisement , directed by Terry Gilliam , along with 24 superstar football players including Ronaldo , Ronaldinho , Luís Figo , Francesco <unk> , Roberto Carlos and Japanese star Hidetoshi Nakata , with former player Eric Cantona the tournament " referee . " In a 2004 advertisement , Henry pits his wits against football stars such as Claude Makélélé , Edgar Davids and Freddie Ljungberg in locations such as his bedroom and living room , which was partly inspired by Henry himself , who revealed that he always has a football nearby , even at home . In tandem with the 2006 FIFA World Cup , Henry also featured in Nike 's <unk> Bonito campaign , Portuguese for " beautiful game . " 
 = = = = Reebok = = = = 
 Henry 's deal with Nike ended after the 2006 FIFA World Cup , when he signed a deal with Reebok to appear in their " I Am What I Am " campaign . As part of Reebok Entertainment 's " Framed " series , Henry was the star of a half @-@ hour episode that detailed the making of a commercial about Henry directed by Spanish actress Paz Vega . 
 = = = = Puma = = = = 
 In 2011 , Henry switched to Puma boots , first wearing the brand in the 2011 MLS All Star game against Manchester United , before announcing a multi @-@ year partnership for Puma to be his performance and lifestyle footwear and apparel sponsor . His first official game with Puma was in the Emirates Cup against former club Arsenal . 
 = = = = Gillette = = = = 
 In February 2007 , Henry was named as one of the three ambassadors of Gillette 's " Champions Program , " which purported to feature three of the " best @-@ known , most widely respected and successful athletes competing today " and also showcased Roger Federer and Tiger Woods in a series of television commercials . For reasons of recognition , Derek Jeter appears in Henry 's place in the advertisements broadcast in North America . In reaction to the handball controversy following the France @-@ Ireland 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifier , Gillette faced a boycott and accusations of doctoring French versions of their Champions poster , but subsequently released a statement backing Henry . 
 = = = = Pepsi = = = = 
 Henry was part of Pepsi 's " Dare For More " campaign in 2005 , alongside the likes of David Beckham and Ronaldinho . 
 = = = = Beats = = = = 
 Henry starred in a 2014 advert for Beats headphones with other global football stars including Neymar and Luis Suárez , with the theme of " The Game Before the Game " and the players pre @-@ game ritual of listening to music . 
 = = = = Video Games = = = = 
 Henry features in EA Sports ' FIFA video game series ; he appears on the covers of FIFA 2001 to FIFA 2005 , in several different editions . He was also a cover star for the Konami Pro Evolution Soccer video game series , and was featured on the covers of Pro Evolution Soccer 4 to Pro Evolution Soccer 6 . 
 = James the Deacon = 
 James the Deacon ( Latin : <unk> <unk> ; died after 671 ) was a Roman deacon who accompanied Paulinus of York on his mission to Northumbria . He was a member of the Gregorian mission which came to England to Christianize the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism , although when he arrived in England is unknown . After Paulinus left Northumbria , James stayed near Lincoln and continued his missionary efforts , dying sometime after 671 according to the medieval chronicler Bede . 
 = = Life = = 
 James was presumably an Italian , like the other members of the Gregorian mission . The dates of his birth and of his arrival in Britain are unknown . He went with Paulinus to Northumbria accompanying Æthelburh , sister of King Eadbald of Kent , who went to Northumbria to marry King Edwin . Traditionally this event is dated to 625 , but the historian D. P. Kirby argues that the mission to Northumbria probably happened before 619 . 
 Edwin died in battle at Hatfield fighting against Penda of Mercia and <unk> in 633 . Edwin had been the main supporter of Paulinus ' mission , and with his death , a pagan backlash set in . Paulinus fled to Kent , along with Æthelburg and Edwin and Æthelburg 's daughter Eanflæd . James , however , remained behind in Northumbria and continued missionary efforts . James ' efforts were centred in Lincoln , at a church that Paulinus had built there , the remains of which may lie under the church of St. Paul @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Bail . This was in the dependent kingdom of Lindsey , where Paulinus had preached prior to Edwin 's death , and it was reconquered by one of Edwin 's successors , Oswald of Northumbria in the 640s . 
 Bede writes that James lived in a village near Catterick , which " bears his name to this day " . He reports that James undertook missionary work in the area and lived to a great age . During the reign of King Oswiu of Northumbria , James attended the royal court , for he celebrated Easter with Oswiu 's queen , Eanflæd , Edwin 's daughter . Both James and Eanflæd celebrated Easter on the date used by the Roman church , which led to conflicts with Oswiu , who celebrated Easter on the date calculated by the Irish church . These dates did not always agree , and was one of the reasons that Oswiu called the Synod of Whitby in 664 to decide which system of Easter calculation his kingdom would use . 
 James was present at the Synod of Whitby , according to Bede 's account of events there . Bede states that after the synod , and the return of Roman customs , James , as a trained singing master in the Roman and Kentish style , taught many people plainsong or Gregorian chant in the Roman manner . 
 James ' date of death is unknown , but Bede implies that he was still alive during Bede 's lifetime , which presumably means that he died after Bede 's birth , sometime around 671 or 672 . This would mean that he was at least 70 years old at his death . It has been suggested that James was Bede 's informant for the life of Edwin , the works of Paulinus , and perhaps for the Synod of Whitby . The historian Frank Stenton calls James " the one heroic figure in the Roman mission " . This reflects the fact that many of the Gregorian missionaries had a habit of fleeing when things went wrong . 
 After his death , James was venerated as a saint . His feast day is 17 August ( Catholic ) or 11 October ( Anglican ) . 
 = Basiliscus = 
 Basiliscus ( Latin : Flavius Basiliscus Augustus ; Greek : <unk> ) ( d . 476 / 477 ) was Byzantine Emperor from 475 to 476 . A member of the House of Leo , he came to power when Emperor Zeno had been forced out of Constantinople by a revolt . 
 Basiliscus was the brother of Empress Aelia Verina , who was the wife of Emperor Leo I ( 457 – 474 ) . His relationship with the Emperor allowed him to pursue a military career that , after minor initial successes , ended in 468 , when he led the disastrous Roman invasion of Vandal Africa , in one of the largest military operations of Late Antiquity . 
 Basiliscus succeeded in seizing power in 475 , exploiting the unpopularity of Emperor Zeno , the " barbarian " successor to Leo , and a plot organised by Verina that had caused Zeno to flee Constantinople . However , during his short rule , Basiliscus alienated the fundamental support of the Church and the people of Constantinople , promoting the Miaphysite <unk> position in opposition to the Chalcedonian faith . Also , his policy of securing his power through the appointment of loyal men to key roles antagonised many important figures in the imperial court , including his sister Verina . So , when Zeno tried to regain his empire , he found virtually no opposition , triumphantly entering Constantinople , and capturing and killing Basiliscus and his family . 
 The struggle between Basiliscus and Zeno impeded the Eastern Roman Empire 's ability to intervene in the fall of the Western Roman Empire , which happened in early September 476 . When the chieftain of the Heruli , Odoacer , deposed Western Emperor Romulus Augustus , sending the imperial regalia to Constantinople , Zeno had just regained his throne , and he could only appoint Odoacer dux of Italy , thereby ending the Western Roman Empire . 
 = = Origins and early career = = 
 Likely of Balkan origin , Basiliscus was the brother of Aelia Verina , wife of Leo I. It has been argued that Basiliscus was uncle to the chieftain of the Heruli , Odoacer . This link is based on the interpretation of a fragment by John of Antioch ( 209 @.@ 1 ) , which states that Odoacer and Armatus , Basiliscus ' nephew , were brothers . However , not all scholars accept this interpretation , since sources do not say anything about the foreign origin of Basiliscus . It is known that Basiliscus had a wife , Zenonis , and at least one son , Marcus . 
 Basiliscus ' military career started under Leo I. The Emperor conferred upon his brother @-@ in @-@ law the dignities of dux , or commander @-@ in @-@ chief , in Thrace . In this country Basiliscus led a successful military campaign against the Bulgars in 463 . He succeeded Rusticius as magister militum per Thracias ( 464 ) , and had several successes against the Goths and Huns ( 466 or 467 ) . 
 Basiliscus 's value rose in Leo 's consideration . Verina 's intercession in favour of her brother helped Basiliscus ' military and political career , with the conferral of the consulship in 465 and possibly of the rank of patricius . However , his rise was soon to meet a serious reversal . 
 = = Disastrous expedition against the Vandals = = 
 In 468 , Leo chose Basiliscus as leader of the famous military expedition against Carthage . The invasion of the kingdom of the Vandals was one of the greatest military undertakings recorded in the annals of history , a combined amphibious operation with over ten thousand ships and one hundred thousand soldiers . The purpose of the operation was to punish the Vandal king Geiseric for the sacking of Rome in 455 , in which the former capital of the Western Roman Empire had been overwhelmed , and the Empress <unk> Eudoxia ( widow of Emperor Valentinian III ) and her daughters had been taken as hostages . 
 The plan was concerted between Eastern Emperor Leo , Western Emperor Anthemius , and General Marcellinus , who enjoyed independence in Illyricum . Basiliscus was ordered to sail directly to Carthage , while Marcellinus attacked and took Sardinia , and a third army , commanded by Heraclius of Edessa , landed on the Libyan coast east of Carthage , making rapid progress . It appears that the combined forces met in Sicily , whence the three fleets moved at different periods . 
 Ancient and modern historians provided different estimations for the number of ships and troops under the command of Basiliscus , as well as for the expenses of the expedition . Both were enormous ; Nicephorus Gregoras speaks of one hundred thousand ships , the more reliable <unk> says that the fleet that attacked Carthage consisted of eleven hundred and thirteen ships , having each one hundred men on board . The most conservative estimation for expedition expenses is of 64 @,@ 000 pounds of gold , a sum that exceeded a whole year 's revenue . 
 Sardinia and Libya were already conquered by Marcellinus and Heraclius , when Basiliscus cast anchor off the <unk> <unk> , now Cap Bon , opposite Sicily , about forty miles from Carthage . Geiseric requested Basiliscus to allow him five days to draw up the conditions of a peace . During the negotiations , Geiseric gathered his ships and suddenly attacked the Roman fleet . The Vandals had filled many vessels with combustible materials . During the night , these fire ships were propelled against the unguarded and unsuspecting Roman fleet . The Roman commanders tried to rescue some ships from destruction , but these manoeuvres were blocked by the attack of other Vandal vessels . 
 Basiliscus fled in the heat of the battle . One half of the Roman fleet was burned , sunk , or captured , and the other half followed the fugitive Basiliscus . The whole expedition had failed . Heraclius effected his retreat through the desert into Tripolitania , holding the position for two years until recalled ; Marcellinus retired to Sicily , where he was reached by Basiliscus ; the general was , however , assassinated , perhaps at the instigation of Ricimer , by one of his own captains ; and the king of the Vandals expressed his surprise and satisfaction , that the Romans themselves would remove from the world his most formidable antagonists . 
 After returning to Constantinople , Basiliscus hid in the church of Hagia Sophia to escape the wrath of the people and the revenge of the Emperor . By the mediation of Verina , Basiliscus obtained the Imperial pardon , and was punished merely with banishment to Heraclea <unk> , in Thrace . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 In 471 and 472 , Basiliscus helped Leo I to get rid of the Germanic influence in his court , helping in the murder of the Alan Magister militum Aspar . The death of Aspar caused a revolt in Thrace , led by the Thracian Ostrogoth Theodoric Strabo , and Basiliscus was dispatched to suppress the revolt , something he successfully did with the aid of his nephew Armatus . In 474 he received the rank of caput senatus , " first among the senators " . 
 At the death of Leo , Zeno , who was a " barbarian " of Isaurian stock , but at the same time son @-@ in @-@ law of Leo , ascended to Emperor , after a short reign of his own son Leo II ( 474 ) . The " barbarian " origins of the Emperor caused antipathy towards Zeno among the people of Constantinople . Furthermore , the strong Germanic portion of the military , led by Theodoric Strabo , disliked the Isaurian officers that Leo I brought to reduce his dependency on the Ostrogoths . Finally , Zeno alienated his fellow Isaurian general Illus , who was bribed by Basiliscus . In the middle of the conspiracy was Verina , who fomented a popular revolt against the Emperor . The uprising , supported by Theodoric Strabo , Illus and Armatus , was successful , and Verina convinced the Emperor to leave the city . Zeno fled to his native lands , bringing with him some of the Isaurians living in Constantinople , and the Imperial treasury . 
 Basiliscus was then acclaimed as Augustus on 9 January 475 at the Hebdomon palace , by the palace ministers and the Senate . The mob of Constantinople got its revenge against Zeno , killing almost all of the Isaurians left in the city . 
 In the beginning , everything seemed to go well for the new Emperor , who even tried to set up a new dynasty by conferring the title of Augusta upon his wife Aelia Zenonis and creating his son Marcus , Caesar , and later Augustus ; however , due to his mismanagement as emperor , Basiliscus quickly lost most of his supporters . 
 = = Rule = = 
 = = = Corruption and the fire of Constantinople = = = 
 The most urgent problem facing the new Emperor was the scarcity of resources left in the imperial treasury . Basiliscus was forced to raise heavy taxes , and to revert to the practice of auctioning the offices , obviously causing a diffuse discontent in the population . He also extorted money from the church , with the help of the Prefect <unk> , Verina 's long @-@ time favourite . 
 Early in his reign , Constantinople suffered a massive fire , which destroyed houses , churches , and completely incinerated the huge library built by Emperor Julian . The fire was seen as a bad omen for the rule of Basiliscus . 
 = = = Tensions with his collaborators = = = 
 Basiliscus had relied on the support of some major figures of the court in his bid for power . However , he quickly lost most of them . First , Basiliscus alienated his own sister Verina 's support , executing the Magister <unk> Patricius . Patricius was the lover of Verina , and the empress had planned to raise him to the imperial rank and to marry him : the very revolt against Zeno had been organised to make Patricius emperor . Basiliscus , however , had out @-@ witted his sister , and , after the flight of Zeno , had the ministers and the Senate choose him , and not Patricius , as Emperor . Basiliscus ordered the death of Patricius , as the officer was a natural candidate to overthrow the new Emperor ; as a consequence , Verina later intrigued against Basiliscus , because of her lover 's execution . 
 Also , Theodoric Strabo , whose hatred of the Isaurian Zeno had compelled him to support Basiliscus ' revolt , left the new Emperor 's side . Basiliscus had in fact raised his own nephew Armatus , who was rumoured to be also the lover of Basiliscus ' wife , to the rank of magister militum , the same that Strabo held . Finally , the support of Illus was most likely wavering , given the massacre of the Isaurians allowed by Basiliscus . 
 = = = Religious controversies = = = 
 In that time , the Christian faith was shaken by the contrast between Miaphysites and Chalcedonians . These were two opposing <unk> positions ; the Chalcedonians claimed that Christ had both human and divine natures , while the Miaphysites claimed he had only one single united nature . The Council of Chalcedon , convoked by Emperor Marcian in 451 , had ruled out Miaphysitism , with the support of the pope in the West and many bishops in the East . However , the Miaphysite position was still strong : the two Miaphysite Patriarchs Timothy Aelurus of Alexandria and Peter the Fuller of Antioch were deposed . 
 From the beginning of his rule , Basiliscus showed his support for the Miaphysites . Zacharias Scholasticus reports how a group of Egyptian Miaphysite monks , having heard of Emperor Leo 's death , had moved from Alexandria to Constantinople to petition Zeno in favour of Timothy , but at their arrival in the capital , they found the newly elected Basiliscus instead . The Magister <unk> <unk> , the former physician of Basiliscus , was the brother of one of the monks , so the delegation obtained an audience with Basiliscus , and , with the support of <unk> and of the Empress , they convinced Basiliscus to recall from exile the banished Miaphysite Patriarchs . 
 Basiliscus re @-@ instated Timothy Aelurus and Peter the Fuller to their sees , and by persuasion of the former issued ( 9 April 475 ) a circular letter ( <unk> ) to the bishops calling them to accept as valid only the first three ecumenical synods , and reject the Council of Chalcedon . All bishops were to sign the edict . While most of the Eastern bishops accepted the letter , Patriarch Acacius of Constantinople refused , with the support of the population of the city , clearly showing his disdain towards Basiliscus by draping the icons in Hagia Sophia in black . 
 = = Fall and death = = 
