 Liverpool fielded a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation , with the surprise inclusion in the squad being Harry Kewell , who played just behind Milan Baroš , who himself had been picked ahead of Djibril Cissé . The inclusion of Kewell meant Dietmar Hamann was left on the substitutes ' bench and Xabi Alonso and Steven Gerrard started in the centre of midfield . Milan fielded a 4 – 4 – 2 diamond formation , with Hernán Crespo preferred to Jon Dahl Tomasson and Filippo Inzaghi , who was not included in the match day squad . Liverpool lined up in their red home kit , whilst Milan wore a changed strip of all white . Liverpool won the toss and kicked off . 
 Milan scored within the first minute of the match after captain Paolo Maldini volleyed in an Andrea Pirlo free kick that had been conceded by Djimi Traoré . The goal made Maldini the oldest scorer in the history of the competition . Liverpool responded almost immediately ; John Arne Riise , who was picked out by a corner kick from Steven Gerrard , hit a volley from the edge of the penalty box . His shot was cleared only for Gerrard to cross in from the right wing , which Sami Hyypiä headed towards goal producing a save out of Dida . Milan almost extended their lead in the 13th minute , after Crespo 's header was cleared off the goal line by Luis García . A few minutes later , Liverpool made a substitution after Harry Kewell picked up a groin injury ; he was replaced by Vladimír Šmicer . Soon after , Kaká passed through to Andriy Shevchenko who put his shot past Liverpool goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek , but Shevchenko was adjudged to have been in an offside position and the goal did not stand . Shevchenko had another chance to score a few minutes later ; after being played onside by <unk> , his shot was saved by Dudek after he came under pressure from the Liverpool defence . Luis García had two chances to score following Shevchenko 's shot ; the first shot from the edge of the penalty area went well over the crossbar and after he was headed through by Baroš his next shot went wide . Straight after this attack , Crespo went through on goal only to be flagged for offside . Almost immediately after this , Liverpool had a penalty claim turned down after Alessandro Nesta allegedly <unk> . Milan countered and scored ; Kaka dribbled the ball into the Liverpool half and passed to Shevchenko , who passed to Crespo at the far post to score and make it 2 – 0 . Minutes later , Crespo extended Milan 's lead with a chip over Dudek after Kaka provided the assist to make it 3 – 0 . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 At the start of the second half , Liverpool made a substitution with Dietmar Hamann replacing Steve Finnan and also changed to a 3 @-@ 5 @-@ 2 formation to reduce the deficit , with Riise and <unk> on the flanks , Alonso and Hamann as holding midfielders and Gerrard playing as an attacking midfielder . Liverpool had the best chance early on with Xabi Alonso sending an effort from 35 yards ( 32 m ) narrowly past Milan 's right hand post . Two minutes later , Shevchenko forced a save from Dudek with a strong free kick from just outside the Liverpool box . 
 A minute after this , Liverpool scored through captain Gerrard , who connected with Riise 's cross and lofted a header past Dida . Soon afterwards , Liverpool scored again as Šmicer beat Dida with a long @-@ range shot into the bottom left @-@ hand corner to leave Liverpool a goal behind . Three minutes after Šmicer 's goal , Liverpool were awarded a penalty , after Gerrard made a run into the Milan box for Baros ' lay @-@ off and was brought down by Gennaro Gattuso . Xabi Alonso 's penalty was saved , but he scored from the rebound to equalise for Liverpool . Milan and Liverpool had chances to take the lead after this , but Clarence Seedorf and Riise failed to score . 
 Milan almost took the lead in the 70th minute , after Dudek dropped a low cross towards Shevchenko , whose effort was cleared off the line by <unk> . Gerrard then had a chance to score but he sent his shot over the crossbar . About ten minutes later García could not control a pass from Gerrard which led to a Milan attack , Crespo played the ball back to Kaka , whose subsequent shot was blocked by Jamie Carragher . A number of substitutions were made before the end of full @-@ time with Liverpool replacing Milan Baroš with Djibril Cissé , while Milan replaced Hernán Crespo and Clarence Seedorf with Jon Dahl Tomasson and Serginho respectively . Milan had the last chance before full @-@ time but Kaka failed to direct Jaap Stam 's header towards goal , meaning the final would go to extra time for the 13th time in the competition 's history . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 Liverpool kicked off the first half of extra time . Pirlo had a chance in the early stages , but he put his shot over the crossbar . Tomasson came close in the later stages of the first period of extra time , but he could not make contact with the ball . Vladimir Šmicer required treatment for cramp towards the end of the first period , as a number of Liverpool players felt fatigued . Liverpool had the most of the early exchanges after winning two corners , but could not score . Shortly afterwards , Milan make their final substitution replacing Gennaro Gattuso with Rui Costa . The best chance of the second half came near the end when Shevchenko shot at goal . Dudek saved only for it to rebound back out to Shevchenko , who again shot from under 6 yards ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) , which Dudek again saved by pushing the shot over the bar . Liverpool had one last chance at the end of extra time , but John Arne Riise 's free kick shot was blocked and following this the referee signalled the end of extra time , which meant a penalty shoot @-@ out would decide the championship . 
 = = = Penalties = = = 
 Liverpool and Milan had each won their last European Cups after winning penalty shoot @-@ outs , and it was also the second time in three years that the final would be decided this way - previously , in the 2003 all @-@ Italian final at Old Trafford , Milan had defeated Juventus 3 @-@ 2 . Milan were first to take a penalty , but Serginho - who had taken Milan 's first penalty in 2003 and scored - shot over the crossbar after attempts from Jerzy Dudek to distract him , which mimicked Bruce Grobbelaar 's " spaghetti legs " antics during the shootout in the 1984 final against AS Roma . Dietmar Hamann took Liverpool 's first penalty and , despite having a broken toe , he scored to put Liverpool 1 – 0 up . Andrea Pirlo was next for Milan , and his penalty was saved by Dudek who dove to his right . Cisse then scored his penalty to put Liverpool 2 – 0 up . Tomasson scored Milan 's next penalty to make the score 2 – 1 in Liverpool 's favour . Riise was next for Liverpool , but his penalty was saved by Dida . Kaka then scored the subsequent penalty to level the scores at 2 – 2 . Vladimír Šmicer took the next Liverpool penalty , and he scored to give them a one @-@ goal advantage . 
 Shevchenko , who had scored the decisive penalty against Juventus ' Gianluigi Buffon in 2003 , then had to score or Liverpool would win . He hit his penalty straight down the middle of the goal . Dudek went down to his right , but blocked the shot with his left hand . Liverpool thus won the penalty shootout by a score of 3 – 2 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match events = = 
 Liverpool 's triumph marked their fifth European Cup and the first by an English team since Manchester United had defeated Bayern Munich in the 1999 final in Barcelona . By winning the European Cup for a fifth time , Liverpool earned the privilege of wearing a multiple @-@ winner badge and the right to keep the trophy ( under normal competition rules , the winning club can keep the trophy for only 10 months , as they must deliver it to UEFA two months before the next year 's final ) . The 2005 – 06 participants competed for a new identical trophy . The rule to keep the trophy , which had been in effect since the 1968 – 69 season , was changed for the 2009 – 10 season , so that the actual trophy remained with UEFA at all times , thus Liverpool was the fifth and last club to accomplish the feat . 
 Liverpool celebrated their victory by parading the trophy around Liverpool in an open @-@ top double @-@ decker bus the day after the final . They were cheered by approximately 1 million supporters , with an estimated 300 @,@ 000 fans located around St George 's Hall – the final destination of the parade . Business experts estimated that one in five workers took time off following the victory . It was also estimated that Liverpudlians drank around 10 @,@ 000 bottles of champagne after the match , with supermarket chain Sainsbury 's stating : " We 've never seen anything like it . We would usually expect to sell this much champagne at Christmas " . 
 Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez admitted after the match that the manner of his side 's victory had stunned him and he stated : " My problem is that I don 't have words to express the things that I feel at this moment " . Praise for Liverpool also came from outside England , including from Argentine legend Diego Maradona , who said , " Even the Brazil team that won the 1970 World Cup could not have staged a comeback with Milan leading 3 @-@ 0 ... The English club proved that miracles really do exist . I 've now made Liverpool my English team . They showed that football is the most beautiful sport of all . You knew they could defend , but the team showed they could play too and wrote a page in the history books . The match will last forever . The Liverpool supporters didn 't let me go to sleep the night before . There were 10 of them to every three Milan supporters . They showed their unconditional support at half @-@ time when they were losing 3 @-@ 0 and still they didn 't stop singing . " 
 Benítez was also prepared to break up his winning side after the final with a number of players expected to leave the club to make way for new arrivals . One of those leaving was Vladimír Šmicer , who had scored Liverpool 's second goal in Istanbul , and whose contract was known not to be renewed before the final , meaning he entered knowing the final was his last game for the club . 
 Milan were similarly astonished at the manner in which they had lost the final . Manager Carlo Ancelotti said , " We had six minutes of madness in which we threw away the position we had reached until then " . The result compounded Milan 's failure to win Serie A a week before the match . Milan 's vice @-@ president , Adriano Galliani , played down the loss , asserting : " Even if we come second in the league , and second in the Champions League , this is not a disastrous season for us " . Captain Paolo Maldini was less optimistic , stating that the reverse was a " huge disappointment " , but he added that Milan would accept the defeat and " go out with their heads high " . 
 Much discussion after the final centered on the future of Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard who had been linked with a move to rivals Chelsea . Gerrard stated in the immediate aftermath of the victory , " How can I think of leaving Liverpool after a night like this ? " Media reports then quoted Gerrard as saying he wished to leave Liverpool , citing events that had occurred in the month after the Champions League victory as the reason . On 6 July , however , Liverpool chief executive Rick Parry released a statement confirming that Gerrard would remain at the club , and Gerrard signed a new four @-@ year contract on 8 July . 
 Despite winning the competition , Liverpool 's place in next season 's Champions League was still in doubt . Prior to the 2005 Champions League Final , The Football Association had decided on 5 May that only the top four finishers in the Premier League would qualify and Liverpool ended their domestic season in fifth place behind Everton . UEFA initially maintained that each country could only have four Champions League spots and suggested that the FA could nominate Liverpool instead of Everton . Liverpool faced a three @-@ week wait to discover if they would be allowed to defend their title . UEFA came to a decision on 10 June , confirming that both Everton and Liverpool would be able to compete in the Champions League ; however , Liverpool were entered into the first qualifying round , and were given no " country protection " ; meaning they could face another English club at any stage of the competition . The UEFA Executive Committee also amended the regulations for future competitions so that the holders would have the right to defend their title and therefore qualify automatically , though at the expense of the lowest placed team in those countries that had more than one qualifier . 
 As champions , Liverpool faced CSKA Moscow ( winners of the 2005 UEFA Cup Final ) in the 2005 UEFA Super Cup , held on 26 August . Liverpool won the match 3 – 1 after extra time . Liverpool 's victory in Istanbul also meant they qualified for the 2005 FIFA Club World Championship . Liverpool beat Deportivo Saprissa 3 – 0 in the semi @-@ final , and played Copa Libertadores champions São Paulo in the final , losing 1 – 0 . 
 = North West Coastal Highway = 
 North West Coastal Highway is a generally north @-@ south Western Australian highway which links the coastal city of Geraldton with the town of Port Hedland . The 1 @,@ 300 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 808 mi ) road , constructed as a sealed two @-@ lane single carriageway , travels through remote and largely arid landscapes . Carnarvon is the only large settlement on the highway , and is an oasis within the harsh surrounding environment . The entire highway is allocated National Route 1 , part of Australia 's Highway 1 , and parts of the highway are included in tourist routes Batavia Coast Tourist Way and Cossack Tourist Way . Economically , North West Coastal Highway is an important link to the Mid West , Gascoyne and Pilbara regions , supporting the agricultural , pastoral , fishing , and tourism industries , as well as mining and offshore oil and gas production . 
 In Geraldton , the highway begins at a grade separated interchange with Brand Highway and roads providing access to the port and town centre . Two major roads link the North West Coastal Highway to the inland Great Northern Highway : Geraldton – Mount Magnet Road in Geraldton , and Nanutarra Munjina Road at Nanutarra , 845 kilometres ( 525 mi ) further north . Several roads link provide access to coastal towns and attractions , including Shark Bay Road , Onslow Road and Karratha Road . With few towns on the highway , roadhouses are the only settlements for long stretches . North West Coastal Highway ends at Great Northern Highway , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) out from Port Hedland . 
 North West Coastal Highway was created in 1944 from existing roads and tracks through remote pastoral areas . However , it was a hazardous route that could be dusty in the dry season , and boggy or washed away in the wet season . Economic growth and development in northern Western Australia prompted initial improvement efforts in the late 1940s , and a sealed road was constructed from Geraldton to Carnarvon by 1962 . The impact of cyclones and seasonal flooding resulted in a realignment inland of the Carnarvon to Port Hedland section , which was constructed and sealed between 1966 and 1973 , and required thirty new bridges . Various upgrades have been carried out in sections across the length of the highway , including the Geraldton Southern Transport Corridor project which grade @-@ separated the highway 's junction with Brand Highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 North West Coastal Highway is the coastal route through Western Australia 's remote north @-@ west . From the Mid West city of Geraldton , the highway heads north 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) to the small town of Northampton , and another 425 kilometres ( 264 mi ) to Carnarvon , the only large settlement along the route . It continues north @-@ east for 660 kilometres ( 410 mi ) to Roebourne , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) beyond the turnoff to Karratha , and ends 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) further east at Great Northern Highway , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) out from Port Hedland . Apart from Whim Creek , between Roeburn and Port Hedland , roadhouses serving the highway are the only settlements on the long stretches of rangeland expanses between these towns . The highway provides access to tourist destinations including Shark Bay , Coral Bay , and Exmouth . North West Coastal Highway supports the diversified economies of the Mid West and Gascoyne regions , including mining , agriculture , fishing and tourism , transitioning to primarily mining , pastoral stations and offshore oil and gas production in the Pilbara . 
 The entire highway is allocated National Route 1 , part of Australia 's Highway 1 , and parts of the highway are included in the tourist routes Batavia Coast Tourist Way ( Tourist Drive 354 ) and Cossack Tourist Way ( Tourist Drive 351 ) . The vast majority of the highway is a two @-@ lane single carriageway with a speed limit of 110 kilometres per hour ( 70 mph ) , except in and around built up areas where it drops down to 50 , 60 , or 70 kilometres per hour ( 30 , 35 , or 45 mph ) . 
 Main Roads Western Australia monitors traffic volume across the state 's road network , including various locations along North West Coastal Highway . In the 2012 / 13 financial year , the recorded traffic volumes ranged from 13 @,@ 350 vehicles per day west of Geraldton – Mount Magnet Road down to 370 north of Minilya – Exmouth Road . The highest percentage of heavy vehicles was 45 @.@ 5 % , west of Karratha Road . Reports commissioned by the Royal Automobile Club of Western Australia ( RAC ) in 2006 and 2008 gave most of the highway a four @-@ star safety rating out of five , but with a significant proportion rated at a three @-@ star level . The overall highway network was generally rated as three @-@ star or four @-@ star , with around 10 % in 2006 and 5 % in 2008 receiving a two @-@ star rating . 
 = = = Geraldton to Carnarvon = = = 
 North West Coastal Highway commences at a diamond interchange at the northern end of Brand Highway . It heads east from the interchange and curves round to the north , past a traffic @-@ light intersection with Geraldton – Mount Magnet Road . The highway continues north through the Geraldton 's outer suburbs for eight kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) before the landscape transitions to scrubland . Between Geraldton to Carnarvon , the highway passes through remote and dry semi @-@ desert areas . Apart from Northampton , 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) out from Geraldton , the only settlements over this 475 kilometres ( 295 mi ) stretch are four roadhouses . <unk> Roadhouse is 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) south of <unk> Road , the turnoff Kalbarri ; Billabong Roadhouse is 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) south of the Shark Bay turnoff , where the Overlander Roadhouse is located ; and the Wooramel Roadhouse is near the Wooramel River crossing . 
 Carnarvon , at the mouth of the Gascoyne River , is the only large town between Geraldton and Karratha , and is an oasis within an arid region . East of the town , the landscape near the river features banana and other horticultural plantations , while the vegetation in the surrounding region is primarily shrublands . The highway skirts east of Carnarvon , and crosses the Gascoyne River nine kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) north @-@ east of Robinson Street , the main road into the town . 
 = = = Carnarvon to Port Hedland = = = 
 North of <unk> , the highway passes through desert and becomes very flat . Bridges span many ephemeral rivers and creeks , with strands of eucalyptus along their floodplains . The next roadhouse , 135 kilometres ( 84 mi ) beyond <unk> , is the Minilya Roadhouse adjacent to the Minilya River . Seven kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) further on is the turnoff to the North West Cape area , including Cape Range National Park , Coral Bay and Exmouth . 
 North West Coastal Highway reaches the Pilbara after 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) , where it deviates further inland . The highway continues north @-@ east for 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) , crossing the Ashburton River close to Nanutarra Roadhouse . Nearby it intersects Nanutarra Munjina Road , an access road to the mining towns of Tom Price and <unk> , and the ghost town of <unk> . 
 Over the next 260 kilometres ( 160 mi ) , the road crosses the Robe River , near the turnoff to Pannawonica , the Fortescue River , adjacent to the Fortescue River Roadhouse , and Maitland River , before it reaches Karratha Roadhouse . The roadhouse is located at the turnoff to Karratha , the nearby town of Dampier , and the <unk> Peninsula . Forty kilometres ( 25 mi ) east , Roebourne is the gateway to Wickham , Point Samson , and the ghost town of Cossack . The highway continues east 125 kilometres ( 78 mi ) to the locality of Whim Creek , crosses the Yule River after a further 55 kilometres ( 34 mi ) , and finishes 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) beyond at Great Northern Highway , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) south @-@ west of Port Hedland and South Hedland . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Prior to the mid 1920 's , travelling north from Geraldton necessitated going through <unk> , Dairy Creek and Gascoyne Junction . In 1926 , a direct route joining Geraldton and Carnarvon was constructed , shortening the trip by 160 km ( 100 mi ) . At first , this was little more than a rough bush track , at least partly used for extracting sandalwood . As there was often little water along this route , tanks with catchment roofs were built at eight locations along the track . The tanks were named for their distance from Carnarvon , at 40 , 55 , 85 , 110 , 125 , 150 , 180 , 200 miles . These tanks provided a life @-@ saving function but when the road was later sealed , they became less important and were gradually removed except for Number 8 tank . Number 8 tank is still used by travellers and marks a point 100 mi ( 200 km ) from Geraldton , 200 mi ( 300 km ) from Carnarvon . 
 Western Australia 's Nomenclature Advisory Committee proposed in October 1940 that a highway name be used to describe the main route from Midland to Geraldton , and extending to areas further north . The suggested name was Great Northern Highway , following on from the naming of the Great Eastern and Great Southern highways . By July 1941 , the committee 's proposal had expanded to three highway names for the roads in the state 's northern areas : Great Northern Highway for the Midland Junction to Wyndham road , Geraldton Highway for Walebing – <unk> – Geraldton route , and North West Coastal Highway for " the road from Geraldton to De Grey , via Northampton , Galena , Carnarvon , <unk> , Winning Pool , <unk> , <unk> , Onslow , <unk> , Mardie , Karratha , Roebourne , Whim Creek , Mundabullangana and Port Hedland " . The proposal was well received by the local municipal councils and road boards . 
 The name North West Coastal Highway was gazetted on 21 April 1944 , under section 10 of the Land Act , 1933 – 1939 . However , the highway was mostly a series of tracks through remote pastoral areas , with the sealed road ending just past Northampton , approximately 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) north of Geraldton . Driving was difficult and hazardous all year round . The road was very dusty in the dry season , and some sections of the road were effectively impassable sand , while other sections contained limestone outcrops that damaged tyres . During the wet season , when rivers flooded , sections of road were essentially bogs , or worse still , were completely washed away . 
 Economic growth and development in Western Australia 's northern regions in the 1940s prompted the state to quadruple road funding between 1946 and 1952 . Two " gangs " of workers were allocated to a 900 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) length of North West Coastal Highway . Given the vast distance the highway travelled , and destructive cyclones in the Pilbara and Gascoyne that could destroy multiple weeks worth of work , the overall improvement was relatively insignificant . Over time , though , the road was improved . 
 = = = Sealing = = = 
 In the late 1950s a significant project was undertaken to seal the highway between Geraldton and Carnarvon . The sealed road had progressed northwards in the preceding years , but only by approximately eight to ten miles ( 13 to 16 km ) each year . The rate of work increased rapidly , and by 1960 , a 100 @-@ mile ( 160 km ) stretch extending south from Carnarvon had been sealed . By the middle of that year , the sealing reached 135 miles ( 217 km ) beyond Geraldton and came 114 miles ( 183 km ) south of Carnarvon , with a 76 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 122 km ) gap . The project was completed in 1962 when the two sections converged at the 455 @-@ mile peg , and was officially opened on 1 September . Completion of the sealed road resulted in increased tourist traffic , and a longer tourist season . 
 A large cyclone swept through the Carnarvon area February 1961 , causing much devastation to the road network . Many floodways were completely washed away , and North West Coastal Highway was immersed in flood water for 60 miles ( 97 km ) either side of Onslow . Carnarvon was cut off from general traffic for two weeks , and the damage to the roads in the region took months to repair . Approval was given to realign the road further inland , where it would be less susceptible to flooding . 
 By the 1960s North West Coastal Highway had become a crucial connection for development in the Pilbara – including the pastoral industry , tourism , and the emergence of iron ore mining . In 1966 the traffic volume was up to 125 vehicles per day , and the unsealed road needed constant maintenance to cope with this demand . There were also frequent delays due to flooding . In 1966 the state government announced that the sealed road would be extended to Port Hedland , over a nine @-@ year period . Substantial portions of the highway would also be relocated above the flood plain . The new alignment on higher ground would be 50 miles ( 80 km ) shorter , and would make bridging rivers easier . 
 Work started at Carnarvon , and 190 miles ( 310 km ) had been completed by 1969 . Locally available material was used to great extent during construction , with techniques adjusted based on what was available ; however , some resources were transported across vast distances . Water , scarce in the dry climate of the North West , was conveyed up to 15 miles ( 24 km ) , aggregate up to 100 miles ( 160 km ) , and bitumen up to 850 miles ( 1 @,@ 370 km ) . The project required thirty bridges , over riverbeds that could be dry all year , but might receive as much as 1 @,@ 300 millimetres ( 51 in ) of rainfall in three months , as had been the case at Onslow in 1961 . The bridges were designed to withstand twenty @-@ year floods , but more severe possibilities were anticipated – the approaches were built lower than the bridge decks , so that excess water would flow around the bridges , rather than over them . 
 The sealing of North West Coastal Highway was nearing completion in 1973 ; additional resources provided to complete the work resulted in the final section , Port Hedland to Roeburn , being finished in only five months . An official opening ceremony was held at South Hedland on 6 December 1974 , with the road pronounced open by Premier Charles Court . The final cost of the project was approximately $ 31 million , substantially more than the initial estimate of $ 17 million . This was mainly due to two factors : increased construction standards , and inflation , which rose from 4 % to 13 % between 1970 and 1974 . 
 = = = Further improvements = = = 
 In the 1980s the highway 's flood resistance was improved with the construction of new , higher @-@ level bridges to replace lower crossing . Galena Bridge over the Murchison River opened on 9 December 1983 , and a new bridge over the Harding River near Roeburn was opened on 22 March 1985 . In the late 1980s the various sections of road across Western Australia 's road network were upgraded or reconstructed , with the worst segments prioritised . In August 1988 , work on upgrading five and a half kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) of North West Coastal Highway was completed , the final section between Geraldton and Carnarvon to have been brought up to standard . In the following two years , segments with a combined length of 241 kilometres ( 150 mi ) were resealed , and 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) was widened from 6 @.@ 2 to 7 metres ( 20 to 23 ft ) , with a one @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) sealed shoulder on each side . 
 The northernmost section of highway , from Great Northern Highway to Port Hedland , was made part of Great Northern Highway in early 1996 . Over a ten @-@ year period from 1996 to 2006 , numerous improvements were made to the highway , with sections widened , reconstructed , and realigned . Intersections and stretches through townsites were also redesigned , existing bridges were strengthened , and new bridges replaced older bridges or floodways . Additional work was necessary to repair damage from natural events . Sections washed away by floods in January 2003 were rebuilt , and opened in October of that year , and repairs to the damage from Cyclone Monty in March 2004 were completed that November . 
 The biggest individual project in this period , across all of rural Western Australia , was Stage 1 of the Geraldton Southern Transport Corridor . The project , constructed between March 2004 and December 2005 at a cost of $ 92 @.@ 5 million , involved the relocation of railway tracks , five kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) worth of road works , and grade separation of roads . North West Coastal Highway 's southern terminus at Brand Highway was upgraded from a roundabout to an interchange , and an overpass was built for <unk> Street to cross North West Coastal Highway . The highway was also made into a dual carriageway in the vicinity of the interchange . Stage 2 of the project , constructed between December 2008 and December 2009 , provided a single carriageway connection from a traffic light @-@ controlled intersection on the highway to Geraldton – Mount Magnet Road , with access to Geraldton Airport . 
 In 2013 work began on a project to seal the highway 's shoulders from <unk> River at <unk> to the Onslow turn @-@ off ; it is expected to be completed by mid @-@ 2015 . Further work to widen the highway between Minilya and <unk> , including replacing two floodways with bridges , is expected to be completed by the end of 2017 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = = Coordinates = = = 
 = Hunyadi family = 
 The Hunyadi family was one of the most powerful noble families in the Kingdom of Hungary during the 15th century . A member of the family , Matthias Corvinus , was King of Hungary from 1458 until 1490 , King of Bohemia ( ruling in Moravia , Lower Lusatia , Upper Lusatia , and Silesia ) from 1469 until 1490 , and Duke of Austria from 1487 until 1490 . His illegitimate son , John Corvinus , ruled the Duchy of Troppau from 1485 until 1501 , and five further Silesian duchies , including Bytom , Głubczyce , <unk> , Racibórz , and Tost , from 1485 until 1490 . The Hunyadi coat @-@ of @-@ arms depicted a raven with a golden ring in its beak . 
 The founder of the family , Voyk , received the eponymous Hunyad Castle ( in present @-@ day Hunedoara , Romania ) from Sigismund , King of Hungary , in 1409 . His ethnicity is the subject of scholarly debate . Some modern historians describe him as a Vlach , or Romanian , knez or boyar , from either Wallachia or Transylvania . Others describe him as a Cuman or Slav nobleman . According to contemporaneous accounts , Voyk moved from Wallachia to Transylvania . Voyk 's oldest son , John Hunyadi , was often mentioned as a " Vlach " by his contemporaries . 
 John Hunyadi , a talented military commander , became the first member of the family to acquire the status of " true baron of the realm " . He was appointed Ban of Severin in 1439 , and Voivode of Transylvania in 1441 . He was also granted the title Perpetual Count of Beszterce in 1452 , thus receiving the first hereditary title created in the Kingdom of Hungary . At his death , John Hunyadi held many lands throughout the Kingdom . John Hunyadi 's fame and fortune led the election of his son , Matthias Corvinus , as King of Hungary in 1458 . Matthias ruled Moravia , Silesia , Austria , and other neighbouring regions . He attempted to secure hereditary line of succession for his son , John Corvinus . This did not happen , however , and John was only able to retain the Duchy of <unk> , along with some other family domains in Hungary , after Matthias died in 1490 . The last male member of the family , Christopher Corvinus , the only son of John , died at the age of six in 1505 . His sister Elisabeth died during childhood . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The family was given its land by Sigismund , King of Hungary , on 18 October 1409 . On that day , Sigismund granted Hunyad Castle and its demesne to Voyk and four of his kinsmen . In addition to Voyk , the grant lists his two brothers , <unk> and Radol , their cousin or uncle also named Radol , and Voyk 's son , John , the future Regent of Hungary . The granted said that Voyk 's father was named " Serbe " , but did not say anything further about the origins of the family . 
 Voyk 's son , John Hunyadi , bore the nickname " Olah " , meaning " Vlach " , in his youth , which implied that he was of Romanian stock . The court historian of Voyk 's grandson King Matthias Corvinus , Antonio Bonfini , explicitly stated that John had been " born to a Vlach father " . Holy Roman Emperor Frederick III likewise knew that King Matthias had been " born to a Vlach father " , and a Venetian man , Sebastiano <unk> , referred to the Romanians as King Matthias 's people . 
 Historians of the 15th and 16th centuries , with perspectives that were either against or in favour of the family , wrote differing reports of the family 's status before King Sigismund 's grant . Jan Długosz described John Hunyadi as " a man of unknown origin " , and he is likewise mentioned as " a Vlach by birth , not highly born " by Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini . On the other hand , Johannes de Thurocz said that John Hunyadi " was descended from a noble and renowned race of Wallachia " . 
 Johannes de Thurocz also wrote that King Sigismund , fascinated by Voyk 's fame , " took him away from Wallachia to his own realm and settled him there " , suggesting that Voyk moved from his Wallachian homeland to the Kingdom of Hungary . The late 15th century historian Philippe de Commines referred to Voyk 's son John as the " White Knight of Wallachia " . In accordance with these sources , Pál Engel , András <unk> , and other contemporary historians have written that the Hunyadi family descended from Wallachian boyars ( noblemen ) . 
 According to another view on the family 's origins , which is championed by historians Camil <unk> and Ion @-@ Aurel Pop , Voyk did not migrate from Wallachia , but was born in a family of Romanian noble knezes from the region of Hátszeg , or Hunyad . They say that Voyk 's grandfather could have been a man named " <unk> " , mentioned in a royal charter from 1360 , and who fathered a son named Serbe ( the name of Voyk 's father ) . According to the charter , <unk> and Serbe together established two villages in the region of Hátszeg . Historian Dezső <unk> offers a third view of the Hunyadis ' ancestry . He said that Voyk was of Romanianized Cuman stock , one of the Wallachian boyars . He attributes Cuman and Tatar ancestry to the Wallachian boyars . Another historian , Miklós Molnár , accepts the Wallachian origin of the family , but also represents a fourth perspective on the origins of the family . He said that they may well have been of Slavic descent . Neither Paul <unk> nor András <unk> @-@ <unk> excluded the possibility of the Hunyadis being of Slavic origin . 
 John Hunyadi 's rapid advance , which astonished his contemporaries , and gave rise to legends about his origins . According to one of these stories , recorded in detail by the 16th @-@ century historian Gáspár Heltai , John Hunyadi was the illegitimate son of King Sigismund with a woman named Elizabeth , who was the daughter of a " rich boyar " from <unk> in Hunyad County . Antonio Bonfini , on the other hand , wrote that John Hunyadi 's mother was an unnamed Greek woman who was related to the Byzantine Emperors . 
 Further legends emerged about the purported Romanian origin of the family . Antonio Bonfini wrote that John Hunyadi " traced his kin to the Roman family of the <unk> " . This story is connected to the Hunyadis ' coat @-@ of @-@ arms , which depicts a raven , <unk> in Latin , with a golden ring in its beak . Coins minted for Prince Vladislav I of Wallachia in 1365 depict a raven @-@ like bird . Based on this similarity , Zsuzsa Teke and some other historians did not exclude the possibility that the Hunyadis were related to the <unk> , the ruling dynasty of Wallachia . Another historian , Péter E. Kovács , wrote that that theory needed further verification . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 = = = Voyk Hunyadi = = = 
 Voyk was born in Wallachia , according to the nearly contemporaneous historians Johannes de Thurocz and Gáspár Heltai . Voyk had been serving as a " court knight " in the royal court when he received the demesne of Hunyad from King Sigismund , suggesting that he was descended from a prominent Wallachian family . Modern historian , <unk> , wrote that Voyk most probably joined Sigismund in 1395 . In this year , Sigismund invaded Wallachia and restored his vassal , Mircea the Old to the princely throne . 
 He was last mentioned in a royal charter in 1414 . Voyk died before 12 February 1419 . On this day , a charter confirming the grant of 1409 was issued for Voyk 's brother , Radol , and for Voyk 's three sons : John the Elder , John the Younger , and Voyk . 
 = = = John Hunyadi , Sr. = = = 
 Voyk 's oldest son , John Hunyadi was born between about 1405 and 1407 . In his youth , he served in the court of George Csáky , Filippo Scolari , and King Sigismund 's other warlike barons . He married Elizabeth Szilágyi around 1429 . Her father owned properties in Bodrog County . 
 John Hunyadi developed his military skills during his journeys in Italy and Bohemia in Sigismund 's entourage in the early 1430s . He and his younger brother ( who was his namesake ) were jointly appointed Ban of Szörény ( present @-@ day <unk> @-@ Turnu Severin , Romania ) in 1439 by Sigismund 's successor , King Albert . With this appointment , they acquired the status of " true barons " . 
 The senior John Hunyadi became Voivode of Transylvania and Count of the Székelys in 1441 , with responsibility for the defense of the southern borders of Hungary against Ottoman raids . He defeated the Ottomans in several battles during his " long campaign " in the Balkan Peninsula in 1443 . The Estates of the realm elected him governor for the period of King Ladislaus V of Hungary 's minority in 1446 . King Ladislaus bestowed the title of Perpetual Count of Beszterce ( present @-@ day Bistrița , Romania ) upon John Hunyadi after he resigned of the governorship in 1452 . This was the first example of a grant of a hereditary title in the Kingdom of Hungary . John Hunyadi had by that time become the richest landowner in the Kingdom of Hungary , who held about 25 fortresses , 30 towns and more than 1 @,@ 000 villages . He died on 11 August 1456 , shortly after his greatest victory over the Ottomans at the Siege of Belgrade . 
 = = = John Hunyadi , Jr . = = = 
 John the Younger was the youngest of Voyk 's two sons that shared the name John , and was first mentioned in a charter issued to four members of his family on 12 February 1419 . King Albert of Hungary appointed him Ban of Szörény together with his brother , John the Elder , in 1439 . He died fighting against the Ottomans in 1441 . His brother wrote of him as " the valiant of the valiant " , showing that John the Younger was regarded a brave soldier . 
 = = = Ladislaus Hunyadi = = = 
 Ladislaus Hunyadi was the older of the two sons of John Hunyadi the elder by Elizabeth Szilágyi . He was born around 1432 . At the age of 20 , he was appointed ispán , or count , of Pozsony County , which made him a " true baron " . He became Ban of Croatia in 1453 and master of the horse in 1456 . 
 With his father 's death , Ladislaus inherited an enormous domain in 1456 . The ambitious Ladislaus had his father 's main opponent , Ulrich II , Count of Celje , captured and murdered on 9 November . The King , who promised amnesty to Ladislaus under duress , had him arrested in next year . Ladislaus was sentenced to death for high treason . He was executed on 16 March 1457 . 
 = = = Matthias Corvinus = = = 
 Matthias , the younger son of John Hunyadi the elder and Elizabeth Szilágyi , was born on 23 February 1443 . He was arrested upon the orders of King Ladislaus V of Hungary on 14 March 1457 , together with his elder brother Ladislaus . Matthias 's brother was executed two days after having been arrested . Fearing a revolt , the King fled to Prague and took Matthias with him . 
 The childless Ladislaus V died on 23 November 1457 . A Diet was convened to elect the new monarch . Matthias ' maternal uncle , Michael Szilágyi , arrived with more than 10 @,@ 000 armed noblemen under his command , and the Diet proclaimed Matthias king on 24 January 1458 . Matthias returned from Prague , but was only crowned with the Holy Crown of Hungary on 29 March 1464 , because he had spent the previous years with fighting against his opponents . 
 Urged by Pope Paul II , Matthias led a crusade against the Czech Hussites and occupied great parts of Moravia and Silesia in 1468 . The Catholic Estates of Moravia proclaimed him King of Bohemia on 3 May 1469 . Matthias ' reign was also recognized in Lusatia and Silesia , but Bohemia proper remained under the rule of his opponents , Kings George of Poděbrady ( till 1471 ) and Vladislaus II Jagiellon . Through a series of wars , Matthias occupied Lower Austria and Styria between 1480 and 1487 . He officially adopted the title of Duke of Austria in 1487 . 
 Matthias married his first wife , Catherine of Poděbrady , in 1461 . She died in childbirth in 1464 . His second wife , Beatrice of Naples , whom he married in 1476 , was infertile . In the last decade of his life , Matthias ensured the succession of his illegitimate son , John Corvinus , to the throne of Hungary . Matthias died on 6 April 1490 . 
 = = = John Corvinus = = = 
 John Corvinus was the illegitimate son of King Matthias and his mistress , Barbara <unk> . John Corvinus was born on 2 April 1473 . Matthias recognized in public that John is his son and granted him the title of Duke of <unk> ( present @-@ day <unk> , Slovakia ) in 1481 . John Corvinus received a number of land grants from his father in the subsequent years . King Matthias granted him the Duchy of Troppau and five further Silesian duchies — <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Tost — in 1485 . 
 King Matthias ' all attempts to secure his son 's succession to the throne proved to be useless shortly after his death . The prelates and the barons elected Vladislaus II Jagiellon king on 15 July 1490 . He retained his domains and the Duchy of Troppau . The new monarch bestowed the title of Duke of Slavonia upon him , but he renounced of it in 1495 . He also renounced of the Duchy of Troppau in 1501 . 
 John Corvinus married Beatrice de <unk> in 1496 . She gave birth to two children , Elizabeth and Christopher . John Corvinus died on 12 October 1504 . His son died at the age of six , his daughter at the age of twelve . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 The following family tree depicts the known members of the Hunyadi family : 
 ( * 
 = born ; † = 
 died ; ∞ 
 = wife or husband ; b . = 
 before ; c . 
 = in about ; m . = 
 mentioned ) 
 = Literary Hall = 
 Literary Hall is a mid @-@ 19th @-@ century brick library building and museum in Romney , West Virginia . It is located at the intersection of North High Street ( West Virginia Route 28 ) and West Main Street ( U.S. Route 50 ) . Literary Hall was constructed between 1869 and 1870 by the Romney Literary Society . 
 Founded in 1819 , the Romney Literary Society was the first literary organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . In 1846 , the society constructed a building which housed the Romney Classical Institute and its library . The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute both flourished and continued to grow in importance and influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . During the war , the contents of the society 's library were plundered by Union Army forces , and many of its 3 @,@ 000 volumes were either scattered or destroyed . After a reorganization in 1869 , the society commenced construction of the present Literary Hall in downtown Romney . It transferred ownership of its Romney Classical Institute campus to the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind in 1870 and in that year completed Literary Hall , where the society reconstituted its library collection and revived its literary activities . 
 The Romney Literary Society 's last meeting was held at Literary Hall in 1886 . From 1886 to 1973 the building was used as a meeting space by the Clinton Lodge of Ancient Free and Accepted Masons and the Order of the Eastern Star . In 1973 , the building was purchased by prominent Romney lawyer Ralph Haines , who used it as a law office and museum . From 1937 to the early 1940s the building also housed a community library . Literary Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1979 . 
 Literary Hall 's basic design incorporates Federal and Greek Revival styles along with Victorian details . Architectural historian Michael J. Pauley described Literary Hall as " one of Romney 's and Hampshire County 's most notable landmarks , and one in which this community is justifiably proud " . 
 = = Geography and setting = = 
 Literary Hall is located in the center of downtown Romney , West Virginia , at the intersection of North High Street ( West Virginia Route 28 ) and West Main Street ( U.S. Route 50 ) on a city lot less than one acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) in size . The Hampshire County Courthouse is immediately to its east across North High Street and the Romney First United Methodist Church is situated immediately to the building 's north . The Old National Building is located to the immediate south of Literary Hall across West Main Street . Literary Hall stands at an elevation of 820 @.@ 3 feet ( 250 @.@ 0 m ) above sea level . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The land upon which Literary Hall was established was originally part of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 20 @,@ 000 km2 ) land grant that Charles II of England awarded to seven of his supporters in 1649 and renewed by an official patent in 1688 . One of these seven supporters , Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper , acquired the entire area in 1681 ; his grandson , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , inherited it in 1719 . 
 Literary Hall was built upon a land lot designated " Lot 56 " to the immediate west of the public square of Romney . In 1790 , the trustees of the Town of Romney commissioned John Mitchel to draft a cadastral survey map of Romney . Prior to this survey , Lord Fairfax had commissioned a similar cadastral survey of Romney sometime before the town 's incorporation on December 23 , 1762 . On June 30 , 1790 , Mitchel submitted to the trustees a " Plan of the Town of Romney " , which divided the town into 100 land lots of equal size , with four lots adjacent to the courthouse comprising the public square . 
 = = = Romney Literary Society = = = 
 The Romney Literary Society , which built Literary Hall between 1869 and 1870 , was organized by nine prominent men in Romney on January 30 , 1819 . With its establishment in 1819 , the Romney Literary Society became the first literary organization of its kind in the present @-@ day state of West Virginia , and one of the first in the United States . On February 4 , 1819 , the constitution of the society was adopted , which provided that the organization should be known as the " Polemic Society of Romney " . The society founded its library in 1819 with the acquisition of two books , and by 1861 the society 's humble library had grown to contain approximately 3 @,@ 000 volumes , consisting of books on literature , science , history and art . 
 The Romney Literary Society commenced a movement to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community " . As a result of this initiative , the teaching of the classics was introduced into the curriculum of Romney Academy in 1820 , thus making the institution the first school of higher education in the Eastern Panhandle . In 1846 , the society constructed a new building to house the Romney Classical Institute and its library , both of which fell under the society 's supervision . 
 The Romney Literary Society and the Romney Classical Institute both flourished and continued to grow in importance and influence until the onset of the American Civil War in 1861 . During the war , many members fought for the Confederate States Army forces and were killed during the conflict . The contents of the society 's library were plundered by Union Army forces and many of its 3 @,@ 000 volumes were either scattered or destroyed . Following the war 's end , only 400 of those volumes could be recovered , with just 200 remaining on the library 's shelves . 
 The Romney Literary Society reorganized on May 15 , 1869 . Following the reorganization , the society built Literary Hall between 1869 and 1870 while also undertaking an initiative to bring the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind to its old Romney Classical Institute campus . The construction of Literary Hall was part of the society 's effort to revive the organization and reassemble its original library . The society set about recovering original volumes and purchasing new ones , and the library reopened with 700 volumes . For a period of ten years between 1870 and 1880 , much of Romney 's intellectual life centered on Literary Hall . As older members died , interest in the society began to dwindle . The society 's meetings were held less frequently , and its last recorded meeting was held on February 15 , 1886 . 
 = = = Clinton Lodge = = = 
 The Clinton Lodge of Ancient Free and Accepted Masons was the second organization to utilize Literary Hall as a meeting place . The Clinton Lodge was the first Masonic lodge to be chartered in Hampshire County and is among the earliest Masonic lodges to be established in present @-@ day West Virginia . It was chartered by the Grand Lodge of Virginia on December 13 , 1825 . The lodge underwent four periods of hiatus : first , between 1838 and December 15 , 1846 ; a second time between 1855 and its rechartering on July 3 , 1857 ; a third time between 1861 and December 11 , 1867 , during the American Civil War and Reconstruction ; and a fourth time between November 29 , 1881 , and November 12 , 1890 , when it was again reactivated . 
 Following the completion of Literary Hall in 1870 , the Clinton Lodge Masons regularly utilized the first floor of the building as a meeting space , while the Romney Literary Society maintained its use of the second floor as a library . Between its various periods of dormancy , the Clinton Lodge and the associated Order of the Eastern Star , which was organized in July 1919 , utilized Literary Hall as a meeting space , and following the Romney Literary Society 's disestablishment , the Masons and Eastern Star continued their use of the building . In 1973 , prominent Romney lawyer Ralph Haines purchased Literary Hall from the Clinton Lodge Masons and provided the lodge with a land lot for the construction of a new Masonic Temple at the corner of Washington and Center Streets in Romney . Following his purchase of Literary Hall , Haines used the historic building as a law office building and private museum . Literary Hall was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 29 , 1979 . 
 = = = Hampshire County Public Library = = = 
 The building again served as a library in March 1937 , when Romney 's community library was relocated to the first floor of Literary Hall from its previous facility in the basement of the Hampshire County Courthouse . The library had been established on April 11 , 1935 , as a project by the American Legion Auxiliary and was housed in a room of the courthouse basement where it was staffed by volunteers and open from 14 : 00 to 16 : 00 on Saturday afternoons . When the library 's collection of both purchased and donated books outgrew its space in the courthouse basement , the Clinton Lodge Masons granted permission to the library to house its collection at Literary Hall in 1937 . Following its move to Literary Hall , the library expanded its hours , and expanded them again , to five afternoons a week , through the assistance of the National Youth Administration and the Works Progress Administration . 
 In January 1942 , a meeting was held for the purpose of establishing a more extensive library service . Later that month , on January 29 , a charter was issued by West Virginia Secretary of State William Smith O 'Brien for the creation of the non @-@ profit Hampshire County Library Association . Following its incorporation , the library was relocated from Literary Hall to two rear adjoining rooms on the second story of the Hampshire County Courthouse . The association continued to house its library collection in the courthouse until 1967 , when the new Hampshire County Public Library building at 153 West Main Street was formally dedicated on September 28 , 1967 . The library had been built on land donated by sisters Kate and Mary Davis , who had been engaged in the restoration of Literary Hall and whose father , Charles Maurice Davis , had been a member of both the Romney Literary Society and the Clinton Lodge Masons , which had both held meetings in the building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The interior and exterior of Literary Hall remain largely intact . At two stories , the building is tall in its proportion and incorporates elements from both early American and Victorian styles , which were common in academic buildings built during this period . 
 Architectural historian S. Allen Chambers described Literary Hall as an anomaly because the basic design and fenestration patterns , which invoke early Federal and Greek Revival design elements , are adorned with details more characteristic of the Victorian era . 
 According to architectural historian Michael J. Pauley of the West Virginia Department of Culture and History 's Historic Preservation Unit , Literary Hall 's unique structural features make the building " one of Romney 's and Hampshire County 's most notable landmarks , and one in which this community is justifiably proud " . Pauley further averred that the building is " highly representative of the development of education and literature in the early United States " . In describing its impact on Romney 's streetscape , Chambers described Literary Hall as " adding distinction to Romney 's major street intersection " . Chambers also noted the building 's resemblance and " strong architectural kinship " to the Romney Presbyterian Church . 
 Literary Hall is a two @-@ story red brick structure , rectangular in plan , and topped with a gable roof . The first floor of Literary Hall consists of four rooms , and the second story is a single large ballroom . Fused with symmetrical elements evoking Federal and Greek Revival architectural styles are exterior decorative moldings and brick <unk> in the Victorian style . 
 The main façade ( south elevation ) of Literary Hall is divided into three bays , and its west and east elevations are divided into five bays . Each of the building 's bays consists of a double @-@ hung sash wooden window , with nine panes of glass within each sash . The windows are symmetrically placed within recessed brick panels that are defined at the first and second stories of the building with elementary brick ribs , or pseudo @-@ pilasters , that form the outer surface of the building 's exterior walls and provide separation of the three bays of the main façade and the five bays of the west and east elevations . The windows are framed by white wooden louvered window shutters . The building 's brick is laid in an American bond pattern , with five courses of stretchers between every course of headers . 
 The main façade is topped by a simple wooden raking cornice that surmounts an ornamental corbel brick pendant . A semicircular fanlight , or lunette , is located in the center of the gable of the building 's main façade , providing lighting to the building 's attic . Chambers described this window as the most antiquated of the building 's architectural elements and may have been based on the fanlight of the county 's earlier courthouse built in 1833 , which was located to the building 's east . 
 Each of the main façade 's first- and second @-@ story windows and the entrance are adorned with white wooden label moldings . The main entrance is composed of a tall double wooden entrance door , with its original handle and locks . Each door consists of four vertical wooden panels . A rectangular transom light of four vertical glass panels tops the main entryway 's double wooden doors . Outside the entryway is a spacious brick stoop that is accessed by a cement walkway from West Main Street . Its brick steps leading up to the stoop were last restored in the late 1970s . 
 Literary Hall is flanked by two interior side chimneys , between the second and third bays of the west and east elevations of the building . The building rests on a sandstone , ashlar block foundation . Its gable roof is sheathed with standing seam tin sheeting . 
 = Raid on Saint @-@ Paul = 
 The Raid on Saint @-@ Paul was an amphibious operation conducted by a combined British Army , Royal Navy and Royal Marines force against the fortified French port of Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte ( now known as Réunion ) during the Napoleonic Wars . The operation was launched on 20 September 1809 as both a precursor to a future full @-@ scale invasion of Île Bonaparte and in order to capture the French frigate Caroline and the East Indiamen she had seized in the Action of 31 May 1809 which were sheltering in the harbour . The operation was a complete success , with British storming parties capturing the batteries overlooking the port , which allowed a naval squadron under Commodore Josias Rowley to enter the bay and capture the shipping in the harbour . 
 The French defenders of the town , despite initially resisting the attack , were unable to prevent the seizure of the port 's defensive fortifications . The British force later withdrew under pressure from the main garrison of the island , burning warehouses containing over £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of silk captured from British merchant ships . Ultimately the French were unable to effectively oppose the invasion , the island 's governor General Des Bruslys retreating to Saint @-@ Denis rather than engage the British and later committing suicide . The transportation of forces from the recently captured island of Rodriguez , the co @-@ ordination of land and naval forces and the failure of the French defenders to co @-@ ordinate an effective response were all features of the subsequent invasion and capture of Île Bonaparte in July 1810 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French Indian Ocean territories of Île de France and Île Bonaparte were heavily fortified island bases from which French frigates were able to launch raids against British trade routes across the Indian Ocean during the Napoleonic Wars . In late 1808 , a squadron of four frigates departed France for the region under Commodore Jacques Hamelin with orders to prey on the convoys of East Indiamen that regularly crossed the Indian Ocean . During the late spring of 1809 , these frigates dispersed into the Bay of Bengal , attacking British shipping and coastal harbours around the rim of the Eastern Indian Ocean . The Royal Navy was also preparing an operation in the region , a staggered campaign intended to blockade , isolate and subsequently capture both Île de France and Île Bonaparte , eliminating the final French territories and bases east of Africa . 
 To conduct the British operation , Admiral Albemarle Bertie at the Cape of Good Hope organised a squadron under Commodore Josias Rowley to blockade the islands , capture any French shipping that presented itself and begin preparations for the invasions . Rowley was equipped with the antiquated ship of the line HMS Raisonnable and a small squadron of frigates and smaller ships , later reinforced with a force of soldiers from Madras in British India , with which he seized the nearby island of Rodriguez to use as a raiding base . 
 On 14 August , one of Rowley 's ships , the 18 @-@ gun sloop HMS Otter , attacked a French brig at Rivière Noire District on Île de France . Although the attack was ultimately unsuccessful , Otter 's captain Nesbit Willoughby and his landing party were able to break into and out of the harbour without severe difficulties . This prompted Rowley to consider a larger scale operation against a more heavily fortified French position . Two months earlier , in the Action of 31 May 1809 , the French frigate Caroline had captured two East Indiamen , the Streatham and Europe in the Bay of Bengal . The French captain , Jean @-@ Baptiste @-@ Henri Feretier , led his prizes back to the French @-@ held islands , arriving off Île de France on 22 July . Feretier was prevented from attempting to reach Port Louis by Rowley 's blockading squadron and instead put his ships into Saint @-@ Paul on Île Bonaparte to unload his captured vessels and replenish his supplies . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Rowley became aware of Feretier 's presence at Saint @-@ Paul during the following month and determined to attack the port and recapture the valuable ships in the harbour . The operation was also to be a prelude to an eventual invasion attempt , giving the squadron experience of an amphibious landing operation . Conferring with Lieutenant Colonel Henry Keating on Rodriguez , Rowley determined that Keating 's men would land behind the gun batteries that defended the town and storm them . This would allow Rowley to bring his squadron directly into the harbour , capture the shipping anchored there and possibly seize the town as well . Rowley 's planning was directly affected by a failed attack on Saint @-@ Paul on 11 November 1806 , when HMS Sceptre and HMS Cornwallis had attacked the harbour without infantry support . Their target was the frigate Sémillante , but neither ship had been able to pass the heavy batteries that protected the port and the British ships were forced to withdraw . 
 On 16 September 1809 , the troops were prepared , and 368 British Army soldiers were embarked on the British frigate HMS Nereide under Captain Robert Corbett , Willoughby 's Otter and the Honourable East India Company schooner Wasp . This troop convoy was joined off Saint @-@ Paul on 18 September by the rest of Rowley 's squadron , the flagship Raisonnable and the frigates HMS Sirius under Captain Samuel Pym and HMS Boadicea under Captain John Hatley . These ships mustered an additional 236 seaman volunteers and Royal Marines who would join the assault . The entire invasion force was then embarked on Nereide , as Corbett had experience with the Île Bonaparte coastline , with the assault designated for the early morning of 21 September . 
 = = Assault = = 
 At 05 : 00 on 21 September 1809 , Nereide entered the bay of Saint @-@ Paul under the cover of darkness and successfully landed the British force , without any sign they had been sighted from the shore , at the Pointe des Galets . The Pointe des Galets was 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Saint @-@ Paul , the distance allowing the force , divided into Keating 's soldiers from Rodriguez and the naval force led by Nesbit Willoughby , to approach the heavy gun batteries that guarded the port unobserved . Storming the strongest batteries , <unk> and la <unk> , at 07 : 00 , the British force surprised the garrisons , captured the fortifications and turned their cannon onto the shipping moored in the harbour , firing grape shot at the decks of the frigate Caroline . 
 A detachment of the British landing force then separated from the main body and seized a third battery named la Neuf , routing a force of local militia that attempted to block their advance with artillery assistance from the British squadron in the bay . The militia had come down from their garrisons in the surrounding hills and been joined by 110 French soldiers who had disembarked from Caroline , but the small French force was easily brushed aside by the British landing party . Keating and Willoughby then destroyed the guns in the first two captured batteries and stormed the remaining two fortifications , once again capturing them and using their own cannon to fire on the shipping in the harbour . 
 While the landing force drove off the defenders and captured the fortifications , the naval squadron entered the harbour and opened up an overwhelming fire on the outnumbered Caroline . Shot was also fired at the captured East Indiamen , various other vessels in the harbour and any small batteries or shore positions that remained in French hands . Feretier and the other French naval officers , recognising that their position was hopeless , cut the anchor cables of their ships and allowed them to drift ashore , where they abandoned ship to escape capture . The British squadron then anchored in the harbour as their crews set about refloating the grounded French ships on the beach . In addition to Caroline and the East Indiamen , Rowley 's squadron successfully captured a 14 @-@ gun privateer brig named Grappler and five or six smaller ships . With the harbour and fortifications in British hands , Keating and Willoughby entered the town of Saint @-@ Paul without further combat . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 On the night of 21 September , the landing party embarked on the British ships in the bay having destroyed all of the fortified positions that surrounded the harbour . During 22 September , French forces were seen gathering in the hills around the town , brought from outlying garrisons to join the main garrison from the capital Saint @-@ Denis by the island 's governor General Des Bruslys . Rowley and Keating anticipated that this force , which outnumbered their own , would recapture the town on 23 September and accordingly ordered Willoughby to land with his marines and sailors to burn French government property along the waterfront . The most obvious and significant target of Willoughby 's force was a warehouse on the docks that was stocked with the captured silk from the East Indiamen captured by Caroline . Willoughby ordered this building to be burned , destroying over £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of captured textiles , ( the equivalent of £ 33 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . Other nearby warehouses were not destroyed as it was not possible to rapidly determine their ownership . Although the French force had reached the outskirts of the town , Willoughby was able to land and <unk> his troops without a single shot being fired . On 22 September , Rowley received a petition from a body of slaves in the town who had escaped during the fighting and demanded arms with which to attack the French . They also offered to burn the town to the ground . Rowley , who sought to cultivate good relations with the populace with a view to capturing the island in the near future , refused their demands and had the slaves returned to their owners , where eight were executed for plotting rebellion . There was however a noted example of a slave displaying loyalty to his owner : The painter Jean @-@ Joseph <unk> de Rosemont had served in the militia forces with the journalist Nicole Robinet de La Serve and was captured when Keating 's troops entered Saint @-@ Paul . Taken aboard the British squadron , Rosemont 's son Amédée applied to exchange himself for his father as a prisoner but was refused . Shortly before the squadron departed , Rosemont 's personal slave Félix swam to the squadron to serve his owner in captivity . For his loyalty , Félix was manumitted when Rosemont was freed in 1810 . 
 On 23 September , Rowley and Keating planned another landing under cover of the guns of the Nereide to drive off the French reinforcements . On landing , however , it was discovered that the French force had disappeared . Lacking support for a counterattack from the local landowners , who favoured a return to the monarchy , Des Bruslys was unwilling to order an assault which he deemed would have inevitably led to an unnecessary bloodbath . Instead , he ordered his forces to abandon Saint @-@ Paul and retire to Saint @-@ Denis during the night . Without support from his commanding officer , Captain St @-@ Michel , commandant of Saint @-@ Paul , agreed to surrender the town entirely , withdrawing his remaining forces under a flag of truce . The agreed truce lasted five days , during which the British force loaded their ships with French government provisions , equipment , military and naval stores and those cargoes from captured British ships that had not been burnt by Willoughby . The French made no effort to prevent this , Des Bruslys having committed suicide some days before , torn between his refusal to surrender the island to the British and his reluctance to order a bloody battle for what he regarded to be an " open island " . 
 Rowley also seized the East Indiamen Streatham and Europe and restored their previous captains and crews , who had been released as part of the truce . A number of smaller merchant ships were captured and all were refitted for the journey to Britain , to be convoyed there by the newly captured Caroline . This 40 @-@ gun frigate , only three years old and very large and powerfully built , was given to Corbett in recognition of his services in the operation and renamed HMS <unk> , reflecting the British name for Île Bonaparte , Île Bourbon . Willoughby was promoted to post captain and immediately took command of Corbett 's former ship Nereide . Late on 28 September , Rowley led his force to sea from Saint @-@ Paul having burnt or seized all government shipping , stores and buildings in the town and surrounding areas . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Casualties of the operation were not high on either side . British losses in the landing party amounted to 15 killed and 58 wounded , with an additional three missing . The naval squadron suffered no known casualties in the engagement , principally because they did not come under heavy fire . French losses have not been calculated , but apart from General Des Bruslys were probably a similar figure to the British . In contrast , the damage to the morale of the French defenders of Île Bonaparte was severe : the death of Des Bruslys and the failure to properly defend the town undermined their efforts to such a degree that the eventual invasion of the island in 1810 was carried out without significant fighting or loss . This invasion force was similar in size to the raiding party and was once again led by Rowley and Keating . 
 Caroline was a " tolerably fine frigate " and her capture was a blow to the French squadron based on Île de France under Hamelin . The recapture of the East Indiamen was also an important success , reducing the impact of French operations in the region during 1809 . The raid also provided the British forces with vital experience in conducting amphibious landings staged from Rodriguez and gave an indication of the quality of French shore defences and defensive formations throughout the islands , which would have an important effect on future operations , especially the Invasion of Île Bonaparte in 1810 . 
 = Cold Case Love = 
 " Cold Case Love " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . It was written and produced by The Y 's ( Justin Timberlake , Robin Tadross and James Fauntleroy II ) . Following Chris Brown 's assault on Rihanna , she started working on the sound of her new album . Timberlake who co @-@ wrote " Cold Case Love " labeled the sound of Rihanna 's new project as a step forward for the singer . In February 2010 , Rihanna admitted that the song 's lyrics are about her complicated relationship with Brown . 
 An R & B song , " Cold Case Love " has an instrumentation infused with a simple piano pattern , thumping bassline , violin and viola strings and electric guitar licks . Lyrically , it is a " melancholic and mature farewell " to a failed relationship . " Cold Case Love " received acclaim from contemporary music critics who labeled the song as a highlight on Rated R and additionally praised Rihanna 's vocals . The singer performed the song on her 2013 worldwide concert tour , Diamonds World Tour , in a medley with " Take a Bow " and " Hate That I Love You " . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Following the assault of Rihanna 's boyfriend Chris Brown on her , there was much speculation as to whether any song featured on the upcoming album would be about him . Producer Chuck Harmony mused that no matter what song Rihanna released as the lead single from the record , it would immediately be looked at as referring to Brown . During an interview with Marc Malkin at the MTV Video Music Awards , American singer @-@ songwriter Ne @-@ Yo stated that listeners should expect an " edgier " and " angrier " Rihanna on the album . He later told In Touch Weekly that the album is definitely more menacing than Rihanna 's prior work , describing the album as " liberated " . The album was released under the title Rated R in November 2009 . 
 " Cold Case Love " was written and produced by The Y 's ( Justin Timberlake , Robin Tadross and James Fauntleroy II ) . At the " Justin Timberlake & Friends Concert in Las Vegas " , Timberlake told MTV News that Rated R is a whole new sound and that the new songs are not just a rehash of what fans heard on her last album . " She broke onto the scene so hard with the last record — to have that many songs on the charts is impressive . I think that the smartest thing she 's doing is not trying to emulate what she did but move forward " , Timberlake explained . In February 2010 , Rihanna admitted that " Cold Case Love " was inspired by her difficult relationship with ex @-@ boyfriend Chris Brown , " It 's a song that everybody wanted to hear , everything that I didn 't say for the past eight months , exactly how I felt about that relationship and how I feel about it now – that song says it all . " When asked what the most important song from the album to her was , she stated that she doesn 't have one , however , Rihanna cited " Cold Case Love " together with " Fire Bomb " as her favorites . 
 Makeba Riddick provided the vocal production of the song . " Cold Case Love " was recorded by Marcos Tovar and Paul Foley at the German Studios and Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles . Bobby Campbell and Kevin Porter served as Tovar 's assistant recording engineers , while Antonio <unk> and Peter Martinez helped Foley . Jean Marie Horvat mixed the song at the Palms Studio in Las Vegas , with Foley serving as a mixing assistant . The engineering was completed by Jeff <unk> , with Montez Roberts and Rick Friedrich serving as assistant engineer . The cello was played by Glenn Fischbach and James J. Cooper III , while the viola was provided by Davis Barnett and Peter <unk> . The violins were played by Charles Parker , Emma <unk> , Gregory <unk> , Igor <unk> , Luigi <unk> and Olga <unk> . John Epcar provided the drums , while Mike Elizondo played the guitar . Larry Gold was the strings arranger and conductor . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Cold Case Love " is an R & B ballad that lasts for a duration of six minutes and four seconds . It contains an instrumentation infused with a simple piano pattern , thumping bassline , violin and viola strings and electric guitar licks . According to Kitty Empire of The Observer , " Cold Case Love " takes six minutes to " arc from a riveting short story for vocal , organ and life @-@ support machine " into a " denouement laden with an actual living string section " . It has a fluid melody and easier production which according to Jim Farber of Daily News , allows Rihanna " to fully emote , to show the feeling behind the stance " . 
 " Cold Case Love " starts with a sparse melody and gradually builds through each verse before it culminates with a full production flourish . The Boston Globe 's Sarah Rodman wrote that Timberlake manages to build a wall of sound , from simple voice and quavering organ to full " strings @-@ beatbox @-@ kitchen @-@ sink melodrama " . According to Will Welch of GQ " Cold Case Love " is a combination of the works by Phil Collins and Lionel Richie and Timberlake 's song " Losing My Way " ( FutureSex / LoveSounds , 2006 ) . Sean Fennessey wrote that on the song Rihanna seems to discover the " flip " side of her 2007 single " Umbrella " . 
 Lyrically , the song is a " melancholic and mature farewell " to a failed relationship . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone wrote Rihanna " slow @-@ boiling " interprets the line " What you did to me was a crime " . According to Jude Rogers of BBC Music the lyrics of the song hint towards her failed relationship with Brown . A reviewer of Plugged In wrote that the lyrics that allude to this are " And I let you reach me one more time / But that ’ s enough . " According to the reviewer , she later admits that the she was blind by her emotional confusion , " your love ain ’ t the kind you can keep . " Jon <unk> of The New York Times wrote that Rihanna compares her love to a crime scene in the " elegiac " " Cold Case Love " which features the couplet " Prints , pictures and white outlines / Are all that 's left at the scene of a cold case love " . 
 = = Reception and live performances = = 
 The song received critical acclaim from contemporary music critics . Kitty Empire of The Observer wrote that while most R & B ballads are woeful , " Cold Case Love " " at least has the wit to sustain a plot " . About.com 's Bill Lamb declared Rihanna 's vocals to be among the " most beautiful " she has recorded and noted that " they are in the service of a very dark , bleak statement " . HitFix reviewer Melinda Newman wrote that it is impossible to listen to the song and not filter it through " that horrific context whether that is how they are meant to be heard or not " . Both Newman and Benjamin Boles of Now cited " Cold Case Love " as a highlight of Rated R. 
 Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly stated , " A genuine moment of vulnerability plays stunningly on the meticulously layered ' Cold Case Love ' " . Writing for GQ , Will Welch declared the song as a " sweeping , grandiose , almost ludicrously over @-@ stuffed and endless album closer " . He wrote that the song is " epic , evocative , on @-@ message ( eat shit , Chris Brown ) and just plain catchy " . Welch cited " Cold Case Love " as his favorite song on the album , while a reviewer for Rap @-@ Up declared it , alongside " Wait Your Turn " , " Hard " and " Rude Boy " , as their favorite song from the album . Writing for Complex magazine , out of 26 Rihanna songs , Claire Lobenfeld placed the song at number 24 and compared it to the material present on Timberlake 's 2006 studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds . 
 Rihanna performed " Cold Case Love " at her 2013 worldwide concert tour , Diamonds World Tour , in a medley with " Take a Bow " and " Hate That I Love You " . Natasha of <unk> in a review of the concert in Toronto , wrote that during the set she " let out her softer side " and that her vocals were " exceptionally clear and strong " . Reviewing the concert in Los Angeles , Rick Florino of Artistdirect wrote , " Scaling everything back momentarily , she emerged from the center of the stage in a stunning red dress for soaring renditions of ' Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) ' , ' Take a Bow ' , and ' Cold Case Love ' flowing within a perfect melody of hits . " In a review of the Ottawa concert on May 2 , 2013 , <unk> Helmer of Ottawa Sun wrote that " diva RiRi " was " crooning " during the set consisted of songs such as " <unk> Song " , " Take a Bow " and " Cold Case Love " ; according to Helmer those were the tracks describing her " tumultuous " relationship with Brown . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Locations 
 Vocals recorded at German Studios and Roc the Mic Studios , New York City , New York ; Westlake Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed at the Palm Studios , Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rated R. 
 = Two @-@ level utilitarianism = 
 Two @-@ level utilitarianism is a utilitarian theory of ethics developed by R. M. Hare . According to the theory , a person 's moral decisions should be based on a set of ' intuitive ' moral rules , except in certain rare situations where it is more appropriate to engage in a ' critical ' level of moral reasoning . 
 <unk> believe that an action is right if it produces the best possible state of affairs . Traditional utilitarianism treats this as a claim that people should try to ensure that their actions maximise overall happiness or pleasure . 
 Two @-@ level utilitarianism is virtually a synthesis of the opposing doctrines of act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism . Act utilitarianism states that in all cases the morally right action is the one which produces the most pleasure , whereas rule utilitarianism states that the morally right action is the one that is in accordance with a moral rule whose general observance would create the most happiness . In terms of two @-@ level utilitarianism , act utilitarianism can be likened to the ' critical ' level of moral thinking , and rule utilitarianism to the ' intuitive ' level . 
 = = Utilitarianism = = 
 Utilitarianism is a type of consequentialist ethical theory . According to such theories , only the outcome of an action is morally relevant ( this contrasts with <unk> , according to which moral actions flow from duties or motives ) . Utilitarianism is a combination of consequentialism and the philosophical position hedonism , which states that pleasure , or happiness , is the only good worth pursuing . Therefore , since only the consequences of an action matter , and only happiness matters , only happiness that is the consequence of an action is morally relevant . There are similarities with preference utilitarianism , where utility is defined as individual preference rather than pleasure . 
 The two predecessor theories to two @-@ level utilitarianism , act and rule utilitarianism , were beset by various objections . For example , rule utilitarianism was criticized for implying that in some cases an individual should pursue a course of action that would obviously not maximise utility . Conversely , act utilitarianism was criticized for not allowing for a ' human element ' in its calculations , i.e. it is sometimes too difficult ( or impossible ) for an ordinary person . 
 As a descriptive model of the two levels , Hare posited two extreme cases of people , one of whom would only use critical moral thinking and the other of whom would only use intuitive moral thinking . The former he called the ' archangel ' and the latter the ' prole ' . It is worth noting that it is not Hare 's intention to divide up the entire human race into either archangels or <unk> ; according to his theory each person shares the traits of both to limited and varying extents at different times . The archangel has superhuman powers of thought , superhuman knowledge and no weaknesses . This unbiased ' ideal observer ' , when presented with an unfamiliar situation , would be able to immediately scan all potential consequences of all possible actions in order to frame a universal principle from which he / she could decide an appropriate action for the situation . Such a person would not need a set of intuitive moral rules , as he / she would be able to decide the correct response to any possible situation by reason alone . By contrast , the prole has these human weaknesses to an extreme degree . He / she must rely upon intuitions and sound prima facie principles all of the time , as he is incapable of critical thought . The set of intuitive moral rules that the prole follows must be simple and general enough that they can be easily understood and memorised , and also quick and easy to use . 
 Once one has identified the different types of moral thinking , the next step is to identify when one ought to think like an archangel , and when like a prole . Hare identifies three types of situation where critical thinking is necessary . The first is when the intuitive general principles conflict in particular cases . The second is when , " though there is no conflict between principles , there is something highly unusual about the case which prompts the question whether the general principles are really fitted to deal with it . " Thirdly , and most importantly , critical thinking is necessary in order to select the intuitive prima facie principles that will be used . 
 = = Criticisms = = 
 Apart from the criticisms that are commonly made of utilitarianism in general , there are several criticisms made specifically against two @-@ level utilitarianism . 
 One objection is that two @-@ level utilitarianism undermines an agent 's commitment to act in accordance with his or her moral principles . For example , a theist will comply with his / her moral code because he / she sees it as based upon God 's will . However , a two @-@ level utilitarian knows that his everyday set of moral rules is merely a guideline , and as such any breach of these rules is unlikely to accompany the same degree of guilt as would someone who believed that it was wrong in principle to act in that way . In reply to this objection , some <unk> have put forward a " radical proposal " ; although they accept utilitarianism as the correct moral theory , it would be more beneficial if we do not proclaim this fact , and keep it a well @-@ guarded secret . " Utilitarianism would then become an esoteric doctrine , accepted by only a few philosophers who would , if challenged , deny its existence in public . " . This form of Utilitarianism ( commonly named as Government House utilitarianism ) , whilst having historically held traction ( Mill 's publications being in the 18th century ) , no longer presents such a convincing case in light of modern education levels and opportunities . 
 David McNaughton argues that , even if the agent 's commitment to his / her principles is not undermined , two @-@ level utilitarianism does not succeed in its goal of showing , " how , on utilitarian principles , it is a good idea to think and reason in a pluralist and non @-@ consequentialist manner . " It is impossible , he claims , to compartmentalise one 's thinking in the way the two @-@ level account requires — to simultaneously think like a utilitarian and act in a non @-@ utilitarian way . Hare 's response to this type of criticism is that he does his own moral thinking in this way , therefore the challenge that this type of moral thinking is impossible must be false . 
 A third variety of objection somewhat related to the problem of ' weakness of will ' is that difficulties arise when we try to keep critical thinking separate from intuitive thinking . 
 = Hurricane Fausto ( 2008 ) = 
 Hurricane Fausto was a strong Category 1 hurricane that had only minor effects on land during its life over the eastern Pacific basin . The seventh tropical depression , sixth named storm , and third hurricane of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season , Fausto formed out of a tropical wave on July 16 . The storm gradually strengthened as it moved towards the west @-@ northwest , becoming a minimal hurricane two days later . On July 19 , Fausto turned towards the northwest as it continued to strengthen . The next day , while passing between the Mexican islands of Clarion and Socorro , the hurricane reached its peak intensity with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 977 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) . 
 Fausto steadily weakened throughout the following two days as it moved over progressively cooler waters . By July 21 , the storm was downgraded to a tropical storm and a tropical depression the next day . Early on July 23 , the depression lacked deep convection and degenerated into a remnant low pressure area . The low persisted for another day before dissipating over open waters . Hurricane Fausto had little effect on land , despite passing close to the islands of Clarion and Socorro where high winds , reaching hurricane @-@ force on Socorro , were recorded . Moderate rainfall from the outer bands of the storm amounted to 1 @.@ 9 in ( 50 mm ) in the Mexican state of Sinaloa . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Fausto were in a westward @-@ traveling tropical wave that moved off the eastern coast of Africa on July 4 . Little development occurred as the wave traversed the Atlantic basin . It entered the eastern Pacific basin on July 12 after crossing Central America and began to show signs of development the next day . The system westward movement became slightly erratic on July 14 as development slowed . The following day , the system became increasingly organized and a tropical depression , which was designated 07 @-@ E , formed about 550 mi ( 890 km ) southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . The depression maintained an area of deep convection around the center of circulation and was located within an area of moderate wind shear . An area of high pressure located over the southwestern United States was forecast to steer the system towards the northwest for most of its existence . A mid @-@ level ridge located to the north of the depression caused it to rapidly travel towards the west at 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) for most of July 16 . 
 Shortly after being designated as a depression , 17 @-@ E was upgraded to a tropical storm and given the name Fausto . Despite being partially exposed from convection , the system featured several banding features which supported a wind intensity of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . As a large cyclone , Fausto slowly intensified , with convection consolidating around the center the next day . The combination of relaxing wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures allowed the storm to intensify . Later that day , the center of Fausto became exposed but a large band of deep convection surrounded the exposed low . Early on July 18 , a banding eye feature began to develop in the southern portion of the storm . Around this time , forward motion slowed as it began to turn towards the northeast . Later that day , a partial eyewall began to develop , indicating that Fausto had strengthened into a hurricane with winds reaching 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . 
 Shortly after being declared a hurricane , the eye started to appear on visible satellite imagery . With low wind shear and warm waters , further intensification was anticipated . Very cold cloud tops with temperatures as low as – 112 ° F ( – 80 ° C ) surrounded the developing eye allowing the storm to intensify . Strengthening stopped for most of July 19 and the first half of July 20 . That day , Fausto strengthened slightly as a ragged eye formed while the storm passed between the islands of Clarion and Socorro . At this time , the hurricane reached its peak intensity with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 977 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) . Operationally , Fausto was assessed to have reached its peak intensity several hours later as a minimal Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) as the eye became better defined . However , the storm was located over 75 ° F ( 24 ° C ) waters , causing it to gradually weaken along with diminishing convective activity . Later that day , Fausto was downgraded to a tropical storm and further weakened to a tropical depression the next day . With little or no remaining convection , the system degenerated into a remnant low pressure area as it traveled towards the west @-@ northwest . The remnants of Fausto dissipated on July 24 , while located about 1 @,@ 065 mi ( 1 @,@ 715 km ) west of Cabo San Lucas . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The National Hurricane Center did not forecast Fausto to affect any major land areas during its existence . As such , no tropical cyclone advisories were issued . The outer bands of Fausto produced moderate rainfall over portions of Sinaloa , Mexico , peaking at 1 @.@ 9 in ( 50 mm ) . Several hours before the center of Fausto passed between Clarion Island and Socorro Island , sustained winds on Clarion were recorded at 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) with gusts to 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) . Nearby Socorro recorded sustained winds of 79 mph ( 129 km / h ) with gusts to 109 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Little or no damage was recorded on the islands . The hurricane @-@ force winds reported on Socorro was recorded as Fausto made its closest approach to the island about 115 mi ( 185 km ) to the southwest . However , due to the distance from the center of Fausto , these winds are suspected to be overestimated . Along the coastline of Mexico , waves up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) were recorded in relation to Fausto . 
 = Action of 9 February 1799 ( South Africa ) = 
 The Action of 9 February 1799 was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars between a British Royal Navy frigate and a French privateer frigate fought 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) west of the southeastern coast of what is now Natal in South Africa . The 32 @-@ gun French frigate Prudente had since the start of the war been part of a squadron operating from Île de France ( now Mauritius ) . This squadron had dispersed during 1798 , with the ships sent on independent commerce raiding operations across the British trade routes in the Indian Ocean . Prudente had subsequently been seized in the autumn of that year by Anne Joseph Hippolyte de <unk> , Comte de Malartic , the Governor of Île de France , and sold to a private raiding company . 
 In early 1799 Prudente was operating off South Africa , attacking British trade passing to or from the Cape Colony when the ship was discovered by British frigate HMS Daedalus under Captain Henry Lidgbird Ball . Prudente turned away and Ball gave chase , following the French ship closely . After five hours Daedalus caught Prudente and fired a raking broadside into the stern , disabling the French ship . For another hour the action continued at close range until Prudente was forced to surrender . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1799 British forces dominated the Indian Ocean , controlling the economically vital trade routes from China , the Dutch East Indies and British India to Europe . The French Navy had originally deployed only two frigates in the region , Prudente and Cybèle , operating from Port Louis on Île de France . This force was subsequently augmented in the summer of 1796 by a large squadron of frigates under Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey , which cruised in the East Indies during 1796 and 1797 , suffering setbacks at Action of 9 September 1796 and the Bali Strait Incident . During 1798 the squadron dispersed , as his crews became increasingly mutinous and the Colonial Assembly of Île de France grew openly disdainful of his efforts , refusing to provide reinforcements or supplies to his ships . 
 To mitigate this disaffection , Sercey ordered two of his frigates , Prudente and Forte to cruise in the Bay of Bengal against British trade during the autumn of 1798 . When these ships returned , Sercey had already sailed for the east , leaving instructions for the frigates to follow . These orders were however countermanded by the Governor of Île de France , Malartic , who ordered the frigates seized while they were in harbour . Although Sercey protested Malartic 's actions , the governor issued new orders to the ships : Forte was sent northeast to operate in the Bay of Bengal off Calcutta while Prudente was partially disarmed and sold to a privateering concern to operate against trade as a commercial investment . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Command of Prudente was given to Captain Emanuel @-@ <unk> Le <unk> , who sailed to the region to the east of the British held Cape Colony to prey on transoceanic merchant shipping sailing to and from Cape Town . The cruise achieved some success , including the seizure of an American merchant ship from Canton , which had been given a prize crew of 17 and armed with 6 @-@ pounder guns from Prudente 's quarterdeck , leaving the French frigate with only 30 guns including its main battery of 12 @-@ pounder long guns . At dawn on 9 February 1799 , while sailing approximately 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ) southwest of the coast of Natal a sail was seen to the southeast , approaching rapidly . Recognising a British frigate , La Joliff ordered his ships to separate at 07 : 00 , the American ship sailing south while he took Prudente northwards , hoping to draw off the British ship so that the prize could escape . 
 The new arrival was HMS Daedalus , a 32 @-@ gun 12 @-@ pounder Royal Navy frigate under the command of Captain Henry Lidgbird Ball . Ball maintained pursuit of Prudente , running 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) behind his opponent until 10 : 00 when La Joliff swung his frigate to starboard with the wind , Ball following close behind . With the British frigate closing , la Joliff ordered his men to begin firing their stern @-@ chasers at Daedalus and at 12 : 10 hauled up to engage , firing a broadside into the British ship . Ball shortened sail and brought his ship across the stern of Prudente , firing a devastating raking broadside into the French frigate at 12 : 25 . Ball then drew Daedalus alongside Prudente and the ships fought a close range broadside duel , fire from Ball 's ship bringing down the mizenmast on Prudente after 15 minutes . It was only at 13 : 21 , more than an hour after the battle had begun , that La Joliff acknowledged the damage to his ship and struck his colours . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Prudente was badly damaged in the engagement and had lost heavy casualties , including 27 killed and 22 wounded . Losses and damage on Daedalus were much lighter , with only one sailor and one Royal Marine killed and eleven wounded . Ball conducted hasty repairs and then brought the captured Prudente into Table Bay on 15 February . There the captured ship was condemned by the port commander Captain George Losack : although Prudente was a high @-@ quality ship the naval facilities at the Cape Colony were insufficient to conduct the necessary repairs and the French frigate was not subsequently commissioned into the Royal Navy . As a result , there were few rewards for the action , unusually the junior officers of Daedalus were not promoted in the aftermath of the battle . Among the prisoners taken from Prudente was a deserter from the Royal Navy named Thomas Tring , who was subsequently court martialed and hanged . 
 In the Indian Ocean theatre the loss of Prudente was compounded a few weeks later by the capture of Forte at the Action of 28 February 1799 , which left Sercey with a shortage of available warships . At the Action of 11 December 1799 his last frigate , Preneuse , was intercepted and destroyed off Île de France . A commander without a command , the French admiral returned to France and subsequently retired . 
 = Thrombophilia = 
 Thrombophilia ( sometimes hypercoagulability or a prothrombotic state ) is an abnormality of blood coagulation that increases the risk of thrombosis ( blood clots in blood vessels ) . Such abnormalities can be identified in 50 % of people who have an episode of thrombosis ( such as deep vein thrombosis in the leg ) that was not provoked by other causes . A significant proportion of the population has a detectable abnormality , but most of these only develop thrombosis in the presence of an additional risk factor . 
 There is no specific treatment for most thrombophilias , but recurrent episodes of thrombosis may be an indication for long @-@ term preventative anticoagulation . The first major form of thrombophilia , antithrombin deficiency , was identified in 1965 , while the most common abnormalities ( including factor V Leiden ) were described in the 1990s . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The most common conditions associated with thrombophilia are deep vein thrombosis ( DVT ) and pulmonary embolism ( PE ) , which are referred to collectively as venous thromboembolism ( VTE ) . DVT usually occurs in the legs , and is characterized by pain , swelling and redness of the limb . It may lead to long @-@ term swelling and heaviness due to damage to valves in the veins . The clot may also break off and migrate ( <unk> ) to arteries in the lungs . Depending on the size and the location of the clot , this may lead to sudden @-@ onset shortness of breath , chest pain , palpitations and may be complicated by collapse , shock and cardiac arrest . 
 Venous thrombosis may also occur in more unusual places : in the veins of the brain , liver ( portal vein thrombosis and hepatic vein thrombosis ) , mesenteric vein , kidney ( renal vein thrombosis ) and the veins of the arms . Whether thrombophilia also increases the risk of arterial thrombosis ( which is the underlying cause of heart attacks and strokes ) is less well established . 
 Thrombophilia has been linked to recurrent miscarriage , and possibly various complications of pregnancy such as intrauterine growth restriction , stillbirth , severe pre @-@ eclampsia and <unk> <unk> . 
 Protein C deficiency may cause purpura fulminans , a severe clotting disorder in the newborn that leads to both tissue death and bleeding into the skin and other organs . The condition has also been described in adults . Protein C and protein S deficiency have also been associated with an increased risk of skin necrosis on commencing anticoagulant treatment with warfarin or related drugs . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Thrombophilia can be congenital or acquired . Congenital thrombophilia refers to inborn conditions ( and usually hereditary , in which case " hereditary thrombophilia " may be used ) that increase the tendency to develop thrombosis , while , on the other hand , acquired thrombophilia refers to conditions that arise later in life . 
 = = = Congenital = = = 
 The most common types of congenital thrombophilia are those that arise as a result of overactivity of coagulation factors . They are relatively mild , and are therefore classified as " type II " defects . The most common ones are factor V Leiden ( a mutation in the F5 gene at position 1691 ) and prothrombin G20210A , a mutation in prothrombin ( at position <unk> in the 3 ' untranslated region of the gene ) . 
 The rare forms of congenital thrombophilia are typically caused by a deficiency of natural anticoagulants . They are classified as " type I " and are more severe in their propensity to cause thrombosis . The main ones are antithrombin III deficiency , protein C deficiency and protein S deficiency . Milder rare congenital thrombophilias are factor XIII mutation and familial <unk> ( an abnormal fibrinogen ) . It is unclear whether congenital disorders of fibrinolysis ( the system that destroys clots ) are major contributors to thrombosis risk . Congenital deficiency of <unk> , for instance , mainly causes eye symptoms and sometimes problems in other organs , but the link with thrombosis has been more uncertain . 
 Blood group determines thrombosis risk to a significant extent . Those with blood groups other than type O are at a two- to fourfold relative risk . O blood group is associated with reduced levels of von Willebrand factor – because of increased clearance – and factor VIII , which is related to thrombotic risk . 
 = = = Acquired = = = 
 A number of acquired conditions augment the risk of thrombosis . A prominent example is antiphospholipid syndrome , which is caused by antibodies against constituents of the cell membrane , particularly lupus anticoagulant ( first found in people with the disease systemic lupus erythematosus but often detected in people without the disease ) , anti @-@ cardiolipin antibodies , and anti @-@ β2 @-@ glycoprotein 1 antibodies ; it is therefore regarded as an autoimmune disease . In some cases antiphospholipid syndrome can cause arterial as well as venous thrombosis . It is also more strongly associated with miscarriage , and can cause a number of other symptoms ( such as <unk> reticularis of the skin and migraine ) . 
 Heparin @-@ induced thrombocytopenia ( HIT ) is due to an immune system reaction against the anticoagulant drug heparin ( or its derivatives ) . Though it is named for associated low platelet counts , HIT is strongly associated with risk of venous and arterial thrombosis . <unk> nocturnal hemoglobinuria ( PNH ) is a rare condition resulting from acquired alterations in the <unk> gene , which plays a role in the protection of blood cells from the complement system . PNH increases the risk of venous thrombosis but is also associated with hemolytic anemia ( anemia resulting from destruction of red blood cells ) . Both HIT and PNH require particular treatment . 
 <unk> conditions associated with sluggish blood flow can increase risk for thrombosis . For example , sickle @-@ cell disease ( caused by mutations of hemoglobin ) is regarded as a mild prothrombotic state induced by impaired flow . Similarly , myeloproliferative disorders , in which the bone marrow produces too many blood cells , predispose to thrombosis , particularly in polycythemia vera ( excess red blood cells ) and essential <unk> ( excess platelets ) . Again , these conditions usually warrant specific treatment when identified . 
 Cancer , particularly when metastatic ( spread to other places in the body ) , is a recognised risk factor for thrombosis . A number of mechanisms have been proposed , such as activation of the coagulation system by cancer cells or secretion of procoagulant substances . Furthermore , particular cancer treatments ( such as the use of central venous catheters for chemotherapy ) may increase the risk of thrombosis further . 
 <unk> syndrome , in which protein from the bloodstream is released into the urine due to kidney diseases , can predispose to thrombosis ; this is particularly the case in more severe cases ( as indicated by blood levels of albumin below 25 g / l ) and if the syndrome is caused by the condition membranous nephropathy . Inflammatory bowel disease ( ulcerative colitis and Crohn 's disease ) predispose to thrombosis , particularly when the disease is active . Various mechanisms have been proposed . 
 Pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of thrombosis . This probably results from a physiological hypercoagulability in pregnancy that protects against postpartum hemorrhage . 
 The female hormone estrogen , when used in the combined oral contraceptive pill and in <unk> hormone replacement therapy , has been associated with a two- to sixfold increased risk of venous thrombosis . The risk depends on the type of hormones used , the dose of estrogen , and the presence of other thrombophilic risk factors . Various mechanisms , such as deficiency of protein S and tissue factor pathway inhibitor , are said to be responsible . 
 Obesity has long been regarded as a risk factor for venous thrombosis . It more than doubles the risk in numerous studies , particularly in combination with the use of oral contraceptives or in the period after surgery . Various coagulation abnormalities have been described in the obese . <unk> activator inhibitor @-@ 1 , an inhibitor of fibrinolysis , is present in higher levels in people with obesity . Obese people also have larger numbers of circulating <unk> ( fragments of damaged cells ) that bear tissue factor . <unk> aggregation may be increased , and there are higher levels of coagulation proteins such as von Willebrand factor , fibrinogen , factor VII and factor VIII . Obesity also increases the risk of recurrence after an initial episode of thrombosis . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A number of conditions that have been linked with venous thrombosis are possibly genetic and possibly acquired . These include : elevated levels of factor VIII , factor IX , factor XI , fibrinogen and thrombin @-@ <unk> fibrinolysis inhibitor , and decreased levels of tissue factor pathway inhibitor . Activated protein C resistance that is not attributable to factor V mutations is probably caused by other factors and remains a risk factor for thrombosis . 
 There is an association between the blood levels of homocysteine and thrombosis , although this has not been reported consistently in all studies . <unk> levels are determined by mutations in the <unk> and CBS genes , but also by levels of folic acid , vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 , which depend on diet . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Thrombosis is a multifactorial problem because there are often multiple reasons why a person might develop thrombosis . These risk factors may include any combination of abnormalities in the blood vessel wall , abnormalities in the blood flow ( as in immobilization ) , and abnormalities in the consistency of the blood . Thrombophilia is caused by abnormalities in blood consistency , which is determined by the levels of coagulation factors and other circulating blood proteins that participate in the " coagulation cascade " . 
 Normal coagulation is initiated by the release of tissue factor from damaged tissue . Tissue factor binds to circulating factor <unk> . The combination activates factor X to factor Xa and factor IX to factor IXa . Factor Xa ( in the presence of factor V ) activates prothrombin into thrombin . <unk> is a central enzyme in the coagulation process : it generates fibrin from fibrinogen , and activates a number of other enzymes and cofactors ( factor XIII , factor XI , factor V and factor VIII , <unk> ) that enhance the fibrin clot . The process is inhibited by <unk> ( which inactivates the first step catalyzed by factor <unk> / tissue factor ) , antithrombin ( which inactivates thrombin , factor IXa , Xa and <unk> ) , protein C ( which inhibits factors Va and VIIIa in the presence of protein S ) , and protein Z ( which inhibits factor Xa ) . 
 In thrombophilia , the balance between " procoagulant " and " anticoagulant " activity is disturbed . The severity of the imbalance determines the likelihood that someone develops thrombosis . Even small <unk> of proteins , such as the reduction of antithrombin to only 70 – 80 % of the normal level , can increase the thrombosis risk ; this is in contrast with hemophilia , which only arises if levels of coagulation factors are markedly decreased . 
 In addition to its effects on thrombosis , hypercoagulable states may accelerate the development of atherosclerosis , the arterial disease that underlies myocardial infarction and other forms of cardiovascular disease . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Tests for thrombophilia include complete blood count ( with examination of the blood film ) , prothrombin time , partial <unk> time , <unk> test , thrombin time and <unk> time , lupus anticoagulant , anti @-@ cardiolipin antibody , anti @-@ β2 glycoprotein 1 antibody , activated protein C resistance , fibrinogen tests , factor V Leiden and prothrombin mutation , and basal homocysteine levels . Testing may be more or less extensive depending on clinical judgement and abnormalities detected on initial evaluation . 
 = = Screening = = 
 There are divergent views as to whether everyone with an unprovoked episode of thrombosis should be investigated for thrombophilia . Even those with a form of thrombophilia may not necessarily be at risk of further thrombosis , while recurrent thrombosis is more likely in those who have had previous thrombosis even in those who have no detectable thrombophilic abnormalities . Recurrent thromboembolism , or thrombosis in unusual sites ( e.g. the hepatic vein in Budd @-@ Chiari syndrome ) , is a generally accepted indication for screening . It is more likely to be cost @-@ effective in people with a strong personal or family history of thrombosis . In contrast , the combination of thrombophilia with other risk factors may provide an indication for preventative treatment , which is why thrombophilia testing may be performed even in those who would not meet the strict criteria for these tests . Searching for a coagulation abnormality is not normally undertaken in patients in whom thrombosis has an obvious trigger . For example , if the thrombosis is due to immobilization after recent orthopedic surgery , it is regarded as " provoked " by the immobilization and the surgery and it is less likely that investigations will yield clinically important results . 
 When venous thromboembolism occurs when a patient is experiencing transient major risk factors such as prolonged immobility , surgery , or trauma , testing for thrombophilia is not appropriate because the outcome of the test would not change a patient 's indicated treatment . In 2013 , the American Society of Hematology , as part of recommendations in the Choosing Wisely campaign , cautioned against overuse of thrombophilia screening ; false positive results of testing would lead to people inappropriately being labeled as having thrombophilia , and being treated with anticoagulants without clinical need 
 In the United Kingdom , professional guidelines give specific indications for thrombophilia testing . It is recommended that testing be done only after appropriate counseling , and hence the investigations are usually not performed at the time when thrombosis is diagnosed but at a later time . In particular situations , such as retinal vein thrombosis , testing is discouraged altogether because thrombophilia is not regarded as a major risk factor . In other rare conditions generally linked with hypercoagulability , such as cerebral venous thrombosis and portal vein thrombosis , there is insufficient data to state for certain whether thrombophilia screening is helpful , and decisions on thrombophilia screening in these conditions are therefore not regarded as evidence @-@ based . If cost @-@ effectiveness ( quality @-@ adjusted life years in return for expenditure ) is taken as a guide , it is generally unclear whether thrombophilia investigations justify the often high cost , unless the testing is restricted to selected situations . 
 Recurrent miscarriage is an indication for thrombophilia screening , particularly antiphospholipid antibodies ( anti @-@ cardiolipin IgG and IgM , as well as lupus anticoagulant ) , factor V Leiden and prothrombin mutation , activated protein C resistance and a general assessment of coagulation through an investigation known as <unk> . 
 Women who are planning to use oral contraceptives do not benefit from routine screening for thrombophilias , as the absolute risk of thrombotic events is low . If either the woman or a first @-@ degree relative has suffered from thrombosis , the risk of developing thrombosis is increased . Screening this selected group may be beneficial , but even when negative may still indicate residual risk . Professional guidelines therefore suggest that alternative forms of contraception be used rather than relying on screening . 
 Thrombophilia screening in people with arterial thrombosis is generally regarded unrewarding and is generally discouraged , except possibly for unusually young patients ( especially when precipitated by smoking or use of estrogen @-@ containing hormonal contraceptives ) and those in whom revascularization , such as coronary arterial bypass , fails because of rapid occlusion of the graft . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 There is no specific treatment for thrombophilia , unless it is caused by an underlying medical illness ( such as nephrotic syndrome ) , where the treatment of the underlying disease is needed . In those with unprovoked and / or recurrent thrombosis , or those with a high @-@ risk form of thrombophilia , the most important decision is whether to use anticoagulation medications , such as warfarin , on a long @-@ term basis to reduce the risk of further episodes . This risk needs to weighed against the risk that the treatment will cause significant bleeding , as the reported risk of major bleeding is over 3 % per year , and 11 % of those with major bleeding may die as a result . 
 Apart from the abovementioned forms of thrombophilia , the risk of recurrence after an episode of thrombosis is determined by factors such as the extent and severity of the original thrombosis , whether it was provoked ( such as by immobilization or pregnancy ) , the number of previous thrombotic events , male sex , the presence of an inferior vena cava filter , the presence of cancer , symptoms of post @-@ thrombotic syndrome , and obesity . These factors tend to be more important in the decision than the presence or absence of a detectable thrombophilia . 
 Those with antiphospholipid syndrome may be offered long @-@ term anticoagulation after a first unprovoked episode of thrombosis . The risk is determined by the subtype of antibody detected , by the antibody titer ( amount of antibodies ) , whether multiple antibodies are detected , and whether it is detected repeatedly or only on a single occasion . 
 Women with a thrombophilia who are contemplating pregnancy or are pregnant usually require alternatives to warfarin during pregnancy , especially in the first 13 weeks , when it may produce abnormalities in the unborn child . Low molecular weight heparin ( LMWH , such as enoxaparin ) is generally used as an alternative . Warfarin and LMWH may safely be used in breastfeeding . 
 When women experience recurrent pregnancy loss secondary to thrombophilia , some studies have suggested that low molecular weight heparin reduces the risk of miscarriage . When the results of all studies are analysed together , no statistically <unk> benefit could be demonstrated . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 In people without a detectable thrombophilia , the cumulative risk of developing thrombosis by the age of 60 is about 12 % . About 60 % of people who are deficient in antithrombin will have experienced thrombosis at least once by age 60 , as will about 50 % of people with protein C deficiency and about a third of those with protein S deficiency . People with activated protein C resistance ( usually resulting from factor V Leiden ) , in contrast , have a slightly raised absolute risk of thrombosis , with 15 % having had at least one thrombotic event by the age of sixty . In general , men are more likely than women to experience repeated episodes of venous thrombosis . 
 People with factor V Leiden are at a relatively low risk of thrombosis , but may develop thrombosis in the presence of an additional risk factor , such as immobilization . Most people with the prothrombin mutation ( G20210A ) never develop thrombosis . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The major ( " type 1 " ) thrombophilias are rare . <unk> deficiency is present in 0 @.@ 2 % of the general population and 0 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 % of people with venous thrombosis . Protein C deficiency , too , is present in 0 @.@ 2 % of the population , and can be found in 2 @.@ 5 – 6 % of people with thrombosis . The exact prevalence of protein S deficiency in the population is unknown ; it is found 1 @.@ 3 – 5 % of people with thrombosis . 
 The minor ( " type 2 " ) thrombophilias are much more common . Factor V Leiden is present in 5 % of the population of Northern European descent , but much rarer in those of Asian or African extraction . In people with thrombosis , 10 % have factor V Leiden . In those who are referred for thrombophilia testing , 30 – 50 % have the defect . The prothrombin mutation occurs at rates of 1 – 4 % in the general population , 5 – 10 % of people with thrombosis , and 15 % of people referred for thrombophilia testing . Like factor V Leiden , this abnormality is uncommon in Africans and Asians . 
 The exact prevalence of antiphospholipid syndrome is not well known , as different studies employ different definitions of the condition . <unk> antibodies are detected in 24 % of those referred to thrombophilia testing . 
 = = History = = 
 German physician Rudolf Virchow categorized abnormalities in the consistency of the blood as a factor in the development of thrombosis in 1856 . The exact nature of these abnormalities remained elusive until the first form of thrombophilia , antithrombin deficiency , was recognized in 1965 by the Norwegian hematologist Olav Egeberg . Protein C deficiency followed in 1981 , when described by researchers from the Scripps Research Institute and the U.S. Centers of Disease Control . Protein S deficiency followed in 1984 , described by researchers at the University of Oklahoma . 
 <unk> syndrome was described in full in the 1980s , after various previous reports of specific antibodies in people with systemic lupus erythematosus and thrombosis . The syndrome is often attributed to the British <unk> Graham R.V. Hughes , and is often referred to as Hughes syndrome for that reason . 
 The more common genetic thrombophilias were described in the 1990s . Many studies had previously indicated that many people with thrombosis showed resistance activated protein C. In 1994 a group in Leiden , The Netherlands , identified the most common underlying defect — a mutation in factor V that made it resistant to the action of activated protein C. The defect was called factor V Leiden , as genetic abnormalities are typically named after the place where they are discovered . Two years later , the same group described a common mutation in the prothrombin gene that caused elevation of prothrombin levels and a mild increase in thrombosis risk . 
 It is suspected that other genetic abnormalities underlying familial thrombosis will in future be discovered through studies of the entire genetic code , looking for small alternations in genes . 
 = M @-@ 149 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 149 is a 10 @.@ 605 @-@ mile ( 17 @.@ 07 km ) north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It connects US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) in Thompson with the Palms Book and Indian Lake state parks . The highway was originally designed in the 1930s and extended a few years later . The last major changes to the highway were made in the 1960s when it was completely paved for the first time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 149 is a rural two @-@ lane highway that starts in the community of Thompson southwest of Manistique on Lake Michigan . It runs west @-@ northwesterly through woodlands away from a junction with US 2 along a small pond in the area . The road curves to the north and passes the cemetery and some small farms south of a crossing with a line of the Canadian National Railway . North of the tracks , the road meets County Road 442 ( CR 442 ) near Indian Lake . M @-@ 149 turns to the west at that junction while CR 442 runs easterly to connect to the main unit of the Indian Lake State Park . The highway continues to a junction with CR 455 , which connects to the western unit of the state part , after which the trunkline turns to the northwest through forested terrain . The highway turns back to the west before intersecting another CR 442 in the area . At this junction , M @-@ 149 turns to the north where it continues for several miles until curving eastward . M @-@ 149 intersects the northern end of CR 455 and turns north once again until it terminates at the main gate to the Palms Book State Park , home of <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( the Big Spring ) . 
 No part of M @-@ 189 is listed on the National Highway System . In 2009 , the Michigan Department of Transportation conducted a survey to determine the traffic volume along the highway , reported using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . The department determined that 421 vehicles a day used the highway south of the junction with CR 442 near Indian Lake State Park while 245 vehicles used remainder of the highway on average . 
 = = History = = 
 The Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) designated M @-@ 149 along a gravel road in late 1930 ; the highway provided access from US 2 northerly to Palms Book State Park . A second highway , the first creation of M @-@ 125 , was formed later in 1931 along another gravel road to connect US 2 southerly with the Thompson State Fish Hatchery . When US 2 was rerouted in the Manistique area in 1936 , that highway was moved further south closer to Lake Michigan ; M @-@ 149 was extended eastward along a section of the paved highway formerly a part of US 2 to connect with M @-@ 125 at the Indian Lake State Park . From that point south , M @-@ 149 replaced M @-@ 125 to Thompson . The former routing of US 2 became CR 442 except for the section used to extend M @-@ 149 . In the latter half of 1960 or the beginning of 1961 , the MSHD paved the sections of M @-@ 149 north and south of the former US 2 segment , completely hard @-@ surfacing the roadway for the first time . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Schoolcraft County . 
 = 2011 Virginia earthquake = 
 The 2011 Virginia earthquake occurred on August 23 at 1 : 51 : 04 p.m. local time in the Piedmont region of the US state of Virginia . The epicenter , in Louisa County , was 61 km ( 38 mi ) northwest of Richmond and 8 km ( 5 mi ) south @-@ southwest of the town of Mineral . It was an intraplate earthquake with a magnitude of 5 @.@ 8 and a maximum perceived intensity of VII ( Very strong ) on the Mercalli intensity scale . Several aftershocks , ranging up to 4 @.@ 5 Mw in magnitude , occurred after the main tremor . 
 The earthquake , along with a magnitude – 5 @.@ 8 quake on the New York – Ontario border in 1944 , is the largest to have occurred in the U.S. east of the Rocky Mountains since an earthquake centered in Giles County in western Virginia occurred during 1897 , with an estimated magnitude of 5 @.@ 8 . 
 The quake was felt across more than a dozen U.S. states and in several Canadian provinces , and was felt by more people than any other quake in U.S. history . No deaths and only minor injuries were reported . Minor and moderate damage to buildings was widespread and was estimated by one risk @-@ modeling company at $ 200 million to $ 300 million , of which about $ 100 million was insured . 
 The earthquake prompted research that revealed that the farthest landslide from the epicenter was 150 miles ( 240 km ) , by far the greatest landslide distance recorded from any other earthquake of similar magnitude . Previous studies of worldwide earthquakes indicated that landslides occurred no farther than 36 miles ( 58 km ) from the epicenter of a magnitude 5 @.@ 8 earthquake . The Virginia earthquake study suggested that the added information about East Coast earthquakes may prompt a revision of equations that predict ground shaking . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The earthquake occurred in the Virginia Seismic Zone , located in the Piedmont region . The Virginia Piedmont area was formed originally as part of a zone of repeated continental collision that created the ancestral Appalachian Mountains , a process that started during the Ordovician period with the Taconic orogeny and finished during the Carboniferous Period with the Alleghenian orogeny . The reverse faults formed during the various <unk> were partly reactivated as normal faults in extension during the Mesozoic Era as the supercontinent Pangaea broke apart . During the Cenozoic Era , compression from the opening and spreading of the Atlantic has caused some of these structures to be reactivated in a reverse sense . 
 The earthquake 's epicenter and most of the aftershocks lie between the surface traces of two structures , the Spotsylvania Fault , a southeast dipping zone of high ductile strain , and the Chopawamsic Fault , a thrust fault . The earthquake 's focal mechanism shows reverse slip faulting on a north to northeast striking fault plane . The spatial distribution of aftershocks show that the causative fault dips to the southeast at 50 – 55 ° . There was no surface faulting associated with the earthquake . The size of the rupture is as yet uncalculated , but similar quakes have been caused by slippage along fault segments that are 5 to 15 km ( 3 to 9 mi ) long . 
 After the earthquake , several websites speculated about whether hydraulic fracturing ( fracking ) for natural gas production could have caused or contributed to the quake . There were not any fracking operations in Virginia at the time of the quake . The nearest fracking was occurring in the Marcellus shale in West Virginia . 
 = = Aftershocks = = 
 Numerous aftershocks occurred after the main tremor . The first four ( of magnitude 2 @.@ 8 , 2 @.@ 2 , 4 @.@ 2 and 3 @.@ 4 ) occurred within 12 hours of the main shock . A 2 @.@ 5 @-@ magnitude shock occurred just after midnight on August 25 , followed at 05 : 07 UTC by the strongest , a magnitude 4 @.@ 5 aftershock that woke many residents in Northern Virginia and Washington , D.C. , and was felt as far away as New England , Georgia , and Illinois . 
 = = Research = = 
 Scientists have known that the difference between seismic shaking in the East versus the West is due in part to the geologic structure and rock properties that allow seismic waves in the East to travel farther without weakening , but during November 2012 , the USGS announced that recent research showed that earthquake shaking in the eastern United States can travel much farther and cause damage over larger areas than previously thought . USGS scientists found that the Virginia earthquake caused landslides at distances four times farther — and over an area 20 times larger — than previous research had shown . USGS Director Marcia McNutt said , " Scientists are confirming with empirical data what more than 50 million people in the eastern U.S. experienced firsthand : this was one powerful earthquake . <unk> the distance over which landslides occur may also help us reach back into the geologic record to look for evidence of past major earthquakes from the Virginia seismic zone . " 
 The USGS found that the farthest landslide from the 2011 Virginia earthquake was 150 miles ( 240 km ) from the epicenter . This is by far the greatest landslide distance recorded from any other earthquake of similar magnitude . Previous studies of worldwide earthquakes indicated that landslides occurred no farther than 36 miles ( 58 km ) from the epicenter of a magnitude 5 @.@ 8 earthquake . The study suggested that the added information about East Coast earthquakes may prompt a revision of equations that predict ground shaking . " What makes this new study so unique is that it provides direct observational evidence from the largest earthquake to occur in more than 100 years in the eastern U.S. Now that we know more about the power of East Coast earthquakes , equations that predict ground shaking might need to be revised . " 
 In addition to the great landslide distances recorded , the landslides from the 2011 Virginia earthquake occurred in an area 20 times larger than expected from studies of worldwide earthquakes . Scientists plotted the landslide locations that were farthest out and then calculated the area enclosed by those landslides . The observed landslides from the Virginia earthquake enclose an area of about 33 @,@ 400 km2 , while previous studies indicated an expected area of about 1 @,@ 500 km2 from an earthquake of similar magnitude . 
 = = Effect = = 
 It is estimated that approximately one @-@ third of the U.S. population might have felt the earthquake , more than any other earthquake in U.S. history . People in certain areas of Pennsylvania , however , did not feel the earthquake at all despite being relatively close to the epicenter . About 148 @,@ 000 people reported their ground @-@ shaking experiences caused by the earthquake on the USGS " Did You Feel It ? " website . Tremors from the Virginia earthquake were felt as far south as Atlanta , Georgia ; as far north as Quebec City , Quebec ; as far west as Illinois and as far east as Fredericton , New Brunswick , with damage reported as far away as Brooklyn , New York . 
 Although earthquakes in the central and eastern U.S. are tens of times less frequent than in the western U.S. , they are typically felt over a much broader region . East of the Rocky Mountains , an earthquake can be felt over an area as much as ten times larger than a similar magnitude earthquake on the west coast . Western rock is relatively young , therefore it absorbs much of the shaking caused by earthquakes . Hence , western earthquakes result in intense shaking close to the epicenter , but fade more quickly the further the earthquakes travel . In the eastern United States , the rock is much older , and earthquake energy can therefore spread further and have a greater impact . A magnitude 5 @.@ 5 eastern U.S. earthquake can usually be felt as far as 300 mi ( 483 km ) from its origin , and sometimes causes damage as far away as 25 mi ( 40 km ) . The relatively shallow depth of this earthquake also contributed to its widespread effects . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Soon after the earthquake , the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration ordered a ground stop along the East Coast , causing some flight delays . The Air Traffic Control tower at John F. Kennedy International Airport was evacuated . Flights were delayed at several airports , including John F. Kennedy International Airport , Newark Liberty International Airport , Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport , Dulles International Airport , and Philadelphia International Airport . At Ronald Reagan National Airport , ceiling tiles fell in one terminal , and flights were halted . 
 A huge increase of cell @-@ phone calls immediately after the event congested the AT & T , Verizon Wireless , Sprint Nextel , T @-@ Mobile USA , and Frontier Communications networks in the Mid @-@ Atlantic region , causing disruptions and loss of service for as much as an hour after the earthquake . 
 = = = = Virginia = = = = 
 The epicenter of the earthquake was in Louisa County , Virginia , where damage was greatest and several minor injuries occurred . The town of Mineral , located 5 mi ( 8 km ) north @-@ northeast from the earthquake 's epicenter , reported the collapse of two buildings , as well as minor damage to several other structures , including the collapse of the ceiling in its Town Hall . Only minor injuries were reported , including the hospitalization of several people reporting chest pains related to the stress of the experience . Fallen chimneys and other structural damage to buildings was also reported in Louisa , the county seat . The Gilboa Christian Church , in Cuckoo , was heavily damaged and rendered unusable . At Louisa County High School , <unk> fell in classrooms , and cracks were seen in walls . Six students had minor injuries . Louisa County schools were closed on August 24 while engineers assessed damage to school buildings . The high school and Thomas Jefferson Elementary were closed for the remainder of the school year . Inspections revealed that 65 homes sustained major or severe damage and 125 homes experienced mild to moderate damage . Damage in Louisa County was estimated at $ 80 @.@ 6 million , of which $ 63 @.@ 8 million was from damage to public school buildings and $ 14 @.@ 7 million was from damage to residences . On August 25 , county officials declared a state of local emergency in order to allow them to request state aid . 
 Multiple reactor sensors at the North Anna Nuclear Generating Station , located 10 mi ( 16 km ) northeast of the epicenter , detected a slight power reduction as a result of vibrations in the reactor or monitoring devices . This caused the two nuclear reactors to shut down automatically seconds before off @-@ site power was lost . The Nuclear Regulatory Commission sent additional inspectors to the Virginia plant after preliminary measurements suggested that the ground shook more than the two reactors were designed to handle . The damage was minimal and the NRC advised that further inspections should not be interpreted to mean that the plant was not safe . After a $ 21 million inspection , engineers stated that they only found cosmetic damage . On November 11 , 2011 , the NRC gave its approval for restarting the reactors . 
 In Charlottesville , about 27 mi ( 43 km ) west of the epicenter , a gas leak closed several streets , including West Main Street . 
 In Spotsylvania County , the August 24 opening of public schools was delayed while damage to buildings was assessed . Six patients were treated at the Spotsylvania Regional Medical Center for minor injuries resulting from the earthquake . 
 Several buildings in Culpeper , about 37 mi ( 60 km ) north of the epicenter , sustained structural damage . The brick façade of the Levy Building , built during 1848 , collapsed and the building was condemned and demolished . The walls of St. Stephen 's Episcopal Church , constructed during 1821 , buckled and were deemed unstable by town officials . Another church , Culpeper Baptist Church , built during 1894 , lost its chimney . Schools in Culpeper County delayed their scheduled August 24 opening to assess damage to buildings . Two minor earthquake injuries were reported by the Culpeper Regional Hospital . Damage in Culpeper was estimated at $ 10 million . 
 In Fredericksburg , about 37 mi ( 60 km ) northeast of the epicenter , the Dickinson Building on the campus of <unk> Community College was deemed unusable for the rest of the semester , and the whole college was closed until alternative classrooms could be found , re @-@ opening on September 6 . Also in Fredericksburg , a gas leak led to the evacuation of homes and businesses in a two @-@ block radius . Officials estimated the damage total at around $ 711 @,@ 000 . 
 In Arlington County , a burst pipe flooded two corridors at the Pentagon . Employees , many of whom left the building when the earthquake was felt , were alerted to the flooding by an alarm system that was installed after the September 11 attacks . Arlington County 's Thomas Jefferson Theater — home to a middle school auditorium , a church , and several community theatre groups — closed for several months due to damage to its fly rack and proscenium . Nearby Alexandria also reported structural damages , though not any injuries . 
 In Prince William County , approximately 59 miles ( 95 km ) north of the epicenter , damage to the dam for Lake Jackson was documented by officials in May 2012 though local residents had noticed lower water levels in the lake in 2011 . Most of the water in the lake was released to relieve pressure . The dam will be rehabilitated at a cost of approximately $ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Washington , D.C. = = = = 
 The White House , the Capitol , and various other buildings were evacuated . The afternoon traffic rush hour was affected , with some traffic lights inoperative , and the Washington Metro system 's trains operated at reduced speeds while tracks and tunnels were inspected . 
 A National Park Service spokesperson reported that surveys revealed cracks near the top of the Washington Monument , the world 's tallest stone structure , which was closed indefinitely . The earthquake damaged three of the four pinnacles ( corner spires ) on the central tower of the Washington National Cathedral , cracked some of its flying buttresses , and caused additional damage . As the cathedral 's insurance policy did not cover earthquake damage , cathedral officials stated that they would need to raise millions of dollars to fully evaluate the damage and to stabilize and repair its limestone exterior . The Smithsonian Castle incurred damage to five decorative turrets , and fifty jars of preserved specimens fell from shelves at the Smithsonian 's National Museum of Natural History . The Embassy of Ecuador suffered structural damage , including three collapsed chimneys and cracked internal walls . The Treasury Building suffered minor damage to exterior railings , some of which fell to the ground and caused closure of a sidewalk . Fire department officials in Washington reported numerous minor injuries as a result of the earthquake . 
 = = = = Other parts of the Mid @-@ Atlantic region = = = = 
 In Wilmington , Delaware , blocks fell to the street from the steeple of St. Thomas the Apostle Church , and the New Castle County Courthouse was evacuated , as was the air traffic control tower of the New Castle County Airport in nearby Wilmington Manor . Fire marshals and building inspectors were called to assess structures throughout Dover , the capital city , where the city hall was evacuated . Numerous buildings in Georgetown , the Sussex County seat , were evacuated while crews checked for damage ; the Emergency Operations Center there reported 200 calls to 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . Delaware Department of Transportation crews were dispatched statewide to inspect interstate highways , the under @-@ construction replacement Indian River Inlet Bridge , the Delaware Memorial Bridge on I @-@ 295 , and other bridges and roads . 
 In Temple Hills , Maryland , residents were evacuated from two damaged apartment buildings . In Kensington , the tops of four spires on the Washington D.C. Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints fell to the ground along with several pieces of marble from the façade . Near Brunswick , the earthquake caused " significant discoloration and a reduction in the quality of the water " of a spring , leading officials to warn against using the water until further notice . In the Fells Point neighborhood of Baltimore , St. Patrick Catholic Church was deemed unsafe and was scheduled to be closed for weeks for repairs . In Salisbury , the City Police station endured damage above doorways and in concrete block walls , and there was also minor cracking in classroom walls at Salisbury University . In Annapolis , several buildings at the United States Naval Academy were damaged . In Suitland , eight jars of preserved fish specimens fell from shelves at a Smithsonian Institution storage facility . The 1740 Mt . Calvert Mansion , a historic site and museum located on the Patuxent River in Upper Marlboro , received substantial structural damage and was closed indefinitely to the public . 
 In Martinsburg , West Virginia , several government buildings were evacuated , and multiple citizens reported feeling their homes shaking violently enough to rattle picture frames off the walls . In Charleston , the Kanawha County Courthouse , the West Virginia State Capitol campus , and several other downtown buildings were evacuated ; Kanawha County dispatchers received more than 350 telephone calls in 45 minutes , but there were not any reports of damage to buildings and infrastructure other than minor plaster cracking in the old courthouse . In Philippi , part of a chimney collapsed at the Barbour County courthouse . The West Virginia Office of Miners ' Health , Safety and Training stated that West Virginia coal mines were safe following the tremors . A roof collapse in Patriot Coal Company 's Big Mountain Complex forced the closure of the mine . 
 Trembling was felt in buildings in Philadelphia , Pittsburgh , Altoona , Hollidaysburg , York , State College , Erie , Allentown , Reading , Harrisburg and elsewhere in Pennsylvania . Just before 2 : 00 p.m. , in the midst of an opening game between New England and Europe in the Little League Baseball World Series , many people in South Williamsport experienced a ground shaking <unk> first . Staffers at the Altoona Mirror evacuated their building after it shook for about 10 seconds from the tremor . They returned about 2 : 25 p.m. The third floor of the Blair County Courthouse in Hollidaysburg was evacuated but court sessions continued on the second floor . A house reportedly was moved off its foundation and its roof buckled in the Three Springs area , Huntingdon County Emergency Management Director Adam Miller said . A minor rockslide occurred on Route 453 near The Grier School in Birmingham . In Center City Philadelphia , a window shattered on a lower floor at the Independence Blue Cross building , and the company sent its 3 @,@ 000 employees home for the day . Other office buildings in Center City Philadelphia were also evacuated soon after the earthquake . Workers at the PPL Corporation in Allentown evacuated the building . However , the Three Mile Island nuclear plant south of Harrisburg continued to operate during the earthquake . The Bucks County Courthouse in Doylestown was evacuated after the earthquake . In Philadelphia , SEPTA Regional Rail trains were restricted to a speed of 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) while tracks were inspected for damage , and PATCO Speedline trains were briefly suspended , with no damage reported . The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation inspected bridges across the state for damage . The Delaware River Port Authority reported no damage to its four bridges across the Delaware River . Minor damage was also reported in the Pittsburgh area . 
 Damage in New Jersey was minor . The state Emergency Management office reported two gas leaks in Gloucester County . In Burlington , Temple B 'nai Israel 's synagogue building , built during 1801 , sustained some water damage when tremor @-@ caused openings in the roof allowed standing water to leak in , and about 20 bricks fell , damaging a congregant 's car . In Camden , a vacant house partially collapsed , and government buildings were evacuated , with city workers given the option of returning home for the day . Due to damage done by the quake , the municipal government of Woodbury reported that the historic Colonel George Gill Green Opera House , which was built during 1880 , would be razed , but instead it was renovated to provide housing for senior citizens . No other infrastructure damage was reported in the state . 
 Tremors were felt to varying degrees throughout New York State , including by people in some buildings in Manhattan . Physical damage occurred in Brooklyn , where a chimney in Red Hook was toppled . There were some disruptions , including building evacuations and delays at airports . Amtrak train service at Penn Station was also delayed . 
 = = = = New England = = = = 
 The earthquake was felt throughout much of the six New England states . In New Haven , Connecticut , play at the 2011 New Haven Open at Yale tennis tournament was stopped for two hours and the main stadium was evacuated while the fire department checked it for damage . No damage or injuries were reported . In Boston , Massachusetts , the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency reported tremors and swaying buildings but no damage . The U.S. District Court in South Boston was evacuated and the University of Massachusetts Boston closed early . In Maine , the earthquake was felt as far north as Augusta and Portland , but no damage was reported in the state . 
 = = = = Midwestern states = = = = 
 In Columbus , Ohio the Huntington Center was briefly evacuated , and occupants on the upper floors of the Rhodes State Office Tower and the Vern Riffe State Office Tower reported feeling strong shaking . Evacuations also occurred in Canton and Akron . In Cleveland , the press box at Progressive Field shook during the third inning of a Cleveland Indians baseball game . 
 Tremors from the earthquake were felt as far north as Saginaw , Michigan , and as far west as communities on Lake Michigan . There were no reports of damage . USGS also listed reports of tremors from as far west as Illinois , Indiana , Wisconsin , and Minnesota . 
 = = = = Southern states = = = = 
 The earthquake was felt in several southern states as far from the epicenter as Alabama , Georgia , and Florida , but no damage was reported . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Tremors from the earthquake were also felt in eastern Canada , mostly in Southern Ontario , as well as in parts of southern Quebec and the Maritime provinces . In Ontario , a few buildings in Toronto were evacuated , and roads were closed as a precautionary measure in case of building collapse in Sudbury and Windsor . The year 2011 is the second consecutive year in which an earthquake was widely felt in Southern Ontario and Quebec , the previous being the June 2010 Central Canada earthquake that also affected that region . 
 = = Internet activity and social media = = 
 The USGS " Did you feel it ? " citizen @-@ based earthquake intensity website received about 60 @,@ 000 reports in the first two hours after the quake , and over 100 @,@ 000 responses within four hours . 
 According to Facebook , the word " earthquake " appeared in the status updates of 3 million users within four minutes of the quake . Twitter said users were sending as many as 5 @,@ 500 messages ( " tweets " ) per second , which exceeds the maximum rate immediately after the death of Osama bin Laden and was " on par with " the rate after the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . 
 Due to the significantly slower propagation of seismic waves compared to the near @-@ speed @-@ of @-@ light transmission of internet traffic , some Twitter users read about the earthquake seconds before feeling the tremors . For example , Twitter users in such cities as New York City and Boston reported reading tweets about the earthquake from users in Washington , D.C. , or Richmond , Virginia , 15 to 30 seconds before feeling the quake itself . 
 The English version of Wikipedia had an encyclopedia article dedicated to the earthquake by 2 : 03 PM , 12 minutes after the event , and it was mentioned in two other Wikipedia articles even earlier . 
 = = Zoo animal reactions = = 
 Staff at the Smithsonian National Zoological Park in Washington , D.C. , reported that some of the animals in the park appeared to show behavior suggesting that they anticipated the earthquake from seconds to minutes before it was felt in the area . The earthquake was felt at the great ape exhibits during afternoon feeding time . About three to ten seconds before the quake , many of the apes abandoned their food and climbed to the top of a tree @-@ like structure in the exhibit . The red @-@ ruffed lemurs sounded an alarm call about 15 minutes before the quake , and the flock of 64 flamingos rushed about and grouped themselves together just before the quake . During the quake , some animals vocalized , some ran or dove for cover , and some stood up and stared at the walls of their enclosures . Some of the animals remained agitated for the rest of the day , while others calmed quickly . 
 = Chesham branch = 
 The Chesham branch is a short single @-@ track railway branch line in Buckinghamshire , England . Although no part of it is within London and it runs entirely above ground , it is owned and operated by the London Underground . It runs from a junction at Chalfont & Latimer with the Metropolitan line and the Chiltern Railways route to Aylesbury , and runs for 3 @.@ 89 miles ( 6 @.@ 26 km ) northwest to its only other station at Chesham . Its terminus at Chesham has since 1961 been the westernmost and since 1994 the northernmost point on the London Underground network . 
 The line was built as part of Edward Watkin 's scheme to turn his Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) into a direct rail route between London and Manchester , and it was envisaged that a station outside Chesham would be an intermediate stop on a through route running north to connect with the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) . Deteriorating relations between the MR and LNWR led to the MR instead expanding to the northwest via Aylesbury , and the scheme to connect with the LNWR was abandoned . By this time much of the land needed for the section of line as far as Chesham had been bought . As Chesham was at the time the only significant town near the MR 's new route , it was decided to build the route as far as Chesham , and to complete the connection with the LNWR at a future date if it proved desirable . Local residents were unhappy at the proposed station site outside Chesham , and a public subscription raised the necessary additional funds to extend the railway into the centre of the town . The Chesham branch opened in 1889 and Chesham became the terminus of the MR. 
 While construction of the Chesham line was underway , the Metropolitan Railway was also expanding to the northwest , and in 1892 the extension to Aylesbury and on to Verney Junction opened . The Chesham line became a branch line , with most trains operating as a shuttle service connecting to the main line rather than as through trains to London . The opening in 1899 of the Great Central Railway , Edward Watkin 's connection between London and Manchester , as well as the highly successful Metro @-@ land campaign encouraging Londoners to move to the rural areas served by the railway , led to an increase in traffic in the area , although the Chesham branch was less affected by development than most other areas served by the railway . In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership and became the Metropolitan line of the London Underground . London Underground aimed to concentrate on their core business of passenger transport in London , and saw the rural and freight lines in Buckinghamshire as an expensive anomaly . The day @-@ to @-@ day operation of the Chesham branch was transferred to the London and North Eastern Railway , although London Transport retained control . In 1960 the line was electrified , and from then 1962 on was operated by London Underground A Stock trains . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s decaying infrastructure and the withdrawal of subsidies brought the future of the line into doubt . As one of its last acts the Greater London Council paid for the replacement of two bridges on the line , allowing operations to continue . The centenary of the line in 1989 saw a renewal of interest and an upgrading of the trains between Chalfont & Latimer and London Marylebone station made commuting more practical , and usage of the line stabilised . The introduction of London Underground S Stock in 2010 led to the replacement of the shuttle service with half @-@ hourly through trains to and from London . 
 = = Background = = 
 The English county of Buckinghamshire is bisected by the Chiltern Hills , which rise sharply and cross the county from northeast to southwest . Although the fertile soil and good drainage of the Chilterns provides ideal conditions for farming , the steep hills historically made travelling difficult . Few sizeable settlements developed in Buckinghamshire , and what roads existed were of poor quality . 
 The county town of Aylesbury , immediately north of the Chilterns and 37 miles ( 60 km ) from the City of London , was an important agricultural centre . As London grew , the significance of Buckinghamshire as a provider of food increased , particularly following the development of the Aylesbury duck in the 18th century . Large numbers of horses , cattle and Aylesbury ducks were herded along the roads to London 's huge livestock market at Smithfield . The strain placed on the roads by bulk livestock movements led to the introduction of a network of high quality toll roads in the area in the 18th century . The roads crossing the Chilterns followed the valley of the River <unk> through Amersham or the River <unk> through Berkhamsted . These roads greatly improved travel in the area , reducing the journey time from Aylesbury to Oxford or London to a single day . 
 Between 1793 and 1800 the Grand Junction Canal canal was built , connecting London to the Midlands . The canal followed the course of the River <unk> through the Chilterns , and included a branch to Aylesbury . For the first time the coal and industrial products of northern England and London could be cheaply supplied to Buckinghamshire , and grain and timber from Buckinghamshire 's farms could easily be shipped to market . The route taken by the Grand Junction Canal ran through the east of the county , leaving the Chiltern towns of southern Buckinghamshire isolated . When Robert Stephenson 's London and Birmingham Railway opened in 1838 it paralleled the route of the canal through Buckinghamshire . Although the short 1839 Aylesbury Railway linked Aylesbury to the London and Birmingham Railway , the rest of central Buckinghamshire remained unconnected to the railway and canal networks . 
 = = Early Chesham railway schemes = = 
 The Chiltern market town of Chesham / <unk> / had historically been an important manufacturing centre . In 1853 the town held three flour mills , three sawmills , three breweries , two paper mills and a silk mill , while of the town 's 6 @,@ 000 inhabitants 30 were recognised as master manufacturers . However , the local economy suffered badly from a lack of connections to the new transport networks . In the 1840s coal cost almost three times more to buy in Chesham than to buy in Berkhamsted , and it took over 21 ⁄ 2 hours for passengers to travel by road from Chesham to the most convenient railway station at Watford . 
 Between 1845 , the height of the railway bubble , and the 1880s numerous schemes were put forward for railways to Chesham . The most significant was an 1845 scheme for an orbital railway bypassing London to connect the railways entering London from the north , west and south ; this route was to pass through Chesham . The scheme was abandoned , as was an 1853 proposal by railway entrepreneur and former Member of Parliament for Buckingham Harry Verney for a railway line from Watford to Wendover via Rickmansworth and Amersham ( around two miles ( 3 km ) from Chesham ) . Robert Grosvenor , 1st Baron Ebury , whose Watford and Rickmansworth Railway had opened in 1862 , proposed extensions from Rickmansworth to Chesham and Aylesbury , but failed to attract funding and abandoned the scheme . To the north of Chesham , the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) promoted a railway link between the Great Northern Railway station at Harpenden and the LNWR 's station at Boxmoor , which would run on to terminate at Chesham . The LNWR baulked at the cost of the earthworks necessary to reach Chesham and the southern stage of the proposal was abandoned ; the line between Harpenden and Boxmoor eventually opened in 1877 . ( The Harpenden – Boxmoor section was never completed ; trains to Boxmoor terminated nearby at Heath Park Halt , and passengers to and from Boxmoor had to complete their journey by horse or horse @-@ drawn bus . ) In 1887 a 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 067 mm ) tramway was proposed , which was to run through the streets of Chesham and on to Boxmoor , but the proposal was abandoned owing to a lack of funds and opposition from the operators of toll roads around Boxmoor . 
 = = Metropolitan Railway Chiltern schemes = = 
 In 1837 Euston railway station opened , the first railway station connecting London with the industrial heartlands of the West Midlands and Lancashire . Railways were banned by a Parliamentary commission from operating in London itself , and thus the station was built on what was then the northern boundary of the city . Other main line termini north of London soon followed at Paddington ( 1838 ) , Bishopsgate ( 1840 ) , Fenchurch Street ( 1841 ) , King 's Cross ( 1852 ) and St Pancras ( 1868 ) . All were built outside the built @-@ up area of the city , making them inconvenient to reach . Charles Pearson ( 1793 – 1862 ) had proposed the idea of an underground railway connecting the City of London with the relatively distant London main line rail termini in around 1840 . In 1854 to promote the scheme he commissioned the first ever traffic survey , determining that each day 200 @,@ 000 walked into the City of London , 44 @,@ 000 travelled by omnibus , and 26 @,@ 000 travelled in private carriages . A Parliamentary Commission backed Pearson 's proposal over other schemes . 
 Despite concerns about vibrations causing subsidence of nearby buildings , the problems of compensating the many thousands of people whose homes were destroyed during the digging of the tunnel , and fears that the tunnelling might accidentally break through into Hell , construction began in 1860 . The new railway was built beneath the existing New Road , running from the Great Western Railway 's terminus at Paddington to Farringdon and the meat market of Smithfield . On 9 January 1863 the line opened as the Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , the world 's first underground passenger railway . The MR was successful and grew steadily , extending its own services and acquiring other local railways in the areas north and west of London . 
 In 1872 Edward Watkin ( 1819 – 1901 ) was appointed as the Metropolitan Railway 's Chairman . A director of many railway companies , he had a vision of unifying a string of railway companies to create a single route running from Manchester via London to an intended Channel Tunnel and on to France . In 1873 Watkin entered negotiations to take control of the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and a section of the former Buckinghamshire Railway running north from Verney Junction to Buckingham . He planned to extend the MR north from London to Aylesbury to join the existing lines and create a direct route from London to the north of England . He also proposed to extend a short rail branch which ran from the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway to the small town of Brill , known as the Brill Tramway , southwest to Oxford , and thus create a through route from London to Oxford . Rail services between Oxford and London at this time were poor , and although still an extremely roundabout route , had the scheme been completed it would have formed the shortest route from London to Oxford , Aylesbury , Buckingham and Stratford upon Avon . The Duke of Buckingham , chairman of the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and owner of the Brill Tramway , was enthusiastic , and authorisation for the scheme was sought from Parliament . Parliament did not share the enthusiasm of Watkin and the Duke , and in 1875 the Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire Union Railway Bill was rejected . 
 Watkin did , however , obtain consent to extend the MR to Harrow , roughly 12 miles ( 19 km ) northwest of London , an extension which opened in 1880 . The Harrow line was further extended to Rickmansworth in 1887 . Rickmansworth at this time was a small town with a population of only 1 @,@ 800 ; to generate passenger traffic for the new station , a horse bus service between Chesham and Rickmansworth opened on 1 September 1887 . 
 = = = 1885 LNWR junction scheme = = = 
 Watkin continued to harbour ambitions of linking his railway companies in the north and south of England , and while the construction of the Rickmansworth extension was underway planned two possible routes north from Rickmansworth across the Chilterns . One proposal envisaged the MR taking over or reaching agreement with the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway , building a link between Rickmansworth and Aylesbury , and running over the A & B 's line to the north . The A & B had close relations with the Great Western Railway , with whom they shared a station at Aylesbury . Watkin felt it possible that the A & B would reach agreement with the GWR instead and not cooperate with the MR. 
 In anticipation of the A & B refusing to cooperate , a tentative agreement was reached with the London and North Western Railway , with whom Watkin was on good terms , for the MR to build a route via Chesham to connect to LNWR mainline . This scheme would provide the LNWR with an alternative route into London when necessary , while providing Watkin with his long @-@ sought connection to the north . The land required for an intermediate station near Chalfont St Giles and a line between there and a site outside Chesham was purchased . Agreement was reached with the LNWR that the costs of building the line would be shared equally by the MR and LNWR in return for the LNWR having running rights to Rickmansworth , and an Act of Parliament authorising the extension was obtained in 1885 . 
 After the Act of Parliament had been granted , membership of the board of the LNWR changed , and they abandoned their support for the extension . By this time , the MR had bought most of the land between Rickmansworth and Chesham required for that section of the route . 
 = = = 1888 Aylesbury extension scheme = = = 
 With relations between the MR and the LNWR deteriorating , Watkin turned his attention to the proposal to link to Aylesbury . Negotiations between the A & B and the GWR had broken down , and Watkin seized an opportunity to agree running rights over the A & B 's route north from Aylesbury , taking over the line completely in 1891 . In 1888 work began on the extension to Aylesbury . 
 While the route to the LNWR via Chesham had been abandoned , much of the land needed for the section south of Chesham had already been bought . As Chesham , with a population in 1882 of 6 @,@ 500 , was the most significant town in the area through which the MR was building , the MR decided to build the section of line between Chalfont and Chesham as a branch line despite Chesham no longer being on the proposed through route to the north . The planned route to the LNWR would have passed to the east of Chesham , and the proposed site of the station was in <unk> , southwest of the town . ( Although the extension to the LNWR was abandoned , the MR continued to buy land between Chesham and Tring for some years afterwards , in anticipation of the scheme being revived . ) 
 Although work had begun on the <unk> station , including the completion of the station hotel ( now the Unicorn pub ) , the population of Chesham were unhappy at the station being built such a distance from the town . With the extension to meet the LNWR abandoned the railway no longer needed to curve away from the town , and a public subscription raised £ 2 @,@ 000 fund a 71 @-@ chain ( 1 @,@ 562 @-@ yd ; 1 @,@ 428 m ) extension to a site near the town centre . Construction of the branch to Chesham began in late 1887 . 
 = = Construction and opening = = 
 The extensions from Rickmansworth to Aylesbury and Chesham were designed by Charles Liddell and built by contractor James Firbank . Rather than follow the valley of the River Chess , which would have been the most convenient route to Chesham , the route out of Rickmansworth was intentionally built on higher ground to reduce the steep climb over the Chilterns towards Aylesbury , and thus rose steadily from Rickmansworth to a hilltop station at Amersham . At Chalfont Road station ( renamed Chalfont & Latimer in 1915 ) , near Chalfont St Giles , the line to Chesham split from the line to Aylesbury . With a total length of 3 miles 56 chains ( 3 mi 1 @,@ 232 yd ; 5 @,@ 955 m ) , the single @-@ track Chesham branch ran alongside the Aylesbury line for a short distance , before curving down the slope of the Chess Valley at a gradient of around 1 in 66 . Chalk from the railway 's cutting along the Chess Valley was used to build an embankment to bring the railway into the town centre . Bridging the watercress beds of the Chess Valley proved problematic , and the cost of the line exceeded its estimate . Additional costs were incurred by the laying of temporary track in early 1889 to allow the directors of the MR a trial trip along the route . 
 On 15 May 1889 a demonstration train comprising two carriages and two locomotives ran along the newly completed line from Chesham to Rickmansworth , carrying the subscribers who had funded the extension and representatives of the local authorities and School Boards covering the areas through which the new line ran . ( As no Metropolitan Railway train had yet run through to Chesham on the finished line , the train from Chesham to Rickmansworth was drawn by two locomotives belonging to the contractors who had built the line , rather than by MR engines . A third engine ran ahead of the demonstration train to act as a pilot . ) A second train carried the directors of the Metropolitan Railway from London to Rickmansworth , collected those passengers who had ridden the demonstration train from Chesham to Rickmansworth , and continued to Chesham . 
 As the line had not yet formally been approved for opening by the Railway Inspectorate , the MR requested that the local authorities not celebrate the event . However , public interest was high and schools closed for the day . Large crowds gathered around the station and along the line , and a banner reading " Long looked for , come at last " was hung across Chesham station . As the train pulled into Chesham , it was greeted by celebratory gunfire as it drew into the town , and a band at the station played See the Conquering Hero Comes . The party alighted at the newly built Chesham goods depot , which had been decorated as a banqueting hall for the occasion , and an opening ceremony was conducted outside by Edward Watkin and local dignitary and railway financier Ferdinand de Rothschild before the group entered the goods depot for a celebratory meal . Watkin gave a speech recollecting George Stephenson 's desire , fifty years earlier , to see the first mainline railway built along the route now being taken by the Metropolitan Railway , joked that he hoped the easy access to London would not lead to the rural nature of the area being displaced by " a sudden influx of <unk> " , and spoke of his desire to see the connection northwards to the LNWR completed . 
 The line was formally inspected by the Railway Inspectorate on 1 July 1889 , and the first official service on the line left Chesham for London 's Baker Street at 6 @.@ 55 am on 8 July 1889 . Throughout the day large crowds flocked to Chesham station to watch the trains , and the arrival and departure of each train at Chesham was greeted with peals of the bells of St. Mary 's Church . Over the course of the day 1 @,@ 500 passengers travelled on the line , and 4 @,@ 300 used the line in its first week of operations . 
 Following the opening of the line , 17 trains per weekday ran in each direction at intervals of one hour from around 7 am to around 11 pm . The initial trains were drawn by Metropolitan Railway A and B Class locomotives . Most trains stopped at all stations , but a fast trains each morning ran between Chesham and Baker Street , taking 50 minutes from start to finish . On Sundays , trains again ran at hourly intervals , but only 12 trains per day ran and there was a three @-@ hour gap in services in the morning to allow the railway 's staff to attend church . 
 The opening of the railway dramatically ended Chesham 's isolation . Commuting to London became possible for the first time , as did affordable excursions to the seaside resorts on the south and east coasts . The products of the area 's industries and farms could for the first time be shipped cheaply to the markets of London , and London newspapers arrived each morning at 7 @.@ 28 am , in time for delivery . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 The station at Chalfont Road was built with almost all facilities on the up side ( the London @-@ bound platform ) . As Chalfont St Giles , the largest nearby settlement , was on the other side of the tracks , most passengers travelling to and from the station were obliged to take a lengthy detour from the single exit . A footpath across the tracks was added in 1925 , but an approach road giving access to the station from the southern side of the railway line was not built until 1933 . The station had three platforms ; one platform in each direction on the London – Aylesbury line , and a bay platform alongside the up platform for trains to Chesham . A run @-@ around loop was built to allow locomotives reversing in the bay platform always to be at the front of their trains . It was built outside the station , meaning locomotives reversing on the Chesham line were obliged to push their trains out of the station before performing the manoeuvre . 
 The station was renamed " Chalfont & Latimer " in 1915 , although station signage was inconsistent and on absorption by London Transport in 1933 its roundel signs read simply " Chalfont " . Increased passenger numbers strained the station 's minimal facilities , and it was eventually redeveloped with extended shelters and improved waiting rooms in 1927 . The platforms were extended during the electrification works of 1957 – 60 . 
 The Metropolitan Railway Act 1885 had given Watkin permission to extend the line from Chesham to connect with the LNWR at Tring . Thus , although it was the terminus of the line , Chesham station was designed with a revival of the LNWR extension scheme in mind . The small station building was set to one side of the tracks to allow for a possible extension onwards . The station had a single platform , with a run @-@ around loop and turntable alongside , together with a coaling station and water tank . The station was lit by gas light until 1925 ; the local gas works , which consumed around 5 @,@ 000 tons of coal each year , threatened to withdraw their coal traffic from the line if the station were fitted with electric lighting . While Chalfont Road station initially served a sparsely populated rural area ( the village of Little Chalfont had not yet grown around the station ) , Chesham station was busy , and at the time of its opening had a full staff of a stationmaster , two ticket inspectors , two clerks , two porters and two collectors . 
 Chesham also had extensive goods facilities , particularly for coal ; the goods yard was initially equipped with a mobile 5 @-@ ton crane , replaced by a fixed 8 @-@ ton crane between 1898 – 1900 . The outward transport of watercress , a major local industry , also generated significant traffic . During the electrification of the line in 1957 – 60 the station was equipped with a bay platform for passenger trains , to allow it to accommodate both through services to and from Baker Street and the Chalfont & Latimer – Chesham shuttle simultaneously . This bay platform was closed on 29 November 1970 and is now a garden . 
 The Metropolitan Railway 's passenger coaches , dating from 1870 and designed for underground use within London , were not fitted with heating until 1895 . Consequently , both stations were also equipped with equipment for heating <unk> , which would be distributed to passengers during cold weather . 
 = = Opening of the Aylesbury line = = 
 As developments on the line from Chalfont Road to Chesham took place , progress continued on the 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) cross @-@ Chiltern link between Chalfont and Aylesbury . On 1 September 1892 work was completed as far as a temporary station south of Aylesbury . ( The connection with the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway — absorbed by the Metropolitan Railway in 1891 — was completed in late 1893 . From 1 January 1894 MR trains used the A & BR 's Aylesbury station , and the temporary station was abandoned . ) The line to Chesham became a branch line , generally operated by a shuttle service between Chalfont Road and Chesham , although some trains at peak periods continued to run between London and Chesham . The MR had bought a number of Metropolitan Railway C Class locomotives to replace the ageing A and B class engines , but these performed poorly on the London @-@ Aylesbury line and were soon replaced by the Metropolitan Railway D Class . As a consequence , the C class engines were often used on the Chesham shuttle services . 
 While construction of the Chesham and Aylesbury lines was underway Watkin continued to press for the extension from Chesham to the LNWR , as did prominent manufacturers in Chesham . However , construction of the extensions had left the MR seriously exposed financially , forcing the board to cut dividends in July 1889 . At a Special General Meeting on 12 February 1890 matters came to a head . Shareholders endorsed the decision to acquire the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and authorised the MR to acquire the moribund Brill Tramway , which connected with the A & BR at Quainton Road station , but blocked the expensive extension beyond Chesham , as well as Watkin 's proposed extension to Moreton Pinkney to the north . ( Watkin 's Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway was refused consent at the time to build south to connect with the MR at Moreton Pinkney , which would have rendered the Moreton Pinkney branch an inevitably loss @-@ making branch line serving a very lightly populated area . Watkin was determined to build this section as a vital segment in his vision of a London – Manchester railway , and proposed that if the MR would not build this section , the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway would build the line themselves and lease it to the MR. The MR board refused to have anything to do with the scheme . Moreton Pinkney was eventually served by Watkin 's railway network in 1899 as <unk> railway station on the Great Central Railway . ) 
 In 1894 Edward Watkin suffered a stroke . Although he nominally remained a director of his railway companies , he resigned all his railway chairmanships and his influence was effectively ended . With the connection at Aylesbury complete , the Metropolitan Railway reached 50 miles ( 80 km ) northwest of London , and his planned route between London and northern England was almost complete . Watkin 's Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway continued to build southwards from its southernmost point at Annesley , reaching Quainton Road station on the former A & BR in 1899 and completing the north @-@ south link , the Great Central Railway ( GCR ) , in time for Watkin to see his vision completed before his death in 1901 . 
 = = Relations with the Great Central Railway = = 
 After Watkin 's retirement from management , relations between the MR and GCR deteriorated rapidly over shared use of Baker Street station and the congested route into London , and soon broke down completely . On 30 July 1898 John Bell , General Manager of the Metropolitan Railway , took control of the Quainton Road signal box himself and refused to allow a GCR train onto MR @-@ owned tracks on the grounds that it was scheduled to take the Great Western rather than the Metropolitan route south of Aylesbury , while on one occasion in 1901 King Edward VII was travelling home after visiting a friend in Wendover ; the MR signalman allowed a slow goods train to run in front of the royal train , causing the King to arrive late back in London . The MR management also refused the GCR permission to install points to connect their engine shed at Aylesbury to the railway line , on the grounds that the land for the shed had been bought clandestinely . Eventually a parallel set of tracks was built for the GCR between Harrow and London , running alongside the MR to a separate terminus at Marylebone , a short distance from Baker Street . The GCR continued to share the less @-@ congested section between Quainton Road and Harrow — including Chalfont Road station — with the MR. 
 With the hostile Metropolitan Railway controlling the GCR 's only approach to London through Quainton Road and Aylesbury , GCR General Manager William Pollitt decided to create a link with the Great Western Railway to create a second route into London which bypassed all MR property . In 1899 the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway began construction of a new line , commonly known as the Alternative Route , to link the GWR 's existing station at Princes Risborough to the new Great Central line . The line ran from Princes Risborough north to meet the Great Central at Grendon Underwood , about three miles ( 5 km ) north of Quainton Road , thus bypassing Quainton Road altogether . Although formally an independent company , in practice the new line was operated as a part of the Great Central Railway . The new route opened in 1906 , and a substantial part of the GCR 's traffic to and from London was diverted onto the Alternative Route , damaging the profitability of the MR 's railway operations . 
 The MR management were horrified at the potential loss of income and restarted negotiations with the GCR , and a 1906 agreement meant that GCR traffic was shared between the old and new routes . Management of the shared route north of Harrow alternated every five years between the MR and GCR . ( A proposed link between Marylebone and the sub @-@ surface section of the Metropolitan Railway , which would have allowed GCR trains to run across London via the MR @-@ controlled Thames Tunnel and on to the south coast , was abandoned . ) The sharing arrangement meant through trains running from Chesham to Marylebone , as well as the MR terminus at Baker Street , and that the branch was worked by GCR trains as well as the ageing MR rolling stock . 
 = = Chesham and Metro @-@ land = = 
 In 1903 Robert Selbie was appointed Secretary of the Metropolitan Railway , working on the electrification of the London sections of the line ; by 1905 the route was electrified as far as Harrow , although the sections north of Harrow , including the Chesham branch , continued to be worked by steam power . In 1908 he was appointed General Manager , a position he was to hold until 1930 . Selbie realised that Watkin 's schemes and the expensive electrification project had left the company with major financial liabilities , and that the MR 's core business in central London would come under significant pressure as the use of automobiles increased and as the new Underground Electric Railways of London tube lines improved their services . Selbie set out to reshape the MR as a feeder route for goods and passengers into London . 
 New branches to Uxbridge , Watford and Stanmore were built , and from 1915 the extremely effective Metro @-@ land advertising campaign began , promoting the lightly developed areas along the MR 's routes as ideal for commuting to London . Watkin 's expansionist schemes had led to the acquisition of huge tracts of near @-@ worthless land in the Buckinghamshire countryside around the MR 's routes , as the MR had tried to take control of as much land as possible along every possible route between London and Manchester . With the GCR complete it was no longer necessary for the MR to keep these lands clear for potential railway use , and Selbie began development on a massive scale . By 1939 over 4 @,@ 600 houses had been built by the MR alone , and entire new towns had grown around the MR 's stations between Harrow and Aylesbury . This development not only generated huge amounts of money from property development , but vastly increased use of the railway for passenger and goods traffic . The MR 's Baker Street terminus was also redeveloped and a block of 180 luxury apartments known as Chiltern Court was built above the station . With the profits generated , the line was further electrified as far as Rickmansworth . Again , the Chesham branch was not electrified and remained operated by steam locomotives ; the electric locomotives would be uncoupled from their trains at Rickmansworth and a steam locomotive would haul the train to Chesham . By this time , the steam sections of the route were generally worked by the powerful Metropolitan Railway H Class engines , capable of speeds of up to 75 miles per hour ( 121 km / h ) . 
 Selbie also made a conscious effort to attract the wealthy classes to the railway . Stations such as Sandy Lodge ( now Moor Park ) were built to serve golf courses and hunts along the route , and horse @-@ vans were provided at stations serving hunts and point to points . Two Pullman cars were introduced in 1909 on selected services between the City of London and Chesham , Aylesbury and Verney Junction for the benefit of businessmen travelling to work and theatregoers returning from London . 
 Despite the huge population growth in southern Buckinghamshire caused by the railway , Chesham remained relatively unaffected by development . Although there was extensive development in Chesham Bois , roughly halfway between Chesham and Amersham , between 1889 and 1925 the population of Chesham itself grew by less than 2 @,@ 000 , and between 1925 and 1935 — the peak of the Metro @-@ land boom — by only 225 . Between 1921 and 1928 the season ticket revenue from Amersham and Chalfont & Latimer stations rose by 134 % ; that from Chesham by only 6 @.@ 7 % . Although the MR owned large tracts of land around Chesham , bought in anticipation of a revival of the LNWR connection scheme , Selbie chose not to build a housing estate on the site , instead selling much of it to the local council . By this time , service on the Chesham branch was of a relatively poor quality . Improvements to the central London section and the prioritisation of the Aylesbury line had led to ageing surplus stock often being used on the Chesham branch , and the partial electrification caused delays at Harrow ( and later Rickmansworth ) as steam locomotives were coupled and uncoupled . As the branch was mainly operated as a shuttle service passengers to and from Chesham were obliged to wait at Chalfont & Latimer station . This had been built to serve a lightly populated area , but the Metro @-@ land development had caused a much larger number of users than it had been designed for , and it had few waiting facilities , poor lighting , inadequate shelter , and dirty toilets . As Amersham grew , more and more of the trains which had previously run direct from London to Chesham instead ran to Amersham , causing further crowding as passengers waited for the shuttle service at Chalfont & Latimer . Improving road transport caused an increasing number of commuters to abandon the Chesham line , which in turn prompted the MR to further reduce passenger services . 
 = = = 1909 accidents = = = 
 Although the short line to Chesham generally had a good safety record , despite its sharp curves and relatively steep gradient , it suffered two significant accidents in this period . On 19 August 1909 the A class engine hauling the 7 @.@ 53 am train from Chesham broke an axle and derailed outside Chesham . There were no injuries but the track was blocked ; a passenger service was maintained by operating shuttle services from each end of the branch to the crash site , where passengers were obliged to walk around the derailed engine to change trains . On 6 November 1909 a <unk> from a locomotive firebox enveloped Robert Prior , the train 's driver , in flames . ( The type of locomotive is not recorded , but it is likely to have been a Metropolitan Railway D Class , which are known to have had a problem with <unk> . ) The locomotive 's fireman managed to drive the train to Chesham , where Prior died from his injuries two days later . An inquest found that Prior had failed to turn on the blower , and a verdict of accidental death was recorded . 
 = = London Transport = = 
 Robert Selbie had fought vigorously for the independence of the Metropolitan Railway , and had successfully preserved the MR 's independence during the grouping of 1923 , which had merged almost all of Britain 's railways into four companies . However , on 17 May 1930 he died suddenly , and his successors acceded to pressure from the Ministry of Transport to merge with London 's other underground railways . On 1 July 1933 the merger brought all of London 's underground railways aside from the short Waterloo & City Railway , under public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . The Metropolitan Railway became the Metropolitan line of the London Underground . 
 Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , aimed to move the network away from freight services , and to concentrate on the electrification and improvement of the core routes in London . In particular , he saw the lines beyond Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes . On 30 November 1935 the last train ran on the Brill Tramway between Brill and Quainton Road , and at the stroke of midnight , the rails connecting the Tramway to the main line were ceremonially severed . The former Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway between Quainton Road and Verney Junction was closed to passengers on 6 July 1936 , and London Transport services north of Aylesbury were withdrawn . 
 = = = London and North Eastern Railway operation = = = 
 The route to Aylesbury and the Chesham branch survived Pick 's cutbacks to the Metropolitan line , but the former Metropolitan Railway 's routes in Buckinghamshire , and in particular the Chesham line , were increasingly regarded as an expensive anomaly by London Transport . After 1937 the operation of all steam services north of Rickmansworth was passed to the London & North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) . The LNER retained Metropolitan Railway E Class locomotives to work the Chesham branch , but other steam services on the former MR were operated by LNER N5 Class locomotives . 
 The LNER did not want to take full responsibility for the line , and although they provided the services , ownership remained with the LPTB . In 1935 the LPTB , seeking to abandon steam power as much as possible , drew up a scheme to include electrification of the Amersham line as part of the New Works Programme . It was not planned to electrify the Chesham branch ; instead , a diesel @-@ powered GWR railcar was borrowed from the GWR for trials on the branch . Although the railcar performed well on the curves and slopes of the branch , the railcar had a capacity for only 70 passengers and was only able to haul light amounts of goods . The LPTB commissioned its own , larger , railcar design , but by the end of 1936 , it decided instead to electrify the Chesham branch , and the railcar schemes were abandoned . The LPTB 's plan envisaged electric trains splitting at Chalfont & Latimer , with half of each train continuing to Amersham and half to Chesham . 
 Although some preparatory work was carried out , the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 brought the electrification north of Rickmansworth to a halt . First class travel was abandoned by the LPTB , along with the Pullman cars , and the line was operated entirely as a shuttle service . In 1940 the Chesham branch was converted to <unk> working , in which the trains could be driven from each end , thus avoiding the time @-@ consuming repositioning of the locomotive . LNER C13 Class locomotives were used for this push @-@ pull working , along with two three @-@ car sets of antiquated Ashbury passenger cars dating from 1898 . 
 = = = Nationalisation = = = 
 On 1 January 1948 , almost all railways in Britain — including the London Transport Passenger Board and the London and North Eastern Railway — were nationalised under the Transport Act 1947 . The LPTB became the London Transport Executive ( LT ) , and the LNER became a part of British Railways . In the Greater London Plan of 1944 Sir Patrick Abercrombie had strongly recommended a halt to further modern development in Chesham and along the Chess Valley to preserve the sensitive local environment , and there was thus little prospect for growth in passenger numbers on the branch . 
 For the first decade after nationalisation services to Chesham continued much as before , although the unification of the mainline companies meant a wider variety of locomotives operating services on the branch . For two weeks from 13 October 1952 LT experimented with a three @-@ car lightweight diesel train on the route , but the train used had difficulty negotiating the line 's sharp bends and the branch reverted to steam operations . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s , British Railways had begun to operate in regional units , and responsibility for services on the former Great Central routes in the Chilterns was transferred to the London Midland Region . Services on the branch were generally hauled by LMS Ivatt Class locomotives , although passenger trains continued to use the 1898 Ashbury cars . British Railways continued to operate goods services on the branch , although these declined steadily owing to competition from road haulage to the point at which coal deliveries were the only significant business . 
 By now the pre @-@ war electrification scheme had been revived . In 1957 electrification between Rickmansworth and Amersham and Chesham began . Chalfont & Latimer 's platforms were extended and a second platform was opened at Chesham on 3 July 1960 to prevent through operations to and from Baker Street from interfering with the Chesham – Chalfont & Latimer shuttle . An electric service using London Underground T Stock began operations between Chesham and Chalfont & Latimer on 16 August 1960 , with former MR electric locomotives hauling the through trains to and from London . A steam locomotive was kept on standby in the new second platform at Chesham , in case of a failure of the electric trains . From June 1962 both the T Stock and the locomotive @-@ hauled trains were replaced by the newly introduced London Underground A Stock . 
 The last scheduled London Transport steam passenger train on the branch left Chesham at 12 @.@ 11 am on 12 September 1960 . 1 @,@ 917 passengers used the line that day , in comparison with a typical Sunday usage of around 100 . Earlier on 11 September descendants of the Chesham residents who had attended Watkin 's original meeting to promote the railway , along with 86 @-@ year @-@ old Albert Wilcox who had been present at the opening of the line , rode the steam shuttle to Chalfont & Latimer and back , and attended a ceremony in Chesham 's Council Chamber . ( Although the 12 @.@ 11 am service from Chesham on 12 September 1960 was the last scheduled London Transport steam service to use the line , a steam train left Marylebone for Chesham each morning at 3 @.@ 55 am to deliver newspapers , returning as the first passenger train from Chesham at 5 @.@ 58 am . This journey to Marylebone was open to the public but was unadvertised and did not appear in published timetables . This arrangement continued to be operated by steam locomotive until 18 June 1962 . ) The Ashbury passenger cars , which by now had each covered around 800 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 km ) , were retired from service . The last steam @-@ powered passenger services on the remaining non @-@ electrified section between Amersham and Aylesbury ran on 9 September 1961 . The line between Amersham and Aylesbury was handed over to British Rail , leaving Chesham as the westernmost point of the London Underground network . The goods yard at Chesham was closed in 1966 , and a train hauled by a former GWR 5700 Class locomotive removed the track from the goods yard , the last steam service to use the line . On 17 October 1967 the newspaper train service and its return journey to Marylebone , by this time worked by a British Rail diesel multiple unit , was abandoned , leaving the branch exclusively operated by London Transport trains . 
 = = = Closure proposals = = = 
 Although LT had hoped that the electrification would boost revenue , the Chesham branch generated little income . In a period of recession LT was reluctant to continue subsidising a little @-@ used branch line some distance outside its core area . Fares were drastically increased in 1970 , leaving a monthly season ticket from Chesham to Baker Street costing £ 43 ( about £ 600 in 2016 ) . London Transport considered closing the branch , but it survived thanks to subsidies from the Ministry of Transport , Buckinghamshire County Council and the Greater London Council . Sunday services on the branch were abolished as a cost @-@ cutting measure , although this decision was reversed following protests . 
 In 1982 the future of the Chesham line came into serious question , as it became clear that the two bridges carrying the line into Chesham were deteriorating badly and that , unless the bridges were replaced , the branch could not continue to operate after 1986 . By this time rail services in Buckinghamshire had been drastically cut back under the Beeching Axe mass rail closure programme of the 1960s . The last passenger trains north of Aylesbury had run on 5 September 1966 , and since then the future of the Amersham – Aylesbury route itself had been in serious doubt . The Greater London Council was scheduled for abolition , bringing their subsidy of the Chesham branch to an end . Buckinghamshire County Council was unwilling to pay for replacing the bridges , proposing instead that the station be relocated to the original proposed station site of the 1880s on the south side of the bridges . Safety concerns had led to a speed limit of 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) over the bridges , and the line appeared certain to be closed . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 Although no part of the Chesham branch was in Greater London , the Greater London Council , as one of its last acts , granted £ 1 @,@ 180 @,@ 000 to replace the bridges . New bridges were built alongside the existing bridges to minimise disruption , and were rolled into place on 24 March 1986 and 14 April 1986 . 
 In 1989 the centenary of the branch saw a revival of interest in the line . Over the weekends of 1 – 2 and 8 – 9 July special services were run between Watford and Chesham , using two preserved Metropolitan Railway steam locomotives and a former MR electric locomotive . The service was a great success , with over 9 @,@ 000 people travelling on the trains and large numbers of people travelling to the area to watch the trains . The success prompted LT to repeat the Steam on the Met event annually until 2000 , although often running to Amersham rather than Chesham . 
 In the early 1990s the number of passengers using the branch stabilised at about 800 people each weekday . In 2009 the Chesham branch saw 427 @,@ 000 journeys each year . The proposal to close the Aylesbury – Marylebone route was dropped , and instead the line was upgraded and equipped with fast British Rail Class 165 trains in the early 1990s . These reduced the travel time between Chalfont & Latimer and Marylebone to 33 minutes , increasing usage of the line as a commuter route . The Chesham branch was proposed as a terminus for the original Crossrail scheme , which would have seen Crossrail trains running from Paddington to serve the stations between Rickmansworth and Aylesbury and the Chesham branch , allowing London Transport to withdraw from Buckinghamshire and cut the Metropolitan line back to serve only the branches to Watford and Uxbridge . The bill proposing the scheme was defeated in Parliament and abandoned in 1995 , and the revived scheme authorised by the Crossrail Act 2008 did not include the branches to Aylesbury and Chesham . By this time the little @-@ used Central line branch from Epping to Ongar had closed , with the last services running on 30 September 1994 , leaving Chesham — already the westernmost point of the London Underground network since 1961 's withdrawal from Aylesbury — as the northernmost point on the London Underground . 
 By the time London Underground operations were transferred to the newly created Transport for London ( TfL ) in 2000 , the A Stock trains were already 40 years old . The C Stock trains used on the Circle line , Hammersmith & City line and sections of the District line and the D Stock used on the remainder of the District line were also ageing , and no plans were in place for their replacement . Following lengthy and expensive negotiations , an order was placed in 2003 with Bombardier Transportation for a fleet of new trains to take over all operations on the Metropolitan , Hammersmith & City and District lines . 
 = = = Restoration of full through service = = = 
 The eight @-@ car configuration of the S Stock design includes open connections between the passenger cars , and thus cannot be split into shorter four @-@ car trains capable of fitting into the bay platform at Chalfont & Latimer station . Consequently , in 2008 TfL announced that the shuttle service was to be abandoned . Instead , the long @-@ standing Metropolitan line service of four trains per hour to and from Amersham was to be reduced to two , with the other two services running as through trains between London and Chesham . After 118 years of service on 11 December 2010 at 12 @.@ 37 pm the last Chesham shuttle service left Chesham station . A Stock trains continued to run on the line , providing through services to London , until 29 September 2012 when they were retired and replaced by S8 Stock trains . 
 = Lockheed AH @-@ 56 Cheyenne = 
 The Lockheed AH @-@ 56 Cheyenne was an attack helicopter developed by Lockheed for the United States Army . It rose from the Army 's Advanced Aerial Fire Support System ( AAFSS ) program to field the service 's first dedicated attack helicopter . Lockheed designed the Cheyenne using a four @-@ blade rigid @-@ rotor system and configured the aircraft as a compound helicopter with low @-@ mounted wings and a tail @-@ mounted thrusting propeller driven by a General Electric T64 turboshaft engine . The Cheyenne was to have a high @-@ speed dash capability to provide armed escort for the Army 's transport helicopters , such as the Bell UH @-@ 1 Iroquois . 
 In 1966 , the Army awarded Lockheed a contract for ten AH @-@ 56 prototypes , but as a stopgap also ordered the simpler AH @-@ 1G Cobra as an interim attack aircraft for combat in Vietnam . The AH @-@ 56 's maiden flight took place on 21 September 1967 . In January 1968 , the Army awarded Lockheed a production contract , based on flight testing progress . A fatal crash and technical problems affecting performance put Cheyenne development behind schedule , resulting in the cancellation of the production contract on 19 May 1969 . Development of the Cheyenne continued in the hope that the helicopter would eventually enter service . 
 But as American involvement in Vietnam was winding down , the Army canceled the Cheyenne program on 9 August 1972 . By this time , the AH @-@ 1 Cobra was widely deployed by the Army during the Vietnam War . Controversy with the United States Air Force over the Cheyenne 's role in combat as well as the political climate regarding military acquisition programs had caused the Army to amend the service 's attack helicopter requirements in favor of a twin @-@ engine conventional helicopter , viewed as less technical and more survivable . The Army announced a new program for an Advanced Attack Helicopter ( AAH ) on 17 August 1972 , which led to the development of the AH @-@ 64 Apache . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Prior to the development of the AH @-@ 56 , all armed helicopters had been modifications to existing aircraft designed for unarmed uses . In 1962 , then U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara convened the Howze Board to review Army aviation requirements . The board recommended an airmobile division supported by 90 armed helicopters . The recommendation of the Howze Board came at the same time the Army was preparing to deploy its first armed escort helicopters to Vietnam ; 15 UH @-@ 1A Iroquois were modified with systems for mounting machine guns , grenade launchers , and rocket pods . 
 In June 1962 , Bell Helicopter presented a new helicopter design to Army officials , in the hopes of soliciting funding for further development . The D @-@ 255 Iroquois Warrior was envisioned as a purpose @-@ built attack aircraft based on the UH @-@ 1B airframe and dynamic components , with a nose @-@ mounted ball turret , a belly @-@ mounted gun pod , and stub wings for mounting rockets or <unk> anti @-@ tank missiles . 
 = = = Attack helicopter requirements = = = 
 In December 1962 , Combat Development Command ( CDC ) drafted a Qualitative Material Requirement ( <unk> ) for an interim , commercial off @-@ the @-@ shelf ( COTS ) aircraft , with a 140 @-@ knot ( 161 mph , 259 km / h ) cruise speed and a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ pound ( 680 kg ) payload . This was seen as an attempt by Army officials , anticipating the potential of the D @-@ 255 , to acquire an interim aircraft to fill the escort role until the Army could determine the requirements for a dedicated armed helicopter . However , the Secretary of the Army disapproved the interim approach and directed that the Army look for a more advanced system that would dramatically improve over current helicopter designs . 
 Based on the guidance from the Secretary of the Army , CDC established Qualitative Material Development Objectives ( <unk> ) for a rotary @-@ wing aircraft with 195 @-@ knot ( 224 mph , 361 km / h ) cruise speed , 220 @-@ knot ( 253 mph , 407 km / h ) dash speed , and the capability to hover out @-@ of @-@ ground @-@ effect ( <unk> ) at 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 830 m ) on a 95 ° F ( 35 ° C ) day . The speed requirements were derived from the speed of aircraft the helicopter would escort . The Director of Defense Research and Engineering ( <unk> ) conditionally approved the changes to the development objectives , pending his review of the proposed program . He also directed the Army to determine whether or not any other helicopter could offer an improvement in performance over the UH @-@ 1B in the meantime . 
 As a result , the Army Material Command ( AMC ) conducted a study to determine if the development objectives were feasible and also established a program office for the Fire @-@ support Aerial System ( FAS ) . AMC recommended to narrow the competition to compound helicopters , as they were considered the only helicopter configuration at the time capable of being developed to meet the objectives . In March 1964 , the Secretary of the Army advised <unk> that modification of existing aircraft would not approach the required performance of the FAS program ; the Army would continue using the armed UH @-@ 1B until development of the FAS could proceed . 
 = = = AAFSS competition = = = 
 On 26 March 1964 , the Army Chief of Staff redesignated the FAS program as the Advanced Aerial Fire Support System ( AAFSS ) . The development objectives document ( <unk> ) for the AAFSS was approved in April 1964 , and on 1 August 1964 , the Transportation Research and Engineering Command contacted 148 prospective contractors with a request for proposals ( RFP ) . Bell submitted the D @-@ 262 , a modification of the D @-@ 255 , but still a conventional helicopter design . Sikorsky submitted the S @-@ 66 , which featured a " <unk> " that would serve as a tail rotor but as speeds increased would rotate 90 ° to act as pusher propeller . Lockheed submitted the CL @-@ 840 design , a rigid @-@ rotor compound helicopter with both a pushing propeller and a conventional tail rotor mounted at the end of the tail . 
 The Army announced Lockheed and Sikorsky as winners of Project Definition Phase contracts on 19 February 1965 . Meanwhile , the Army also continued to pursue an interim aircraft for combat in Vietnam until the AAFSS could be fielded , resulting in development of the Bell AH @-@ 1 Cobra which would become the backbone of the Army 's attack helicopter fleet during and after the Vietnam War . 
 Lockheed and Sikorsky developed proposals for their respective designs , establishing three configurations to satisfy both the development objectives and a revised RFP based on a draft requirements document . An evaluation board studied each company 's proposal and then submitted its recommendation to a selection authority council on 6 October 1965 . On 3 November 1965 , the Army announced Lockheed as the winner of the AAFSS program . The Army perceived Lockheed 's design as less expensive , able to be delivered sooner , and a lower technical risk than Sikorsky 's <unk> . On 17 December 1965 , the Army released the final requirements document . The document added fourteen requirements that were not previously addressed by Lockheed 's proposal , including the addition of an aerial rocket armament subsystem . 
 On 23 March 1966 , the Army awarded Lockheed an engineering and development contract for 10 prototypes , designating the aircraft AH @-@ 56A . Initial operating capability was planned for 1972 with an optimistic target of late 1970 . Lockheed began construction of the aircraft at its Van Nuys , California facility , and on 3 May 1967 , Lockheed held a roll @-@ out ceremony for the AH @-@ 56A . The aircraft was christened Cheyenne by the Army . The first flight of the AH @-@ 56 occurred on 21 September 1967 . The Secretary of Defense approved pre @-@ production funding to support an initial production order for 375 aircraft on 8 January 1968 . Manufacture of the 10 Cheyenne prototypes was completed by 1969 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Lockheed designed the Cheyenne as a compound helicopter , which combines a helicopter with fixed @-@ wing features for increased performance , usually speed . The design included features such as a rigid main rotor , low @-@ mounted wings , and a pusher propeller . The Cheyenne was powered by a General Electric T64 turboshaft engine . Thrust was provided by a pusher propeller at the rear of the aircraft . At high speeds , the amount of lift provided by the wings , along with thrust from the pusher prop , reduced the aerodynamic loading of the rotor . At such speeds , the rotor produced 20 % of the lift and could be adjusted by collective pitch control changes . Rotor tilt was controlled through gyroscopic precession . The Cheyenne achieved speeds over 200 knots ( 230 mph , 370 km / h ) , but as a compound helicopter was unable to qualify for speed records in helicopter categories . 
 The Cheyenne had a two @-@ seat tandem cockpit featuring an advanced navigation and fire control suite . The tandem seating placed the pilot in the rear seat , and the gunner in the front seat . An unusual feature of the gunner 's station was that the entire seat , sighting system , and firing controls rotated to keep the gunner facing the same direction as the gun turret being controlled . The gun @-@ sight afforded the gunner direct viewing from the turret by way of a periscope sight . The pilot had a helmet mounted sight system for aiming weapons . 
 Weapon turrets were mounted at the nose and the middle of aircraft underbelly . The nose turret could rotate + / - 100 ° from the aircraft 's centerline and could mount either a 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 57 in ) grenade launcher , or a 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 308 in ) minigun . The belly turret included a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) automatic cannon with 360 ° of rotation . Mechanical stops prevented the belly turret from aiming at any part of the helicopter . 
 Six external hardpoints were located along the bottom of the helicopter , with two under each wing and two on the fuselage under the sponsons . The two inner wing hardpoints could carry pods of three TOW missiles . 2 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 70 mm ) rockets in 7 @-@ rocket or 19 @-@ rocket launchers could be carried on the four wing hardpoints . The two fuselage mounts were dedicated to carrying external fuel tanks . The wing hardpoints were also plumbed to allow the carriage of additional fuel tanks if required . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Flight testing = = = 
 Flight testing began with the first flight of the second AH @-@ 56 ( s / n 66 @-@ <unk> ) in September 1967 . During early flight tests , a rotor instability issue was discovered when the aircraft was flying at low altitude in ground effect . As the flight envelope was expanded , this instability and other minor problems were discovered and quickly addressed . 
 Lockheed and the Army held a 13 @-@ minute demonstration " first flight " for the public at the Van Nuys Airport on 12 December 1967 . During the flight , the Cheyenne demonstrated some of the new capabilities brought about by the thrusting propeller ; the helicopter could slow down or accelerate without pitching the nose up or down , as well as being able to pitch the nose down or up at a hover , without causing the aircraft to accelerate forwards or backwards . The Cheyenne demonstrated a stationary hover in a 30 @-@ knot ( 35 mph , 56 km / h ) crosswind , and at the end of the flight landed on its two forward landing gear , " bowed " to the audience and then gently set the tail landing gear down as it taxied to parking . By March 1968 , the AH @-@ 56 had established a flight envelope of 170 knots ( 196 mph , 315 km / h ) in forward flight , 25 knots ( 29 mph , 46 km / h ) sidewards , and 20 knots ( 23 mph , 37 km / h ) rearwards . 
 The project suffered a setback on 12 March 1969 , when the rotor on prototype # 3 ( s / n 66 @-@ <unk> ) struck the fuselage and caused the aircraft to crash , killing the pilot , David A. <unk> . The accident occurred on a test flight where the pilot was to manipulate the controls to excite <unk> oscillations ( or half @-@ P hop ) in the rotor ; <unk> is a vibration that happens once per two main rotor revolutions , where P is the rotor 's rotational speed . The accident investigation noted that safety mechanisms on the controls had apparently been disabled for the flight . The investigation concluded that the pilot @-@ induced oscillations had set up a resonant vibration that exceeded the rotor system 's ability to compensate . After the investigation , the rotor and control systems were modified to prevent the same problem from occurring again . 
 = = = Production contract canceled = = = 
 The Army issued a cure @-@ notice to Lockheed on 10 April 1969 , citing 11 technical problems , and unsatisfactory progress on the program . The main issues were the half @-@ P hop vibration issue , and the aircraft gross weight exceeding program requirements . In response , Lockheed proposed an " improved flight control system " ( ICS ) to reduce rotor oscillations , and steps for removing excess weight and addressing other minor issues in production helicopters . The Army felt Lockheed 's solutions to the cure @-@ notice issues would delay the program and increase costs . Citing Lockheed 's inability to meet the production timeline , the Army canceled the AH @-@ 56 production contract on 19 May 1969 , but retained the development contract in hopes that the issues could be resolved . 
 In September 1969 , Cheyenne prototype # 10 ( s / n 66 @-@ <unk> ) underwent wind tunnel testing at NASA Ames Research Center , to research the half @-@ P hop and drag issues . The engineers did not realize that the fixed mounts used to secure the aircraft in the wind tunnel would not allow the helicopter to move relative to the rotor , as it did in flight . As a result , there was no natural damping of the rotor pitching motion . The remote controllers ' lack of sensory feedback from helicopter compounded the situation . During high speed testing to replicate the half @-@ P hop vibration , the rotor oscillations quickly accelerated out of control and struck the tail boom , resulting in the destructive breakup of the helicopter . 
 Lockheed worked on modifying the AH @-@ 56 design to address the vibration and other issues . As a precaution , Cheyenne # 9 ( s / n 66 @-@ <unk> ) was fitted with an ejection seat for the pilot after the March accident . The downward firing ejection seat was placed in the forward seat in place of the gunner 's station . This prototype would be used for all remaining envelope expansion flights . Prototype # 9 also received an upgraded transmission and drivetrain , and a hinged rear canopy in place of the original sliding canopy around 1970 . The new transmission allowed the T64 @-@ GE @-@ 16 turboshaft engine output to be increased from a derated 3 @,@ 435 horsepower ( 2 @,@ 561 kW ) to 3 @,@ 925 horsepower ( 2 @,@ 927 kW ) , and the new canopy eliminated the canopy vibrations . 
 Cheyenne prototype # 6 ( s / n 66 @-@ <unk> ) began conducting weapons testing at Yuma Proving Ground , Arizona , demonstrating the ability for the gunner and pilot to accurately fire on separate targets on each side on the helicopter . Towards the end of 1970 , the Army funded work on TOW missile guidance and night sighting systems . Prototypes # 6 and # 9 were also tested and evaluated at Yuma Proving Ground from 30 January to 23 December 1971 , to determine if stability and control systems were sufficient . Deficiencies were identified in lateral directional stability , uncommanded motion during maneuvering , high vibration , and poor directional control during sidewards flying . 
 Following the testing at Yuma , prototype # 9 received the improved T64 @-@ GE @-@ 716 engine producing 4 @,@ 275 shp ( 3 @,@ 188 kW ) and the planned production version of the ICS system . With these upgrades , the helicopter surpassed its performance requirements . However , under certain conditions stability and control did not completely satisfy the test pilots . Lockheed had studied ways to prevent unstable feedback from the gyro . The solution was to relocate the gyro from the top of the rotor head to below the transmission with flexible connections to the rotor . The pilot 's controls were connected to hydraulic servomotors then connected through springs to the gyro . This system prevented rotor vibration forces from transmitting back into the flight controls . It was called the " advanced mechanical control system " ( AMCS ) and was installed on Cheyenne # 7 in 1972 to improve handling and rotor stability . 
 = = = Program demise = = = 
 In 1971 , political friction increased between the Army and the Air Force over the close air support ( CAS ) mission . The Air Force asserted that the Cheyenne would infringe on the Air Force 's CAS mission in support of the Army , which had been mandated with the Key West Agreement of 1948 . The Department of Defense ( DOD ) conducted a study that concluded that the Air Force 's A @-@ X program , the Marine Corps ' Harrier , and the Cheyenne were significantly different that they did not constitute a duplication of capabilities . On 22 October 1971 , the Senate Armed Services subcommittee on Tactical Air Power conducted hearings to evaluate the CAS mission and the pending programs . The most damaging testimony for the Army 's program came from the commander of the Air Force 's Tactical Air Command , General William W. <unk> , who cited helicopter casualty statistics of Operation Lam Son 719 . 
 The Army convened a special task force under General Marks in January 1972 , to reevaluate the requirements for an attack helicopter . The purpose of the Marks Board was to develop an " updated and defensible " material needs document . The task force conducted flight evaluations of the AH @-@ 56 , along with two industry alternatives for comparison : the Bell 309 King Cobra and Sikorsky S @-@ 67 Blackhawk . Analysis of the three helicopters determined that the Bell and Sikorsky helicopters could not fulfill the Army 's requirements . 
 The Army also conducted a weapons demonstration for the Senate Armed Services Committee in early 1972 , to show off the Cheyenne 's firepower and garner support for attack helicopter development . The first TOW missile that was fired in the demonstration failed and went into the ground . The second missile was fired and hit the target . Previously , 130 TOW missiles had been fired without failure , but the failure of the first missile was now linked to perception of the aircraft . In April 1972 , the Senate published its report on CAS . The report recommended funding of the Air Force 's A @-@ X program , which would become the A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II , and limited procurement of the Harrier for the Marine Corps . The report never referred to the Cheyenne by name and only offered a lukewarm recommendation for the Army to continue procurement of attack helicopters , so long as their survivability could be improved . 
 The Cheyenne program was canceled by the Secretary of the Army on 9 August 1972 . The helicopter 's large size and inadequate night / all @-@ weather capability were reasons stated by the Army for the cancellation . The Cheyenne 's analog and mechanical weapons systems were becoming out of date as new digital systems that were more accurate , faster , and lighter were being developed . The Cheyenne 's unit cost had increased and was likely to increase further if new avionics were incorporated . 
 On 17 August 1972 , the Army initiated the Advanced Attack Helicopter ( AAH ) program . AAH sought an attack helicopter based on combat experience in Vietnam , with a lower top speed of 145 kn ( 167 mph , 269 km / h ) and twin engines for improved survivability . Lockheed offered the CL @-@ 1700 , a modified version of the Cheyenne with two engines and omitted the pusher propeller , without success . The AAH program led to the AH @-@ 64 Apache , which entered service in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 After the cancellation , the Army conducted an evaluation of the seventh Cheyenne equipped with the AMCS flight control system . The testing showed the AMCS removed most of the remaining control problems , improved stability , improved handling , and decreased the pilot workload . With the AMCS , the Cheyenne reached a speed of 215 kn ( 247 mph , 398 km / h ) in level flight and in a dive achieved 245 kn ( 282 mph , 454 km / h ) ; it also demonstrated improved maneuverability at high speeds . Prototype # 7 was the last Cheyenne to fly . Lockheed had counted on the Cheyenne to establish itself in the helicopter market with its rigid rotor technology , but the ambitious project was unsuccessful . The firm did not pursue development of another helicopter . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 No. 2 66 @-@ <unk> is on display at Fort Polk , Louisiana . 
 No. 5 66 @-@ <unk> is stored at the Army Aviation Museum , Fort Rucker , Alabama . 
 No. 6 66 @-@ <unk> is on display at Fort Campbell . 
 No. 7 66 @-@ <unk> is on display at the Army Aviation Museum , Fort Rucker . 
 = = Specifications ( AH @-@ 56A ) = = 
 Data from Jane 's Aircraft <unk> AH @-@ 56A 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Two ; one pilot , one copilot / gunner ( front seat ) 
 Length : 54 ft 8 in ( 16 @.@ 66 m ) 
 Rotor diameter : 51 ft 3 in ( 15 @.@ 62 m ) 
 Height : 13 ft 8 @.@ 5 in ( 4 @.@ 18 m ) 
 Empty weight : 12 @,@ 215 lb ( 5 @,@ 540 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 18 @,@ 300 lb ( 8 @,@ 300 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 25 @,@ 880 lb ( 11 @,@ 740 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × General Electric T64 @-@ GE @-@ 16 turboshaft , 3 @,@ 925 shp ( 2 @,@ 930 kW ) 
 Rotor systems : 4 blades on main rotor , 4 blades on tail rotor , 3 blades on pusher propeller 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 212 knots ( 244 mph , 393 km / h ) 
 Cruise speed : 195 knots ( 225 mph , 362 km / h ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 063 nmi ( 1 @,@ 225 mi , 1 @,@ 971 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 20 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 3 @,@ 000 ft / min ( 15 @.@ 23 m / s ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 
 1 × nose turret with either an <unk> 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 57 in ) grenade launcher or an <unk> 7 @.@ 62 × 51mm machine gun and 
 1 × belly turret with an <unk> 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) cannon 
 Hardpoints : 6 
 Rockets : 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) FFA rockets 
 Missiles : BGM @-@ 71 TOW missiles 
 = Not One Less = 
 Not One Less ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a 1999 drama film by Chinese director Zhang Yimou , adapted from Shi <unk> 's 1997 story " A Sun in the Sky " ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> shàng yǒu ge <unk> ) . It was produced by Guangxi Film Studio and released by China Film Group Corporation in mainland China , and distributed by Sony Pictures Classics and Columbia TriStar internationally . 
 Set in the People 's Republic of China during the 1990s , the film centers on a 13 @-@ year @-@ old substitute teacher , Wei Minzhi , in the Chinese countryside . Called in to substitute for a village teacher for one month , Wei is told not to lose any students . When one of the boys takes off in search of work in the big city , she goes looking for him . The film addresses education reform in China , the economic gap between urban and rural populations , and the prevalence of bureaucracy and authority figures in everyday life . It is filmed in a neorealist / documentary style with a troupe of non @-@ professional actors who play characters with the same names and occupations as the actors have in real life , blurring the boundaries between drama and reality . 
 The domestic release of Not One Less was accompanied by a Chinese government campaign aimed at promoting the film and cracking down on piracy . Internationally , the film was generally well @-@ received , but it also attracted criticism for its ostensibly political message ; foreign critics are divided on whether the film should be read as praising or criticizing the Chinese government . When the film was excluded from the 1999 Cannes Film Festival 's competition section , Zhang withdrew it and another film from the festival , and published a letter rebuking Cannes for politicization of and " discrimination " against Chinese cinema . The film went on to win the Venice Film Festival 's Golden Lion and several other awards , and Zhang won the award for best director at the Golden Rooster Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1990s , primary education reform had become one of the top priorities in the People 's Republic of China . About 160 million Chinese people had missed all or part of their education because of the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s and early 1970s , and in 1986 the National People 's Congress enacted a law calling for nine years of compulsory education . By 1993 , it was clear that much of the country was making little progress on implementing nine @-@ year compulsory education , so the 1993 – 2000 seven @-@ year plan focused on this goal . One of the major challenges educators faced was the large number of rural schoolchildren dropping out to pursue work . Another issue was a large urban – rural divide : funding and teacher quality were far better in urban schools than rural , and urban students stayed in school longer . 
 = = Production and cast = = 
 Not One Less was Zhang Yimou 's ninth film , but only the second not to star long @-@ time collaborator Gong Li ( the first was his 1997 Keep Cool ) . For this film , he cast only amateur actors whose real @-@ life names and occupations resembled those of characters they played in the film — as The Philadelphia Inquirer 's Steven Rea described the performances , the actors are just " people playing variations of themselves in front of the camera " . For instance , Tian <unk> , who played the mayor , was the real @-@ life mayor of a small village , and the primary actors Wei Minzhi and Zhang Huike were selected from among thousands of students in rural schools . ( The names and occupations of the film 's main actors are listed in the table below . ) The movie was filmed on location at <unk> County 's Shuiquan Primary School , and in the city of Zhangjiakou ; both locations are in Hebei province . 
 The movie was filmed in a documentary @-@ like , " neorealist " style involving hidden cameras and natural lighting . There are also , however , elements of heavy editing — for example , Shelly Kraicer noted that many scenes have frequent , rapid cuts , partially as a result of filming with inexperienced actors . 
 Zhang had to work closely with government censors during production of the film . He related how the censors " kept reminding [ me ] not to show China as too backward and too poor " , and said that on the title cards at the end of the movie he had to write that the number of rural children dropping out of school each year was one million , although he believed the number was actually three times that . Not One Less was Zhang 's first film to enjoy government support and resources . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 = = Plot = = 
 Thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Wei Minzhi arrives in Shuiquan village to substitute for the village 's only teacher ( Gao <unk> ) while he is away on family business . When Gao discovers that Wei does not have a high school education and has no special talents , he instructs her to teach by copying his texts onto the board and then making the students copy them into their notebooks ; he also tells her not to use more than one piece of chalk per day , because the village is too poor to afford more . Before leaving , he explains to her that many students have recently left school to find work in the cities , and he offers her a 10 yuan bonus if all the students are still there when he returns . 
 When Wei begins teaching , she has little rapport with the students : they shout and run around instead of copying their work , and the class troublemaker , Zhang Huike , insists that " she 's not a teacher , she 's Wei <unk> 's big sister ! " After putting the lesson on the board , Wei usually sits outside , guarding the door to make sure no students leave until they have finished their work . Early in the month , a sports recruiter comes to take one athletic girl , Ming <unk> , to a special training school ; unwilling to let any students leave , Wei hides Ming , and when the village mayor ( Tian <unk> ) finds her , Wei chases after their car in a futile attempt to stop them . 
 One day , after trying to make the troublemaker Zhang apologize for bothering another student , Wei discovers that Zhang has left to go find work in the nearby city of Zhangjiakou . The village mayor is unwilling to give her money for a bus ticket to the city , so she resolves to earn the money herself , and recruits the remaining students to help . One girl suggests that they can make money by moving bricks in a nearby brickyard , and Wei begins giving the students mathematical exercises centered on finding out how much money they need to earn for the bus tickets , how many bricks they need to move , and how much time it will take . Through these exercises and working to earn money , her rapport with the class improves . After earning the money , she reaches the bus station but learns that the price is higher than she thought , and she cannot afford a ticket . Wei ends up walking most of the way to Zhangjiakou . 
 In the city , Wei finds the people that Zhang was supposed to be working with , only to discover that they had lost him at the train station days before . She forces another girl her age , Sun <unk> , to help her look for Zhang at the train station , but they do not find him . Wei has no success finding Zhang through the public address system and " missing person " posters , so she goes to the local television station to broadcast a missing person notice . The receptionist ( Feng <unk> ) will not let her in without valid identification , though , and says the only way she can enter is with permission from the station manager , whom she describes as " a man with glasses " . For the rest of the day , Wei stands by the station 's only gate , stopping every man with glasses , but she does not find the station manager , and spends the night asleep on the street . The next day the station manager ( Wu <unk> ) sees her at the gate again , through his window , and lets her in , scolding the receptionist for making her wait outside . 
 Although Wei has no money to run an ad on TV , the station manager is interested in her story and decides to feature Wei in a talk show special about rural education . On the talk show , Wei is nervous and hardly says a word when the host ( Li <unk> ) addresses her , but Zhang — who has been wandering the streets begging for food — sees the show . After Wei and Zhang are reunited , the station manager arranges to have them driven back to Shuiquan village , along with a truckload of school supplies and donations that viewers had sent in . Upon their return , they are greeted by the whole village . In the final scene , Wei presents the students with several boxes of colored chalk that were donated , and allows each student to write one character on the board . The film ends with a series of title cards that recount the actions of the characters after the film ends , and describe the problem of poverty in rural education in China . 
 = = Themes = = 
 While most of Zhang 's early films had been historical epics , Not One Less was one of the first to focus on contemporary China . The film 's main theme involves the difficulties faced in providing rural education in China . When Wei Minzhi arrives in Shuiquan village , the teacher Gao has not been paid in six months and the school building is in disrepair , and chalk is in such short supply that Gao gives Wei specific instructions limiting how large her written characters should be . Wei sleeps in the school building , sharing a bed with several female students . The version of the film released overseas ends with a series of title cards in English , the last of which reads , " Each year , poverty forces one million children in China to leave school . Through the help of donations , about 15 % of these children return to school . " 
 Because the people and locations used in the film are real but are carefully selected and edited , the film creates a " friction " between documentary reality and narrative fiction . This balancing act between the real and the imaginary has drawn comparisons to neorealist works such as those of Iranian directors Abbas Kiarostami and Mohsen Makhmalbaf , and Zhang has openly acknowledged the influence of Kiarostami in this film . Zhang Xiaoling of the University of Nottingham argues that Zhang Yimou used the documentary perspective in order to suggest that the story is an accurate reflection of most rural areas in China , while Shelly Kraicer believes that his " simultaneous presentation of seemingly opposing messages " is a powerful artistic method in of itself , and that it allows Zhang to circumvent censors by guaranteeing that the movie will include at least one message that they like . Jean @-@ Michel <unk> of Le Monde maintains that the film was produced " in the shadow of two superpowers " and needed to make compromises with each . 
 The film addresses the prominent place that bureaucracy , and verbal negotiation and struggle , occupy in everyday life in China . Many scenes pit Wei against authority figures such as the village mayor , the announcer in the train station , and the TV station receptionist who also acts as a " gatekeeper " . Aside from Wei , many characters in the film show a " blind faith " in authority figures . While she lacks money and power , Wei overcomes her obstacles through sheer obstinacy and ignorant persistence , suggesting that speech and perseverance can overcome barriers . Wei becomes an example of " heroic obstinacy " and a model of using determination to face " overwhelming odds " . For this reason , the film has been frequently compared to Zhang 's 1993 The Story of Qiu Ju , whose heroine is also a determined , stubborn woman ; likewise , Qiu Ju is also filmed in a neo @-@ realistic style , set partially in contemporary rural China and partially in the city , and employs mostly amateur actors . 
 Not One Less portrays the mass media as a locus of power : Wei discovers that only someone with money or connections can gain access to a television station , but once someone is on camera she or he becomes part of an " invisible media hegemony " with the power to " manipulate social behavior " , catching people 's attention where paper advertisements could not and moving <unk> to donate money to a country school . The power of television within the film 's story , according to <unk> Pang of the Chinese University of Hong Kong , reflects its prominent place in Chinese society of the late 1990s , when domestic cinema was floundering but television was developing quickly ; Pang argues that television @-@ watching forms a " collective consciousness " for Chinese citizens , and that the way television unifies people in Not One Less is an illustration of this . 
 Money is important throughout the film . Concerns about money dominate much of the film — for example , a large portion is devoted to Wei and her students ' attempt to earn enough money for bus tickets — as well as motivating them . Most major characters , including Wei , demand payment for their actions , and it is left unclear whether Wei 's search for Zhang Huike is motivated by altruism or by the promise of a 10 @-@ yuan bonus . Zhu Ying points out the prominence of money in the film creates a conflict between traditional Confucian values ( such as the implication that the solutions to Wei 's problems can be found through the help of authority figures ) and modern , capitalist and individualistic society . 
 Finally , the film illustrates the growing urban – rural divide in China . When Wei reaches Zhangjiakou , the film creates a clear contrast between urban and rural life , and the two locations are physically separated by a dark tunnel . The city is not portrayed as idyllic ; rather , Zhang shows that rural people are faced with difficulties and discrimination in the cities . While Wei 's first view of the city exposes her to well @-@ dressed people and modern buildings , the living quarters she goes to while searching for Zhang Huike are cramped and squalid . Likewise , the iron gate where Wei waits all day for the TV station director reflects the barriers poor people face to survival in the city , and the necessity of connections to avoid becoming an " outsider " in the city . Frequent cuts show Wei and Zhang wandering aimlessly in the streets , Zhang begging for food , and Wei sleeping on the sidewalk ; when an enthusiastic TV host later asks Zhang what part of the city left the biggest impression , Zhang replies that the one thing he will never forget is having to beg for food . A.O. Scott of The New York Times compared the " unbearable " despair of the film 's second half to that of Vittorio De Sica 's 1948 Bicycle Thieves . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Cannes withdrawal = = = 
 Neither Not One Less nor Zhang 's other 1999 film The Road Home was selected for the 1999 Cannes Film Festival 's Official Selection , the most prestigious competition in the festival , where several of Zhang 's earlier films had won awards . The rationale is uncertain ; Shelly Kraicer and Zhang Xiaoling claim that Cannes officials viewed the Not One Less ' happy ending , with the main characters ' conflicts resolved by the generosity of city dwellers and higher @-@ up officials , as pro @-@ China propaganda , while Zhu Ying claims that the officials saw it and The Road Home as too anti @-@ government . Rather than have his films shown in a less competitive portion of the festival , Zhang withdrew them both in protest , stating that the movies were apolitical . In an open letter published in the Beijing Youth Daily , Zhang accused the festival of being motivated by other than artistic concerns , and criticized the Western perception that all Chinese films must be either " pro @-@ government " or " anti @-@ government " , referring to it as a " discrimination against Chinese films " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Rotten Tomatoes gave it a " fresh " 95 % approval rating , based on 43 reviews and Metacritic gave it a 73 , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . Many focused on the film 's ending title cards : several compared them to a public service announcement , and Philip Kemp of Sight & Sound wrote , " All that 's missing is the address we should send donations to . " Zhang Xiaoling , on the other hand , considered the titles to be an implicit criticism of the state of rural education in China , saying , " the news that voluntary contributions have helped 15 percent of the pupils to return to school is aimed to give rise to a question : what about the remaining 85 percent ? " The disagreement about the title cards is also reflected in the critical reaction to the rest of the film 's resolution . Kemp described the ending as " feelgood " and criticized the film for portraying officials and generous <unk> as coming to the rescue , The Washington Post 's Desson Howe called the ending " flag @-@ waving " , and The Independent 's Gilbert Adair called it " sugary " . Alberto Barbera of the Venice Film Festival , on the other hand , said that while the end of the film may have been like propaganda , the rest was a " strong denunciation of a regime that is unable to assure proper education for the country children " . Likewise , Zhang Xiaoling argued that although the film superficially appears to praise the city people and officials , its subtext is harshly critical of them : he pointed out that the apparently benevolent TV station manager seems to be motivated more by audience ratings than by altruism , that the receptionist 's callous manner towards Wei is a result of Chinese " bureaucratism and nepotism " , and that for all the good things about the city , Zhang Huike 's clearest memory of city life is having to beg for food . Zhang and Kraicer both argued that critics who see the film as pro @-@ government propaganda are missing the point and , as Kraicer put it , " mistaking [ one ] layer as the message of the film ... mistaking the part for the whole " . David Ansen of Newsweek and Leigh Paatsch of the Herald Sun each pointed out that , while the film is " deceptive [ ly ] " positive at face value , it has harsh criticism " bubbling under the surface " . Chinese critics Liu Xinyi and Xu Su of Movie Review recognized the dispute abroad over whether the film was pro- or anti @-@ government , but made no comment ; they praised the film for its realistic portrayal of hardships facing rural people , without speculating about whether Zhang intended to criticize or praise the government 's handling of those hardships . Hao Jian of Film Appreciation , on the other hand , was more critical , claiming that the movie was organized around a political message and was intended to be pro @-@ government . Hao said that Not One Less marked the beginning of Zhang 's transformation from an outspoken independent director to one of the government 's favorites . 
 Overall , critics were impressed with the performances of the amateur actors , and Jean @-@ Michel <unk> of Le Monde called that the film 's greatest success . Peter Rainer of New York Magazine praised the scene of Wei 's interview on TV as " one of the most improbably satisfying love scenes on film " . The film also received praise for its artistic merits and Hou Yong 's cinematography , even though its visuals were simplistic compared to Zhang 's previous films ; for example , A.O. Scott of The New York Times praised the " richness " displayed by the film despite its deliberate scarcity of color . Reviewers also pointed out that Zhang had succeeded in breaking away from the " commercial entertainment wave " of popular film . Noel Vera of <unk> writes that the film concerns itself mainly with emotional impact , at the expense of visual extravagance , making it the opposite of earlier Zhang Yimou films such as Red Sorghum . Other critics noted the strength of the film 's storytelling ; for instance , Rainer called the film an " uncommon , and uncommonly moving , love story " , and Film Journal International 's Kevin Lally described it as " a poignant story of poverty and spirit reminiscent of the great Italian neo @-@ realists . " Another well @-@ received part of the film was the segment in which Wei teaches math by creating practical examples out of her attempt to raise money for the bus to Zhangjiakou ; in the Chinese journal Teacher Doctrines , Mao Wen wrote that teachers should learn from Wei 's example and provide students with practical exercises . 
 Wei Minzhi 's character received mixed reactions : Scott described her as a " heroic " character who demonstrates how obstinacy can be a virtue , whereas Richard Corliss of Time says she is " no brighter or more resourceful than [ her students ] " . Reactions to the city portion of the movie were also mixed : while Zhang describes the second half of the film as an eloquent commentary on China 's urban @-@ rural divide and Kevin Lally calls it " startling " , Kemp criticizes it for being a predictable " Victorian cliché " . 
 = = = Box office and release = = = 
 Rights to distribute the film were purchased by the China Film Group Corporation , a state @-@ sponsored organization , and the government actively promoted the film . It was officially released in mainland China in April 1999 , although there were showings as early as mid @-@ February . Sheldon H. Lu reports that the film grossed ¥ 18 million , an average amount , in its first three months of showing ; by the end of its run in November , it sold ¥ 40 million at the box office . ( In comparison , Zhang 's 2002 film Hero would earn ¥ 270 million three years later . ) Nevertheless , Not One Less was the highest @-@ grossing domestic film of 1999 , and <unk> Pang has called it a " box office success " . In the United States , the film was released in theaters on 18 February 2000 , and grossed $ 50 @,@ 256 in its first weekend and $ 592 @,@ 586 overall ; The release was handled by Sony Pictures Classics , and home video distribution by Columbia TriStar ; Not One Less was Columbia 's first Chinese film . 
 Lu warns that domestic box office sales are not reliable indicators of a film 's popularity in mainland China , because of piracy and because of state or social group sponsorship ; many workers were given free tickets to promote the film , and a 1999 report claimed that more tickets were purchased by the government than by individuals . The film was more popular than most government @-@ promoted films touting the party line and Lu claims that it had " tremendous social support " , but Pang points out that its success was " not purely egalitarian , but partly constructed . " 
 At the time of Not One Less ' release , DVD and VCD piracy was a growing concern in mainland China , and the China Copyright Office issued a notice forbidding unauthorized production or distribution of the film . This was the first time China had enacted special copyright protections for a domestic film . On 21 April 1999 , Hubei province 's Culture Office issued an " Urgent Notice for Immediate Confiscation of <unk> Not One Less VCDs " , and two days later the Culture Office and movie company joined forces to conduct raids on ten audio @-@ video stores , seizing pirated discs from six of them . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Although it was withdrawn from Cannes , Not One Less went on to win the Golden Lion , the top award at the Venice Film Festival . Zhang also received a best director award at the Golden Rooster , mainland China 's most prestigious award ceremony , and the film was voted one of the top three of the year in the Hundred Flowers Awards . Awards the film won or was nominated for are listed below . 
 = Shōkaku @-@ class aircraft carrier = 
 The two Shōkaku @-@ class ( <unk> , Shōkaku @-@ gata ) aircraft carriers were built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1930s . Completed shortly before the start of the Pacific War in 1941 , they have been called " arguably the best aircraft carriers in the world " when built . With the exception of the Battle of Midway , they participated in every major naval action of the Pacific War , including the attack on Pearl Harbor , the Indian Ocean Raid , the Battle of the Coral Sea , and the Guadalcanal Campaign . 
 Their inexperienced air groups were relegated to airfield attacks during the attack on Pearl Harbor , but they later sank two of the four fleet carriers lost by the United States Navy during the war in addition to one elderly British light carrier . The sister ships returned to Japan after the Battle of the Coral Sea , one to repair damage and the other to replace aircraft lost during the battle , so neither ship participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After the catastrophic losses of four carriers during that battle , they formed the bulk of the IJN 's carrier force for the rest of the war . As such they were the primary counterattack force deployed against the American invasion of Guadalcanal in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons in August . Two months later , they attempted to support a major offensive by the Imperial Japanese Army to push the United States Marines off Guadalcanal . This resulted in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands where they crippled one American carrier and damaged another in exchange for damage to Shōkaku and a light carrier . Neither attempt succeeded and the Japanese withdrew their remaining forces from Guadalcanal in early 1943 using the air group from Zuikaku to provide cover . 
 For the next year , the sisters trained before moving south to defend against any American attempt to retake the Mariana Islands or the Philippines . Shōkaku was sunk by an American submarine during the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 as the Americans invaded the Marianas and Zuikaku was sacrificed as a decoy four months later during the Battle of Cape <unk> . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The two Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were ordered in 1937 as part of the 3rd Naval Armaments Supplement Program . No longer restricted by the provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty , which had expired in December 1936 , and with relaxed budgetary limitations , the IJN sought qualitative superiority over their foreign counterparts . Drawing on experience with their existing carriers , the Navy General Staff laid out an ambitious requirement for a ship that equaled the 96 @-@ aircraft capacity of the Akagi and Kaga , the speed of Hiryū and the defensive armament of Kaga . The new ship was also to have superior protection and range over any of the existing carriers . 
 The Basic Design Section of the Navy Technical Department decided upon an enlarged and improved Hiryū design with the island on the port side , amidships . After construction of the ships began , the Naval Air Technical Department ( NATD ) began having second thoughts about the location of the island because it thought that the portside location of the island on Hiryū and Akagi had an adverse impact on airflow over the flight deck . Another issue identified was that the amidships position shortened the available landing area , which had the potential to be problematic in the future as aircraft landing speeds increased with their growing weight . To verify these assumptions , the NATD filmed hundreds of takeoffs and landings aboard Akagi in October – November 1938 and decided to move the island over to the starboard side and further forward , about one @-@ third of the length from the bow . Shōkaku was the furthest advanced by this point and the supporting structure for the bridge had already been built ; rebuilding it would have delayed construction so it was left in place . The changes that had to be made consisted of a 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) widening of the flight deck opposite the island and a corresponding 50 @-@ centimeter ( 20 in ) narrowing on the starboard side and the addition of 100 metric tons ( 98 long tons ) of ballast on the port side to re @-@ balance the ship . 
 The ships had a length of 257 @.@ 5 meters ( 844 ft 10 in ) overall , a beam of 29 meters ( 95 ft 2 in ) , a draft of 9 @.@ 32 meters ( 30 ft 7 in ) at deep load , and a moulded depth of 23 m ( 75 ft 6 in ) . They displaced 32 @,@ 105 metric tons ( 31 @,@ 598 long tons ) at deep load . Based on hydrodynamic research conducted for the Yamato @-@ class battleships , the Shōkaku class received a bulbous bow and twin rudders , both of which were positioned on the centerline abaft the propellers . Their crew consisted of 1 @,@ 660 men : 75 commissioned officers , 56 special duty officers , 71 warrant officers and 1 @,@ 458 petty officers and crewmen , excluding the air group . 
 The Shōkaku @-@ class ships were fitted with four Kampon geared steam turbine sets , each driving one 4 @.@ 2 @-@ meter ( 13 ft 9 in ) propeller , using steam provided by eight Kampon Type Model B water @-@ tube boilers . With a working pressure of 30 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 942 kPa ; 427 psi ) , the boilers gave the turbines enough steam to generate a total of 160 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 120 @,@ 000 kW ) and a designed speed of 34 @.@ 5 knots ( 63 @.@ 9 km / h ; 39 @.@ 7 mph ) . This was the most powerful propulsion system in IJN service , 10 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 and 6 @,@ 000 kW ) more than the Yamato class and the Mogami @-@ class cruiser , respectively . During their sea trials , the sister ships achieved 34 @.@ 37 – 34 @.@ 58 knots ( 63 @.@ 65 – 64 @.@ 04 km / h ; 39 @.@ 55 – 39 @.@ 79 mph ) from 161 @,@ 290 – 168 @,@ 100 shaft horsepower ( 120 @,@ 270 – 125 @,@ 350 kW ) . They carried 5 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 9 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 18 @,@ 000 km ; 11 @,@ 200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boiler uptakes were trunked to the ships ' starboard side amidships and exhausted just below flight deck level through two funnels that curved downward . The Shōkaku class was fitted with three 600 @-@ kilowatt ( 800 hp ) turbo generators and two 350 @-@ kilowatt ( 470 hp ) diesel generators , all operating at 225 volts . 
 = = = Flight deck and hangars = = = 
 The carriers ' 242 @.@ 2 @-@ meter ( 794 ft 7 in ) flight deck had a maximum width of 29 meters and overhung the superstructure at both ends , supported by pillars . Ten transverse arrestor wires were installed on the flight deck that could stop a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 8 @,@ 800 lb ) aircraft . If the aircraft missed those , it could be stopped by one of three crash barricades . Although space and weight were allocated for two aircraft catapults , their development was not completed before the Shōkaku @-@ class ships were sunk . The ships were designed with two superimposed hangars ; the upper hangar was about 200 meters ( 656 ft 2 in ) long and had a width that varied between 18 @.@ 5 and 24 meters ( 60 ft 8 in and 78 ft 9 in ) . It had a height of 4 @.@ 85 meters ( 15 ft 11 in ) while the lower hangar was 4 @.@ 7 meters ( 15 ft 5 in ) high and only usable by fighters . The lower hangar was about 20 meters ( 65 ft 7 in ) shorter than the upper one and its width ranged from 17 @.@ 5 to 20 meters ( 57 ft 5 in to 65 ft 7 in ) . Together they had a total area of 5 @,@ 545 square meters ( 59 @,@ 690 sq ft ) . Each hangar could be subdivided by five or six fire curtains and they were fitted with fire fighting foam dispensers on each side . The lower hangar was also fitted with a carbon dioxide fire suppression system . Each subdivision was provided with a pair of enclosed and armored stations to control the fire curtains and fire fighting equipment . 
 Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by three elevators that took 15 seconds to go from the lower hangar to the flight deck . The forward elevator was larger than the others to allow aircraft that had just landed to be moved below without folding their wings and measured 13 by 16 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 52 ft 6 in ) . The other elevators were narrower , 13 by 12 meters ( 42 ft 8 in × 39 ft 4 in ) . The ships mounted a crane on the starboard side of the flight deck , abreast the rear elevator . When collapsed , it was flush with the flight deck . 
 The Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were initially intended to have an air group of 96 , including 24 aircraft in reserve . These were envisioned as 12 Mitsubishi A5M ( " Claude " ) monoplane fighters , 24 Aichi D1A2 ( " Susie " ) Type 96 dive bombers , 24 Mitsubishi <unk> ( " Mabel " ) Type 97 No. 2 torpedo bombers , and 12 Nakajima <unk> Type 97 reconnaissance aircraft . All of these aircraft were either superseded by larger , more modern aircraft or cancelled while the ships were being built , so the air group was revised to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , 27 Aichi D3A ( " Val " ) dive bombers , and 27 Nakajima B5N ( " Kate " ) torpedo bombers . In addition , the ship carried 2 Zeros , 5 " Vals " , and 5 " Kates " as spares for a total of 84 aircraft . 
 = = = Armament and sensors = = = 
 The carriers ' primary anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of eight twin @-@ gun mounts equipped with 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 in ) Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns mounted on projecting sponsons , grouped into pairs fore and aft on each side of the hull . The guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) , and a ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at an elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was fourteen rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . The ship was equipped with four Type 94 fire @-@ control directors to control the 12 @.@ 7 cm guns , one for each pair of guns , although the director on the island could control all of the Type 89 guns . 
 Their light AA armament consisted of a dozen triple @-@ gun mounts for license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 AA guns , six mounts on each side of the flight deck . The gun was the standard Japanese light AA weapon during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high @-@ speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high @-@ speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast " . These guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and a ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the 15 @-@ round magazines . The Type 96 guns were controlled by six Type 95 directors , one for every pair of mounts . 
 In June 1942 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku had their anti @-@ aircraft armament augmented with six more triple 25 mm mounts , two each at the bow and stern , and one each fore and aft of the island . The bow and stern groups each received a Type 95 director . In October another triple 25 mm mount was added at the bow and stern and 10 single mounts were added before the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 . After the battle , Zuikaku 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced with 26 single mounts for the 25 mm Type 96 gun , bringing the total of 25 mm barrels to 96 , 60 in 20 triple mounts and 36 single mounts . These guns were supplemented by eight 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . Each 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) rocket weighed 22 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 50 lb ) and had a maximum velocity of 200 m / s ( 660 ft / s ) . Their maximum range was 4 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 yd ) . 
 Shōkaku was the first carrier in the IJN to be fitted with radar , a Type 21 early @-@ warning radar , mounted on the top of the island around September 1942 . The date of Zuikaku 's installation is unknown , but both ships received a second Type 21 radar in a retractable installation adjacent to the flight deck after October . Before June 1944 , a Type 13 air @-@ search radar was installed on the light tripod mast abaft the island . The Shōkaku @-@ class carriers were also fitted with a Type 91 hydrophone in the bow that was only useful when anchored or moving very slowly . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The Shōkaku class had a waterline belt that consisted of 46 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) of Copper @-@ alloy Non @-@ Cemented armor ( CNC ) that covered most of the length of the ship . The belt was 4 @.@ 1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) high , of which 2 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) was below the waterline . The lower strake of the armor was backed by 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of Ducol steel . The magazines were protected by 165 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) of New Vickers Non @-@ Cemented ( NVNC ) armor , sloped at an inclination up to 25 ° and tapered to thicknesses of 55 – 75 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) . The flight and both hangar decks were unprotected and the ships ' propulsion machinery was protected by a 65 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck of CNC armor . The NVNC armor over the magazines was 132 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) thick and 105 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick over the aviation gasoline storage tanks . All of the deck armor was overlaid on a 25 @-@ millimeter deck of Ducol steel . 
 The <unk> were the first Japanese carriers to incorporate a torpedo belt system . Based on model experiments that began in 1935 , it consisted of a liquid @-@ loaded " sandwich " of compartments outboard of the torpedo bulkhead . The experiments showed that a narrow liquid @-@ loaded compartment was necessary to distribute the force of a torpedo or mine 's detonation along the torpedo bulkhead by spreading it across the full width of the bulkhead and to stop the splinters created by the detonation . Outboard of this were two compartments intended to dissipate the force of the gases of the detonation , including the watertight compartment of the double bottom . The two innermost compartments were intended to be filled with fuel oil that would be replaced by water as it was consumed . The torpedo bulkhead itself consisted of an outer Ducol plate 18 – 30 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 71 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick that was riveted to a 12 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) plate . The IJN expected the torpedo bulkhead to be damaged in an attack and placed a thin holding bulkhead slightly inboard to prevent any leaks from reaching the ships ' vitals . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Careers = = 
 Shortly after completion in 1941 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to the newly formed Fifth Carrier Division , which was itself assigned to the 1st Air Fleet ( Kidō Butai ) , and began working up to prepare for the Pearl Harbor attack . Due to their inexperience , their air groups were tasked with the less demanding airfield attack role rather than the anti @-@ ship mission allocated to the veteran air groups of the older carriers . Each carrier 's aircraft complement consisted of 18 Zero fighters , 27 D3A dive bombers , and 27 B5N torpedo bombers . The two carriers contributed a total of 12 Zeros and 54 D3As to the first wave on the morning of 8 December 1941 ( Japan time ) ; these latter aircraft struck Wheeler Army Airfield , Hickam Field , and Naval Air Station Ford Island while the fighters strafed Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay . Only the 54 B5Ns participated in the second wave , striking Ford Island , Hickam Field and Kaneohe Bay again . The Fifth Carrier Division 's aircraft conducted the majority of the attack against the airfields , supplemented only by fighters from the other four carriers . Only one of Shōkaku 's dive bombers was lost during the attack ; in exchange 314 American aircraft were damaged or destroyed . Historian Alan <unk> said the young aviators delivered " a sterling performance , greatly exceeding expectations and outshining the dive bombers from the more experienced carriers . " 
 In January 1942 , together with Akagi and Kaga of the First Carrier Division , the sisters supported the invasion of Rabaul in the Bismarck Archipelago , as the Japanese moved to secure their southern defensive perimeter against attacks from Australia . Aircraft from all four carriers attacked the Australian base at Rabaul on 20 January ; the First Carrier Division continued to attack the town while the Fifth Carrier Division moved westwards and attacked Lae and Salamaua in New Guinea . They covered the landings at Rabaul and Kavieng on 23 January before returning to Truk before the end of the month . After the Marshalls – Gilberts raids on 1 February , the Fifth Carrier Division was retained in home waters until mid @-@ March to defend against any American carrier raids on the Home Islands . 
 = = = Indian Ocean raid = = = 
 The sister ships then rejoined the Kido Butai at Staring Bay on Celebes Island in preparation for the Indian Ocean raid . By this time the air groups had been reorganized to consist of 21 each of the A6Ms , D3As and B5Ns . The Japanese intent was to defeat the British Eastern Fleet and destroy British airpower in the region in order to secure the flank of their operations in Burma . Shōkaku and Zuikaku contributed aircraft to the 5 April Easter Sunday Raid on Colombo , Ceylon . Although the civilian shipping had been evacuated from Colombo harbor , the Japanese sank an armed merchant cruiser and a destroyer and severely damaged some of the support facilities . The Kido Butai returned to Ceylon four days later and attacked Trincomalee ; the sisters ' aircraft sank a large cargo ship and damaged the monitor HMS Erebus . In the meantime , the Japanese spotted the light carrier HMS Hermes , escorted by the destroyer HMAS Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku were the first to attack the Allied ships , both of which were sunk . 
 = = = Battle of the Coral Sea = = = 
 En route to Japan , the Fifth Carrier Division was diverted to Truk to support Operation Mo ( the planned capture of Port Moresby in New Guinea ) . While they were preparing for the mission , the Americans intercepted and decrypted Japanese naval messages discussing the operation and dispatched the carriers Yorktown and Lexington to stop the invasion . The Japanese opened Operation Mo by occupying Tulagi , in the Solomon Islands , on 3 May . American land @-@ based aircraft had spotted the light carrier Shōhō escorting the transports of the main invasion force on 6 May , and the American carriers moved west to place themselves in a position to attack it the following morning . 
 Shōhō was quickly located again that morning and sunk . In turn , the Japanese spotted the oiler , Neosho , and her escorting destroyer , which were misidentified as a carrier and a light cruiser . A single dive bomber was lost during the consequent airstrike that sank the destroyer and damaged Neosho badly enough that she had to be scuttled a few days later . Late in the afternoon , the Japanese launched a small airstrike , without any escorting fighters , based on an erroneous spot report . The American carriers were far closer to the Japanese than they realized and roughly in line with their intended target . Alerted by radar , some of the American Combat Air Patrol ( CAP ) was vectored to intercept the Japanese aircraft , the rest being retained near the carriers because of bad weather and fading daylight . The American fighters mauled the Japanese attackers who were forced to call off the attack , but some of the surviving Japanese pilots became confused in the darkness and attempted to verify if the American carriers were their own before being driven off . 
 On the morning of 8 May , both sides located each other at about the same time and began launching their aircraft about 09 : 00 . The American dive bombers disabled Shōkaku 's flight deck with three hits , but the carrier was able to evade all of the torpedoes . Hidden by a rain squall , Zuikaku escaped detection and was not attacked . In return , the Japanese aircraft badly damaged Lexington with two torpedo and two bomb hits and scored a single bomb hit on Yorktown . The torpedo hits on Lexington cracked one of her avgas tanks , and leaking vapor caused a series of large explosions that caused her to be scuttled . 
 The air groups of the sisters were decimated in the battle , which forced Zuikaku to return to Japan with Shōkaku for resupply and aircrew training , and neither carrier was able to take part in the Battle of Midway in June . En route to Japan , Shōkaku was caught in a severe storm and nearly capsized as the weight of the water used to put out the fires had compromised her stability . Repairs took three months and she was not ready for action until late August . 
 = = = Battle of the Eastern Solomons = = = 
 The American landings on Guadalcanal and Tulagi on 7 August 1942 caught the Japanese by surprise . The next day , the light carrier Ryūjō joined the sister ships in the First Carrier Division , which departed for Truk on 16 August . Having learned the lesson taught at Midway , the IJN strengthened the fighter contingent at the expense of the torpedo bombers assigned to its carriers ; the Shōkaku @-@ class carriers mustered 53 Zeros , 51 D3As , 36 B5Ns and 2 Yokosuka <unk> @-@ C " Judy " reconnaissance aircraft between them . After an American carrier was spotted near the Solomon Islands on 21 August , the division was ordered to bypass Truk and continue to the south . Ryūjō was detached early on 24 August to move in advance of the troop convoy bound for Guadalcanal and to attack the American air base at Henderson Field if no carriers were located . The two fleet carriers were to stand off , prepared to attack the Americans if found . 
 Ryūjō and her escorts were the first Japanese ships spotted and sunk by the Americans later that morning , but Zuikaku and Shōkaku were not spotted until the afternoon . Shortly before an unsuccessful attack by the pair of Douglas SBD Dauntlesses conducting the search , the sisters launched half of their dive bombers to attack the American carriers Enterprise and Saratoga . Most of the American carrier aircraft were already airborne by this time , either on CAP , returning from search missions , or from sinking Ryūjō , so only a small airstrike was launched in response to the spot report . About an hour after the first Japanese airstrike took off , a second airstrike that included the rest of the dive bombers was launched , but their target location was mistaken and they failed to find the Americans . The first airstrike attacked the two American carriers , scoring one hit on the battleship USS North Carolina and three hits on Enterprise , but they were mauled by the large number of airborne American aircraft and heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . Uncertain of the damage inflicted on each other , both sides disengaged later that evening . 
 = = = Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands = = = 
 The First Carrier Division , now including the light carrier Zuihō , departed Truk on 11 October to support the Japanese Army operation to capture Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . At this time , the sisters mustered 54 A6Ms , 45 D3As , and 36 B5Ns between them . Four days later , the Japanese spotted a small American convoy that consisted of a fleet tug towing a gasoline barge and escorted by the destroyer Meredith . Aircraft from Shōkaku and Zuikaku sank the latter , but did not attack the tug . 
 The Japanese and American carrier forces discovered each other in the early morning of 26 October and each side launched air strikes . Shōkaku was badly damaged by six hits from USS Hornet 's dive bombers ; Zuikaku was not spotted or attacked as she was hidden by the overcast conditions , just like at the Battle of the Coral Sea . In exchange , the Japanese crippled Hornet with two torpedoes and three bombs . In addition , two aircraft crashed into the American carrier and inflicted serious damage . Enterprise was also damaged by two bomb hits and a near miss and a destroyer was damaged when it was struck by a B5N . Attacks later in the day further damaged Hornet , which was abandoned and later sunk by Japanese destroyers Makigumo and Akigumo . The Japanese lost nearly half their aircraft that participated in the battle , together with their irreplaceable experienced aircrew . On 2 November , the First Carrier Division was ordered home for repairs and training . 
 Shōkaku 's repairs continued until March 1943 and Zuikaku , together with the recently repaired Zuihō , sailed for Truk on 17 January to support the impending evacuation of Japanese ground forces from Guadalcanal ( Operation Ke ) . On 29 January , the two carriers flew off 47 Zeros to Rabaul and Kahili Airfield , contributing some of their own aircraft and pilots . Zuihō was then used to cover the evacuation , while Zuikaku remained at Truk , together with the two Yamato @-@ class battleships , acting as a fleet in being threatening to sortie at any time . 
 In May , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were assigned to a mission to counterattack the American offensive in the Aleutian Islands , but this operation was cancelled after the Allied victory on Attu on 29 May 1943 . The sister ships were transferred to Truk in July . In response to the carrier raid on Tarawa on 18 September , the carriers and much of the fleet sortied for Eniwetok to search for the American forces before they returned to Truk on 23 September , having failed to locate them . The Japanese had intercepted some American radio traffic that suggested another attack on Wake Island , and on 17 October , Shōkaku and Zuikaku and the bulk of the 1st Fleet sailed for Eniwetok to be in a position to intercept any such attack , but no attack occurred and the fleet returned to Truk . At the beginning of November , the bulk of their air groups were transferred to Rabaul to bolster the defenses there , just in time to help defend the port against the Allied attack a few days later . They accomplished little there , for the loss of over half their number , before returning to Truk on the 13th . The sisters returned to Japan in December . 
 In February 1944 , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were transferred to Singapore . On 1 March the carrier divisions were reorganized with the new fleet carrier Taihō replacing Zuihō in the division . The First Carrier Division sailed in mid @-@ May for Tawi @-@ Tawi in the Philippines . The new base was closer to the oil wells in Borneo on which the IJN relied and also to the Palau and western Caroline Islands where the Japanese expected the next American attack ; the location lacked an airfield on which to train the inexperienced pilots and American submarine activity restricted the ships to the anchorage . 
 = = = Battle of the Philippine Sea = = = 
 The 1st Mobile Fleet was en route to Guimares Island in the central Philippines on 13 June , where they intended to practice carrier operations in an area better protected from submarines , when Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa learned of the American attack on the Mariana Islands the previous day . Upon reaching Guimares , the fleet refueled and sortied into the Philippine Sea where they spotted Task Force 58 on 18 June . At this time , the sister ships mustered 54 Zeros , 60 D4Ys and 36 Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers . As the carriers were launching their first airstrike the following morning , Taihō was torpedoed by an American submarine and later sank . Later that morning , Shōkaku was torpedoed by a different submarine , USS Cavalla . The three or four torpedoes started multiple fires in the hangar , which ignited fueling aircraft , in addition to causing heavy flooding . As the bow continued to sink , aircraft and munitions began to slide forward and a bomb in the hangar detonated . This ignited gas and oil fumes which caused a series of four explosions that gutted the ship . Shōkaku sank several minutes later with the loss of 1 @,@ 263 of her crew . 570 men were rescued by a light cruiser and a destroyer . 
 The loss of Taihō and Shōkaku left Zuikaku to recover the Division 's few remaining aircraft after their heavy losses ( only 102 aircraft remained aboard the seven surviving carriers by the evening ) and the 1st Mobile Fleet continued its withdrawal towards Okinawa . The Americans did not spot the Japanese carriers until the afternoon of the following day and launched a large airstrike that only succeeded in hitting Zuikaku with a single bomb that started a fire in the hangar . 
 = = = Battle of Leyte Gulf = = = 
 In October 1944 , Zuikaku was the flagship of Admiral Jisaburo Ozawa 's decoy Northern Force in Operation Shō @-@ Gō 1 , the Japanese counterattack against the Allied landings on Leyte . At this time , the ship had 28 A6M5 Zero fighters , 16 A6M2 Zero fighter @-@ bombers , 7 D4Y reconnaissance aircraft and 15 B6Ns . On the morning of 24 October , she launched 10 fighters , 11 fighter @-@ bombers , 6 torpedo bombers , and 2 reconnaissance aircraft as her contribution to the airstrike intended to attract the attention of the American carriers away from the other task groups that were to destroy the landing forces . This accomplished little else as the Japanese aircraft failed to penetrate past the defending fighters ; the survivors landed at airfields on Luzon . The Americans were preoccupied dealing with the other Japanese naval forces and defending themselves from air attacks and finally found the Northern Force late that afternoon , but Admiral William Halsey , Jr . , commander of Task Force 38 , decided that it was too late in the day to mount an effective strike . He turned all of his ships north to position himself for an attack . 
 The American carriers launched an airstrike shortly after dawn ; Zuikaku was struck by three bombs and one torpedo that started fires in both hangars , damaged one propeller shaft , and gave her a 29 @.@ 5 ° list to port . Fifteen minutes later , the fires were extinguished and the list was reduced to 6 ° by counterflooding . She was mostly ignored by the second wave of attacking aircraft , but was a focus of the third wave that hit her with six more torpedoes and four bombs . The bombs started fires in the hangars , the torpedoes caused major flooding that increased her list , and the order to abandon ship was issued before Zuikaku sank by the stern . Lost with the ship were 49 officers and 794 crewmen , but 47 officers and 815 crewmen were rescued by her escorting destroyers . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Maserati MC12 = 
 The Maserati MC12 is a limited production two @-@ seater sports car produced by Italian car maker Maserati to allow a racing variant to compete in the FIA GT Championship . The car entered production in 2004 , with 25 cars produced . A further 25 were produced in 2005 , making a total of 50 cars available for customers , each of which was pre @-@ sold for € 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Maserati designed and built the car on the chassis of the Enzo Ferrari , but the final car is much larger and has a lower drag coefficient . The MC12 is longer , wider and taller and has a sharper nose and smoother curves than the Enzo Ferrari , which has faster acceleration , better braking performance ( shorter braking distance ) and a higher top speed . The top speed of the Maserati MC12 is 330 kilometres per hour ( 205 mph ) whereas the top speed of the Enzo Ferrari is 350 kilometres per hour ( 217 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 The MC12 was developed to signal Maserati 's return to racing after 37 years . The road version was produced to <unk> the race version . One requirement for participation in the FIA GT is the production of at least 25 road cars . Three GT1 race cars were entered into the FIA GT with great success . Maserati began racing the MC12 in the FIA GT toward the end of the 2004 season , winning the race held at the Zhuhai International Circuit . The racing MC12s were entered into the American Le Mans Series races in 2005 but exceeded the size restrictions and consequently paid weight penalties due to excess range . 
 = = Development = = 
 Under the direction of Giorgio <unk> , Maserati began development of an FIA GT @-@ eligible race car . This car , which would eventually be named the MC12 , was initially called the " MCC " ( " Maserati Corse Competizione " ) and it was to be developed simultaneously with a road @-@ going version , the " MCS " ( " Maserati Corse <unk> " ) . Frank Stephenson did the majority of the body styling , but the initial shape was developed during wind tunnel testing from an idea had by <unk> Giugiaro . The MCC has a very similar body shape to the MC12 , but there are several key differences , most notably the rear spoiler . Andrea Bertolini served as the chief test driver throughout development , although some testing was done by Michael Schumacher , who frequently tested the MCC at the Fiorano Circuit . During the development process , the MCC name was set aside after Maserati established the car 's official name , MC12 . 
 The car is based heavily on the Enzo Ferrari , using a slightly modified version of the Ferrari Dino V12 , the same gearbox ( but given the unique name of " Maserati <unk> " ) and the same chassis and track ( length of axle between the wheels ) . The windshield is the only externally visible component shared with the Enzo ; the MC12 has a unique body which is wider , longer and slightly taller . The increased size creates greater downforce across the MC12 's body in addition to the downforce created by the two @-@ metre spoiler . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The MC12 is a two @-@ door coupe with a <unk> top roof , although the detached roof cannot be stored in the car . The mid @-@ rear layout ( engine between the axles but behind the cabin ) keeps the centre of gravity in the middle of the car , which increases stability and improves the car 's cornering ability . The standing weight distribution is 41 % front and 59 % rear . At speed , however , the downforce provided by the rear spoiler affects this to the extent that at 200 kilometres per hour ( 125 mph ) the downforce is 34 % front and 66 % rear . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Even though the car is designed as a homologation vehicle and is a modification of a racing car , the interior is intended to be luxurious . The interior is a mix of gel @-@ coated carbon fibre , blue leather and silver " <unk> " , a synthetic material which was found to be " too expensive for the fashion industry " . The centre console features the characteristic Maserati oval analogue clock and a blue ignition button , but it has been criticised for lacking a radio , car stereo or a place to install an aftermarket sound system . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The body of the car , made entirely of carbon fibre , underwent extensive wind tunnel testing to achieve maximum downforce across all surfaces . As a result , the rear spoiler is two metres ( 79 in ) wide but only 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , the underside of the car is smooth , and the rear bumper has diffusers to take advantage of ground effect . Air is sucked into the engine compartment through the air scoop ; its positioning on top of the cabin makes the car taller than the Enzo . The exterior is available only in the white @-@ and @-@ blue colour scheme , a tribute to the America <unk> racing team that drove the Maserati Tipo Birdcages in the early 1960s . The car is noted for the awkwardness that results from its size ; very long and wider than a Hummer H2 . This , combined with the lack of a rear window , can make parking the MC12 challenging . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 The MC12 sports a 232 @-@ kilogram ( 511 lb ) , 5 @,@ 998 cc ( 366 cu in ) Enzo Ferrari @-@ derived V12 engine , mounted at 65 ° . Each cylinder has four valves , lubricated via a dry sump system , and a compression ratio of 11 @.@ 2 : 1 . These combine to provide a maximum torque of 652 newton metres ( 481 lbf · ft ) at 5500 rpm and a maximum power of 630 PS ( 460 kW ; 620 hp ) at 7500 rpm . The redline rpm is indicated at 7500 — despite being safe up to 7700 — whereas the Enzo has its redline at 8200 rpm . 
 The Maserati MC12 can accelerate from 0 to 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) in 3 @.@ 8 seconds ( though Motor Trend Magazine managed 3 @.@ 7 seconds ) and on to 200 kilometres per hour ( 125 mph ) in 9 @.@ 9 seconds . It can complete a standing ( from stationary ) quarter mile in 11 @.@ 3 seconds with a terminal speed of 200 kilometres per hour ( 125 mph ) or a standing kilometre in 20 @.@ 1 seconds . The maximum speed of the Maserati MC12 is 330 kilometres per hour ( 205 mph ) . 
 Power is fed to the wheels through a rear @-@ mounted , six @-@ speed semi @-@ automatic transmission . The gearbox is the same as the Enzo 's transmission ( tuned to different gear ratios ) but renamed " Maserati <unk> " . It provides a shift time of just 150 milliseconds , and is mechanical with a 215 @-@ millimetre ( 8 @.@ 5 in ) twin @-@ plate dry clutch . 
 = = = Chassis = = = 
 The MC12 's chassis is a monocoque made of carbon and <unk> , with an aluminium sub @-@ chassis at the front and rear . It has a roll bar to provide additional strength , comfort and safety . Double wishbone suspension with push @-@ rod @-@ operated coil springs provide stability and dampers smooth the ride for the passengers . The front of the car can be raised for speed bumps and hills by pressing a button that extends the front suspension . There are two modes for the chassis ' tuning which can also be changed with a button in the cabin : " sport " , the standard setting , and " race " , which features less of the " Bosch ASR " ( anti @-@ slip regulation ) traction control , faster shifts and stiffer suspension . 
 = = = Wheels = = = 
 The MC12 has 480 @-@ millimetre ( 19 in ) wheels with a width of 230 millimetres ( 9 in ) at the front and 330 millimetres ( 13 in ) at the rear . The tyres are " Pirelli P Zero Corsas " with codes of 245 / 35 ZR 19 for the front tyres and 345 / 35 ZR 19 for the rear . The brakes are Brembo disc brakes with a Bosch anti @-@ lock braking system ( ABS ) . The front brakes have a diameter of 380 millimetres ( 15 in ) with six @-@ piston calipers and the rear brakes have a diameter of 335 millimetres ( 13 @.@ 2 in ) with four @-@ piston calipers . The centre @-@ lock wheel nuts that hold the wheels to the chassis are colour @-@ coded ; red on the left of the car , blue on the right . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The car has generally received mixed reviews , with critics saying it is hard to drive , overpriced and too large . Other criticisms include the lack of a trunk , rear window , spare tire and radio , and the way the car 's engine was limited or " drugged " . Current driver for Vitaphone Racing Team , Andrea Bertolini , the chief test driver throughout the development , said the car , " reacts well and is very reliable in its reactions . " 
 The Top Gear television series acquired an MC12 , and test driver The Stig achieved a lap time of 1 : 18 @.@ 9 around the Top Gear track — 0 @.@ 1 seconds faster than his lap in the Enzo Ferrari . Host Jeremy Clarkson also drove it , comparing it to the Maserati <unk> , a car he disliked . Clarkson criticised the car greatly , pointing out that , unlike the Enzo , it lacks a rear window . He also commented that it is " difficult " due to its size , and , " one of the <unk> cars " , he has ever driven , meaning a small action by the driver results in an exaggerated reaction from the car . For these reasons , he promptly renamed the car " The MC Hammer " . Regarding the design of a racing car and modification to road standards he said , " is it a racer ? Is it a GT car ? Is it a de @-@ tuned Enzo in a fat suit ? You can 't really tell . " Despite his criticisms he did compliment the smooth ride : 
 This car glides over bumps , the suspension absorbing the <unk> Johnnies ' laziness without transferring a single ripple to the cool blue interior with its Milanese fashion house upholstery . 
 Motor Trend Magazine reviewer Frank Markus had a more positive opinion . Despite initial skepticism he said , " It turns out that the Enzo makes a more comfortable and attractive road car when made over as a butch Maserati racer in street couture " . Markus complimented the stability of braking and the handling ability of the MC12 , especially the drifting allowed by the traction control when cornering , commenting that " There 's none of the knife @-@ edged limit handling we criticised in the more extreme Enzo . It 's even more forgiving at the limit than an Acura NSX . " 
 When Automobile Magazine tested an MC12 , reviewer Preston Lerner called it " user @-@ friendly " , praising the responsiveness and simplicity of driving . Lerner approved of Frank Stephenson 's work with the styling of both the car 's exterior and interior , calling the trim " Speed @-@ Racer @-@ ish " but " without looking as though it belongs in a Nitrous @-@ ized Civic " . He also complimented the ASR 's level of intervention , commenting that it " lets the fun factor get reasonably high before kicking in " . 
 In 2008 Evo Magazine ran the MC12 at Nordschleife and obtained a 7 : 24 @.@ 29 @-@ second lap time . This was also the second time an MC12 recorded a faster lap time than its Ferrari counterpart , with the Enzo lapping the track 1 second slower . 
 = = Racing = = 
 = = = FIA GT = = = 
 In 2004 Maserati completed three MC12 GT1 race cars intended for the FIA GT GT1 class . The AF Corse factory @-@ backed squad debuted the race at Imola , yet the FIA did not allow the MC12 to score points due to its debated homologation . Even with this setback , the team managed to take second and third places . At the next round at Oschersleben , the MC12 of Andrea Bertolini and Mika Salo won for the first time . At the final round of the year at Zhuhai , the FIA finally agreed to <unk> the MC12s and allow them to score points towards the championship . With this , the MC12 again took victory , allowing it to score enough points to finish 7th in the teams championship . 
 In 2005 Maserati won the FIA GT Manufacturers Cup with 239 points : almost double the score of next team ( Ferrari with 125 points ) . The two teams that entered MC12s into the FIA GT , Vitaphone Racing and JMB Racing , finished first and second respectively in the Team Cup , with Vitaphone winning by a considerable margin . Four of the MC12 drivers were in the running to win the FIA GT Drivers ' Title at the Bahrain International Circuit at the start of the final race of 2005 : Karl Wendlinger and Andrea Bertolini each on 71 points and Timo Scheider and Michael Bartels on 70 . Gabriele Gardel of Ferrari was also on 70 points , however , and in the crucial race he placed ahead of all of the Maseratis , driving an older Ferrari 550 Maranello . Gardel took the title , leaving all of the Maserati drivers within four points of first place ( Scheider and Wendlinger receiving four points for the race ) . 
 In 2006 the only team representing Maserati was Vitaphone Racing . On September 30 , 2006 , Vitaphone secured the Teams ' Championship for the 2006 season despite their drivers placing 5th and 7th in the Budapest 500 km race with weight penalties of 85 kilograms and 105 kilograms respectively . Bertolini and Bartels also shared first place in the Drivers ' Championship on 71 points but the manufacturers cup went to Aston Martin . 
 Vitaphone Racing again won the GT1 Teams ' Championship in the 2007 season on 115 points , followed by fellow MC12 team Scuderia Playteam <unk> on 63 points . JMB Racing also entered two MC12s , but they were used by amateur drivers competing in the Citation Cup , which was won by JMB 's driver Ben <unk> . Maserati also won the Manufacturers ' Cup by a significant margin while Thomas Biagi won the Drivers ' Championship . Fellow Vitaphone drivers Miguel Ramos and Christian Montanari tied for sixth , while Playteam 's Andrea Bertolini and Andrea <unk> were just behind . 
 For 2008 , Vitaphone Racing returned with a pair of MC12s for drivers Andrea Bertolini , Michael Bartels , and Miguel Ramos , as well as newcomer Alexandre <unk> . The season ended with another Teams ' Championship for Vitaphone Racing ( 122 @.@ 5 points ) and Drivers ' Championship for Bertolini and Bartels . In the ninth round , the team fielded a third car under the name of Team <unk> , driven by Pedro Lamy and Matteo Bobbi which scored one point . JMB Racing retained a single MC12 for 2007 Citation Cup winner Ben <unk> and drivers Peter <unk> and Alain Ferté , competing in the first five events of the championship . 
 In the 2009 season the Vitaphone Racing won the fifth consecutive Team Championship , while Bertolini and Bartels gained their third Drivers ' Championship . The other two drivers were Miguel Ramos and Alex Müller , who ended in sixth position . Starting from the fourth round , the team entered a third car under the name of Vitaphone Racing Team DHL , driven by Matteo Bobbi and Alessandro Pier Guidi , achieving good results : despite being only a one @-@ car team , with a partial season involvement , they ended the Teams ' Championship in fourth position ( 32 points ) , scoring a victory in the last round . 
 = = = FIA GT1 World Championship = = = 
 With the inauguration of the FIA GT1 World Championship in 2010 , Maserati continued their commitment to the series with two teams entering . Vitaphone Racing Team , the defending FIA GT Champions , won five races en route to the Drivers ' and Teams ' World Championships , but Maserati lost to Aston Martin in the Manufacturers ' Trophy . The second team representing Maserati was <unk> <unk> 's Triple H Team <unk> . 
 = = = Italian GT = = = 
 MC12s have had great success racing in Italy , and have replaced the <unk> " Maserati Trofeo Light " as Maserati 's representative in the Italian GT Championship . In 2005 Maserati introduced two MC12s to the GT1 division under Scuderia Playteam and Racing Box , with the teams placing first and third overall respectively . The cars were re @-@ entered in 2006 , with Scuderia Playteam again securing overall victory and Racing Box coming second . From 2007 , GT1 cars are not permitted in the championship , and Scuderia Playteam moved to the FIA GT Championship . 
 Racing Box also participated in the non @-@ championship 6 Hours of <unk> twice , winning in 2005 with Michele Rugolo , Leonardo <unk> , and Davide <unk> , then again in 2006 with Pedro Lamy , Marco <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Super GT = = = 
 In 2006 , the Le Mans winning outfit Team Goh was intending to race a Maserati MC12 in the Super GT series in Japan . However , the team was forced to withdraw because of driver problems ( Jan Magnussen falling ill suddenly and returning to Denmark ) and disappointing lap times at the Suzuka Circuit during testing . While the car was faster than its Super GT rivals down the straights , it was losing more than a second per lap in the corners due to its poorer aerodynamics . 
 = = = American Le Mans Series = = = 
 In 2004 the Maserati MC12s were unable to compete in series backed by the ACO , such as the Le Mans Endurance Series ( LMES ) in Europe and the American Le Mans Series ( ALMS ) because they exceeded both the length and width restrictions for their class . The car 's nose was shortened by 200 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) to attempt to comply with regulations , but was still 66 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) too wide . In 2005 the governing body of the ALMS , the International Motor Sports Association ( IMSA ) , allowed the MC12s to compete as a guest with the agreement that they were not allowed to score championship points and were forced to run a weight penalty . Some ALMS teams initially objected to the participation of the MC12 due to the possibility that an accident could eliminate their chances at the 24 Hours of Le Mans , but the MC12 was finally allowed to race . The ACO stood by their ruling on the car by forbidding it from entering other Le Mans series . 
 The lone MC12 would be campaigned under the Maserati Corse banner , but run by the American Risi Competizione team . The 2005 American Le Mans Series season was not as successful for the team , with the team scoring no wins . In the final race at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca , the MC12 was clipped by a competitor , causing damage that resulted in a lengthy pit stop . After resuming the race , a loss of traction caused by cold tires made the car hit a curb , which broke the radiator and took the MC12 out of the race . 
 In August 2007 , Fredy <unk> and Didier <unk> announced their preparation of a former FIA GT MC12 for use in the American Le Mans Series . The car made its debut at Road America , finishing 3rd in the GT1 class after qualifying competitively . The only other race entered was Round 11 at Road Atlanta for the Petit Le Mans where the team failed to finish following an accident , but were still classified second in class . Doran 's Maserati however had qualified on the class pole . The team selected Michelin tires instead of the <unk> originally used by Maserati Corse in 2005 , and was also allowed to race with a full @-@ width rear wing instead of the smaller wing used by Maserati Corse and teams in FIA GT , although the wing was not as tall . IMSA also allowed Doran to score points in the American Le Mans Series championships . 
 = = MC12 <unk> Corse = = 
 The Corse is a variant of the MC12 intended for racetrack use . In contrast to the race version of the MC12 , of which street @-@ legal versions were produced for homologation purposes , the MC12 Corse is intended for private use , albeit restricted to the track , as the Corse 's modifications make it illegal to drive on the road . 
 The Corse was developed directly from the MC12 GT1 , which won the 2005 FIA GT Manufacturers Cup . The car was released in mid @-@ 2006 , " in response to the customer demand to own the MC12 racing car and fueled by the growth in track days , where owners can drive their cars at high speeds in the safety of a race track " , as stated by Edward Butler , General Manager for Maserati in Australia and New Zealand . In similar fashion to the Ferrari FXX , although the owners are private individuals , Maserati is responsible for the storage , upkeep , and maintenance of the cars , and they are only driven on specially organized track days . Unlike the FXX , Corsas are not used for research and development , and are used only for entertainment . A single MC12 Corsa has been modified by its owner to make it street @-@ legal . 
 Only twelve MC12 Corsas were sold to selected customers , each of whom paid € 1 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 47 million ) for the privilege . Another three vehicles were produced for testing and publicity purposes . The Corsa shares its engine with the MC12 GT1 ; the powerplant produces 755 PS ( 555 kW ; 745 hp ) at 8000 rpm , 122 PS ( 90 kW ; 120 hp ) more than the original MC12 . The MC12 Corse shares the GT1 's shortened nose , which was a requirement for entry into the American Le Mans Series . The car was available in a single standard color , named " Blue Victory " , though the car 's paint could be customized upon request . The MC12 Corse possesses steel / carbon racing brakes , but is not fitted with an anti @-@ lock braking system . 
 = = Birdcage 75th = = 
 The Birdcage 75th is a concept car created by automobile manufacturer Maserati and designed by Pininfarina . It was first introduced at the 2005 Geneva Auto Show . It draws inspiration from the Maserati Tipo 61 Birdcage of the 1960s and was made as a celebration of Pininfarina 's 75th anniversary . It was said that Maserati originally planned to produce this car under the name Maserati <unk> in 2008 , but due to problems with Pininfarina , the plans were never carried out . 
 = Leonard Harrison State Park = 
 Leonard Harrison State Park is a 585 @-@ acre ( 237 ha ) Pennsylvania state park in Tioga County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is on the east rim of the Pine Creek Gorge , also known as the Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania , which is 800 feet ( 240 m ) deep and nearly 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) across here . It also serves as headquarters for the adjoining Colton Point State Park , its sister park on the west rim of the gorge . Leonard Harrison State Park is known for its views of the Pine Creek Gorge , and offers hiking , fishing and hunting , whitewater boating , and camping . The park is in Shippen and Delmar Townships , 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of Wellsboro at the western terminus of Pennsylvania Route 660 . 
 Pine Creek flows through the park and has carved the gorge through five major rock formations from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods . Native Americans once used the Pine Creek Path along the creek . The path was later used by lumbermen , and then became the course of a railroad from 1883 to 1988 . Since 1996 , the 63 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 102 @.@ 0 km ) Pine Creek Rail Trail has followed the creek through the park . The Pine Creek Gorge was named a National Natural Landmark in 1968 and is also protected as a Pennsylvania State Natural Area and Important Bird Area , while Pine Creek is a Pennsylvania Scenic and Wild River . The gorge is home to many species of plants and animals , some of which have been reintroduced to the area . 
 Although the Pine Creek Gorge was clearcut in the 19th and early 20th centuries , it is now covered by second growth forest , thanks in part to the conservation efforts of the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) in the 1930s . The park is named for Leonard Harrison , a Wellsboro lumberman who cut the timber there , then established the park , which he donated to the state in 1922 . The CCC improved the park and built many of its original facilities . Since a successful publicity campaign in 1936 , the park has been a popular tourist destination and attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors each year . Leonard Harrison State Park was chosen by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) Bureau of Parks for its " 25 Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " list , which praised its " spectacular vistas and a fabulous view of Pine Creek Gorge , also known as Pennsylvania 's Grand Canyon " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Humans have lived in what is now Pennsylvania since at least 10 @,@ 000 BC . The first settlers were Paleo @-@ Indian nomadic hunters known from their stone tools . The hunter @-@ gatherers of the Archaic period , which lasted locally from 7000 to 1000 BC , used a greater variety of more sophisticated stone artifacts . The Woodland period marked the gradual transition to semi @-@ permanent villages and horticulture , between 1000 BC and 1500 AD . Archeological evidence found in the state from this time includes a range of pottery types and styles , burial mounds , pipes , bows and arrows , and ornaments . 
 Leonard Harrison State Park is in the West Branch Susquehanna River drainage basin , the earliest recorded inhabitants of which were the Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks . They were a matriarchal society that lived in stockaded villages of large long houses , and " occasionally inhabited " the mountains surrounding the Pine Creek Gorge . Their numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . 
 After this , the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley were under the nominal control of the Iroquois . The Iroquois lived in long houses , primarily in what is now New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . They and other tribes used the Pine Creek Path through the gorge , traveling between a path on the Genesee River in modern New York in the north , and the Great Shamokin Path along the West Branch Susquehanna River in the south . The Seneca tribe of the Iroquois believed that Pine Creek Gorge was sacred land and never established a permanent settlement there . They used the path through the gorge and had seasonal hunting camps along it , including one just north of the park near what is now the village of Ansonia . To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois encouraged displaced tribes from the east to settle in the West Branch watershed , including the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) . 
 The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) led to the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin . On November 5 , 1768 , the British acquired the New Purchase from the Iroquois in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix , including what is now Leonard Harrison State Park . The Purchase line established by this treaty was disputed , as it was unclear whether the border along " Tiadaghton Creek " referred to present @-@ day Pine Creek or to Lycoming Creek , further to the east . As a result , the land between them was disputed territory until 1784 and the Second Treaty of Fort Stanwix . After the American Revolutionary War , Native Americans almost entirely left Pennsylvania , although some isolated bands of Natives remained in Pine Creek Gorge until the War of 1812 . 
 = = = Lumber era = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of William Penn and his Quaker colonists in 1682 , up to 90 percent of what is now Pennsylvania was covered with woods : more than 31 @,@ 000 square miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km2 ) of eastern white pine , eastern hemlock , and a mix of hardwoods . The forests near the three original counties , Philadelphia , Bucks , and Chester , were the first to be harvested , as the early settlers used the readily available timber to build homes , barns , and ships , and cleared the land for agriculture . The demand for wood products slowly increased and by the time of the American Revolution the lumber industry had reached the interior and mountainous regions of Pennsylvania . Lumber thus became one of the leading industries in Pennsylvania . Trees were used to furnish fuel to heat homes , tannin for the many tanneries that were spread throughout the state , and wood for construction , furniture , and barrel making . Large areas of forest were harvested by colliers to fire iron furnaces . Rifle stocks and shingles were made from Pennsylvania timber , as were a wide variety of household utensils , and the first Conestoga wagons . 
 By the early 19th century the demand for lumber reached the Pine Creek Gorge , where the surrounding mountainsides were covered with eastern white pine 3 to 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 to 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter and 150 feet ( 46 m ) or more tall , eastern hemlock 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) in circumference , and huge hardwoods . Each acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) of these virgin forests produced 100 @,@ 000 board feet ( 236 m3 ) of white pine and 200 @,@ 000 board feet ( 472 m3 ) of hemlock and hardwoods . For comparison , the same area of forest today produces a total of only 5 @,@ 000 board feet ( 11 @.@ 8 m3 ) on average . According to Steven E. Owlett , environmental lawyer and author , shipbuilders considered pine from Pine Creek the " best timber in the world for making fine ship masts " , so it was the first lumber to be harvested on a large scale . Pine Creek was declared a public highway by the Pennsylvania General Assembly on March 16 , 1798 , and rafts of spars were floated down the creek to the Susquehanna River , then to the Chesapeake Bay and the shipbuilders at Baltimore . The lumbermen would then walk home , following the old Pine Creek Path at the end of their journey . A spar sold for one dollar and three spars up to 90 feet ( 27 m ) long were lashed together to make a ship 's mast . The largest spar produced on Pine Creek was 43 inches ( 110 cm ) in diameter 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) above the base , 93 feet ( 28 m ) long , and 33 inches ( 84 cm ) in diameter at the top . By 1840 , Tioga County alone produced over 452 such spar rafts with more than 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 board feet ( 52 @,@ 000 m3 ) of lumber . 
 As the 19th century progressed , fewer pines were left and more hemlocks and hardwoods were cut and processed locally . By 1810 there were 11 sawmills in the Pine Creek watershed , and by 1840 there were 145 , despite a flood in 1832 which wiped out nearly all the mills along the creek . Selective harvesting of pines was replaced by clearcutting of all lumber in a tract . The first lumbering activity to take place close to what is now Leonard Harrison State Park occurred in 1838 when William Dodge and some partners built a settlement at Big Meadows and formed the Pennsylvania Joint Land and Lumber Company . Dodge 's company purchased thousands of acres of land in the area , including what is now Colton Point State Park . In 1865 the last pine spar raft floated down the creek , and on March 28 , 1871 the General Assembly passed a law allowing splash dam construction and clearing of creeks to allow loose logs to float better . The earliest spring log drives floated up to 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 board feet ( 47 @,@ 000 m3 ) of logs in Pine Creek at one time . These logs floated to the West Branch Susquehanna River and to sawmills near the Susquehanna Boom at Williamsport . Hemlock wood was not widely used until the advent of wire nails , but the bark was used to tan leather . After 1870 the largest tanneries in the world were in the Pine Creek watershed , and required 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) of bark to produce 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) of quality sole leather . 
 In 1883 the Jersey Shore , Pine Creek and Buffalo Railway opened , following the creek through the gorge . The new railroad used the relatively level route along Pine Creek to link the New York Central Railroad with the Clearfield Coalfield . In the surrounding forests , log drives gave way to logging railroads , which transported lumber to local sawmills . There were 13 companies operating logging railroads along Pine Creek and its tributaries between 1886 and 1921 , while the last log drive in the Pine Creek watershed started on Little Pine Creek in 1905 . The west rim , which became Colton Point State Park , had a logging railroad by 1903 , which was able to harvest lumber on Fourmile Run that had been previously inaccessible . The old @-@ growth forests were clearcut by the early 20th century and the gorge was stripped bare . Nothing was left except the dried @-@ out tree tops , which became a fire hazard , so much of the land burned and was left barren . On May 6 , 1903 the Wellsboro newspaper had the headline " Wild Lands <unk> " and reported landslides through the gorge . The soil was depleted of nutrients , fires baked the ground hard , and jungles of blueberries , blackberries , and mountain laurel covered the clearcut land , which became known as the " Pennsylvania Desert " . Disastrous floods swept the area periodically and much of the wildlife was wiped out . 
 = = = Nessmuk and Leonard Harrison = = = 
 George Washington Sears , an early conservationist who wrote under the pen name " Nessmuk " , was one of the first to criticize Pennsylvania lumbering and its destruction of forests and creeks . In his 1884 book Woodcraft he wrote of the Pine Creek watershed where 
 A huge tannery ... poisons and blackens the stream with chemicals , bark and ooze . ... The once fine covers and thickets are converted into fields thickly dotted with blackened stumps . And , to crown the desolation , heavy laden trains of ' The Pine Creek and Jersey Shore R.R. ' go thundering [ by ] almost hourly ... Of course , this is progress ; but , whether backward or forward , had better be decided sixty years hence . 
 Nessmuk 's words went mostly unheeded in his lifetime and did not prevent the clearcutting of almost all of the virgin forests in Pennsylvania . 
 Sears lived in Wellsboro from 1844 until his death in 1890 , and was the first to describe the Pine Creek Gorge . He also described a trip to what became Leonard Harrison State Park : after a 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) buggy ride , he then had to hike 7 miles ( 11 km ) through tangles of fallen trees and branches , down ravines , and over banks for five hours . At least he reached " The Point " , which he wrote was " the jutting terminus of a high ridge which not only commands a capital view of the opposite mountain , but also of the Pine Creek Valley , up and down for miles " . A Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( PHMC ) state historical marker commemorating Nessmuk was dedicated in the park in 1972 . 
 The creation of the park was the work of Leonard Harrison , a former lumberman and businessman from Wellsboro who owned a substantial amount of land in the Pine Creek Gorge . In the 1890s Harrison operated a sawmill at Tiadaghton in the middle of the gorge , which was supplied with logs , not by train as was most common in that era , but by a log slide built into the side of the gorge . The log slide was used on a year @-@ round basis : during the winter the logs slid down on ice ; following the snowmelt the slide was greased to ease the descent of the logs . After the village and the mill were destroyed by a fire , Harrison turned his attention to tourism . He purchased 121 acres ( 49 ha ) of land at the site of the current park in 1906 , then developed this land , known as " The Lookout " , and invited the public to enjoy the beauty of Pine Creek Gorge . Harrison donated the picnic grounds to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1922 . 
 Although the park was donated to the state , the Wellsboro Chamber of Commerce made initial improvements there and operated it for the first two decades . Elsewhere in the gorge the state bought land abandoned by lumber companies , sometimes for less than $ 2 per acre ( $ 5 per ha ) . Except for the adjoining Colton Point State Park , this land became the Tioga State Forest , which was officially established in 1925 and lies just north and south of the park . As of 2008 the state forest encompasses 160 @,@ 000 acres ( 65 @,@ 000 ha ) , mostly in Tioga County . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Despite its status as Leonard Harrison State Forest Park , it took time for the park to become more well known . Access to the park over small roads was still difficult . An elderly woman who had lived nearby all her life visited the park for the first time in 1932 and asked , on seeing the gorge , " How long has this been here ? " 
 The Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) improved access and constructed many of the amenities at Leonard Harrison park from 1933 to 1936 , during the Great Depression . Leonard Harrison State Park is one of many examples of the work of the CCC throughout north @-@ central Pennsylvania . The CCC built picnic and comfort facilities , made roads and trails ( often following old logging roads ) , and planted stands of white pine , spruce and larch . Some of the CCC @-@ constructed facilities remain and are still used , and the park has hosted a reunion of former CCC workers each summer since 1990 . 
 In 1936 Larry Woodin of Wellsboro and other Tioga County business owners began a tourism campaign to promote the Pine Creek Gorge as " The Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania " . Greyhound Bus Lines featured a view of the canyon from a Leonard Harrison lookout on the back cover of its Atlantic Coast timetable . The bus line 's Chicago to New York City tour had an overnight stay in Wellsboro and a morning visit to the canyon for $ 3 . More than 300 @,@ 000 tourists visited the canyon by the autumn of 1936 , and 15 @,@ 000 visited Leonard Harrison over Memorial Day weekend in 1937 . That year more visitors came to the Pine Creek Gorge than to Yellowstone National Park . In response to the heavy use of the local roads , the CCC widened the highways in the area , and guides from the CCC gave tours of the canyon . A PHMC state historical marker honoring the CCC 's work in the park and county was dedicated on June 3 , 1995 . Near the lookout over the gorge there is a bronze statue of a " Tioga County CCC Worker " , unveiled on August 14 , 1999 , as a monument to the achievements of the CCC . 
 After the Second World War the state took over operation of the park , and expanded its size beyond the original land donated by Harrison : six purchases between 1946 and 1949 increased the park 's area from 128 acres ( 52 ha ) to 585 acres ( 237 ha ) at a cost of $ 26 @,@ 328 . The Pennsylvania Geographic Board dropped the word Forest and officially named it Leonard Harrison State Park on November 11 , 1954 . The park was improved in the following decade with the completion of new latrines ( 1963 ) and a new concession stand and visitor center ( 1968 ) . Pine Creek was named a state scenic river on December 4 , 1992 , which ensured further protection of Pine Creek Gorge in its natural state . In 1997 the park 's Important Bird Area ( IBA ) was one of the first 73 IBAs established in Pennsylvania . In 2000 the park became part of the Hills Creek State Park complex , an administrative grouping of eight state parks in Potter and Tioga counties . In 2005 the state began a $ 1 @.@ 2 million upgrade of park facilities , including a new maintenance building , the replacement of three pit latrines at the overlook and campground , the addition of showers at the campground , and the conversion of all restrooms to flush toilets . 
 The second half of the 20th century saw great changes in the rail line through the park . Regular passenger service on the canyon line ended after the Second World War , and in 1960 the second set of train tracks was removed . Conrail abandoned the section of the railroad passing through the gorge on September 21 , 1988 . The right @-@ of @-@ way eventually became the Pine Creek Rail Trail , which follows the path of the former Pine Creek Path . The first section of the rail trail opened in 1996 and included the 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) section in the park : as of 2008 the Pine Creek Rail Trail is 63 @.@ 5 miles ( 102 @.@ 2 km ) long . 
 Leonard Harrison State Park continued to attract national attention in the post @-@ war era . The New York Times featured the park and its " breath @-@ taking views of the gorge " as well as its trails and picnic groves in a 1950 article , and in 1966 praised the whitewater boating on Pine Creek and the park 's " outstanding look @-@ out points " . The Pine Creek Gorge , including Leonard Harrison and Colton Point State Parks and a 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) section of Tioga State Forest , was named a National Natural Landmark ( NNL ) in April 1968 . The plaque for the entire NNL is on the lookout terrace of Leonard Harrison State Park . Another New York Times article on whitewater canoeing in 1973 noted the damage along the creek done by Hurricane Agnes the year before , and Leonard Harrison 's waterfalls . 
 In the new millennium , the two state parks on either side of the Pine Creek Gorge are frequently treated as one . A 2002 New York Times article called Leonard Harrison and Colton Point state parks " Two State Parks , Divided by a Canyon " and noted their " overlooks offer the most spectacular views " . Leonard Harrison and Colton Point were each included in the list of state parks chosen by the DCNR Pennsylvania Bureau of Parks for its " 25 Must @-@ See Pennsylvania State Parks " list . The DCNR describes how they " offer spectacular vistas and a fabulous view of Pine Creek Gorge , also known as Pennsylvania 's Grand Canyon " . It goes on to praise their inclusion in a National Natural Landmark and State Park Natural Area , hiking and trails , and the Pine Creek Rail Trail and bicycling . 
 = = Pine Creek Gorge = = 
 Leonard Harrison State Park lies on the east side of the Pine Creek Gorge , also known as the Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania . A sister park , Colton Point State Park , is on the west side , and the two parks combined form essentially one large park that includes parts of the gorge and creek and parts of the plateau dissected by the gorge . Pine Creek has carved the gorge nearly 47 miles ( 76 km ) through the dissected Allegheny Plateau in northcentral Pennsylvania . The canyon begins in southwestern Tioga County , just south of the village of Ansonia , and continues south to near the village of Waterville in Lycoming County . The depth of the gorge in Colton Point State Park is about 800 feet ( 240 m ) and it measures nearly 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) across . 
 The Pine Creek Gorge National Natural Landmark includes Colton Point and Leonard Harrison State Parks and parts of the Tioga State Forest along 12 miles ( 19 km ) of Pine Creek between Ansonia and Blackwell . This federal program does not provide any extra protection beyond that offered by the land owner . The National Park Service 's designation of the gorge as a National Natural Landmark notes that it " contains superlative scenery , geological and ecological value , and is one of the finest examples of a deep gorge in the eastern United States . " 
 The gorge is also protected by the state of Pennsylvania as the 12 @,@ 163 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 922 ha ) Pine Creek Gorge Natural Area , which is the second largest State Natural Area in Pennsylvania . Within this area , 699 acres ( 283 ha ) of Colton Point and Leonard Harrison State Parks are designated a State Park Natural Area . The state Natural Area runs along Pine Creek from Darling Run in the north ( just below Ansonia ) to Jerry Run in the south ( just above Blackwell ) . It is approximately 12 miles ( 19 km ) long and 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide , with state forest roads providing all of the western border and part of the eastern border . 
