 Within the park , Pine Creek and the walls of the gorge " visible from the opposite shoreline " are also protected by the state as a Pennsylvania Scenic River . In 1968 Pine Creek was one of only 27 rivers originally designated as eligible to be included in the National Wild and Scenic River system , and one of only eight specifically mentioned in the law establishing the program . Before Pine Creek could be included in the federal program , the state enacted its State Scenic Rivers Act , then asked that Pine Creek be withdrawn from the national designation . However , there was much local opposition to its inclusion on the state 's list , based at least partly on mistaken fears that protection would involve seizure of private property and restricted access . Eventually this opposition was overcome , but Pennsylvania did not officially include it as one of its own state Scenic and Wild Rivers until November 25 , 1992 . The state treated Pine Creek as if it were a state scenic river between 1968 and 1992 . It protected the creek from dam @-@ building and water withdrawals for power plants , and added public access points to reduce abuse of private property . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 Although the rock formations exposed in Leonard Harrison State Park and the Pine Creek Gorge are at least 300 million years old , the gorge itself formed only about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , in the last ice age . Pine Creek had flowed northeasterly until then , but was dammed by rocks , soil , ice , and other debris deposited by the receding Laurentide Continental Glacier . The dammed creek formed a lake near the present village of Ansonia , and the lake 's glacial meltwater overflowed the debris dam , which caused a reversal of the flow of Pine Creek . The creek flooded to the south and quickly carved a deep channel on its way to the West Branch Susquehanna River . 
 The park is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 821 feet ( 555 m ) on the Allegheny Plateau , which formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when Gondwana ( specifically what became Africa ) and what became North America collided , forming Pangaea . While the gorge and its surroundings appear mountainous , these are not true mountains : instead years of erosion have made this a dissected plateau , causing the " mountainous " terrain seen today . The hardest of the ancient rocks are on top of the ridges , while the softer rocks eroded away forming the valleys . 
 The land on which Leonard Harrison State Park sits has undergone tremendous change over the last 400 million years . It was once part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a buildup of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found today in the Pine Creek drainage basin : sandstone , shale , conglomerates , limestone , and coal . 
 Five major rock formations are present in Leonard Harrison State Park , from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods . The youngest of these , which forms the highest points in the park and along the gorge , is the early Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal . Low @-@ sulfur coal was once mined at three locations within the Pine Creek watershed . Below this is the late Mississippian Mauch Chunk Formation , which is formed with grayish @-@ red shale , siltstone , sandstone , and conglomerate . <unk> were once carved from the exposed sections of this conglomerate . Together the Pottsville and Mauch Chunk formations are some 300 feet ( 91 m ) thick . 
 Next below these is the late Devonian and early Mississippian Huntley Mountain Formation , which is made of grayish @-@ red shale and olive @-@ gray sandstone . This is relatively hard rock and forms many of the ridges . Below this is the red shale and siltstone of the Catskill Formation , about 760 feet ( 230 m ) thick and some 375 million years old . This layer is relatively soft and easily eroded , which helped to form the Pine Creek Gorge . Cliffs formed by the Huntley Mountain and Catskill formations are visible north of the park at Barbour Rock . The lowest and oldest layer is the Lock Haven Formation , which is gray to green @-@ brown siltstone and shale over 400 million years old . It forms the base of the gorge , contains marine fossils , and is up to 600 feet ( 180 m ) thick . 
 The dominant soil in Leonard Harrison State Park is somewhat excessively drained Oquaga channery loam , which is often associated with well drained Lordstown channery loam . Much of the campground near the eastern boundary is supported by Morris gravelly silt loam , which is somewhat poorly drained due to a subsoil <unk> . The Oquaga tends to be very strongly acidic ( pH 4 @.@ 8 ) , Morris is strongly acidic ( pH 5 @.@ 3 ) and Lordstown is moderately acidic ( pH 5 @.@ 5 ) . All of these soils belong to the <unk> soil order . 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . The mean annual precipitation for the Pine Creek watershed is 36 to 42 inches ( 914 to 1 @,@ 070 mm ) . The highest recorded temperature at the park was 104 ° F ( 40 ° C ) in 1936 , and the record low was − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) in 1934 . On average , July is the hottest month at Leonard Harrison , January is the coldest , and June the wettest . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Descriptions from early explorers and settlers give some idea of what the Pine Creek Gorge was like before it was clearcut . The forest was up to 85 percent hemlock and white pine , with the rest hardwoods . Many animal species that are now vanished inhabited the area . A herd of 12 @,@ 000 American bison migrated along the West Branch Susquehanna River in 1773 . Pine Creek was home to large predators such as wolves , lynx , wolverines , panthers , fishers , foxes and bobcats , all save the last three now locally extinct . The area had herds of elk and deer , and large numbers of black bears , river otters , and beavers . In 1794 , two of the earliest white explorers to travel up Pine Creek found so many rattlesnakes on its banks that they had to sleep in their canoe . Further upstream , insects forced them to do the same . 
 The virgin forests cooled the land and streams . Centuries of accumulated organic matter in the forest soil caused slow percolation of rainfall into the creeks and runs , so they flowed more evenly year @-@ round . Pine Creek was home to large numbers of fish , including trout , but dams downstream on the Susquehanna River have eliminated the shad , salmon , and eels once found in the creek . The clearcutting of forests destroyed habitat for animals , but there was also a great deal of hunting , with bounties paid for large predators . 
 = = = State Natural Area and wildlife = = = 
 While Leonard Harrison and Colton Point State Parks and parts of the surrounding Tioga State Forest are now the Pine Creek Gorge National Natural Landmark , it is their status as part of a Pennsylvania State Natural Area that provides the strongest protection for them . Within this Natural Area , all logging , mining , and oil and gas drilling are prohibited , and only foot trail access is allowed . In 1988 the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources , precursor to the DCNR , described it as 
 about 95 % State owned , <unk> , and designated the Pine Creek Gorge Natural Area . It is a place of unique geologic history and contains some rare plant communities , an old growth hemlock stand , ... active bald eagle nest [ s ] ... and is a major site of river otter reintroduction . Departmental policy is protection of the natural values of the Canyon from development and overuse , and restoration of the area to as near a natural condition as possible . 
 The gorge has over 225 species of wildflowers , plants and trees , with scattered stands of old growth forest on some of its steepest walls . The rest of the gorge is covered with thriving second growth forest that can be over one hundred years old . However , since clearcutting , nearly 90 percent of the forest land has burnt at least once . Typical south @-@ facing slopes here have mountain laurel below oak and hickory trees , while north @-@ facing slopes tend to have ferns below hemlocks and hardwoods . Large chestnuts and black cherry can also be found . 
 The Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania is known for its fall foliage , and Leonard Harrison State Park is a popular place to observe the colors , with the first three weeks of October as the best time to see the leaves in their full color . Red leaves are found on red maple , red oak , and black cherry , while orange and yellow leaves are on black walnut , sugar maple , aspen , birch , tulip poplar and chestnut oak , and brown leaves are from beech , white oak , and eastern black oak trees . Plants of " special concern " in Pennsylvania that are found in the gorge include Jacob 's ladder , wild pea , and hemlock parsley . 
 There are over 40 species of mammals in the Pine Creek Gorge . Leonard Harrison State Park 's extensive forest cover makes it a habitat for " big woods " wildlife , including white @-@ tailed deer , black bear , wild turkey , red and gray squirrels . Less common creatures include bobcats , coyote , fishers , river otters , and timber rattlesnakes . There are over 26 species of fish in Pine Creek , including trout , suckers , fallfish , and rock bass . Other aquatic species include crayfish and frogs . 
 Several species have been reintroduced to the gorge . White @-@ tailed deer were imported from Michigan and released throughout Pennsylvania to reestablish what had once been a thriving population . The current population of deer in Pennsylvania are descended from the original stock introduced beginning in 1906 , after the lumberman had moved out of the area . The deer population has grown so much that today they exceed their carrying capacity in many areas . River otters were successfully reintroduced in 1983 and now breed in the gorge . Despite the fears of anglers , their diet is only 5 percent trout . 
 Fishers , medium @-@ sized weasels , were reintroduced to Pine Creek Gorge as part of an effort to establish a healthy population of fishers in Pennsylvania . Prior to the lumber era , fishers were numerous throughout the forests of Pennsylvania . They are generalized predators and will hunt any smaller creatures in their territory , including porcupines . Elk have been reintroduced west of the gorge in Clinton County and occasionally wander near the west rim of the canyon . Coyotes have come back on their own . Invasive insect species in the gorge include gypsy moths , which eat all the leaves off trees , especially oaks , and hemlock woolly <unk> , which weaken and kill hemlocks . Invasive plant species include purple loosestrife and Japanese knotweed . 
 = = = Important Bird Area = = = 
 Leonard Harrison State Park is part of Important Bird Area # 28 , which encompasses 31 @,@ 790 acres ( 12 @,@ 860 ha ) of both publicly and private held land . State managed acreage accounts for 68 percent of the total area and includes Leonard Harrison and Colton Point State Parks and the surrounding Tioga State Forest lands . The Pennsylvania Audubon Society has designated all 585 acres ( 237 ha ) of Leonard Harrison State Park as part of the IBA , which is an area designated as a globally important habitat for the conservation of bird populations . 
 Ornithologists and bird watchers have recorded a total of 128 species of birds in the IBA . Several factors contribute to the high total of bird species observed : there is a large area of forest in the IBA , as well as great habitat diversity , with 343 acres ( 139 ha ) of open water that is used by many of the birds , especially bald eagles . The location of the IBA along the Pine Creek Gorge also contributes to the diverse bird populations . 
 In addition to bald eagles , which live in the IBA year round and have successfully established a breeding population there , the IBA is home to belted kingfishers , scarlet tanagers , black @-@ throated blue warblers , common mergansers , blue and green heron , hermit thrushes , and wood ducks . Large numbers of ospreys use the gorge during spring and fall migration periods . The woodlands are inhabited by the ruffed grouse , Pennsylvania 's state bird , and wild turkeys . Swainson 's thrush breeds in the IBA and the northern harrier breeds and overwinters in Pine Creek Gorge . 
 A variety of warblers is found in Leonard Harrison State Park . The Pennsylvania Audubon Society states that Pine Creek Gorge is " especially rich in warbler species , including Pine , Black @-@ throated Blue , Black @-@ throated Green , Blackburnian , and Black @-@ and @-@ white . " Many of these smaller birds are more often heard than seen as they keep away from the trails and overlooks . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 = = = Trails = = = 
 Leonard Harrison State Park is a destination for avid hikers , with some challenging hikes in and around the Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania . The park has 4 @.@ 6 miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) of trails that feature very rugged terrain , pass close to steep cliffs , and can be slick in some areas . In 2003 , the DCNR reported that 37 @,@ 775 people used the trails in the park , and another 24 @,@ 407 bicycled in it . 
 Overlook Trail is a 0 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) path to Otter View , a vista looking to the south . This moderately difficult loop passes reminders of the CCC 's work in the park , including a plantation of red pines and an old incinerator . 
 Turkey Path is a difficult trail , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long ( down and back ) , that follows Little Fourmile Run down the side of the canyon , descending over 800 feet ( 240 m ) to Pine Creek and the rail trail at the bottom of the gorge . It was originally a mule drag used to haul timber to the creek . There are several waterfalls on the trail , which passes through an environmentally sensitive area and is on a steep slope . Hikers are encouraged to remain on the path to reduce erosion and protect fragile plant life along the trail . In 2006 a hiker who had left the path slipped near a waterfall and fell to his death . 
 A vista at the halfway point on Turkey Path was constructed in 1978 by the Youth Conservation Corps . Hand rails , steps and observation decks were added to the path in 1993 by the Pennsylvania Conservation Corps . The park website classifies it as a " down and back trail " since there is no bridge across Pine Creek . However , there is also a Turkey Path from Colton Point State Park on the west rim of the gorge down to a point on Pine Creek just upstream of the end of this trail . According to Owlett and the DCNR Pine Creek Rail Trail map , the creek can be forded with care when the water is low , and the Turkey Path connects the two parks . 
 Pine Creek Rail Trail is a 63 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 102 @.@ 0 km ) rail trail from Wellsboro Junction , just north of Wellsboro , south through the Pine Creek Gorge to Jersey Shore : 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of this trail is in Leonard Harrison and Colton Point State Parks . A 2001 article in USA Today said the scenic beauty of the Grand Canyon of Pennsylvania made the trail one of " 10 great places to take a bike tour " in the world . 
 = = = Camping and picnics = = = 
 Camping is a popular pastime at Leonard Harrison State Park , with 3 @,@ 511 persons using the rustic camping facilities in 2003 . The DCNR classifies camping facilities as " rustic " if they do not have flush toilets or showers . The state has renovated the park camping area since 2003 , building modern bathrooms with flush toilets and hot showers , and no longer considers it " rustic " . The park has updated electric sites for RV campers as well . The campground has picnic tables and fire rings . The park has almost 100 picnic tables for use ; seven of these tables are in shelters . The park hosted some 29 @,@ 150 picnickers in 2003 . 
 = = = Hunting , fishing , and whitewater = = = 
 Hunting is permitted on about 250 acres ( 100 ha ) of Leonard Harrison State Park : hunters are expected to follow the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania State Game Commission . The common game species are ruffed grouse , eastern gray squirrel , wild turkey , white @-@ tailed deer , and black bear ; however , hunting groundhog is prohibited . Additional acres of forested woodlands are available for hunting on the grounds of the adjacent Tioga State Forest . 
 Fishing is permitted at the state park , though anglers must descend the Turkey Path to reach Pine Creek . This has been designated as approved trout waters by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission , which means the waters will be stocked with trout and may be fished during trout season . Other species of fish found in Pine Creek include smallmouth bass and some panfish . Several small trout streams are accessible from within the park , which had 2 @,@ 597 anglers in 2003 . Historically , fishermen of note on the stretch of Pine Creek in the park include President Theodore Roosevelt and Pennsylvania Governor William A. Stone . 
 Edward Gertler writes in Keystone Canoeing that Pine Creek " is possibly Pennsylvania 's most famous canoe stream " and attributes this partly to the thousands who decide to boat on it after they " peer into Pine Creek 's spectacular abyss from the overlooks of Leonard Harrison and Colton Point state parks " . The park contains 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of Pine Creek , which is Class 1 to Class 2 whitewater here . Boaters do not normally start or end their run in the park , which has no launches : it is part of the 16 @.@ 8 @-@ mile ( 27 @.@ 0 km ) trip from Ansonia ( Marsh Creek ) south to Blackwell ( Babb Creek ) . 
 = = Nearby state parks = = 
 Leonard Harrison State Park is mostly in Shippen Township , with a small portion in Delmar Township north of Stowell Run . It is 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of Wellsboro at the western terminus of Pennsylvania Route 660 . The following state parks are within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of the park : 
 = Zero Sum ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Zero Sum " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on April 27 , 1997 . It was directed by Kim Manners , and written by Frank Spotnitz and Howard Gordon . " Zero Sum " included appearances by William B. Davis , Laurie Holden and Morris Panych . The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology , or fictional history of The X @-@ Files . " Zero Sum " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 7 , being watched by 18 @.@ 6 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode has received mixed to positive responses from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , a case Mulder is asked to investigate is covertly covered up by the agents ' boss Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who has made a sinister bargain with The Smoking Man ( Davis ) . 
 The decision to center another episode around Skinner — following the third season episode " Avatar " — was made when Gillian Anderson took a week off to shoot the film The Mighty . Rather than have Duchovny carry the additional workload , the writing staff decided to focus the episode on supporting cast members . " Zero Sum " was the final appearance in the series by Morris Panych . In addition , the episode saw the return of the virus @-@ carrying bees from the season @-@ opener " Herrenvolk " and would later return in the 1998 feature film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a postal routing center in Vienna , Virginia a woman is killed by a swarm of bees in the bathroom while taking a cigarette break . Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , working for The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) , covers up the death by deleting the file on the case from agent Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) computer , cleaning up all the evidence at the scene , burning the woman 's body in an incinerator and replacing the police 's blood sample for the case by posing as Mulder . As he leaves the police station , Skinner is chased down by Detective Ray Thomas , who believes he is Mulder . Skinner tells him there is nothing on the case warranting his involvement , and leaves . 
 Shortly after Skinner arrives home he is met by Mulder , who tells him about the case and the fact that someone is going to great lengths to cover it up . Mulder reveals that Detective Thomas was killed , which shocks Skinner . Mulder tells Skinner that Scully is undergoing tests regarding her cancer . Later that night Skinner meets with The Smoking Man , who is accompanied by Thomas ' murderer , the Gray Haired Man ( Morris Panych ) . Skinner is angry that Thomas was killed and wants to end their arrangement , which The Smoking Man refuses to allow . Mulder calls Skinner , telling him about the woman 's body being burned and the blood evidence being tampered with . Mulder tells Skinner that he is trying to match the bullet that killed Thomas to a gun issued to a federal agent or local officer . Skinner searches his drawer and realizes that his gun was missing and must have been the one used for the murder . Skinner , realizing he has been set up , calls The Smoking Man , who confirms that Thomas was killed with Skinner 's gun and that by going to the police Skinner would end up implicating himself in the murder . The Smoking Man refuses to provide any details on what he is covering up . 
 Skinner returns to the routing center where he tears a hole in the bathroom wall and finds a large honeycomb of dead bees . He visits an entomologist to look at one of the bees and is told that Mulder visited him six months ago about a similar subject . Skinner finds Mulder 's file on the matter , copying down the contact information for Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) . Mulder tells Skinner that a bank near the police station took a picture of the detective , which shows him with Skinner , but the picture is too obscured for Mulder to identify him . Skinner calls Covarrubias , who does not have any evidence to provide him at this time . The entomologist is killed by a swarm of bees . The next day , Mulder and Skinner look at his body , which is infected with smallpox transmitted by the bees . Skinner visits the co @-@ worker of the postal worker who died , who tells him she was pressured to not say anything about what happened by men who demanded a damaged package . At the photo lab Mulder analyzes the photo , which reveals Skinner 's identity . 
 The Smoking Man meets with the Syndicate , who are responsible for the bees . Soon afterward a swarm of bees attacks a school in Columbia , South Carolina , and one of the teachers dies as a result . Skinner heads to the hospital , where he is met by Covarrubias . She demands to know what he knows about the matter . He tells her he believes that the bees are being used as a carrier for some sort of experiment . Skinner returns home where he is confronted by Mulder , who now suspects that Skinner has been working against him all this time . Skinner is able to convince Mulder that he would not have forced his own drawer lock open and hence could not have been the murderer . Convinced of Skinner 's evidence , Mulder turns in the gun with the serial number filed off so Skinner is not blamed for the murder . That night Skinner confronts The Smoking Man in his apartment , angry that nothing has been done for Scully . The Smoking Man convinces him that Scully will die if he kills him and Skinner leaves without killing him , but not before firing warning shots . Shortly afterwards Covarrubias calls The Smoking Man , who tells her to tell Mulder what he wants to hear while an unknown man is shown behind her listening on another phone . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ writer Frank Spotnitz described the episode as a " fortunate accident " . Late in the fourth season of the show Gillian Anderson left the show for a week to film her part in the film The Mighty . The producers , knowing that they would have to write an episode without Dana Scully , decided it was not fair to have David Duchovny carry the same workload as in a normal episode considering her absence . As such , a story was devised in which his involvement would be light . This resulted in the decision to write , for the second year in a row , an episode focused on Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) . Howard Gordon , having written the previous Skinner @-@ centric episode , " Avatar " joined Spotnitz and the two wrote the episode over a weekend while another Gordon written episode , " Synchrony " was in production . The writers felt that this was the perfect time to bring in Skinner 's deal with The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) to cure Scully 's cancer , made in the episode " Memento Mori " . Frank Spotnitz said of Skinner 's deal , " The hard thing for Skinner was that we had to keep him in the middle . We had him tell Mulder not to bargain with The Smoking Man in order to save Scully 's life . And then he himself struck a Faustian bargain with the Cigarette Smoking Man and was in his debt for some kind . " 
 The writing staff felt that " Zero Sum " was a logical place to bring back the bees that were used in the season premiere , " Herrenvolk " , feeling it was important to not have something paranormal happen to Skinner in this episode considering that had been done in the previous season . Live bees were used for filming , but showed up poorly in the footage ; visual effects technician Laurie Kallsen @-@ George then spent nine days digitally enhancing the footage to improve upon this . The virus @-@ carrying bees would later form a central plot point in the series ' 1998 feature film adaptation . 
 Director Kim Manners noted that the episode " was a really good show for me , because I had not got a chance to work with Mitch . And they wrote a great script , you know ? It was really something he could sink his teeth into and he just did a great job . Bill Davis was fabulous in that show too " . This was the second episode of the series to not feature Scully , the first being the second season episode " 3 " . Guest actor Morris Panych , portraying the Syndicate assassin The Grey @-@ Haired Man , makes his last appearance in the series in this episode . Panych had previously appeared in " Piper Maru " , " Avatar " , " Herrenvolk " and " Memento Mori " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Zero Sum " premiered on the Fox network on April 27 , 1997 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on February 11 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 7 with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 18 @.@ 6 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 The episode has received mixed to positive responses from critics . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , rated the episode an A , calling it " utterly bad @-@ ass " . Handlen felt that the episode effectively toyed with the series ' usual narrative structure , making lead character Fox Mulder seem " nearly as much of an antagonist " as The Smoking Man ; Handlen also felt that " Zero Sum " gave significant insight into the character of Walter Skinner . Paula Vitaris , writing for Cinefantastique , rated " Zero Sum " one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , noting that its " pacing and tone are off " . Vitaris felt that " Duchovny and Pileggi give good performances " , despite Pileggi seeming " unintentionally comic " at times ; though she noted that " an episode without Scully feels pretty empty " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , noting that " Pileggi looks much more comfortable here than he did in last year 's showcase [ ' Avatar ' ] " . Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode 's attempts to tie into the wider storylines — the appearance of Marita Covarrubias in particular — are where it " really stumbles " ; noting that its success lies " in the shock value of seeing a deliberately familiar story through the fractured view of another character " . 
 = Edward Hollamby = 
 Edward " Ted " Ernest Hollamby OBE ( 8 January 1921 – 29 December 1999 ) was an English architect , town planner , and architectural conservationist . Known for designing a number of modernist housing estates in London , he also achieved notability for his work in restoring Red House , the Arts and Crafts building in Bexleyheath , Southeast London which was designed by William Morris and Philip Webb in 1859 . 
 Born in Hammersmith , West London , Hollamby served in the Royal Marines during the Second World War before embarking on a career in architecture . Involved with the Communist Party of Great Britain and other leftist groups , his socialist beliefs led him to work in the public sector , first for the Miners ' Welfare Commission and then for London County Council ( LCC ) , where he was involved in the design and construction of such modernist post @-@ war housing estates as Bethnal Green 's Avebury Estate , Kennington 's Brandon Estate , and Deptford 's Pepys Estate . 
 In 1952 , Hollamby and his family moved into the Red House , embarking on projects to renovate and restore it . A great fan of the house 's original inhabitant , he also involved himself in the early activities of the William Morris Society , which held a number of meetings at the property . Awarded an OBE for his career in 1970 , from 1969 to 1981 Hollamby worked as Director of Architecture , Planning and Development for the London Borough of Lambeth , before moving to work for the London Docklands Development Corporation from 1981 to 1985 . He continued restoring Red House in later life , opening it up to visitors and establishing the Friends of Red House charity in 1998 . 
 The Guardian described Hollamby as " very much an architect of the 20th century , a public servant who believed not just in high quality architecture but in the existence and nurturing of the public realm , of public architecture and civic design . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hollamby was born in his parental home of 6 Wellesley Avenue in Hammersmith , West London . He was the oldest of two sons born to Ethel May Hollamby , née Kingdom ( 1899 / 1900 – 1966 ) , and Edward Thomas Hollamby ( 1893 – 1978 ) , a police constable . His primary education took place at St. Peter 's Church School , before he won a scholarship to study at a junior technical school . From there , he gained a higher education by training in architecture at the nearby Hammersmith School of Arts and Crafts during the 1930s . At the college , he was inspired by the Arts and Crafts aesthetic propounded by one of his lecturers , Alwyn Waters , and through him came to take an interest in William Morris , who had been a pioneer of the Arts and Crafts movement in the latter part of the 19th century . At the same time , Hollamby was influenced by the modernist movement in architecture to which two of his favourite lecturers , Arthur Ling and Alex Lowe , belonged , and joined the Modern Architectural Research Group ( MARS ) . 
 Following the completion of his studies , he moved to Lancashire to assist a project building the Royal Ordnance factory number 7 in Kirby , before returning to London to work in housing design for the Metropolitan Borough of Hammersmith . On 18 May 1941 , he married Doris Isabel Parker ( 1920 – 2003 ) , an old friend who worked as a clerk and who , like Hollamby , was a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain ( CPGB ) . Their wedding took place at St Michael 's Church at <unk> , Middlesex , after which they moved to St. Peter 's Square , Hammersmith . They went on to have two daughters and a son . In August 1941 , during Britain 's involvement in World War II , Hollamby was called up to serve in the British armed forces . Assigned to the Royal Marine Engineers , he served most of the conflict in Trincomalee , Ceylon . 
 = = = Architectural career = = = 
 Much like many architects of his generation , following the British victory Hollamby pursued a career in local authority offices . He first worked as an architect for the Miners ' Welfare Commission from 1947 to 1949 , in this position designing pithead baths and a colliery extension at Lofthouse , Yorkshire . After gaining further qualifications from the Royal Institute of British Architects , he proceeded with a three @-@ year evening course in town planning , run by William Holford and Arthur Ling at the Bartlett School of Architecture , London . 
 He meanwhile worked under Leslie Martin as a senior architect at the Architects ' Department of the London County Council ( LCC ) from 1949 to 1962 . During this period , he oversaw the design of two neighbouring schools in North Hammersmith , now known as the Phoenix School ; he unsuccessfully tried to have the school named after Morris . He was also involved in the design and construction of several modernist , high @-@ rise post @-@ war housing estates , namely Bethnal Green 's Avebury Estate and Kennington 's Brandon Estate , personally securing a sculpture by Henry Moore for the latter . In his final years in this position he focused on estates in south London , working on Deptford 's Pepys Estate and the first designs for what became Thamesmead . 
 From there becoming the borough architect for the Metropolitan Borough of Hammersmith , in January 1963 , he moved to become borough architect for the Metropolitan Borough of Lambeth , and following the reorganisation of Greater London he remained in that position for its successor , the London Borough of Lambeth . Here he rose to the position of the borough 's director of architecture , planning and development , which he held from 1969 to 1981 . In this position he oversaw the construction of several high @-@ rise housing towers alongside an innovative low @-@ rise development at <unk> Gardens , high @-@ density scheme for Central Hill , as well as a project that combined the construction of new housing with the conservation of old , particularly around Clapham Manor Street . In 1970 , Hollamby was awarded an Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for his work in architecture . However , in the early 1980s , he became increasingly unhappy in the position as a result of conflict with certain local Labour Party politicians and sought different employment . 
 Amid the growing neo @-@ liberal , Thatcherite economic changes brought about under the Premiership of Margaret Thatcher , he moved into the private sector to work for the London Docklands Development Corporation from 1981 to 1985 , when he retired . As part of this he took a role in Europe 's largest urban regeneration project , proposing a mix of redevelopment and conservation of existing buildings , using this mixed method to create a design guide for the regeneration of the Isle of Dogs . In this position he also campaigned for the Docklands Light Railway and oversaw the exterior refurbishment of St George in the East . 
 Over the course of his career he also served on the boards of such professional bodies as English Heritage ( 1986 – 90 ) , the Historic Buildings Council ( 1972 – 82 ) , and the Royal Institute of British Architects ( 1961 – 5 and 1966 – 72 ) . 
 = = = Red House = = = 
 In the early 1950s , Hollamby and Doris were living in St. Peter 's Square , Hammersmith with two friends , Dick and Mary Toms . Born in London , Richard " Dick " Toms ( 1914 – 2005 ) was largely self @-@ taught as an architect , and had met and befriended Edward during the war before gaining employment alongside him at the LCC . Toms ' wife Mary ( née Lehner , 1920 – 2010 ) was Austrian but had been born in Berlin , Germany . Because her grandfather was Jewish , she fled Austria after it was annexed by Nazi Germany in 1938 . Both couples were involved in left @-@ wing political activism , being members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the British @-@ Soviet Friendship Society ; they were thus sympathetic to the far left political causes to which Morris had devoted much of his later life . 
 In 1952 , the two couples discovered that Red House was up for sale , and as architects with an interest in Morris , they recognised its historic value . By this point , the Red House had been empty for 18 months , after Thomas Hills and his family had left in 1951 , and had fallen into a state of dilapidation . Deciding to share the property between themselves , they were able to afford a mortgage with the aid of a loan from Toms ' father @-@ in @-@ law ; he only agreed to provide the loan if the house was owned in Toms ' name , and thus the Hollambys became Toms ' tenants . The two families then moved in with their six children , and a seventh was born soon after . They camped in the house 's grounds while carrying out a project of renovation . 
 After being made habitable , the two families divided the house between them , with separate living rooms , bedrooms , bathrooms , and kitchens . Corridors , stairs , and the old kitchen ( which they termed the " Eating Room " ) were shared communally . As a result of their leftist activism , they allowed meetings of both the British @-@ Soviet Friendship Society , and the CPGB to take place in the house . They also permitted members of the Woodcraft Folk to camp in its grounds . In 1953 , the inaugural meeting of the William Morris Society took place at the house , at which 45 people were present . In 1954 , a third architect , David Gregory Jones , moved in to the two rooms adjoining the downstairs gallery . 
 In 1957 , the Toms left Red House and moved to Blackheath , desiring to live closer to central London . They were replaced by Jean and David Macdonald ; Jean was an architect colleague of Edward 's who shared his socialist values , while David was an accountant and woodworker . Rearranging the former ownership arrangements , the Macdonalds and Hollambys agreed to legally own half of the property each , while Jones remained as a lodger . Together , the two couples made repairs and restorations to the house ; they repaired the leaking roof and added Morris & Co. wallpapers along with furniture from Heal 's and <unk> . In 1960 , the William Morris Society held a garden party there to commemorate the building 's centenary . However , in 1964 the Macdonalds left and the Hollambys assumed sole ownership of the House . 
 Hollamby himself left the Communist Party following the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 . He remained committed to leftist ideals and involved himself in a number of local socio @-@ political groups , including the local branch of the Labour Party and with his wife was a founding member of Bexley Civic Society . After his retirement in 1985 , Hollamby decided to open the Red House up to visitors , offering guided tours on one Sunday per month . As the number of those attending such tours grew , especially in the 1996 centenary of Morris ' death , Hollamby began to search for a way of securing future public access . In 1998 , he helped to establish the Friends of Red House , a group of individuals who were largely members of the Bexley Civic Society , and who helped to maintain the House and its gardens as well as give tours to visitors . Hollamby also authored two books on Red House ; the first , Red House , Bexleyheath : The Home Of William Morris , was published by Phaidon Press in 1991 as part of its series on " Architecture in Detail " , and the second was a short guide book for visitors co @-@ written with Doris and published by the William Morris Society in 1993 . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Hollamby died suddenly as a result of heart disease at Red House on 29 December 1999 ; he was the third owner to die while in residence . His funeral was held on 21 January 2000 in Eltham , with a secular humanist service conducted by Barbara Smoker . The Friends of Red House took over the public openings at this point . Amid ill health , Doris left Red House and moved into a care home in 2002 ; she died in April 2003 . With the aid of an anonymous benefactor , the house was purchased and gifted to The National Trust in 2003 , who turned it into a visitor 's attraction , with tours continuing to be organised by the Friends of Red House . 
 = Aubrey ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Aubrey " is the twelfth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and the thirty @-@ sixth episode overall . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 6 , 1995 . It was written by Sara B. Charno and directed by Rob Bowman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Aubrey " received a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 and was watched by 9 @.@ 7 million households . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the episode , Mulder and Scully believe that a serial killer from the 1940s passed his genetic trait of violence to his grandchild after a detective , BJ Morrow ( Deborah Strang ) mysteriously uncovers the remains of an FBI agent who disappeared almost fifty years before while investigating a modern @-@ day murder case similar to the older cold case . 
 Although " Aubrey " was written by Charno , Glen Morgan and James Wong , who had written for The X @-@ Files before , provided additional contributions to the story . The story for the episode developed around the concept of 50 @-@ year @-@ old murders and the transfer of genetic memory . This was later combined with a separate concept about a female serial killer . Terry O 'Quinn , who guest stars in the episode , would later play roles in the 1998 feature film , the ninth season episode " Trust No 1 " , become a recurring character as Peter Watts on Millennium , and appear on the short @-@ lived series Harsh Realm . Strang 's work on the episode was submitted for Emmy consideration . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the town of Aubrey , Missouri , local detective B.J. Morrow tells Lt. Brian Tillman ( Terry O 'Quinn ) that she has gotten pregnant from their affair . He requests her to meet him at a motel later that night . While waiting for him , B.J. has a vision that leads her to a field where she digs up the skeletal remains of an FBI agent . 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) head to Aubrey , where the remains are identified as belonging to Agent Sam Chaney , who disappeared in the area with his partner , Tim Ledbetter , in 1942 . The agents find discrepancies in B.J. ' s story , but Tillman comes to her defense . Mulder tells Scully of the case Chaney and Ledbetter were investigating , which involved the rapes and murders of three women with the word " Sister " slashed on their chest . Discovering similar cuts on Chaney 's chest during the autopsy , B.J. instinctively realizes that the cuts spell the word " Brother . " B.J. admits her affair and pregnancy to Scully . 
 Tillman reveals that a new murder has occurred where a woman had the word " Sister " slashed on her chest . B.J. claims to have seen the victim in her dreams , which involve a man with a rash on his face and a monument , which after a quick sketch by B.J. , Mulder recognizes as the Trylon and <unk> from the 1939 New York World 's Fair . Searching old mugshot photos , B.J. recognizes the man from her dream as Harry Cokely , who was arrested in 1945 for raping a woman named Linda Thibedeaux and slashing " Sister " on her chest . Scully believes that B.J. unconsciously recalled the case since her father was a cop and may have discussed it . The agents visit the now @-@ elderly Cokely , who now lives alone after being released from prison in 1993 . Cokely insists he was at home when the latest murder occurred . 
 B.J. awakens from a nightmare covered in blood , finding the word " Sister " slashed into her chest . She also sees a young Cokely reflected in the mirror behind her . She heads to a stranger 's basement and tears away the floorboards , revealing the skeletal remains within that is found to be of the missing Ledbetter 's . Cokely is arrested , but denies attacking B.J. , insisting he 's too old to even leave his residence without his large oxygen flask . Scully tells Mulder that blood on the latest victim matches Cokely 's . The agents visit Thibedeaux , who describes her encounter with Cokely in the 1940s . Mulder notices a photo of her at the 1939 World 's Fair featuring the Trylon and <unk> . When pressed , she reveals that the rape resulted in a child , which she put up for adoption . The FBI tracks down the child , who turns out to have been B.J. ' s father , causing Mulder to surmise that B.J. is the killer and may be operating on genetic memories which tend to skip a generation . 
 As the agents are on their way to intercept her , B.J. attacks Thibedeaux , but stops when she sees the " Sister " scars on her chest . The agents find Thibedeaux after B.J. has left , and head to Cokely 's house , believing him to be her next target . B.J. , who has already arrived , cuts Cokely 's respirator tubes and attacks him with a razor . When the agents arrive B.J. attacks Mulder but when Cokely finally dies she stops . B.J. is placed in Shamrock Women 's Prison Psychiatric Ward where she is put on suicide watch after attempting to self @-@ abort . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Sara B. Charno , making it her first writing contribution to the series . The episode was directed by Rob Bowman . Charno initially developed a story revolving around the concept of 50 year old murders and the transfer of genetic memory . This was later combined with a separate concept about a female serial killer . Glen Morgan and James Wong , who had written for The X @-@ Files before , provided additional contributions to the story . The script was revised shortly before shooting , resulting in newer scenes being added , such as the scene where BJ attacks Mulder . 
 Morgan and Wong suggested casting Woodward as Harry Cokely , who had previously performed work for them on their series 21 Jump Street . Actor Terry O 'Quinn , who appears in this episode as Lt. Brian Tillman , later appeared as different characters in the 1998 feature film and the ninth season episode " Trust No 1 " . He later had a recurring role as Peter Watts on Millennium , the sister series to The X @-@ Files , and appeared in the short @-@ lived series Harsh Realm . O 'Quinn later earned the nickname " Mr. Ten Thirteen " , due to his appearance in multiple shows and movies affiliated with Ten Thirteen Productions , the company that produced The X @-@ Files . 
 Series creator Chris Carter was happy with the finished episode , later noting , " I think it came out great " . He further elaborated : " Morgan Woodward was excellent as well . Rob Bowman came through for us and gave us an excellent job . " Director Rob Bowman later declared that he was proud of the sequence where BJ wakes up with blood on her chest . Many members of the cast and crew were pleased with the casting . Carter called it " terrific " . He said Deborah Strang 's performance was " top notch " . Furthermore , Strang 's performance was submitted for an Emmy nomination , although she didn 't make the final list . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Aubrey " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 6 , 1995 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 9 @.@ 7 million households . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a B , describing it as " a well @-@ paced murder mystery with an inventive wrap @-@ up " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two positively critiqued the episode 's " character study " of BJ Morrow , noting that it " makes this episode stand out " . Shearman and Pearson also complimented Strang 's performance , writing that she " seizes the part and gives it dignity . " However , the two were critical of the genetic defect , arguing that , because Strang 's character is fleshed out , the reveal turns her into " a puppet of the paranormal " . Critical Myth reviewer John Keegan gave the episode a 7 out 10 rating and wrote that , " Overall , this episode opens some interesting doors , adding the concept of genetic memory to the list of phenomena that cannot be explained in fully material terms . While the plot makes a certain amount of sense , there are a number of convenient moments that take away from the whole . But the end result is a strong episode . " 
 Other reviews were more mixed . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club said that most of " Aubrey " was " fun " , although Tillman was not " particularly interesting " . He stated that things got " dicey " for him around the revelation about Thibedeaux 's child and that he did not buy Mulder 's genetic impulse theories . He criticised the ending , writing that it " [ sacrificed ] whatever mood and character development the previous thirty had spent establishing for cheesy theatrics , and the whole thing lands with a resounding thud . There are too many problems with the concept ; the nature / nurture debate has been going on for decades , and this ep throws the whole thing out the window in about two minutes . No other cause for BJ 's actions is ever given ... That 's some lazy writing right there . " Meghan Deans from Tor.com gave the episode a mixed review and wrote that it was " sort of good [ but ] sort of a terrible idea " . She cited the theme of " breaking the cycle of abuse " as a plus for the entry , noting that it was a " revenge story [ of ] a woman righting the wrongs of her male ancestors and breaking the cycle of violence outside the family " . However , Deans was critical of various elements of the episode , most notably , the genetic theory conceit and the idea of a " activator baby " that caused Morrow 's past ancestors to work through her . 
 = 1979 Imperial Valley earthquake = 
 The 1979 Imperial Valley earthquake occurred at 16 : 16 Pacific Daylight Time ( 23 : 16 UTC ) on October 15 just south of the Mexico – United States border . It affected Imperial Valley in Southern California and Mexicali Valley in northern Baja California . The earthquake had a relatively shallow hypocenter and caused property damage in the United States estimated at $ 30 million USD . The irrigation systems in the Imperial Valley were badly affected , but no deaths occurred . It was the largest earthquake to occur in the contiguous United States since the 1971 San Fernando earthquake eight years earlier . 
 The earthquake was 6 @.@ 4 on the moment magnitude scale , with a maximum perceived intensity of IX ( Violent ) on the Mercalli intensity scale . However , most of the intensity measurements were consistent with an overall maximum intensity of VII ( Very strong ) , and only the damage to a single structure , the Imperial County Services building in El Centro , was judged to be of intensity IX . Several comprehensive studies on the total structural failure of this building were conducted with a focus on how the building responded to the earthquake 's vibration . It was one of the first heavily instrumented office buildings to be severely damaged by seismic forces . 
 The Imperial Valley is surrounded by a number of interconnected fault systems and is vulnerable to both moderate and strong earthquakes as well as earthquake swarms . The area was equipped with an array of strong motion seismographs for analyzing the fault mechanisms of nearby earthquakes and seismic characteristics of the sediments in the valley . The earthquake was significant in the scientific community for studies of both fault mechanics and repeat events . Four of the region 's known strike @-@ slip faults and one additional newly discovered normal fault all broke the surface during the earthquake . 
 = = Tectonic setting = = 
 The Salton Trough is part of the complex plate boundary between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate where it undergoes a transition from the continental transform of the San Andreas Fault system to the series of short spreading centers of the East Pacific Rise linked by oceanic transforms in the Gulf of California . The two main right – lateral strike @-@ slip fault strands that extend across the southern part of the trough are the Elsinore Fault Zone / Laguna Salada Fault to the western side of the trough and the Imperial Fault to the east . The Imperial Fault is linked to the San Andreas Fault through the Brawley Seismic Zone , which is a spreading center beneath the southern end of the Salton Sea . 
 With the San Jacinto Fault Zone to the northwest , the Elsinore fault to the south @-@ southwest , and the Imperial fault centered directly under the Imperial Valley , the area frequently encounters seismic activity , including moderate and damaging earthquakes . Other events in 1852 , 1892 , 1915 , 1940 , 1942 , and 1987 have impacted the region . More small to moderate events of less than 6 @.@ 0 ( local magnitude ) have occurred in this area than any other section of the San Andreas fault system . 
 = = Earthquake = = 
 The earthquake was caused by rupture along parts of the Imperial Fault , the Brawley fault zone and the Rico Fault , a previously unknown normal fault near Holtville , though slip was also observed on the Superstition Hills Fault and the San Andreas Fault . The maximum observed right lateral displacement on the Imperial fault — measured within the first day of the event to the northwest of the epicenter — was 55 – 60 cm ( 22 – 24 in ) , but measurements taken five months following the earthquake closer to the southeast end of the rupture showed there was an additional 29 cm ( 11 in ) of <unk> slip ( for a total slip of 78 cm ( 31 in ) . Several strands of the Brawley fault zone , to the east of the Imperial fault , ruptured intermittently along a length of 11 @.@ 1 km ( 6 @.@ 9 mi ) , and just one kilometer of the Rico fault slipped with a maximum vertical displacement of 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) ( no horizontal slip was observed on that fault ) . 
 The pattern of displacement along the Imperial Fault was very similar to that observed for the northern part of the rupture during the 1940 El Centro earthquake , although on this occasion the rupture did not extend across the border into Mexico . This had been explained as the behavior of individual slip patches along the Imperial Fault with two patches rupturing in 1940 and only the northern one in 1979 . The faulting that gave rise to the earthquake has been modeled by comparing synthetic seismograms with near @-@ source strong motion recordings . This analysis showed that the rupture speed had at times exceeded the shear wave velocity , making this the first earthquake for which <unk> rupture was inferred . 
 The United States Geological Survey operates a series of strong motion stations in the Imperial Valley and while the majority of stations in the array recorded ground accelerations that were not unexpected , station number six registered an unusually high vertical component reading of <unk> which , at the time , was the highest yet recorded as the result of an earthquake . One explanation of the anomaly attributed the amplification to path effects and a separate theory put forth described <unk> effects that generated a focused pulse directly at the station . A later proposal stated that both <unk> and focusing effects due to a " lens like effect " produced by a sedimentary wedge at the junction of the Imperial and Brawley faults ( under the station ) may have been the cause of the high reading . 
 = = Damage = = 
 The earthquake caused damage to the Californian towns of El Centro and Brawley , and in the Mexican town of Mexicali Mexico . There were injuries from the quake on both sides of the border . The state Office of Emergency Preparedness declared 61 injuries on the American side and police claimed that 30 were injured in Mexico . The Red Cross stated that cuts from broken glass , bruises form falling objects , and a few broken bones were reported . California 's Interstate 8 developed cracks in it , but vehicles were still able to traverse the highway . The California Highway Patrol warned drivers that use of the road would be at their own risk . 
 Damage to the roadways was heavier farther north on California State Route 86 where settling of the road by as much as four to six inches occurred , and a bridge separation closed the highway west of Brawley . Governor Jerry Brown ended a presidential campaign trip through New England early in order to return to the Imperial Valley and declare a state of emergency there . Two fires occurred in El Centro with the loss of a trailer being reported , though fire was avoided near the Imperial County Airport when a 60 @,@ 000 barrel gasoline tank farm was seriously damaged and was losing 50 US gallons ( 190 l ; 42 imp gal ) a minute . Firefighters drained the tanks and replaced the fuel with water to avoid the gasoline vapor from causing a hazard . 
 The earthquake shaking also led to extensive damage to the irrigation systems of the Imperial Valley , leading to breaches in some canals , particularly the All @-@ American Canal that brings water to the valley from the Colorado River . A 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) section of the unlined canal between the Ash and East Highline canals experienced settling . The Imperial Irrigation District estimated damage to be $ 982 @,@ 000 for the three canals . Water flow was immediately reduced to prevent further damage and to allow assessments to be made , and within four days the repairs had been completed and full capacity restored . A hydraulic gate and a concrete facility that were damaged during the May 1940 earthquake needed repair again . The 1940 event caused significant destruction to canals on both sides of the international border , with 108 km ( 67 mi ) of damage along eight canals on the US side alone . 
 = = Imperial County Services building = = 
 The Imperial County Services building , a six @-@ story reinforced concrete building located 29 km ( 18 mi ) northwest of the epicenter in El Centro , was built in 1971 when there were few other tall buildings in the area . The decision to equip the building with nine strong motion sensors in May 1976 was based on its size , structural attributes , and location in a seismically active area . Unusually detailed structural analysis was possible as a result of the building having been outfitted with the instrumentation . The initial configuration was tested shortly after its installation when a relatively small ( 4 @.@ 9 local magnitude ) earthquake occurred 32 km ( 20 mi ) northwest of the building on November 4 , 1976 . The accelerations recorded on the equipment during the event proved to be of very low amplitude and , as a result , the instrumentation was upgraded to include a 13 channel configuration in the building along with a <unk> triaxial ( 3 channel ) <unk> located 340 ft ( 100 m ) east of the building at ground level . The full 16 channel system was managed by the California Division of Mines and Geology Office of Ground Motion Studies and provided almost 60 seconds worth of high resolution data during the 1979 event . 
 In an interview with the Los Angeles Times following the earthquake , Fritz Matthiesen , a scientist with the United States Geological Survey , said that the instruments captured " about the third or fourth most significant recording of building damage we 've made in 40 years " and that they " have only three other cases in which damage has occurred in an instrumented building " . 
 Several types of irregular construction styles were incorporated into the building that contributed to its mass and strength not being uniform throughout the structure . These differences in strength allowed damage to be concentrated in one or more areas rather than being distributed equally and reduced the building 's ability to sustain the tremors . Two of the irregularities of the building were the end shear walls that stopped below the second floor and the first floor carrying its load via square support columns . The result of the design was that the first floor was less stiff than the upper floors , and during the earthquake the building sustained uneven damage distribution , a condition that may have led to the complete collapse of the building in a larger earthquake . Because of its failure at the foundation and first floor level , the building was considered a total loss and was ultimately demolished . 
 = = Aftershocks = = 
 An early study of the event encompassed more than 2 @,@ 000 aftershocks ( and included four of magnitude 5 @.@ 0 or greater ) that were recorded within 20 days of the mainshock , with the area south of the border near the epicenter remaining relatively quiet . Most of the aftershock activity was within 15 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) of Brawley ( especially the first eight hours after the mainshock ) , although they occurred from the Salton Sea in the north to the Cerro Prieto Geothermal Power Station to the south , a distance of 110 kilometers ( 68 mi ) . The first strong aftershock ( 5 @.@ 0 ) occurred at 23 : 19 GMT just 2 @.@ 5 minutes after the mainshock and the strongest aftershock ( 5 @.@ 8 ) occurred at 6 : 58 GMT on October 16 west of Brawley . 
 While the focal mechanism of the mainshock was right @-@ lateral fault slip on the northwest trending Imperial fault , a marked change in the distribution of aftershocks occurred with the onset of the Brawley aftershock , which exhibited left @-@ lateral slip . A distinct zone of aftershocks formed a belt from west of Brawley to near Wiest Lake , where sinistral motion on a northeast trending conjugate fault responded to an increase in tension at the northwest end of the Imperial fault . Another line of aftershocks along the projection of the southern San Andreas fault extended south into the valley up to 50 km ( 31 mi ) . Activity in that area of the valley had been <unk> through 1978 , and a few events occurred just prior to the event , and a significant increase in the amount of activity followed the mainshock . 
 = = Ground disturbances = = 
 During two outings in late 1979 and early 1980 several researchers ( including Thomas H. Heaton and John G. Anderson ) examined the region near the New River and discovered ground disturbances that were related to the Brawley aftershock . Along the banks of the river the seismologists discovered sand boils , a newly formed pond , and an extension crack that was found to run 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) near the south bank in an irregular and disconnected fashion from Brawley to Wiest lake . It was later discovered that the Brawley earthquake had an aftershock zone that matched the area of the disturbances . <unk> recorded from the nearby Del Rio Country Club also showed " clear and impressive evidence " of near field ground motions , which may have indicated nearby primary faulting . 
 Numerous sites running along the New River were examined including the twin reinforced concrete bridges in Brawley . <unk> of the foundations there resulted in severe damage , and occurred as a result of the October 15 main shock , though the Brawley earthquake 's epicenter was nearby . At the Imperial County Dump , several instances of ground failure were observed in sedimentary deposits near the top of and parallel to the river bank , and other cracks were found in that area that were determined to be the result of differential settling . Farther north at the entrance to the Del Rio Country Club , 30 cm ( 12 in ) <unk> were located west of Route 111 , but undisturbed Pleistocene sedimentary layers likely indicated that the scarps were the result of local slumping in the <unk> and not the result of surface faulting . A large pond had apparently formed near the <unk> radio station 's antenna site where profound liquefaction and subsidence occurred in the river valley . Two weeks following the earthquake sand boils at the same location were still discharging water . 
 = Up All Night ( One Direction album ) = 
 Up All Night is the debut studio album by English @-@ Irish group One Direction , released by Syco Records in November 2011 in Ireland and the United Kingdom , followed by a worldwide release during 2012 . Four months after finishing third in the seventh series of British reality singing contest The X Factor in December 2010 , One Direction began recording the album in Sweden , UK and the United States , working with a variety of writers and producers . The album is predominantly a pop music album which orientates into pop rock , dance @-@ pop , teen pop and power pop . The album 's lyrical content regards being young , relationships , heartbreak and empowerment . Staged in support of the album , One Direction performed the album 's songs live on televised shows , at awards ceremonies , and during their worldwide Up All Night Tour . 
 The album received generally favourable reviews from contemporary music critics , many of whom appreciated the album 's combination of melodic song craft and catchy , pop @-@ oriented material that , while slickly produced , avoided the commercial cynicism and adult contemporary posturing of some of their ' 80s and ' 90s forebears . An international success , the album topped the charts in sixteen countries and , by December 2012 , has sold over 4 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . The album bowed at number two on the UK Albums Chart and ultimately became the UK 's fastest @-@ selling debut album of 2011 . Up All Night debuted to number one on the United States Billboard 200 , selling 176 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , Up All Night was the third global best @-@ selling album of 2012 with sales of 4 @.@ 5 million copies . 
 One Direction finished 2012 with two of that year 's top five best @-@ selling albums in the United States ; Up All Night at number three and their second studio album , Take Me Home , at number five , making the boy band the first act to place two albums in the year @-@ end top five in the Nielsen SoundScan era . In addition , Up All Night became the best @-@ selling album by a group and the third best @-@ selling debut album of 2012 . Four singles were released from the album , including the UK Singles Chart top ten hits " What Makes You Beautiful " , " Gotta Be You " , and " One Thing " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 After being formed and finishing third in the seventh series of The X Factor in 2010 , One Direction were signed by Simon Cowell to a £ 2 million Syco Records record contract . Recording for their debut album began in January 2011 , as they flew to Los Angeles to work with Moroccan @-@ Swedish producer RedOne . In February 2011 , One Direction and nine other contestants from the series participated in the X Factor Live Tour . After the tour concluded in April 2011 , the group continued working on their debut album . Recording took place in Sweden , the United States , and the United Kingdom , as One Direction worked with producers Carl Falk , Savan Kotecha , Steve Mac , RedOne , Toby Gad and Rami Yacoub , among others . The album also features songs written by Ed Sheeran , Kelly Clarkson , and Tom Fletcher . In May 2011 , Kotecha spoke to Digital Spy , and he elaborated that One Direction were " experimenting " with sounds on their debut album . Kotecha said that he was involved in the " early stages " of producing the record . " The stuff I 've heard has been really catchy and everyone loves the guys , so it 's just about capturing that in the music , which I think is what they 're going to be doing . " Sonny Takhar , the chief executive officer of Syco Records , in an August 2011 issue of Music Week , described the recording process as a " very intensive period " for the group . Takhar added the resulting album was one of the best pop records made by Syco Records in the past few years , and that he was confident it would be successful . In November 2011 , they signed a record deal with Columbia Records in North America . Steve Barnett , the co @-@ chairman of Columbia Records , said it was not a difficult decision to sign with One Direction . " Other artists in that category had gotten a little older , " he said . " I just thought there was a void , and maybe they could seize and hold it . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Up All Night is predominately a pop music album which orientates into elements of the dance @-@ pop , teen pop , pop rock and power pop genres , with electropop and rock music influences . Instrumentation throughout the record is provided by guitar strings , drums and a piano . The album opens with lead single " What Makes You Beautiful " , an uptempo teen pop and power pop song . The opening guitar riff has been noted as similar to that of Grease single " Summer Nights " . " What Makes You Beautiful " has a guitar @-@ based chorus ; Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey likened it to a cross between Pink 's " Raise Your Glass " and McFly 's " All About You " . It also contains cowbell instrumentation , and the middle eight consists of an " oh na na na " hook . The second song on the album , as well as the second single , " Gotta Be You " , is a mid @-@ tempo pop rock ballad . Set in an orchestral arrangement , its instrumentation includes a guitar , piano lines , and abundant strings . The chorus of the song opens with falsettos that are followed by vocal harmonies . 
 The third single from the album , " One Thing " , is an upbeat pop rock song . The song has a " plucky " guitar riff and a " forceful " chorus with Lewis Corner of Digital Spy dubbing it " arena @-@ ready " . The song 's melody has been noted for similarities between Backstreet Boys song " I Want It That Way " . The fourth song on the album and fourth single , " More than This " , is a pop ballad . " More than This " contains sounds of synthesizers . The fifth song on the album , title track " Up All Night " , is an uptempo electropop and dance @-@ pop song . Lyrically , the song is a party @-@ anthem , with the Katy Perry name @-@ check in the chorus being noted by various publications . The sixth cut , " I Wish " , is a mid @-@ tempo pop ballad . The song 's lyrical tone has been compared to Robyn 's " Dancing On My Own " . The seventh song , " Tell Me a Lie " , is an uptempo pop rock song which features prominent guitar instrumentation and pulsating beats . The song was originally intended for Kelly Clarkson 's album Stronger ( 2011 ) . Clarkson spoke to Capital FM on how she was proud of the end result . " It 's a really cute song , I love it . I loved that they liked it . They sound really great on it . I already have it – I 'm so VIP with my copy on my computer ! It does sound really good . " 
 The eighth track , " Taken " , is a guitar @-@ driven pop ballad . Lyrically , the song is about heartbreak and relationships . The ninth cut , " I Want " , is an uptempo pop rock song which features a prominent piano line . This song was co written by The Vaccines . The tenth song on the album , " Everything About You " , is an uptempo teen pop and electro pop song . The eleventh song on the album , " Same Mistakes " , is a mid @-@ tempo pop song , which utilizes piano lines , synthesizers and percussions . The twelfth track , " Save You Tonight " , is an uptempo synthpop song , and has a retro sound and arrangement . The thirteenth song , final song on the standard edition , " Stole My Heart " , is an uptempo dance @-@ pop track which has been noted for similarities between Taio Cruz 's hit 2010 single " Dynamite " . The first cut on the deluxe edition and overall fourteenth song on the album , " Stand Up " , is an uptempo electropop and pop rock song . The second song on the deluxe edition , " Moments " , is a mid @-@ tempo pop ballad . Instrumentation includes a gently strummed guitar and intermediate piano lines . The song 's lyrics revolve around an unrequited love . During the album 's UK launch in late 2011 , Tomlinson referred to the song as his favourite track on the album . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Up All Night was made available on CD and digital download in two editions : the deluxe edition , in hard form shape of a yearbook , features a book @-@ sized collection of photos , quotes , and lyrics from the five members of One Direction , and two extra songs : " Stand Up " and " Moments " . The album was released by Syco Records in Ireland and the UK on 18 November 2011 and 21 November 2011 respectively . The album was released on 25 November 2011 and 28 November 2011 in Australia and New Zealand respectively . The album was fully released in Europe in early 2012 . The album was initially set for release in North America on 23 March 2012 through Columbia Records ; however , it was rescheduled for a one @-@ week earlier release on 13 March 2012 with Columbia Records releasing a statement : " due to overwhelming fan demand , their debut album will be released one week early on 13 March 2012 . " 
 For the North American release on 13 March 2012 , Columbia Records executives used social media to shape its marketing campaign . Columbia Records co @-@ chairman Steve Barnett and his team decided to reverse the usual pattern of releasing a single on radio . Instead the label mounted a four @-@ month marketing campaign aimed at building a fan base through social media before a single was ever released or played on the radio . The social media campaign asked fans to sign petitions and to enter video competitions to win a concert in their town . The campaign was a success as One Direction 's Facebook followers in the United States rose from 40 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 . " What Makes You Beautiful " sold more than 131 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , even though it had yet to be played on the radio . Radio programmers were flooded with calls from fans . Johnny Wright , who managed New Kids on the Block , Backstreet Boys and ' N Sync , said : " Now they are calling the radio station , and the radio station is scratching its head , saying , ‘ We don 't even have that record yet , ’ . It 's almost like the return of The Beatles . I call it hype , but it 's positive hype because it 's all real . It 's not manufactured . No one paid these kids . " 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " on Red or Black ? on 10 September 2011 . The performance started with hosts Ant & Dec announcing that the band was supposedly running late for their appearance , and cut to a video of One Direction boarding a London Tube carriage full of fans , as the studio version of the song began playing . Each fan on the tube was given a numbered ticket . The band and fans disembarked the tube and made their way to the television studio , where the remainder of the song was sung live . After the song , Styles caught a numbered ticket raining onstage . The number corresponded to a ticket held by a fan from the tube ; the colour of the fan 's shirt was the correct answer for the Red or Black ? challenge . The band performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and its B @-@ side , " Na Na Na " , at the BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards on 9 October 2011 . The band also performed the song to open telethon Children in Need 2011 on 19 November 2011 . One Direction performed " Gotta Be You " , " One Thing " , and " What Makes You Beautiful " at Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball on 4 December 2011 , at The O2 Arena . They performed a medley of " She Makes Me Wanna " and " What Makes You Beautiful " with JLS on the The X Factor 's eighth series final on 10 December 2011 . The group performed " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " on Dancing on Ice on 5 February 2012 . 
 In Italy , the group performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 2012 Sanremo Music Festival on 14 February 2012 . In France , they performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " on Le Grand Journal on 22 February 2012 . In the United States , One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " , " More than This " and " One Thing " on The Today Show at the Rockefeller Center on 12 March 2012 . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 fans descended on the plaza . They also performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 2012 Kids ' Choice Awards on 31 March 2012 . One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " and " One Thing " on comedy television show Saturday Night Live and also appeared in a comedy sketch with Sofía Vergara on 7 April 2012 . In Australia , they performed " One Thing " and " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 54th Logie Awards , where they also presented an award for " Most Popular New Female Talent " on 15 April 2012 . On 12 August 2012 , One Direction performed " What Makes You Beautiful " at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London , which represented the handover to Rio de Janeiro as the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 One Direction 's debut headline UK concert tour , the Up All Night Tour , was officially announced on 27 September 2011 . The tour began on 18 December 2011 in Watford , England and ended 26 January 2012 in Belfast , Northern Ireland . Shows in the UK and Ireland were an instant success — many rumored to have sold out in under 10 seconds . In February 2012 , One Direction announced an Australasia leg , the tour dates set for April 2012 , set to visit cities Sydney , Brisbane , Melbourne , Auckland and Wellington . Once the first leg of the tour was complete , the band joined Big Time Rush as an opening act on the Better With U Tour . On 21 March 2012 , One Direction announced an extended North American leg of the tour . The North American leg was set to start on 24 May 2012 and comprise 26 shows . Shortly after the announcement , British recording artist Olly Murs was confirmed to be the opening act for select dates on tour . On the tour , One Direction covered Kings of Leon 's " Use Somebody " , Gym Class Heroes ' " Stereo Hearts " , The Zutons ' " Valerie " , <unk> 's " Torn " and The Black Eyed Peas ' " I Gotta Feeling " . A recording of their tour , entitled Up All Night : The Live Tour , was released in late May 2012 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Up All Night yielded four singles . The lead single , " What Makes You Beautiful " , was released in September 2011 and debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , after becoming the most pre @-@ ordered Sony Music Entertainment single in history and selling 153 @,@ 965 copies in its first week . The single also topped the Irish and Scottish Singles Charts , and reached the top ten on the Australian and New Zealand Singles Charts , Flemish Ultratop 50 , Canadian Hot 100 , Japan Hot 100 and the United States Billboard Hot 100 . " What Makes You Beautiful " was released by Columbia Records in the United States on 14 February 2012 . In the US , the single became the highest Billboard Hot 100 debut for a British act since 1998 , when it debuted at number 28 . It peaked at number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 and also became a chart success on other Billboard charts , reaching the top five on the Pop Songs , Adult Pop Songs , and Hot 100 Airplay charts , whilst topping the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . The track sold 3 @,@ 881 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in 2012 , becoming the best @-@ selling song by a boy band in digital history . With over 5 million copies sold worldwide , it is among the best @-@ selling singles of all time . At the 2012 BRIT Awards , the song won the BRIT Award for Best British Single . 
 " Gotta Be You " was released as the album 's second single in Ireland and the United Kingdom in November 2011 . The second single peaked on both the Irish and UK Singles Charts at number three . " One Thing " was released on 6 January 2012 as the second single in various European countries and in the UK as the third single on 13 February 2012 . The song also served as the album 's second single in the United States being sent to US contemporary hit radio ( CHR ) playlists on 22 May 2012 . The single peaked at number six and nine on the Irish and UK Singles Charts respectively , becoming the third consecutive top ten single for One Direction in Ireland and the UK . " One Thing " was One Direction 's second best @-@ selling song in the UK by August 2012 , denoting sales of 154 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , One Direction became the second act of 2012 to have two singles in the top ten simultaneously with " One Thing " at number 3 and " What Makes You Beautiful " at number 10 . " One Thing " peaked at number 39 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The track was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on 21 September 2012 , denoting sales of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . " More than This " was confirmed to be released as the fourth single by Sony Music Australia in early May 2012 . Released digitally on 25 May 2012 , the final single failed to replicate the success of its predecessors , charting in lower regions on the singles charts in Australia , Ireland , and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Up All Night received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 64 , which indicates " generally favourable reviews " . AllMusic 's Matthew Chisling commended the album for its appeal to the teenage audience , " limitless potential for the time being , this is a perfectly sized , and targeted , collection . " PopMatters ' Zachary Houle called the album a " laudable addition to the boy band pantheon " and a " well @-@ crafted slice of pop you can pop bubbles to " . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey commended the album for " a collection of pg pop rock with killer choruses " and summarised it as " an adorable as expected debut with a surprising amount of bite " . Cosmopolitan 's Sophie Goddard lauded the album for a collection of " toe @-@ tappers that are just impossible to dislike " . The Independent editor Simon Price gave the album two out of five stars , and in an assessment wrote : " the album consists of fifteen instalments of inoffensive daytime radio pop , of which half the songs sound like " I Want It That Way " by the Backstreet Boys , the other half like " Free Fallin ' " by Tom Petty , it will sell by the zillion . " Daily Star 's John Earls complimented the group for creating an album " that doesn 't take the easy route " , quipping that the album has " big personalities " and " belting fun pop anthems " , whilst Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone criticised the album for lacking personality . Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly perceived that the album " won 't help the group earn much respect in music circles . But if a tween @-@ pop empire is what these boys are after , they 're definitely headed in the right direction " . 
 In a detailed review , Jason Lipshutz from Billboard wrote , [ Up All Night ] demonstrates an originality in sound that was necessary for the revitalization of the boy band movement . The electropop currently dominating Top 40 radio is seamlessly weaved into the pop harmonies made standards by ' N Sync , Backstreet Boys and 98 Degrees -- for instance , the title track sounds like a hybrid of Backstreet Boys ' " Larger than Life " and an LMFAO song , and even includes a Katy Perry name @-@ check . Up All Night has its ups and downs , but One Direction complete two important tasks on their debut album : the boy band notches a long @-@ lasting hit with " What Makes You Beautiful , " and they look forward instead of back . Get ready to hear a lot more of One Direction . Matthew Horton of Virgin Media opined that the album brims with " punchy pop rock " , and considered the dance @-@ orientated " Stole My Heart " : " the only misstep , which only reinforces their decision to go pop rock . " MSN Music 's Ben Chalk called the album : " manufactured , calculated and commercial " , assessing that the resulting album " is a corking pop album " . In his review , he also complimented the album for its collection of singles : " ' [ Up All Night ] is a collection of highly polished pop gems , which knows its market and gives it what it wants " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album topped the charts in sixteen countries . Up All Night became the third best selling album of 2012 globally , selling 4 @.@ 5 million units . It entered the UK Albums Chart at number two on 27 November 2011 , selling 138 @,@ 631 copies , becoming the UK 's fastest @-@ selling debut album of 2011 and also the fastest selling album of 2011 to miss out on the top spot . The album was kept off the top spot by the first week sales of Rihanna 's Talk That Talk , which sold 163 @,@ 819 copies . The album became the sixteenth biggest @-@ selling album in the UK of 2011 , with 468 @,@ 000 copies sold . As of 8 December 2012 , the album had sold 777 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . The record became the fifteenth best @-@ selling album in the UK of 2012 , with sales of 372 @,@ 000 copies . It was certified double platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on 15 February 2013 , denoting shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies . As of November 2014 , the album has sold 1 @,@ 086 @,@ 434 copies in the UK . The record held the runner @-@ up position for four non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Irish Albums Chart , and was the tenth biggest selling album in 2011 in Ireland . After six months in the Irish Albums Chart top twenty , the album peaked at number one in its twenty @-@ seventh week . The album topped the Australian ARIA Chart for five consecutive weeks , and was certified quintuple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 350 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , the album topped New Zealand Albums Chart for three non @-@ consecutive weeks , and was certified triple platinum by Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipments of 45 @,@ 000 units . 
 The album debuted atop the Italian Albums Chart on the issue dated 16 February 2012 . It was certified platinum by Federation of the Italian Music Industry ( FIMI ) , denoting sales of 60 @,@ 000 units . In Mexico , the album topped the Mexican Albums Chart for twelve non @-@ consecutive weeks , and was certified four times platinum by the Mexican Recording Industry Association ( AMPROFON ) , denoting shipments of 240 @,@ 000 units . In Canada , the album bowed atop the Canadian Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 35 @,@ 000 copies , which made One Direction the first UK group in Canadian chart history to enter at number one with their debut album , and the first international act to debut at number one in the Nielsen SoundScan era ( post 1991 ) with their debut album . The album has been certified double platinum by Music Canada , denoting shipments of 160 @,@ 000 units . The album went straight to number one on the United States Billboard 200 chart , selling 176 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , which made One Direction the first UK group in US chart history to debut at number one with their first album . They were inducted into the Guinness World Records as a result . The album was certified two times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on 26 July 2012 , denoting shipments of 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . Up All Night also became the first album by a boy band to sell 500 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US by October 2012 . The album has sold over 2 @.@ 05 million copies in the United States as of August 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from album liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 ( Credits taken from AllMusic and Up All Night 's liner notes . ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cullompton = 
 Cullompton ( / <unk> / ) is a town and civil parish in the district of Mid Devon and the county of Devon , England , locally known as Cully . It is 13 miles ( 21 km ) miles north @-@ east of Exeter and lies on the River Culm . In 2011 the parish as a whole had a population of 8 @,@ 499 while the built @-@ up area of the town had a population of 7 @,@ 439 
 The earliest evidence of occupation is from the Roman period – there was a fort on the hill above the town and occupation in the current town centre . <unk> was mentioned in Alfred the Great 's will . In the past the town 's economy had a large component of wool and cloth manufacture , then later leather working and paper manufacture . 
 A large proportion of town 's inhabitants are commuters but there is some local manufacturing , including flour and paper mills . It has a monthly farmers ' market held on the second Saturday of every month which is the oldest event of its kind in the South West . It is home to two grade I listed buildings : the fifteenth @-@ century St Andrew 's parish church and the seventeenth @-@ century house known as The Walronds . The centre of the town is the only conservation area in Mid Devon and there are seven grade II * listed buildings and ninety grade II listed buildings in the parish . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy and orthography = = = 
 The derivation of the name Cullompton is disputed . One derivation is that the town 's name means " <unk> on the River Culm " with Culm probably meaning knot or tie ( referring to the river 's twists and loops ) . The other theory is that it is named after Saint Columba of Tir @-@ de @-@ Glas , who preached to West Saxons in 549 AD . The Revd Grubb also states that the parish church was probably formerly dedicated to St Columba ( although for the last 500 years it has been dedicated to St Andrew ) and that tradition records there was an ancient figure or image of Columba . There are 40 recorded spellings of Cullompton between the first recorded use of the name and the present day , and even as late as the mid @-@ nineteenth century three spellings were in use : the post office spelled it Cullompton ; in their 1809 first edition the Ordnance Survey map used <unk> and the railway station sign said <unk> . The railway station sign was changed to Cullompton in 1874 and the Ordnance Survey used Cullompton in the edition of their map published in 1889 . It is affectionately known as Cully . 
 = = = Roman period = = = 
 On St Andrew 's Hill , to the north @-@ west of Cullompton town centre , two Roman forts were discovered in 1984 by aerial photography carried out for Devon County Council . The earlier , smaller fort ( the boundary ditches of which showed up in cropmarks ) was later replaced by a second , larger fort . The ramparts of this second fort are preserved on two sides as modern field boundaries with substantial earthen banks with hedges on top . The banks on the other two sides were removed shortly before the site was recognised as Roman . The site was made a scheduled monument in 1986 . The aerial photography also revealed two subsidiary military enclosures or annexes to each fort . In 1992 a geophysical survey was made of the fort and areas to the east and west and this was followed by a trial excavation to the west of the site . These confirmed the existence of two forts , and the ditch of the second fort was excavated . Pottery from the site was dated from around 50 – 70 AD , which is consistent with a previous date of before 75 AD based on finds from <unk> . A Roman settlement near Shortlands Lane was excavated in 2009 . A large quantity of Roman pottery , burial remains and fragments of hypocaust tile from the second and third century was found . 
 = = = Saxon period to the eighteenth century = = = 
 Saxon settlers moved into the Culm Valley in the seventh century and Cullompton was made the site of a minster . In 872 Alfred the Great bequeathed <unk> and its lands to his son Æthelweard . At the time of the Norman Conquest , it was held by the Lady Gytha , the widow of Godwin , Earl of Wessex . In 1067 William the Conqueror passed through the villa of <unk> on his way to besiege Exeter where Gytha was living . In 1087 William the Conqueror gave the manor to Baldwin , his wife 's favourite nephew . It was subsequently held by the Earl of Devon for many years until in 1278 <unk> Countess of Devon willed it to the Abbot and Convent of Buckland <unk> . With the Dissolution of the Monasteries it was sold to Sir John St Ledger . The five prebends of Cullompton ( Colebrook , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Upton ) were presented by William the Conqueror to Battle Abbey in Sussex and were later held by St Nicholas Priory , Exeter . In 1536 St Nicholas Priory was dissolved and the last Prior gained appointment as the Vicar of Cullompton . Patronage then passed to the More family of <unk> . 
 In 1278 the town was granted its first market to be held on a Thursday . In 1356 the town gained its first water supply by a deed of gift of the Abbot of Buckland . The water ( known as the Town Lake or watercourse ) came from a stream rising at Coombe Farm and flowed into a pond near Shortlands . From there it flowed in several open channels to all parts of the town . Water bailiffs were employed to protect the interests of the town and a tradition of " <unk> " took place . This was a ceremony which took place every seven years where a group of townsfolk would inspect the channel and ensure that it was not being abused . The first recorded <unk> was in 1716 . In the mid nineteenth century the water courses were used for boiling vegetables , surface drainage and emptying cesspools . A Board of Health Inspector in 1854 concluded that " typhus and other epidemic diseases are so prevalent here more so than in any other parish in the Union " . They were eventually only used to keep the streets clean and continued to flow until 1962 when the town council decided that they were not willing to pay for their upkeep . 
 During the English Civil War the Royalist Earl of Bath tried to raise troops in Cullompton but met resistance from local people . Troops passed through Cullompton on several occasions during the civil war : Sir Ralph Hopton rode with a small troop though the town on his way to Cornwall ; Cornish Royalist forces marched through Cullompton on their way to join Prince Maurice at Chard as did The Earl of Essex and Thomas Fairfax . There were also troops on the streets of Cullompton again in 1655 during <unk> 's Uprising . 
 In 1678 a local innkeeper , John Barnes was hanged after being found guilty of highway robbery . He had waylaid , with the help of accomplices , a coach travelling from Exeter to London and made off with about £ 600 but he was recognised by the guards from Exeter , where he had been a <unk> . Another local man called Tom Austin was hanged in August 1694 . Although he had been wealthy , he spent all his money and turned to highway robbery . He killed Sir Zachary <unk> during a robbery . Then , in a single day in 1694 , he killed his aunt , her five children , his own wife and his two children . 
 The Cullompton Company of Volunteers ( a voluntary body of soldiers ) was first raised in 1794 and continued until 1810 . The volunteer companies were formed following Britain 's entry into the French Revolutionary Wars and continued to exist during the Napoleonic Wars . Cullompton was the first inland town to offer to raise a volunteer company ( on 16 May 1794 ) and on 24 June the volunteers were accepted . The first commander , Captain <unk> , was a former Marine officer . The company was formed into a battalion with 11 other volunteer companies called the Hayridge ( later Highbridge ) regiment . It had 1 @,@ 200 men and three companies were based in Cullompton with a barracks in New Cut . <unk> died in 1794 and was succeeded by Henry Skinner Esq . In 1801 the company became a cavalry troop and was then disbanded only to be reformed in 1805 when hostilities with France resumed . Many Cullompton men fought in the Peninsular War and at the Battle of Waterloo . 
 The first Nonconformist congregation began in 1662 when the vicar of Cullompton , Revd William Crompton , was ejected from the established church . He continued to preach and a Protestant Dissenters meeting house was built in 1698 which became the Unitarian Chapel . In the eighteenth century there was a prevalence of Dissent with the local vicar recording in 1736 that of a population of <unk> there were 508 Presbyterians , 133 Anabaptists and 87 Quakers . By 1743 the first Baptist Chapel had been built . John Wesley 's journal records preaching near the town in 1748 . 
 = = = Nineteenth century to present = = = 
 In 1805 or 1806 the last bull @-@ baiting in the town took place . On 7 July 1839 , a severe fire destroyed many houses in Cullompton . About two thirds of the town burnt with 145 houses and other buildings being destroyed . A subscription for rebuilding was set and donations of £ 5 were made by Barne and Son , tanners of Tiverton , and Cullompton tanners <unk> and Selwood . In 1847 a riot occurred in the town due to the high price of wheat . Three houses were attacked , including one in Pound Square belonging to Mr Selwood , the owner of a local tannery and also a maltster . He was accused of speculatively buying 2000 bushels of corn and when his house was attacked , almost all the windows were broken and his furniture was also damaged . 
 There have been police stations in the town since 1857 , when the first Police Station was rented . It had three cells and a petty session courtroom . A new police station was built in 1974 , which underwent a major refurbishment in 2011 , to become a police force hub for Mid Devon , with 72 staff members . The town acquired its first steam driven fire engine in 1914 which cost £ 100 and was paid for by voluntary subscription . 
 In April 1903 a petition objecting to the renewal of alcohol licences for local inns , signed by 450 people , was presented to the Brewsters sessions ( magistrates court meetings in England where pub licences were renewed or granted ) . A deputation sent to the session explained that the number of licensed houses was too large in proportion to the population . In 1917 , the cattle market moved from the Higher Bullring to a field near the station . The first cinema was opened in the Victoria Hall in 1918 by Bill Terry and in 1977 the town was twinned with <unk> in Brittany , France . 
 In 1920 , a public company was formed to provide an electricity supply for Cullompton which merged with the <unk> Electricity Company in 1927 to form the Culm Valley Electricity Supply Co . Ltd . A gasworks was set up in Cullompton in 1865 for the Cullompton Gas Light and Coke Co . This was taken over by the Devon Gas Association and nationalised in 1949 . The gasworks was closed in 1956 and Cullompton was then supplied from Exeter . 
 Another serious fire occurred on 17 October 1958 , when Selwood 's tannery in Exeter Street was gutted by fire ; the site was subsequently used by a series of supermarkets . It was run as a Gateway store and then as a Somerfield before closing in 2010 . Aldi re @-@ opened on the site in April 2014 following a major refurbishment of the store . 
 The town saw a major expansion in the 1970s as the construction of a bypass in 1969 , and its conversion into part of the M5 in 1974 , made it a popular commuter town , and it continued to expand during the closing years of the 20th century and the first few years of the 21st century . The Mid Devon Local Development Framework Proposals include plans to erect 95 new dwellings a year , and to build 4 @,@ 000 square metres ( 43 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of new employment floorspace a year between the start of the plan and 2026 . The first Cullompton town website was set up in 1998 and a new website was created in 2011 . CCTV was installed in the main street in 2000 . 
 In March 2010 , it was announced that the town 's magistrates ' court was to be closed due its poor facilities and lack of rooms . It had been suggested that the site might be developed as a town hall or the site used as a car <unk> but this plan was prevented when a group formed to oppose the proposal to purchase the site for a new town hall were elected to two thirds of the council seats in May 2011 . In June 2011 , it was announced that two local businesspeople had purchased the site and the building was demolished in March 2012 to make space for a car park . 
 The town got its first permanent library in 1938 in a building on Exeter Hill . In September 2011 , a new library opened on a new site , which was four times the size of the old one and cost three million pounds . This was followed shortly afterwards , in December 2011 , by the opening of the Cullompton Community Centre , costing 1 @.@ 5 million pounds . The Tiverton Dramatic Society used the new venue to stage the first pantomime to be performed in Cullompton for 20 years . 
 = = = Economic history = = = 
 Cullompton has a long history of manufacturing , first with wool and cloth manufacture , and then later with leather working and light industry . 
 = = = = Cloth trade = = = = 
 In the 15th century the weaving of fine <unk> and later <unk> was introduced to the area by weavers from the continent . This was largely a cottage industry and merchants would have premises where the fleeces would be combed and sorted . John Lane was one of the best known local cloth merchants ( see Lane 's Aisle in the section on St Andrew 's church below ) . In the seventeenth century , Higher and Lower King 's Mills were fulling mills for the local industry . In 1816 Mr Upcott employed 60 weavers and ' many spinners ' . The Wellington based firm Fox Brothers had a branch factory built in 1890 and made high quality woolen and worsted cloth until 1977 . During World War I , their entire output was of khaki cloth , employing over 200 people . In 1910 Mrs Gidley , wife of Dr Gustavus Gidley , set up a hand @-@ weaving enterprise in the stables of Heyford House with the aim of giving employment to ex @-@ servicemen and disabled people . To manage it she appointed two women , one a granddaughter of Bishop Phillpotts . Later the business evolved into machine knitted garments . 
 = = = = Mills powered by the town leat = = = = 
 A leat runs to the east of the town 's main street but it is uncertain when it was first constructed . By the early seventeenth @-@ century the southern end of the leat and one mill are shown on a map . There were three main mills : Higher Mill , Lower Mill and Middle Mill . Higher Mill appears to have always been a corn mill and it continued to produce animal feed until 1974 . It has since been converted to housing but a water turbine remains . Middle Mill was used as a woollen mill in the nineteenth century and was also associated with Bilbie ’ s bell foundry ( see below ) . Around 1900 , the mill was steam powered and had a boiler delivered . It is labelled as an axle works on the 1904 Second Edition Ordnance Survey map . The only remains of Middle Mill are some walls and a chimney base . Lower Mill ceased working in 1968 . The building is now in residential use but the sluices ( made by <unk> and Gunn of the Lowman Ironworks , Tiverton ) can still be seen , as can the water wheel and gearing . 
 = = = = Tanning = = = = 
 Tanning in Cullompton goes back to at least the sixteenth century and in the nineteenth century there were three tanneries : Crow Green , Lower King 's Mill and Court Tannery . The tannery at Higher King 's Mill was active between about 1830 and 1875 and employed 12 labourers in 1851 and 9 a decade later . Court Tannery was established by 1871 and had closed by 1906 . It was located at the north end of the town behind Court House , which was the residence of the owners of the tannery . In 1871 it employed 21 men and was probably steam @-@ powered . A local tanner , James Whitby , along with George Bodley and John Davis patented an improved bark mill ( used to grind bark for producing <unk> used in the tanning process ) . 
 The Crow Green tannery was situated at the south @-@ west end of the town and was already in existence in 1816 . It had a water @-@ powered bark mill and 47 tan pits at that date . It was owned by the Selwood family for much of the 19th and 20th centuries , who probably purchased it from James Whitby around 1830 , and it was often referred to as Selwood 's tannery . It suffered from fires in 1831 , 1867 and 1958 . In 1881 it employed 48 people and over 100 in 1958 ( 8 % of the local workforce at the time ) . One of the major products of the factory in the nineteenth century was high @-@ quality sole leather , but during the Second World War , only poor @-@ quality hides , such as buffalo , were allocated to the firm . The business was badly damaged by the invention of rubber stick @-@ on shoe soles which reduced the demand for sole leather from shoe repairers . It finally finished operation in 1967 when the leather side of the business was sold to a Yorkshire firm . 
 The building to the north @-@ west of Exeter Hill , which formerly housed the water @-@ powered bark mill , is now an antiques warehouse and the remains of the leat and tail race can still be seen . This side of the site was also the location of the lime yard . The other half of the site , to the south @-@ east of Exeter Hill , which was the location of the tan yard , is now the site of an Aldi supermarket . 
 In addition to tanning , the leather industry included a leather dressing works ( founded in 1921 and which closed in 1982 ) and a glove maker , <unk> and Brown . 
 = = = = Paper making = = = = 
 The first paper mill in Cullompton dates from 1729 , with mills being set up near by at Hele and Higher <unk> in 1767 , at Lower <unk> <unk> and Langford c 1788 . These would have been small water @-@ powered vat mills , where paper was made by hand , generally by women and children . Records show that the mill in Cullompton was owned by a Mr Simon Mills in 1757 and was taken over by a Mr Theodore Dart in 1799 . There followed a number of different owners of whom one of the most significant was Albert Reed who purchased the mill in 1883 . His brother , William Reed , established a partnership with a Mr C King Smith . The Reed & Smith group ( which acquired New <unk> Mill in 1950 ) became one of the biggest <unk> in the UK . A <unk> machine was installed in 1892 and continued to make paper at Higher Kings until about 1972 . A new machine was built in 1956 to make blue sugar bags and other products , and has been modified over the years to make different grades of paper and card . St Regis acquired Higher Kings in the early 1980s and since then the mill has diversified into making a wide range of recycled coloured papers and boards . It is now owned by Asia File Corporation . 
 = = = = Cabinet making = = = = 
 <unk> cabinet makers was founded in 1800 and grew until it employed 50 people , with workshops at Cockpit Hill and Duke Street . After World War I a retail shop was opened by the firm in Fore Street and it kept going doing retailing and repairs until the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 A former employee of <unk> , William Broom , started his own cabinet making business in 1920 and employed 7 or 8 workmen until the 1930s when the Great Depression meant that by the start of the Second World War , William Broom was the only worker in the firm . After the war , the firm concentrated on repair work and antiques restoration . The firm closed in 1990 with the retirement of Sid Russ who had taken the firm over after William Broom retired . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Mark Whitton founded Whitton 's in the early 1900s carrying timber with a horse and cart . After World War I the company carried coal to the gas works and local paper mills . In 1923 they bought their first Sentinel steam lorry and carried paper to Bristol , returning with animal feed . During the Second World War they were run by the Ministry of Transport and after the war were nationalised to become part of British Road Services . The brothers who had owned the company moved back into haulage , setting up a new firm which went into receivership in the 1970s and was then bought by Wild Transport of Exeter in 1973 . 
 = = = = Bell foundry and clock making = = = = 
 A Cullompton man called Chubb travelled widely to repair bells during the reign of James I. In 1745 a vestry meeting determined that in order to reduce the cost of having the church bells repaired , the bells should be cast in some part of the almshouses , and a bell founder be found to work there . In 1746 Thomas Bilbie , from Chew Stoke in Somerset , created a new bell foundry ( The West of England Church <unk> ) in the town , paying an annual rent of £ 1 / 13 / 4 ( £ 1 @.@ 67 ) for premises in the Almshouse building . He recast the six bells of Cullompton church as eight new ones . In 1754 Thomas 's eldest son also called Thomas moved to Cullompton to take over the bell foundry . Over a period of 26 years he cast 239 bells , the majority for churches in Devon . When he died , aged 53 in 1780 , his son Thomas Castleman Bilbie took over the business and cast 197 bells from 1780 to 1813 . The business was then sold to <unk> and co. who moved it to Exeter in 1850 . St Michael 's and All Angel 's in <unk> has a peal of 8 bells cast by Bilbie in Cullompton , at a cost of £ 108 12 shillings and 8 pence ( £ 1 @.@ 63 ) in 1749 . 
 The Bilbie family were also involved in clock making . In 1749 Thomas <unk> ( senior ) was asked to make a set of chimes for Cullompton church . Thomas II worked on clock mechanisms to play tunes on church bells at East Coker and also at Beaminster . Thomas Castleman is recorded as having made a clock for Cullompton Church in 1811 at a cost of £ 55 . 
 = = = = Other industries = = = = 
 There was also a jam factory , ' Devon Dale Jam ' in the 1930s and a foundry . 
 = = Government = = 
 The town and civil parish of Cullompton has three wards : North ( 6 councillors ) , South ( 7 councillors ) and Outer ( 2 councillors ) . The town council first met on 1 December 1894 when it took over from the Parochial Committee , and since 1995 the town has had a mayor elected by the councillors . It is part of Mid Devon District Council and there are three Cullompton wards in the district council North ( 2 councillors ) , South ( 2 councillors ) and Outer ( 1 councillor ) . The total population of the wards at the 2011 Census was 9 @,@ 835 . It is also part of Devon County Council and is represented through the Cullompton Rural ward . 
 From Saxon times it was part of the hundred of Hayridge . From 1894 to 1935 it was part of Tiverton Rural District and prior to that it was part of Tiverton Sanitary District and Tiverton Poor Law Union . It may have been a borough in the 17th century but this status was not sustained . 
 It is part of the Tiverton and Honiton constituency and its MP in 2012 was Neil Parish . It was formerly part of the Northern Parliamentary Division of Devon ( 1831 – 67 ) , the North Division ( 1867 – 85 ) , the North Eastern Division ( 1885 – 1918 ) and the Honiton Division . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Cullompton is 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ east of Tiverton , 13 miles ( 21 km ) north @-@ north @-@ east of Exeter and 149 miles ( 240 km ) west @-@ south @-@ west of London . It is at about 70 m above sea level . The parish covers nearly 8 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 km2 ) and stretches for 7 miles ( 11 km ) along the Culm valley . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2011 Census the parish of Cullompton had a population of 8 @,@ 499 . The wards of Cullompton North and Cullompton South contain the urban area and had a combined population of 7 @,@ 643 . 
 In 2001 there were 5 @,@ 464 people aged 16 to 74 of whom 3 @,@ 665 were economically active and employed , 1 @,@ 556 were economically inactive and 131 economically inactive but unemployed . Figures in 2001 on ethnic composition for Mid Devon as a whole were : White British 97 @.@ 57 % , White other 1 @.@ 24 % and White Irish 0 @.@ 4 % and for religious composition 75 @.@ 40 % Christian , 15 @.@ 98 % no religion . 
 The population of the parish changed little from the start of the 19th century until the 1970s , remaining at around 3 @,@ 000 ( see chart ) . However it increased rapidly in the last part of the 20th century and the start of the 21st . Cullompton 's population growth looks set to continue as Mid Devon 's core strategy foresees 95 new dwellings being built per year in the period to 2026 . In 1660 the population of the town ( only including the urban parts of the parish ) has been estimated at 1 @,@ 800 , which made it the 10th largest town in Devon and Cornwall . The town 's population grew to 2 @,@ 750 by 1750 ( meaning it was the 8th largest town ) but it then fell rapidly so that it was only 2 @,@ 275 by 1805 - only the 23rd largest town in Devon and Cornwall . This fall in population , in a period when many other towns grew rapidly , was probably due to the decline in the importance of the cloth trade in this period . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In 2001 the proportion of people living and working in Cullompton was 43 % with 19 % of the town 's working population employed in Exeter . 
 = = = Retail = = = 
 In 2001 the retail sector in Cullompton met fairly local needs only . The town currently has two supermarkets , Tesco , which opened in September 2008 and Aldi which opened in April 2014 . Mole Valley Farmers has a store in the town which sells a wide range of goods including farm requirements , garden supplies and hardware . 
 The Cullompton street market came to an end in the late 1950s but it was revived for a trial period of seven weeks starting on Saturday 28 June 2008 . Although in the initial few weeks trading was good , overall takings for the traders were disappointing . The town also has an indoor market in the town hall every Wednesday 
 A farmers ' market held in Cullompton is the oldest event of its kind in the South West . It was Tracey <unk> 's idea , and after much work , the first market was held on 13 June 1998 . She was later consulted by the producers of the long running radio soap opera The Archers and the Cullompton farmers ' market was mentioned in one of the episodes . It is held monthly on the second Saturday of the month . 
 There is an active traders group ( Cullompton Traders Association ) which holds a range of events . The Bullring Market has been relaunched since Dec 2012 and continues into 2013 every Wednesday and Saturday . 
 = = = Kingsmill industrial estate = = = 
 Mid Devon District Council owns 11 industrial units at the Kingsmill industrial estate which are let by a variety of businesses . Business based on the estate include Gregory Distribution , who have 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) of temperature controlled storage which they use for a contract to deliver chilled and frozen goods to Spar stores in the southwest . There is also a flour mill , milk depot , marketing and advertising agency and an industrial clothing shop as well as Higher Kings Mill . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 The town has an annual Christmas parade to celebrate the switching on of the town 's Christmas lights and a festival week in the summer which includes the annual town <unk> ( formerly known as the Cullompton Town Picnic and Classic Car Show ) . 
 Community facilities improved during 2011 , with the completion of two projects . The first was a ' community hub ' called ' The Hayridge ' , which opened in September . The facility , which is open six days a week , has a public lending library and cafe with free Wi @-@ Fi access , IT suites and conference facilities . The office space is used by Cullompton Adult Community Learning which was previously based at the local secondary school . Cullompton Adult Community Learning is run by Devon County Council and offers a range of courses for adult learners ranging from Indian Head Massage to French for Beginners . Courses are run in the Hayridge 's learning suites on the first floor . The second major project completed in 2011 was the Cullompton Community centre , which opened in December . This is a 9 @,@ 250 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 859 m2 ) building created for community use with sponsorship from St Andrew 's church and with grants from Devon County Council and <unk> Environmental Fund , donations from church members , and money from the South West of England Regional Development Agency . The main meeting area has seating capacity for 180 people , and there are five further meeting rooms as well as offices , kitchens and toilets . 
 A major recreational area for the town is the Cullompton Community Association 's fields which cover 32 acres ( 13 ha ) in the centre of the town . The fields are used for a variety of events , which include a circus , whippet racing and a firework display . The Association is a registered charity which was formed in 1970 to provide a recreation area for the town . It purchased the fields , which are next to the riverside walk along the leat , for £ 11 @,@ 500 . The site was chosen as the water meadows needed to be maintained to help prevent flooding and it was also close to the cricket and bowling clubs . Youth activities have been provided by a youth centre called the John <unk> Centre since it opened in 1988 . 
 In February 2008 the Culm Valley Integrated Centre for Health opened in Cullompton . The services provided at the site include : the College Surgery Partnership which is a large general practice with ten doctors ; complementary therapies provided by Culm Valley Natural Health ; self care groups a health food café , a physic garden and a pharmacy run by Alliance Boots . Health care is also provided by the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Trust , which has run a residential centre called ' The Woodmill ' since May 1998 . It is the most southerly residential assessment and rehabilitation centre run by the Trust in the United Kingdom , and provides rehabilitation for up to 23 adults with acquired brain injury . 
 Cullompton United Charities provides a number of Charitable services to residents of Cullompton . The majority of the funds come from bequests made to the parish from the seventeenth century onwards . Thirteen separate charities were combined in 1921 and then in 1953 further amalgamation went on with the Trott 's almshouses , John Lanes Charity and the Charity of George Spicer combining to form the current United Charities . There are nine local almshouses which are available to local residents over the age of 55 . They also offer Alpha <unk> emergency call services for the elderly , can refund up to £ 100 to school leavers under 25 who have spent money equipping themselves with tools , books , vocational training or further education and offer financial help needy individuals resident in the parish to help them purchase specific items . They also own a building called Community House in the town centre , where local organisations can hire meeting rooms . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The street plan of the town still reflects the medieval layout of the town . Most shops lie along Fore Street with courts behind them linked by alleyways . The length of the high street reflects the prosperity of the town from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century when it was a centre of the cloth trade . The street plan is still fundamentally the same as shown on a map of 1663 , with a wider area at the North end where markets were held , roads to Tiverton and Ponsford and a small lane leading down to a mill ( now known as Lower Mill ) . This map has only two buildings with roofs coloured blue ( conventionally meaning they were of slate ) – St Andrew 's church and the Walronds . There are two grade I listed buildings in Cullompton : the fifteenth century parish church ( St Andrew 's ) and the Walronds at 6 Fore Street . There are also seven grade II * listed buildings and ninety grade II listed buildings . The centre of the town is a conservation area – the only one in the Mid Devon area . <unk> House , a Victorian manor house is near to the town centre and within the parish . 
 = = = The Walronds = = = 
 The Walronds was probably built in 1605 which is the date over the hall fireplace . John Peter , a lawyer , acquired the property by marriage into the Paris family and his initials are over the fireplace . The plan is a traditional one with the ground floor hall divided from the entrance passage by a screen . The main range has three storeys and there are two wings which are both two storeys high . In the upper south @-@ east room is a barrel shaped ceiling and a second fireplace with the date 1605 . The association with the <unk> family only dates from the eighteenth century . 
 It is now owned by Cullompton Walronds Preservation Trust which was registered as a charity and as a private company limited by guarantee in the spring of 1997 . It inherited half the building in 2005 from Miss June Severn and bought the other half . In 2008 the building became the only building in Mid Devon to be put on English Heritage 's Buildings at Risk Register and received £ 250 @,@ 000 from Devon County Council and £ 100 @,@ 000 from Mid Devon District Council for restoration work . Emergency repairs costing £ 15 @,@ 000 were carried out during 2008 . In July 2010 the Heritage Lottery Fund announced that it would provide a grant of £ 1 @.@ 75 million to help complete the restoration . Work began with the erection of scaffolding in August 2011 . Restoration including restoring the rendering on the house . This had been removed in 1898 causing water to penetrate the fabric of the building . The house re @-@ opened to the public following the restoration on 29 March 2014 with a display of kersey cloth and costumes made by the Walronds Costume making group . 
 The upper floors of the house , the inner garden and car park will be leased to the Vivat Trust for holiday lettings . The trust will retain the three rooms adjoining the path from Fore Street for public use . These comprise a meeting room , a kitchen and a lavatory . Additionally , the Trust plans to convert the garden which stretches back to Shortlands Lane into a park for the people of the town . 
 = = = St Andrew 's Church = = = 
 St Andrew 's church dates from the fifteenth century and is set back from the main street but despite this its tower is a landmark which is highly visible from the surrounding area . The tower is 100 feet ( 30 m ) tall with pinnacles on top which add a further 20 feet ( 6 m ) to its height . On the west face are the badly damaged remains of a Crucifixion scene with figures of Edward VI and St George to either side . The tower also has a large clock face by Norman of Ilfracombe dating from about 1874 . Despite being the first part of the church to be seen when approaching from the main street , it is however the most recent part of the church , being built 1545 – 1549 . The tower is built in the local red sandstone with carved parts in Beer and Ham Hill stone . 
 The nave and chancel are carried on five pairs of piers and the interior has a boarded wagon roof coloured in blue , crimson and gold which stretches the whole length of the church . At the time of the construction of the Bristol and Exeter Railway , William Froude – the engineer given responsibility for this section of the line by Isambard Kingdom Brunel – inserted iron stringers to prevent the walls from spreading as a result of vibrations from the trains . A screen runs across the whole width of the church . 
 At the end of the nave is a Jacobean gallery with four oak pillars about 9 feet ( 3 m ) tall . It dates from 1637 and there are sixteen figures carved on it . These figures are typical of the Stuart period and represent the twelve apostles and the Four Evangelists ( meaning that Matthew and Mark appear twice ) . At the centre are Saint Andrew ( with an X cross ) , Saint Peter ( with a key ) and Saint John ( with the chalice ) . 
 The central window of the North Aisle is a World War II memorial and a World War I memorial is on the other side . Moores Chantry ( the last bay of the North Aisle ) contains some original box pews and at the rear of the church are two large pieces of oak which make up a Golgotha which once rested on top of the Rood Screen . They are carved with rocks , skulls and bones . They were probably removed from the church in 1549 and cut into 2 pieces . For many years they remained in the graveyard . 
 On the south side of the church is the first major addition to the church : Lane 's Aisle . This was built 1526 – 1529 by a local cloth merchant , John Lane . It is fan vaulted in a style inspired by the Dorset aisle at Ottery St Mary and some of the carvings are similar to John Greenway 's Chapel at Tiverton . John Lane and wife are buried at the east end of the aisle . 
 = = = Cullompton Manor House = = = 
 Cullompton Manor House is a grade II * listed building with sections built in 1603 ( dated panel and initials TT for Thomas <unk> on the top corner of the front of the house ) and 1718 ( on a lead cistern head of a drainpipe , are the letters ( L ) S / <unk> ( R ) and the date 1718 ) . It was originally a private residence and now forms part of the Manor House Hotel . It has a jettied half timbered front with four gables and stone end walls with upper windows on carved brackets . It was probably built in the sixteenth century but was refurbished in 1603 for Thomas <unk> , a clothier . The original structure consisted only of the front part , in which there were three rooms and a passage on the ground floor , three rooms opening into each other on the floor above , and above again . The front room on the left was the former hall with large oak panels of the Queen Anne period , and a moulded and beamed ceiling . Part of an earlier newel stair which descended to the hall or kitchen survives above a back staircase . The house was remodelled in 1718 for William <unk> . At the front of the building is a hooded shell porch of the early 18th century supported on pilasters and the back of house is also early 18th century of red and blue brick , with windows with thick glazing bars beneath a hipped slate roof with coved eaves . It was given the name of The Manor House in 1850 by J. S. Upcott who owned the property at that time . During World War II it was requisitioned by the army and used to billet officers . The adjacent house , <unk> , was originally a separate residence but was bought by the owners of the Manor House Hotel and incorporated into the hotel in the 1980s . 
 The building is currently on the Heritage at Risk Register following a serious deterioration in its condition which led to concerns for public safety , and the issuing of a repairs notice under section 48 of Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 by Mid Devon District Council . 
 = = = Cullompton Leat = = = 
 Running parallel to the main high street is a leat with a public footpath running along it . The leat runs from Head Weir , north of Cullompton , and takes its water from the <unk> Stream . It flows past three former watermills ( Upper , Middle and Lower Mill ) and then empties into the Culm near First Bridge . It is uncertain when the leat was first made but the south end of the leat and Lower Mill are shown on an early seventeenth @-@ century map . The leat is no longer in use for powering mills and the Environment Agency is not interested in managing the leat nor keeping it flowing so the Cullompton Leat Conservancy Board was formed to restore and maintain the Leat in 2005 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Junction 28 of the M5 lies within the parish of Cullompton and a short distance from the town centre . Other major road links are the <unk> to Honiton and the former A38 to Exeter which runs through the town , and is now the <unk> . In 2001 61 @.@ 6 % of people living in Cullompton travelled to work by car or van and 83 % of households had at least one car . In October 1969 a bypass was completed but after only five years this was upgraded to form part of the M5 . Since this time traffic coming from the south of Cullompton to the M5 junction has had to pass through the centre of the town . There are now problems with air quality in the town and Mid Devon District Council have made the whole of the built up area in Cullompton an Air quality management area . Traffic on the exit slip road leaving the M5 northbound often backed up onto the motorway , so the Highways Agency and Devon County Council made junction improvements by widening roads , introducing traffic lights and reopening the left hand lane of the northbound slip road , at a cost of £ <unk> This cost was covered by businesses moving to Cullompton . 
 There are two routes for relief roads being considered by Mid Devon District Council – a western route and an eastern route . If a lower growth option is chosen it is proposed that only the western route would be constructed . An alternative Outer Eastern Relief Road crossing the M5 at Old Hill was rejected as the existing bridges would need rebuilding , making the cost prohibitive . There is some opposition to both routes – a group called Cullompton Against Western Relief Road has been formed to oppose one route and there is also opposition to the eastern route which passes through the Cullompton Community Fields . 
 The Bristol and Exeter Railway opened a station at Cullompton when the railway opened on 1 May 1844 . Around 1931 the lines were widened to provide two passing loops and a new goods shed and waiting room were constructed . It closed to passengers on 5 October 1964 , the site now being used for the M5 motorway Cullompton services . The nearest railway station is now Tiverton Parkway . Devon County Council 's Travel Transport Plan includes the re @-@ opening of Cullompton Railway Station and in July 2 @-@ 16 Mid Devon District Council announced that it would spend £ 40k on engineering design work to test the viability of their concept for a new station . This matched a previous commitment by Taunton Deane Borough Council of £ 40k and £ 10k contributions from the Town Councils of Cullompton and Wellington . 
 The 1 , 1A and 1B buses run by Stagecoach provide regular bus services to Tiverton and Exeter . There is also a town circular bus run by <unk> , and an express bus run by First Somerset & Avon which runs from Exeter to Taunton and stops at Cullompton . 
 = = Education = = 
 Cullompton has two primary schools : St Andrews Primary School which is a medium @-@ sized primary school with approximately 230 pupils in Key Stages 1 & 2 , and nine classes and <unk> Primary School . The secondary school is Cullompton Community College . It opened in 1964 on the present site and became fully comprehensive in 1979 . It is now a co @-@ educational comprehensive school for students aged between 11 and 16 with approximately 650 students on roll and in December 2003 it secured sponsorship of £ 50 @,@ 000 from The Co @-@ operative Group to enable it to become a Business and Enterprise college . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 As well as the Parish church , St Andrew ( see # Landmarks ) , there are several other religious sites . The Roman Catholic church , Saint Boniface , was built in 1929 by Manuel de las Casas who was descended from the uncle of Bartolomé de las Casas . The Methodist church in New Cut is the third chapel on the site . The first was started in 1764 and the current building was built following a fire in 1872 which did serious damage to the chapel built in 1806 . The Unitarian chapel on Pound Square dates from 1913 following the collapse of the previous building in 1911 . It is the oldest nonconformist congregation in Cullompton . Hebron Evangelical Church was built in 1962 . The Baptist Church is the site of a meeting house erected in 1743 on High Street . 
 = = Sports and leisure = = 
 = = = Local teams and clubs = = = 
 Cullompton Rugby Club was formed in 1892 and played on thirteen different grounds in and around the town before their current ground – Stafford Park – was purchased in 1980 . In 2008 @-@ 9 the senior 1st XV team won the Western Counties West League finishing the season unbeaten . On Saturday 9 May 2009 they won the EDF Energy Senior Vase by beating Tyldesley 8 @-@ 7 at Twickenham . Exeter Chiefs prop Ben Moon formerly played for Cullompton and has now played for the England <unk> 20s . Ladies rugby started at Cullompton in 1997 and by 2009 the team had two qualified coaches . They currently play in the National Challenge South West South 2 league . Former Cullompton flanker Izzy Noel Smith , currently playing for Bristol has been capped for England . 
 The local football team is Cullompton Rangers who were formed in 1945 and play in Premier Division of the South West Peninsula League . Their ground is called Speeds Meadow . There was also a women 's football team – Cullompton Rangers L.F.C. who were formed when Exeter City L.F.C. amalgamated with Cullompton Rangers AFC but in 2011 the women 's team folded when the manager was forced to leave and a replacement could not be found . 
 Cullompton cricket club was established in 1892 and they play at <unk> Meadow , by the Cullompton Community Association Fields . There are also a variety of other clubs including several bowls clubs and badminton , running , squash , and Taekwondo martial arts clubs . 
 = = = Sports and leisure facilities = = = 
 The town has a sports centre , Culm Valley Sports Centre , which is currently run by Mid Devon District Council . It was opened in 1985 and facilities include a fitness studio , an all weather pitch , a sports hall , squash courts and a sauna . The town is also home to <unk> Park – a golf course and sporting and recreational centre which first opened in March 1992 . The facilities include a Parkland Golf Course , a Golf School , a 40 bedroom hotel , conference suites , health & fitness centre , indoor bowls , fishing lake , beauty salon , restaurants and a sports bar 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Painter and architect John Shute was born in Cullompton . 
 Architect Charles Fowler was born in Cullompton . 
 Richard Crosse , painter , was born in Knowle , a hamlet in the parish . 
 The puritan clergyman Thomas Manton was town lecturer around 1644 . 
 The engineer William Froude lived in Cullompton and was churchwarden from 1842 – 44 . 
 WG Hoskins died in the town on 11 January 1992 . 
 The singer Joss Stone lives near Cullompton . 
 = 2005 Texas Longhorns football team = 
 The 2005 Texas Longhorn football team represented the University of Texas at Austin during the 2005 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season , winning the Big 12 Conference championship and the national championship . The team was coached by Mack Brown , led on offense by quarterback Vince Young , and played its home games at Darrell K. Royal – Texas Memorial Stadium . 
 The team 's penultimate victory of the season , the Big 12 Championship Game , featured the biggest margin of victory in the history of that contest . They finished the season by winning the 2006 Rose Bowl against the USC Trojans for the national championship . Numerous publications have cited this victory as standing among the greatest performances in college football history , and ESPN awarded the 2006 ESPY Award for the " Best Game " in any sport to the Longhorns and the Trojans . The Longhorns finished as the only unbeaten team in NCAA Division I @-@ A football that year , with thirteen wins and zero losses . 
 Texas earned its second Big 12 Conference football championship to make 27 conference championships total , including 25 in the Southwest Conference . It was their fourth national championship in football and the ninth perfect season in the history of Longhorn football . 
 The team set numerous school and NCAA records , including their 652 points which set an NCAA record for points scored in a season . After the season ended , six Longhorns from this championship team joined professional football teams through the 2006 NFL Draft . Seven more Longhorns followed suit in the 2007 NFL Draft and they were joined by two free agents . Another nine followed through the 2008 Draft and free @-@ agency to make a total of twenty @-@ four players who entered into the National Football League ( NFL ) . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 Media and fans of college football consider the UT program one of the great powerhouses of the game because of the school 's winning record as well as their previous national championships in 1963 , 1969 and 1970 . From 1936 to 2004 , the team finished the season in the top ten team of the Associated Press Poll 23 times , or one @-@ third of the time . At the start of the 2005 season , the Longhorns were one of the most victorious programs in college football history ; they were third in total victories and fourth if measured by winning percentage . 
 In the 2004 season Vince Young led the team to the 2005 Rose Bowl , the school 's first Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) game , and a top 5 finish in the major polls . It should also be noted that Vince Young predicted that the Longhorns would return to the Rose Bowl next season in a post game interview where he proclaimed , " We 'll be back ! " Young returned for the 2005 – 2006 season , as did most of the other key players from 2004 – 2005 , with the exception of Cedric Benson , Derrick Johnson , and Bo Scaife . Texas was given a pre @-@ season No. 2 ranking ( behind the defending National Champions , the University of Southern California ) by Sports Illustrated magazine , the Associated Press Poll and the USA Today Coaches Poll . 
 During the summer of 2005 , a period free of official team practices , Young and his receivers spent extra practice time working on their timing and team @-@ work . The fall Orange and White intra @-@ team scrimmage was held on August 21 , 2005 , as an event open to the public . Running back Ramonce Taylor returned the opening kickoff 94 yards for a touchdown . Young completed five of seven passing attempts for 68 yards and one touchdown . Senior Richmond McGee made two 33 @-@ yard field goals and emerged as the top candidate to handle field goals , kickoffs and punts . Brown said of McGee , " We 've never had one person do all three , so it 's a concern , but right now , he would be the guy . " 
 The success of the 2004 team and the efforts during the off @-@ season fueled anticipation by sports writers that Texas would play for the national championship if they could win their away game against Ohio State University and end their five @-@ game losing streak against Oklahoma . The BCS system required any team competing in the championship game to be ranked either number one or number two in the BCS Standings at the end of the season . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Roster = = 
 The final roster of the season : 
 Texas had very few problems affecting the roster . Only one defensive starter missed a game due to injury . On offense , starting running back Selvin Young injured his ankle in the game against Louisiana @-@ Lafayette and re @-@ injured it the following week against Ohio State . He did not play in the games against Rice or Baylor . Receiver Jordan Shipley missed the entire season due to a pulled hamstring . 
 The Austin Police Department charged UT receiver Myron Hardy with a Class A misdemeanor for carrying a prohibited weapon , a " ' butterfly style knife ' that operates like a switchblade , making it a prohibited weapon . " Hardy appeared in four games for the 2004 team , catching one pass for four yards . He redshirted in 2005 and returned to the roster for 2006 . 
 The police investigated assault allegations against Cedric Griffin and Ramonce Taylor but no charges were filed . The incident allegedly occurred December 10 , 2005 , near the Sixth Street entertainment district . The UT athletics department found no reason to discipline the players and they both played in the final game of the season . Also in December , the police announced they were investigating a Longhorn player in a separate incident that occurred in September . This incident allegedly involved armed robbery with a handgun . The police did not name the target of the investigation . 
 Three Longhorns , freshman running backs Michael Houston and Jerrell Wilkerson and sophomore defensive back Bobby Tatum , elected to transfer prior to UT 's bowl game . All three were reserve players . 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Louisiana Lafayette = = = 
 This game marked the second meeting of the Texas Longhorns and the Louisiana Lafayette Ragin ' Cajuns . In their first meeting in 2000 , UT fell behind 10 – 0 before quarterback Major Applewhite entered the game late in the first quarter and threw for 315 yards and 4 touchdowns as the Longhorns scored 52 unanswered points in a 52 – 10 victory . 
 Prior to kickoff of the 2005 game , the stadium announcer made an appeal for donations to help those suffering in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , which devastated parts of Louisiana five days previously . Donations were not accepted at the game because of a policy against official fund @-@ raising . As the Longhorns entered the field , special teams player Karim Meijer carried a United States flag that was given to the team on Thursday by former Longhorn Nathan Kaspar who flew the flag during missions in southeastern Iraq . For this game only , the Longhorns wore throwback uniforms furnished by Nike as a way of honoring the past . The throwback jerseys were similar to jerseys worn during their 1963 National Championship season under Coach Darrell K. Royal . Football 's origins in the Northeastern United States have created an expectation that it is a cold @-@ weather sport , but the temperature at kickoff was 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) which is also the average temperature in Austin for the month of September . 
 Texas scored first when Selvin Young ran the ball in for a touchdown . The extra point attempt by Richmond McGee was no good . The Cajuns were able to score three points on a field goal by Sean Comiskey making the score Texas 6 , Louisiana Lafayette 3 . Texas replied with 54 unanswered points to win the game 60 – 3 . With the win , Texas improved its record in season @-@ opening games to 93 – 17 – 3 and 72 – 2 – 2 when they open the year at home . That figure includes 11 straight wins and victories in 30 of their last 31 games at home . Their home record under Mack Brown improved to 39 wins and 3 losses . 
 Several new Longhorn players entered the game . True freshman running back Jamaal Charles set the UT rushing record for a debut game with 135 yards and a rushing touchdown alongside one reception for 18 yards , after taking over during the game for injured running back Selvin Young . True freshman running back Henry Melton also saw his first action and scored his first touchdown at the college level . True freshman Quan Cosby got his first college start , and two other true freshmen ( Roy Miller and Aaron Lewis ) saw action . 
 = = = Ohio State = = = 
 According to USA Today , the match @-@ up between the Longhorns and the Ohio State Buckeyes ( OSU ) was one of the most @-@ anticipated games of the 2005 season . Teams have become increasingly conservative in scheduling highly ranked non @-@ conference opponents , so a meeting of the number 2 and number 4 teams in the country was unusual this early in the season . Because of the significance of the game in the national championship race , ESPN College GameDay chose the game as the site of its weekly broadcast . The American Football Coaches Association brought the national championship trophy to the game and displayed it on the field near Bevo , the UT mascot ( photo below ) . 
 Texas and Ohio State are two of the oldest and " most storied " programs in college football , but this game was the first meeting between the two teams . For Texas , it meant playing a second Big Ten Conference " powerhouse " less than one year after winning the first meeting between Texas and the University of Michigan at the end of the 2004 season . 
 The game was played in Ohio Stadium , also known as " The Horseshoe " or " the Shoe " . This stadium is notoriously tough for visiting teams , as its large capacity and structural design focus a tremendous amount of crowd noise that can make it difficult for the visiting team to call audibles at the line of scrimmage . The game 's 105 @,@ 565 attendance set a record for Ohio Stadium . 
 Texas scored first with a 42 yard field goal , which was a career @-@ long for Longhorn kicker David Pino . A five yard touchdown pass from Vince Young to Billy Pittman gave the Longhorns a 10 – 0 lead at the end of the first quarter . The Buckeyes controlled most of the second quarter . Their first score was a 45 yd field goal by Josh Huston followed by a 36 yard touchdown pass from Troy Smith to Santonio Holmes to tie the score at 10 – 10 . They took the lead with two more field goals from Josh Huston . Texas made a field goal to trim Ohio State 's lead to 16 – 13 at the half . In the third quarter , Texas made one field goal and OSU made two , extending Ohio State 's lead to 22 – 16 . In the fourth quarter , Texas regained the lead with a touchdown pass from Young to Limas Sweed . UT 's Aaron Harris sacked OSU 's Troy Smith for a safety and Texas took a three point lead , which they held when time expired . 
 Texas ' win , by a score of 25 – 22 , was the lowest scoring game Texas would experience all season , both in terms of points scored by Texas and total points . Fourth @-@ ranked OSU became the highest @-@ ranked non @-@ conference opponent the Longhorns had ever beaten at an opponent 's home stadium . The previous high came in 1983 when third @-@ ranked Texas pulled off a 20 – 7 upset versus fifth @-@ ranked Auburn . Texas became the first non @-@ conference opponent to beat the Buckeyes in Ohio Stadium since 1990 , putting an end to a 36 @-@ game home victory string over non @-@ conference opponents . The Longhorns also were the first team to beat the Buckeyes in a night game at The Horseshoe and it was UT 's 10th straight victory in a night @-@ game road contest . ESPN and College Football Rivals each named the game one of the best football games of the season . 
 = = = Rice = = = 
 The Rice Owls and Texas met in 2005 for the 88th time . Texas held a 65 – 21 – 1 lead in the series , which began in 1914 . For the Longhorns this series ranks fourth in number of games played , behind Texas A & M , Oklahoma , and Baylor . The two schools were once conference foes in the Southwest Conference and have maintained a rivalry despite the fact that Texas enjoys a sizable lead in the series . President John F. Kennedy alluded to the <unk> of the rivalry in his 1962 speech on America 's space program : " But why , some say , the moon ? ... And they may well ask why climb the highest mountain . Why , 35 years ago , fly the Atlantic ? Why does Rice play Texas ? ... We choose to go to the moon ... and do the other things , not because they are easy , but because they are hard . " In addition to continuing a traditional rivalry , playing Rice in a home and away series allows for Texas to play games in Houston , Texas , an important recruiting base for UT , which has a significant Texas Exes alumni population . 
 The Horns took possession of the ball to start the game and used less than two minutes in scoring on a 25 @-@ yard carry by Jamaal Charles . Rice advanced to the Texas 43 @-@ yard line before punting the ball to Texas ' one @-@ yard line , forcing the Longhorns to start from inside their own end zone . UT drove the ball 99 yards in seven plays for a second touchdown . With four seconds left in the first quarter , Vince Young threw a pass that was intercepted by Ja <unk> Shepherd at the UT 20 @-@ yard line . Rice lost yardage on their possession and failed to convert on fourth down so they turned the ball over on downs . The rest of the first @-@ half scoring was dominated by the Longhorns as they scored four more touchdowns to take a 42 – 0 lead . The Owls had four – more possessions in the second – quarter but never advanced the ball past their own 30 @-@ yard line . 
 In the second half , each team scored one field goal and one touchdown , although Texas missed their extra point so they won the game 51 – 10 . UT 's Jamaal Charles ran for 189 yards and three touchdowns on 16 carries in his first start for the Longhorns . After the game , Charles said that his goal was to rush for 200 yards each game but that he was not disappointed to fall short of 200 yards rushing because he hit his goal of rushing for three touchdowns . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 Sportscasters touted the contest with the Missouri Tigers as a showcase between of the two best dual @-@ threat quarterbacks playing in college football , pitting Missouri quarterback Brad Smith against Vince Young of Texas . The two players combined for 582 yards total offense . Both Young and Smith led their respective team in rushing yards . Young had 108 rushing yards while Smith had 57 . Young had 236 passing yards compared to Smith 's 181 . 
 The Longhorns and the Tigers each scored two touchdowns in the first quarter , though Missouri missed an extra point to let Texas take a 14 – 13 lead . Texas scored another touchdown and a field goal to make a 24 – 13 lead at halftime . In the second half , Texas scored four more touchdowns , missing one extra point to increase their lead to 51 – 13 . Missouri was scoreless for 40 minutes of play until they scored a touchdown with 3 : 54 left to play ; it was their only score of the second half . Texas won the game 51 – 20 to extend its series lead over Missouri to 15 – 5 . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 Football fans consider the annual game between Texas and the Oklahoma Sooners ( OU ) one of the greatest rivalries games in all of college sports . Though officially called the Red River Rivalry , it remains better known by its traditional name , the Red River Shootout ; the 2005 match @-@ up was the 100th in the series . 
 Since 1912 the teams have played the game at the Cotton Bowl stadium in Dallas , Texas , amid the atmosphere of the adjacent Texas State Fair . This is unusual because most college football games alternate between the opponents home stadiums . Dallas was chosen as the neutral site because it is approximately halfway between the two schools . The stadium is divided down the 50 @-@ yard line , with half of the stadium predominantly clad in the crimson and cream colors of Oklahoma , and the other half mostly wearing the burnt orange and white of Texas . 
 The game frequently has implications for the conference and national championship races . Since 1945 , at least one of the teams was ranked among the top 25 teams in the nation coming into 60 out of 65 games . Prior to the 2005 game , Texas held an advantage in the all @-@ time series 55 – 39 – 5 , which included a 43 – 35 – 4 edge in Dallas , but Oklahoma had won the 5 previous games , including the two worst losses ever for a Texas team in the series . Those losses had helped build a reputation that Mack Brown was not capable of winning in " Big Games " . Four times during those five years , Texas ' loss to Oklahoma prevented them from playing in the Big 12 Conference Championship Game . One of these two teams appeared in four of the nine BCS national championship games from 1999 to 2007 . 
 The Longhorns scored first with a touchdown pass from Vince Young to Ramonce Taylor ; this was the first time for Texas to lead Oklahoma since 2002 and Texas ' first passing touchdown against Oklahoma since 2000 . The Sooners ' Garrett Hartley answered with a 52 @-@ yard field goal , the longest of his college career , and a 9 @-@ yard field goal . Longhorn Jamaal Charles scored next on an 80 @-@ yard touchdown run . UT then scored with a 38 @-@ yard field goal by Richmond McGee and a 64 @-@ yard long bomb from Young to Billy Pittman just before halftime , giving Texas a 24 – 6 lead at the half . UT made the only score of the third quarter : a 27 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Young to Pittman . In the fourth quarter UT scored two touchdowns while OU scored one . 
 UT was favored by 14 points and won the game by 33 points , tying the biggest margin of victory for the Longhorns in the history of the rivalry , a 40 – 7 victory in 1941 . The game also marked the sixth time the Longhorns entered the contest ranked second nationally ; they have won all six . With the win , Texas started their season 5 – 0 for the first time since 1983 . 
 = = = Colorado = = = 
 Of all the teams on Texas regular season schedule , Colorado had the best historical record against Texas up to the start of the season . The all @-@ time record was tied at 7 – 7 , and the record since the formation of the Big 12 conference was tied at 3 – 3 . Texas established a lead early in the game and never lost it ; they led 35 – 10 at halftime and defeated the 2005 Colorado team by a final score of 42 – 17 . 
 Texas scored touchdowns on all five of their first half possessions ; these included three rushing touchdowns by Vince Young , one rushing touchdown by Selvin Young , and one touchdown pass from Vince Young to Limas Sweed . Colorado was scoreless in the first quarter . In the second quarter they scored with a 48 yard field goal by Mason Crosby and a touchdown pass from Joel Klatt to Evan Judge . After neither team scored in the third quarter , each team completed one touchdown pass in the final period . 
 Vince Young had the best statistical performance of his career to date , completing 25 of 29 passing attempts for 336 yards and two passing touchdowns in addition to 58 yards rushing and 3 rushing touchdowns . His 86 @.@ 2 % completion percentage set a new single @-@ game record for UT , breaking his previous record of 85 @.@ 7 % set against Oklahoma State in 2004 . After the game , Colorado Head Coach Gary Barnett said of Young 's passing performance , " We can 't do that in practice against air . " meaning that his team would not have been able to complete 86 @.@ 2 % of their passes even if playing unopposed . 
 = = = Texas Tech = = = 
 The Texas Tech Red Raiders came into the game undefeated and ranked number 10 in the nation with hopes of beating Texas , winning out the season , and playing for a national championship . 
 The Longhorns scored a field goal on their first possession and Texas Tech answered with a touchdown pass by Cody Hodges . Texas regained the lead when Henry Melton rushed for a touchdown . In the second quarter , the Red Raiders tied up the game with a field goal before Texas regained the lead with two touchdown runs by Selvin Young and a touchdown pass to Billy Pittman . In the third quarter , the Longhorns extended their lead with two touchdowns to one by Texas Tech . Texas ' seventh touchdown came with 6 : 30 left in the game and it was the last points scored in the game . 
 Texas won the game 52 – 17 and moved into first place in the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) standings for the first time since they were implemented in 1998 . The BCS formula took into account strength of schedule so that teams received more credit for beating stronger opponents . This allowed Texas to advance in the rankings since they beat an unbeaten team while University of Southern California , who previously held the number one spot , beat Washington , a 1 – 6 team . 
 The week following the Texas Tech game Vince Young said he still planned to return for his senior season in 2006 . Young , a candidate for the Heisman trophy , also apologized for striking the " Heisman pose " during the win over Texas Tech ; this had been viewed as an immodest indiscretion . 
 = = = Oklahoma State = = = 
 Texas place at the top of the BCS rankings lasted only one week . On October 29 , 2005 , Texas initially trailed but rallied to beat an Oklahoma State Cowboys team that had held a losing record through the season so far . Texas retained the top spot in the computer rankings , but not by enough to stay ahead of USC in the overall BCS standings . 
 Oklahoma State scored first , with a surprising 49 yard pass from Al Pena to D <unk> Woods . The Cowboys had lined up tight on 4th and 1 as if trying a short , power run , but faked that play and threw a deep pass instead , catching the Longhorn defense off @-@ guard . Texas replied with a touchdown pass from Young to Thomas , but David Pino missed the extra point , allowing the Cowboys to retain the lead . Oklahoma State scored another touchdown and Texas completed a field goal to make the score 21 – 9 at the end of the first quarter . The Cowboys scored one touchdown in the second quarter off of a pass that was deflected by Texas , and Texas made a field goal near the end to cut into the lead , leaving Oklahoma State ahead 28 – 12 at halftime . The second half was dominated by Texas as they scored five unanswered touchdowns to win the game . The scores consisted of two rushing touchdowns by Vince Young , two rushing touchdowns by Ramonce Taylor , and a 21 yard touchdown pass to Neale Tweedie . 
 Despite Oklahoma State 's 0 – 4 start to conference play , they led Texas the entire first half , including a lead of as much as nineteen points . It was the third straight year that Texas trailed Oklahoma State at halftime and came from behind to win by a sizable margin ( 47 – 28 ) . Vince Young set a school record for total yards in one game with 506 yards ( 239 passing , 267 rushing ) . Young also became one of only seven players in NCAA history to have accumulated over 200 yards rushing and 200 yards passing in a single game . Over the past three meetings between the two schools ( 2003 – 2005 ) , the Longhorns outscored the Cowboys by a combined second @-@ half score of 118 – 0 . 
 TBS announced that the Longhorns ' come @-@ from @-@ behind victory scored a record viewership rating of 1 @.@ 927 million viewers . This represented a 21 percent increase over the previous TBS network record for Southern California vs. Stanford in 2004 . 
 = = = Baylor = = = 
 The Longhorns first played the Baylor Bears in 1901 and have faced them annually since both were members of the Southwest Conference . In the 95 meetings through 2005 , Texas ' record was 69 wins , 22 losses , and 4 ties . Only Texas A & M and the University of Oklahoma had faced Texas more often on the football field . 
 Texas was stopped on their first drive due to an unsuccessful fourth down conversion . Baylor 's first possession ended when UT 's Michael Huff intercepted a pass from Baylor 's Terrance Park . Longhorn Jamaal Charles scored a touchdown on the drive but the kick was blocked , giving Texas the only first @-@ quarter score and a 6 – 0 lead . Texas extended the lead in the second quarter with rushing touchdowns from Henry Melton , Jamaal Charles , and Ramonce Taylor . Taylor made two more touchdowns in the third quarter and Quan Cosby caught a touchdown pass from Young . In the fourth quarter , Taylor scored his fourth touchdown and backup quarterback Matt Nordgren scored on an odd play where he was hit and fumbled while scrambling for the goal line but the ball traveled forward at about the same speed he was running and bounced right back up into his hands . Texas won the 2005 game 62 – 0 making it the only shutout of the 2005 season for the Longhorns . 
 The 2005 Baylor game was played in Waco , Texas , approximately 100 miles ( 161 km ) north on Interstate 35 from Austin . Since UT home games are usually sold out and Waco is relatively close to Austin , recent games against Baylor have attracted numerous Texas fans driving to Waco to see the game . The Baylor athletic department suspended ticket sales at one point in an effort to limit the number of Longhorn fans who purchased tickets . The average attendance for Baylor 's home games for the season was 38 @,@ 899 , but for the UT game the attendance was 44 @,@ 783 still short of the 50 @,@ 000 official capacity for Baylor 's Floyd Casey Stadium . 
 = = = Kansas = = = 
 In order to win the 2004 game against the Kansas Jayhawks , Texas had to convert a 4th @-@ and @-@ 18 situation and complete a touchdown pass with only eleven seconds remaining on the clock . The 2005 game provided much less on @-@ field drama , as Texas led 52 – 0 by halftime and defeated Kansas 66 – 14 . 
 In the first quarter , Texas scored touchdowns on a pass to Limas Sweed , a run by Jamaal Charles , a pass to Quan Cosby , and a punt return by Aaron Ross . In the second quarter , the Longhorns had a touchdown run by Ramonce Taylor and touchdown catches from David Thomas and Peter Ullman . David Pino also kicked a field goal for the Horns . In the third quarter , Kansas opened the scoring with a 59 @-@ yard touchdown by Jon Cornish . Taylor scored another touchdown . UT had the only score of the fourth quarter , a touchdown by Selvin Young . 
 UT fans were unhappy with ABC 's television coverage of the event . The network elected to stick with the Oklahoma vs. Texas A & M game instead of switching to the Kansas vs. Texas game . ABC stayed with the Oklahoma vs. A & M game through the final down and then ran three full minutes of commercials while the Texas vs. Kansas game continued . By the time they switched over Texas was already leading 14 – 0 . The ABC announcers started their coverage saying " And now , we 'll join the game you 've been waiting for all week , which has pretty much already been decided . " ABC then broke away from their coverage at halftime to broadcast other events . This left thousands of UT fans who assembled to watch the game in Darrell K. Royal – Texas Memorial Stadium stranded without coverage for much of the game . 
 The lopsided victory allowed Texas to play several less @-@ experienced players . Back @-@ up quarterback Matt Nordgren entered the game in the third quarter , replacing Vince Young . Third @-@ string quarterback Matt McCoy replaced Nordgren just past the midpoint of the fourth quarter . Since Colt McCoy was listed third on the UT depth chart , television broadcasters referred to Matt McCoy ( no relation ) as Colt McCoy , a mistake they repeated over the season . The Longhorns did not play Colt in the 2005 season , choosing to redshirt him instead . After viewing this game as part of a recruiting visit to UT , Jevan Snead – ranked as one of the top high school quarterbacks in the nation , elected to switch his commitment from University of Florida to Texas . 
 = = = Texas A & M = = = 
 This game marked the 112th meeting between Texas and the Texas A & M Aggies and the game is part of a multi @-@ sport rivalry called the Lone Star Showdown . It is the longest @-@ running rivalry for both the Longhorns and the Aggies and the football series is the third most @-@ played rivalries in college football . Texas came into the 2005 contest with a 72 – 34 – 5 record . During the week before the game , the Longhorns conducted their traditional Hex Rally . As a result of a tragic accident in 1999 , the Aggies did not host a school @-@ sponsored version of their traditional Bonfire but an unofficial version called " Student Bonfire " was held November 19 , 2005 despite a county @-@ wide ban on bonfires . The game 's attendance was 86 @,@ 616 , which is 4 @,@ 016 more than the official stadium capacity for Kyle Field . 
 Like the contest against Missouri , sportswriters touted the Texas A & M game as showcasing two of the best dual @-@ threat quarterbacks playing in college football . However , Texas A & M 's starting quarterback Reggie McNeal missed the game due to an ankle injury ; instead , freshman quarterback Stephen McGee made his first start . The game was a back @-@ and @-@ forth affair ultimately won by Texas , 40 – 29 . The eleven point win was their second slimmest margin of victory of the regular season to that point , and they lost points in all three major polls but still remained solidly in second place . 
 The game was the poorest performance of the season by the Longhorns , both offensively and defensively . On offense , Vince Young had only 162 yards of offense , his lowest output of the season . The Associated Press remarked on the poor performance and said that Young , considered one of the nations best quarterbacks and a Heisman trophy candidate coming into the game , was " not even the best quarterback on the field that day " . The Daily Texan predicted that the game could hurt Young 's chances for the Heisman , but they also quoted UT head coach Mack Brown as saying " Looking at the numbers from what Reggie Bush did last week and Vince did today , Reggie probably leads , but next week , Vince plays at noon , and Reggie at 3 , so I think voters will wait and watch to see what happens . " 
 UT running backs Henry Melton and Ramonce Taylor also received criticism . Taylor was criticized for running backwards and sideways in an effort to gain yards , instead of moving ahead and breaking tackles . The Daily Texan observed " Five of Taylor 's 15 carries resulted in a loss or no gain for a total of minus @-@ 17 yards . However , the other 10 carries totaled 119 yards for an average of 11 @.@ 9 yards per positive running play . The sophomore didn 't have a positive gain of fewer than 5 yards and accumulated three runs of 20 yards or longer . " Greg Davis , UT 's offensive coordinator , said " Ramonce is a darter . The only time that really concerned me was a third @-@ and @-@ two situation . We talked to him on the sideline about a little bit more down and distance awareness . " Melton was criticized for " tiptoeing indecisively " . and letting himself get tackled near the line of scrimmage . 
 On defense , the Longhorns held A & M to only 118 yards passing but gave up 277 yards rushing ; the highest allowed by the Longhorns all season . Despite the poor outing , Texas finished the regular season undefeated . Gene Chizik , UT 's defensive coordinator , said " This really is an eye @-@ opening experience . Obviously , we 've got to get better . But I 'll tell you what , we 're all going to drive home 11 – 0 . " 
 = = = Big 12 Championship = = = 
 The Big 12 Championship Game is held by the Big 12 Conference each year . The championship game pits the Big 12 North Division champion against the South Division champion in a game held after the regular season has been completed . Despite losing the last two games of the regular season , Colorado retained the best record in the North Division of the Big 12 Conference . Prior to the game , Colorado head coach Gary Barnett said , " I do not think anybody expects us to come in here and beat Texas . " His team lost the game 70 – 3 , the most lopsided score in any college football conference championship to date . 
 The Longhorns scored ten touchdowns in their first eleven possessions . They started with first @-@ quarter touchdowns by Henry Melton and Jamaal Charles . The Buffaloes got their only score of the game , a field goal , at the start of the second quarter . Vince Young , Limas Sweed , David Thomas , and Jamaal Charles scored touchdowns in the second quarter to give the Horns a 42 – 3 lead at halftime . In the third quarter , Selvin Young , Charles and Melton each scored rushing touchdowns . Brandon Foster scored a touchdown on defense due to Michael Griffin blocking a Colorado punt . Halfway through the third quarter , Texas already had 70 points , but went on cruise control from that point on and did not score again . 
 Following the victory , the largely UT crowd stayed in the stands to celebrate the Longhorns ' return to the Rose Bowl — this time for a shot at a National Championship . As players circled the stadium giving high @-@ fives and handshakes to fans , a section of the railing collapsed and fans spilled onto the sideline . One person suffered injuries and was removed from the field on a stretcher . 
 Texas earned its second Big 12 football championship to make 27 conference championships total , including 25 in the Southwest Conference . The week after the game , Barnett was fired as Colorado 's head coach and replaced by Dan Hawkins , the former head coach of Boise State . 
 = = = Rose Bowl = = = 
 For the 2005 season , the Rose Bowl also served as the BCS National Championship Game as a result of the Bowl Championship Series agreement . In the weeks leading up to the 2006 Rose Bowl , the game was described by numerous publications as one of the most @-@ anticipated match @-@ ups in college football history and even as the greatest college football game of all time . This was Texas ' second trip to the Rose Bowl in school history , alongside their trip the previous season . 
 Less than three weeks before the game , USC Trojan Reggie Bush won the Heisman trophy — since vacated — ahead of second place finisher Vince Young . Bush had the second highest number of first place votes in Heisman history ( behind O.J. Simpson ) and the highest percentage of first place votes , while Young had a record number of second place votes . Bush 's 933 @-@ point margin of victory was the 17th highest in the history of the Heisman voting . The third finalist was USC 's Matt Leinart , who won the Heisman trophy in 2004 . This Rose Bowl would mark the first time two Heisman trophy winners would ever play in the same backfield . 
 The game 's outcome was in doubt until the final minute of play . With 19 seconds left on the game clock , Vince Young ran for a touchdown and regained the lead for the Longhorns . He followed up by running the ball into the end zone for a two @-@ point conversion . Leinart had time to attempt one pass but his pass fell out of bounds as time expired ; UT beat USC by the score of 41 – 38 . 
 Young completed 30 of 40 passes for 267 yards and carried the ball 19 times for 200 yards and 3 rushing touchdowns . His 467 total yards set a new Rose Bowl and BCS Championship Game record . He won the Rose Bowl " Most Valuable Player " ( MVP ) award for the second consecutive year , joining Ron Dayne , Bob <unk> , and Charles White as the only two @-@ time winners but the only player from outside the Big Ten or Pac @-@ 10 . David Thomas ' ten receptions set a UT record for most receptions in a game by a tight end . 
 Prior to the game , commentators had postulated that the 2005 USC team was one of or even the " greatest team of all @-@ time " . ESPN analysts were virtually unanimous in their declaration of the 2005 USC Trojans as the best offense in the history of college football , despite the fact that they were in second place behind Texas in terms of points scored during the season . ESPN analysts Mark May and Kirk Herbstreit declared , before the 2005 Rose Bowl had even been played , that the 2005 USC Trojans were the second best college football team of the past 50 years . May placed them behind only the 1995 Nebraska Cornhuskers ; Herbstreit behind only the 2001 Miami Hurricanes . This led to Texas fans at the Rose Bowl mockingly chanting " Best ... Team ... Ever " during the post @-@ game celebration . Stewart Mandell of Sports Illustrated observed , " ESPN spent the better part of Christmas season comparing that Trojans squad to some of the most acclaimed teams of all time only to find out that they weren 't even the best team that season . " 
 Texas ' Rose Bowl win was the 800th victory in school history and it earned the Longhorns their fourth consensus national championship in football . Since the game , the media , coaches , and other commentators have heaped praise upon the Texas team , Young , and the Rose Bowl performance . Both the Rose Bowl win as well as the Longhorns ' overall season have both been cited as standing among the greatest performances in college football history by observers such as College Football News , the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , Scout.com , Austin American @-@ Statesman , and Sports Illustrated . ESPN awarded the two teams the 2006 ESPY Award for the " Best Game " in any sport . 
 Texas ' win over USC was their ninth consecutive victory when facing a ranked opponent . Texas broke USC 's winning streak ( then the longest in the nation ) at 34 and claimed the longest running winning streak for themselves at 20 wins in a row . Texas ' 20 @-@ game winning streak was the second @-@ longest winning streak in school history ; Texas had 30 wins in a row from 1968 to 1970 . Texas extended the winning streak to 21 before a September 9 , 2006 , loss to Ohio State University . In beating USC , Texas defeated a No. 1 ranked team for the first time since defeating Alabama in the Orange Bowl on January 1 , 1965 . The Longhorns ended the season ranked third in the all @-@ time list of both total wins and winning percentage ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 The pre @-@ season editions of the Associated Press Poll and USA Today Coaches Poll pre @-@ season polls both ranked Texas number two in the nation behind defending National Champion University of Southern California . The two teams maintained those rankings throughout the entire 2005 regular season . Texas was ranked second in each week of the BCS rankings , except for one week where Texas took the top spot with USC falling to number two . The BCS rankings during 2005 were based on a formula which factored in the votes of two human polls ( the USA Today coach 's poll and the Harris Interactive poll ) , combined with a variety of computer rankings . The computer rankings favored Texas as the No. 1 team throughout the entire season , due partly to Texas 's wins over ranked programs such as Ohio State University and Texas Tech University . 
 On October 24 , 2005 , Texas passed USC in the BCS rankings due to a strong showing in the computer rankings , which favored the Longhorns because of the overall strength of their opponents as well as the October 22 , 2005 , win over previously unbeaten Texas Tech . The first @-@ place ranking was the first for UT in the BCS era , and the first top ranking in any major football poll since October 8 , 1984 , when they were atop both the Associated Press and Coaches polls . The 0 @.@ <unk> % margin separating Texas from USC was the slimmest margin between the top two teams since the inception of BCS rankings . 
 The stay at the top was short @-@ lived . With the October 31 , 2005 , BCS rankings , Texas remained first in the computer rankings , with Virginia Tech pulling even with USC for number two in the computer rankings . However , USC remained atop both human polls and was able to reclaim the top overall ranking . Texas and USC won the rest of their games and faced each other in the National Championship , which Texas won 41 – 38 . This was only the 35th meeting of the two top @-@ ranked teams in the history of college football , including both regular season and bowl games . The BCS system now ensures that the two top teams in the BCS rankings face each other annually in a national championship game , but the methodology for ranking the teams remains controversial among fans and sportswriters . 
 The 2005 season marks only the eighth time in 50 years that exactly two teams have gone into the bowl season undefeated . This has been a major criticism of the BCS format , which does not use a playoff to determine the national championship . Unless there are exactly two unbeaten teams , both from BCS conferences , the choice of the top two teams can generate controversy . If more than two undefeated teams remain , then one or more of those teams must be left out . If one or fewer undefeated teams remain , then an opponent must be chosen from among the one @-@ loss teams , meaning that other one @-@ loss teams will be left out . 
 In the eight National Championship games through the 2006 Rose Bowl , the team ranked number one prior to the game has won five times , while the number two team has won three times . Up to the 2007 season , no school had won the BCS championship twice . In the final polls after the bowl games , Texas received all 62 first place votes in the Coaches Poll and all 65 first place votes in the AP Poll . 
 = = After the season = = 
 Analysts labeled the team , their season , and their championship victory as the greatest or among the greatest in the history of the sport . College Football News judged the 2005 Longhorns to have played the greatest college football season ever . Sports @-@ writers at College Football News also consider the 2006 Rose Bowl to be the best college football game ever played . Furman <unk> of the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution said " if there ever has been a greater game , I never saw it , and I 've been watching college football games since 1934 . " Scout.com called it " one of the best national title games ever " , while Kevin Hench of Fox Sports called it " perhaps the greatest college football game ever played . " ESPN declared the 2006 Rose Bowl Game an instant classic and re @-@ aired it within a week of the original broadcast . ESPN later awarded the 2006 ESPY Award to the Longhorns and Trojans for the 2006 " Best Game " in any sport . Vince Young and Matt Leinart accepted the award on behalf of their teams . ESPN columnist Mark Schlabach ranked the 2005 Texas Longhorns as fourth @-@ best among the first ten BCS @-@ era champions . 
 The championship game drew attention from political figures . Head Coach Mack Brown took a congratulatory call from United States President George W. Bush , who told Brown , " Congratulations on a wonderful moment ... Tell the team congratulations , we 're proud of them . " White House Press Secretary Scott McClellan said Bush wished Brown and the Longhorns all the best , and said that he looked forward to having them visit the White House soon . Bush was formerly a Governor of Texas and his daughter Jenna is a UT graduate . On February 14 , 2006 , Bush did host the team and coaches at the White House . California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger lost a bet with Texas Governor Rick Perry on the outcome and had to send Perry a basket of " California wines , fruit and other goodies " . The food was donated to National Guard troops in Texas . Both governors also offered autographed , handmade cowboy boots that were auctioned to benefit survivors of Hurricane Rita and Hurricane Katrina . Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa lost a bet with Austin Mayor Will Wynn and had to send a basket of produce , such as avocados , from a local farmers ' market ; Wynn had bet Texas ' finest barbecue . 
 Seconds after Texas beat Southern California 41 – 38 , the university lit the UT tower orange , the traditional signal of victory on the campus . Since this was a national championship , office lights were also left selectively lit in order to form a number " 1 " on all four sides of the tower ( pictured ) . Texas students and fans spilled onto the streets of Austin and made their way to campus for an impromptu celebration . Though police were out in force , there were no reports of problems . The school commissioned a painting titled The University of Texas National Championship 2005 by Opie <unk> to commemorate the win in the Rose Bowl and the National Championship . 
 Special editions of magazines and products featured the team . Dave Campbell 's Texas Football put out a 45 @,@ 000 @-@ copy special issue titled One for the Ages – Vince Young Leads Longhorns to the Fourth National Title . This issue included a column from Longhorn fan Matthew McConaughey as well as 15 pages of photos from the Rose Bowl . The cover featured Young kissing the " crystal football " national championship trophy . Sports Illustrated held up their regular weekly edition to await the results of the Rose Bowl . They finally went to press with a cover showing Young diving into the end zone with the label " Superman " . Analysis inside the issue gave Young a large part of the credit for the win . They also printed a special commemorative issue in the state of Texas with Young on the cover , shouting in triumph amidst a storm of multi @-@ colored confetti after winning the game . Features in the special edition included a story on Vince Young 's Glory Days by Tim Layden , as well as a story dissecting How the Rose Bowl was won by Austin Murphy . The issue was on sale alongside the regular edition of the magazine . General Mills produced a commemorative issue Wheaties box featuring Mack Brown and a Texas Longhorns football helmet on the front . The commemorative packaging was sold nationwide . Texas is the first national college football champion to be featured since Nebraska was on the box in 1997 . 
 Individual players and coaches also received honors . " Vince Young Day " was proclaimed by Mayor Bill White in Houston on January 10 , 2006 , to honor the Houston native . White said that Young is " an inspiration to all Houstonians , both young and old . " On January 15 , 2006 , 51 @,@ 244 Texas fans gathered in Darrell K. Royal – Texas Memorial Stadium to celebrate the team and their victorious season . Mack Brown was named the Paul " Bear " Bryant College Football Coach of the Year , as voted on by the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters Association . Brown became the first winner of the award from UT since Darrell Royal in 1963 . The championship season lifted the reputation of Mack Brown and the offensive coordinator , Greg Davis . Davis was consistently criticized for over @-@ conservative play @-@ calling . After the championship win the criticism quieted down , but did not go away completely . As of 2007 sportswriters continue to debate whether Vince Young and the other talented UT players succeeded despite Davis or because of him . 
 Despite previous statements that he would return for his senior season , redshirt junior quarterback Vince Young announced that he would forgo his final year of NCAA eligibility and made himself eligible for the 2006 National Football League draft . The Tennessee Titans chose him as the third overall draft pick . Besides Young , five other Longhorns from this championship team joined professional teams through the 2006 NFL Draft – Michael Huff ( number 7 overall ) , Cedric Griffin ( number 48 overall ) , David Thomas ( number 86 overall ) , Jonathan Scott ( number 141 overall ) and <unk> Wright ( number 222 overall ) . As a result , fullback <unk> Hall was re @-@ united with his former team @-@ mate Vince Young in the NFL , playing for Tennessee . One year later , seven more members of this team were selected in the 2007 NFL Draft – Michael Griffin ( number 19 overall ) , Aaron Ross ( number 20 overall ) , Justin Blalock ( number 39 overall ) , Tim Crowder ( number 56 overall ) , Brian Robison ( number 102 overall ) , <unk> Brown ( number 147 overall ) , Kasey Studdard ( number 183 overall ) . Lyle <unk> and Selvin Young were not drafted but signed with NFL teams as free agents . In the 2008 NFL Draft , five more Longhorns from this team were selected : Limas Sweed ( number 53rd overall ) , Jamaal Charles ( number 73 overall ) , Jermichael Finley ( number 91 overall ) , Tony Hills ( number 130 overall ) , and Frank Okam ( number 151 overall ) . In addition , Brandon Foster , Marcus Griffin , Nate Jones and Derek Lokey agreed to sign free @-@ agent contracts with NFL teams . 
 For the fiscal year which ended in August 2005 , just as the 2005 football season was starting , Texas was the nation 's richest and most profitable football program , with revenue of $ 53 @.@ 2 million , and a profit of $ 38 @.@ 7 million . Following the national championship , for the 2005 – 2006 fiscal year , UT also led the nation in royalties from merchandise sales , setting a new national record at $ 8 @.@ 2 million . These royalties went to the University as a whole , not specifically to the athletics programs . The team topped the merchandise rankings again for the 2006 – 2007 fiscal year . 
 The official website of UT football posted a special logo ( pictured ) proclaiming the Longhorns as the national champions . The logo featured the script " National Champions " centered prominently in the center , with " <unk> @-@ <unk> " in the lower left and " THE OFFICIAL <unk> OF THE <unk> OF <unk> <unk> " in the lower right . In the background was an image of a rose , with a small Longhorn symbol appearing in front of the rose and between the two sections of the smaller print . In the upper right @-@ hand side , the years " 1963 , 1969 , 1970 , 2005 " appear , with the " 2005 " given special emphasis . These years correspond to the four consensus national championships won by the UT football team . The special logo was removed from the website 's home page after a few months , but as of 2007 it is still found on certain portions of the site related to the 2005 season . 
 = = List of accomplishments = = 
 Longhorn players from both the offense and defense set records for their performance during the season or received national recognition and awards . 
 Vince Young won the Davey O 'Brien Award , presented annually to the quarterback adjudged by the Davey O 'Brien Foundation to be the best of all National Collegiate Athletic Association quarterbacks . Young also won the Maxwell Award , presented annually to the nation 's top college football player as adjudged by a panel of sportscasters , sportswriters , and National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) head coaches and the membership of the Maxwell Football Club . Furthermore , he won the Manning Award , the only quarterback award which takes into account the athlete 's performance in the bowl season , as opposed to being awarded at the end of regular season play . 
 Young had 1 @,@ 050 rushing yards and 3 @,@ 036 passing yards , making him the first player in NCAA Division I @-@ A or I @-@ AA history to rush for 1 @,@ 000 yards and throw for 2 @,@ 500 yards in a single season . 
 In 2007 , ESPN compiled a list of the top 100 plays in college football history ; Vince Young 's game @-@ winning touchdown in the 2006 Rose Bowl ranked number 5 . 
 Michael Huff , Jonathan Scott , <unk> Wright , and Vince Young were named to first team of the 2005 Associated Press All @-@ American Team ; Justin Blalock and Aaron Harris were named to the third team . 
 Michael Huff won the Jim Thorpe Award , presented annually to the top defensive back in college football as adjudged by the Jim Thorpe Association . 
 The team also set school and NCAA records and received accolades . 
 UT completed the ninth perfect season in the history of Longhorn football , and the first undefeated season since 1969 . 
 This season marked the first football championship by any university in Texas since the 1970 UT championship season . 
 The Longhorns finished the season as the only unbeaten team in the nation , going 13 – 0 overall . Texas won 13 games in a season for the first time in school history . Only five teams have ever won more games ( 14 ) and posted a perfect record in a single NCAA Division I @-@ A football season before the College Football Playoff : Ohio State in 2002 , Alabama and Boise State in 2009 , Auburn in 2010 , and Florida State in 2013 . Fourteen other teams have scored 13 wins in a season . 
 With the conclusion of the 2005 season , UT posted five consecutive ten @-@ win seasons and eight consecutive nine @-@ win campaigns for the first time in school history ( though seasons are generally longer than in the past ) . 
 Texas ' 652 points were a NCAA Division I record for points scored in a season ( broken by the 716 points scored by the 2008 Oklahoma Sooners ) . The previous record was 624 points scored by Nebraska in 1983 ( under NCAA rules , bowl game statistics count toward the total in 2005 . Thus , all thirteen of Texas 's games are counted in accumulating the 652 points . The 1983 Nebraska team scored 654 points , including its bowl game , but only its twelve regular season games are counted for statistics , thus the 624 total points ) . Their 50 @.@ 2 points per game set a new school record . 
 The Horns set two new school records for total yardage . The first was a new single @-@ season total @-@ yardage record with 6 @,@ 657 , passing the previous record of 5 @,@ 709 set in 2003 . Of the 6 @,@ 657 yards , 556 yards were earned in the Rose Bowl . The second record was most total yards per game at 512 @.@ 1 . They also set a school single @-@ season record for yards per rushing play with 5 @.@ 9 . 
 In total yards per play , 2005 stands second on the UT record list with 7 @.@ 07 . The record for most yards per play is held by the 1993 team with 7 @.@ 44 . 
 With 5 rushing touchdowns scored in the Rose Bowl , Texas scored 55 for the season , setting a new single @-@ season school record . The old record of 52 touchdowns was set in 1969 and equaled in 1970 . 
 On January 25 , 2006 , the United States Senate bestowed another honor on the team when Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison presented Senate Resolution 352 commending the team for winning their fourth national championship . 
 = Vermont Route 14 = 
 Vermont Route 14 is a north – south state highway in northeastern Vermont , United States . It is 110 @.@ 2 miles ( 177 @.@ 3 km ) long and extends from U.S. Route 4 and U.S. Route 5 in White River Junction to Vermont Route 100 in Newport . Between White River Junction and the city of Barre , the route parallels Interstate 89 . Vermont Route 14 was originally designated in 1922 as part of the New England road marking system . Its north end was truncated in 1926 as a result of the designation of U.S. Route 2 but was extended north along an old alignment of Vermont Route 12 in the 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = White River Junction to East Montpelier = = = 
 VT 14 begins at the intersection of US 4 and US 5 in White River Junction in the town of Hartford , at the confluence of the White River and the Connecticut River . VT 14 heads northwest as Maple Street , crossing under I @-@ 91 without an interchange , and continues through the town center of Hartford , along the north bank of the White River . 5 miles ( 8 km ) later it passes through the small village of West Hartford and soon enters the town of Sharon . After traveling another 5 miles ( 8 km ) along the river , VT 14 intersects with VT 132 in Sharon center and continues northwest into the town of Royalton , where it passes through the town 's three villages along the White River . VT 14 first goes through South Royalton , where it has a junction with VT 110 , then continues to follow the winding path of the river through Royalton center , finally reaching the village of North Royalton , where it meets with VT 107 . From here , VT 14 turns north , leaving the main White River to follow the Second Branch of the White River . VT 14 runs for about 3 miles ( 5 km ) in western Royalton town , then enters the village of East Bethel in the town of Bethel . Less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , VT 14 enters the town of Randolph , passing through the village of South Randolph . After traveling north for another 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) , VT 14 arrives in the village of East Randolph , where it has a junction with VT 66 , which is signed for the Randolph town center . 
 VT 14 continues north for another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) through the village of North Randolph before entering the town of Brookfield . Upon reaching the village of East Brookfield about 3 @.@ 6 miles ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) north of the town line , VT 14 intersects with VT 65 , the route to Brookfield center . Further north , VT 14 passes by Ainsworth State Park , which straddles the town line between Brookfield and Williamstown and also marks the upstream end of the Second Branch of the White River . VT 14 continues north through the narrow mountain pass of the state park and eventually arrives at the town center of Williamstown , where it intersects VT 64 . After another 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) , VT 14 crosses into the town of Barre . It proceeds through the village of South Barre , intersecting with VT 63 , and continuing into the city of Barre . In Barre city , VT 14 runs along South Main Street for 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) until the junction with U.S. Route 302 . US 302 and VT 14 overlap along North Main Street as they head into the city center . At the city center , the two overlapped routes split at a large four @-@ way intersection that also includes a junction with VT 62 , a short connector to I @-@ 89 . US 302 heads northwest directly towards the city of Montpelier , while VT 14 heads north along Maple Avenue towards the town of East Montpelier . VT 14 briefly re @-@ enters Barre town for about 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 @.@ 0 km ) before entering the town limits of East Montpelier . After 2 @.@ 4 miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) , VT 14 crosses the Winooski River into the town center , where it meets U.S. Route 2 . 
 = = = East Montpelier to Newport = = = 
 After overlapping with US 2 for 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) through East Montpelier center , VT 14 continues for 3 miles ( 5 km ) to an intersection with VT 214 , in North Montpelier village . It soon enters the town of Calais , running for nearly 7 miles ( 11 km ) through the eastern part of this mostly rural town , including the village of East Calais , plus another 8 miles ( 13 km ) through the next town , Woodbury . Within Woodbury , it passes through the small town center , then continues past Greenwood Lake to run for several miles along the narrow river valley at the eastern edge of the Woodbury Mountains . Upon entering the next town , Hardwick , the valley opens up as the road approaches the town center , where the <unk> River crosses east to west . Here , northbound VT 14 is joined by westbound VT 15 , as they run concurrently to the northwest for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , crossing the <unk> River just north of the town center , after which VT 15 continues west as the two routes separate . VT 14 continues north along the west shore of Hardwick Lake , as the valley the road has been passing through narrows again . After 4 miles ( 6 km ) , VT 14 briefly enters the town of Greensboro , where it passes along the shore of Lake <unk> , then continues northwest into the town of <unk> . VT 14 bypasses the small villages of the town , running along a more westerly track . 
 After traveling 8 miles ( 13 km ) through rural <unk> , VT 14 proceeds north into the town of Albany , where it runs for another 7 miles ( 11 km ) , passing through the village of Albany along the way . North of Albany , VT 14 continues into the town of <unk> , where it intersects VT 58 at the town center . The two routes overlap to the north and west for 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) . After another 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) in northern <unk> town , VT 14 enters Coventry , where it is immediately joined by U.S. Route 5 coming from the southeast . The two routes overlap for about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) through Coventry center then separate , with US 5 heading north to the city of Newport and VT 14 heading northwest towards the town of Newport , where it ends at VT 100 , less than 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) after crossing the town line . VT 100 and VT 105 continue into Newport Center . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 19th century turnpikes = = = 
 The roads of the southern half of modern VT 14 were improved at the beginning of the 19th century as various privately owned turnpikes . The oldest of these was the White River Turnpike , which was chartered on November 1 , 1800 . The road was to run 21 miles ( 34 km ) from the mouth of the White River to the point where it was joined by the Second Branch of the White River , and connected the settlements of White River Junction , Sharon , and Royalton . The toll road was in operation for 52 years . By the end of this period , receipts from the road had become very small due to the recent opening in 1850 , along the same path as the turnpike , of a new railway line of the Vermont Central Railroad . 
 Another portion of modern VT 14 , between East Brookfield and Williamstown center , was to be improved by another turnpike corporation , the Williamstown Center Turnpike , which was chartered on November 14 , 1803 . The charter provided that the road be turned over to the state after having been in operation for 25 years ( later amended to 40 years ) . The company , however , did not do anything in its first two years of existence and only began laying out the road in 1805 . 
 A third turnpike corporation , the Randolph Turnpike , was chartered on November 7 , 1805 , to build a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) northward continuation of the White River Turnpike . The road of the Randolph Turnpike was to run from North Royalton to East Randolph . The corporation was dissolved by the state legislature on November 6 , 1833 . 
 = = = Route designation = = = 
 In 1922 , the New England states adopted a region @-@ wide system for route numbering . New England Route 14 was initially designated as a north – south route beginning at White River Junction , through Montpelier , to the city of Burlington . The route used modern VT 14 to Barre , then US 302 to Montpelier , and US 2 to Burlington . By 1925 , an extension into New Hampshire had been designated continuing across the Connecticut River to Lebanon , New Hampshire and heading southeast to Franklin , along modern US 4 to Andover and New Hampshire Route 11 to Franklin . 
 At the end of 1926 , the American Association of State Highway Officials formally established the U.S. Highway System and many of the New England inter @-@ state routes were redesignated as U.S. Routes . The portion of New England Route 14 from Barre to Burlington was assigned to U.S. Route 2 , while the portion in New Hampshire was assigned to U.S. Route 4 . This shortened Route 14 in the south to US 4 / US 5 in White River Junction , and in the north to US 2 in the city of Barre . In 1935 , the portion of US 2 between Montpelier and St. <unk> was relocated to a more northerly alignment using a section of then Vermont Route 18 . The old US 2 alignment was redesignated as US 302 . VT 14 was extended northward several miles to East Montpelier , ending at the junction of newly relocated US 2 and Vermont Route 12 . 
 In the 1960s , the northern half of Vermont Route 12 ( north of Montpelier ) was relocated to the " Montpelier @-@ Morrisville State Highway " , which connected Montpelier with the village of Morrisville . Originally , VT 12 continued north from Montpelier via East Montpelier to Hardwick and Barton , then overlapped with U.S. Route 5 to the city of Newport via Coventry . Between Hardwick and Coventry , VT 12 had an alternate route , Vermont Route 12B , that took a more westerly alignment via Albany . The relocation of the northern half of VT 12 to a new alignment resulted in the redesignation of its original northern alignment . The portion between Hardwick and Barton became a new Vermont Route 16 . The portion between East Montpelier and Hardwick was assigned as an extension of VT 14 . At the same time , VT 12B was also redesignated as a further northward extension of VT 14 , including an additional 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) piece connecting to VT 100 in the town of Newport , resulting in the modern VT 14 alignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Chulip = 
 Chulip ( <unk> ) , stylized as Chu ♥ lip , is an adventure / simulation video game developed by Punchline and released on October 3 , 2002 in Japan by Victor Interactive Software for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) video game console . After numerous delays , the game was released in North America by Natsume on February 13 , 2007 as a GameStop @-@ exclusive title . Chulip was released on the PlayStation Network as a " PS2 Classic " on December 4 , 2012 . 
 Chulip puts the player in the role of a young man who has just moved to a new town and next door to the girl of his dreams . Although she wants nothing to do with him due to his family 's poor economic status , he decides to write her a heartfelt love letter . When the letter is stolen , it is up to the protagonist to travel around the village and retrieve all of its pieces . The gameplay of Chulip revolves around improving the player 's reputation with the citizens in order to access all parts of the town . To do this , the player must impress each member of the community and then kiss them . 
 Chulip was directed by <unk> Kimura , a former employee of Love @-@ de @-@ Lic . Kimura wanted the game 's focus to be on kissing in public , a more Western @-@ accepted custom , within a Japanese setting . Chulip suffered dismal sales , while its overall critical reception has been negative to average . Most reviews cited the game 's quirkiness and charm as its strong points yet criticized its tedious gameplay mechanics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chulip opens with a dream sequence in which the unnamed , male protagonist kisses the girl he loves under the talking " Lover 's Tree " on a green hill . The dream takes its course , the tree ends the sequence saying they lived happily ever after . However , once the protagonist wakes up , he and his father are just moving into Long Life Town , which appears very much like a small , Japanese village . Coincidentally , the girl of his dreams lives in this town , but she flatly rejects him due to his status as coming from a very poor family . Taking his father 's advice , the hero decides to kiss the odd citizens of the town in order to strengthen his heart and improve his reputation . En route to doing so , he also resolves to write a love letter to his crush . When this treasured set of papers is stolen , he must search Long Life Town for the missing pieces . The hero 's journey involves numerous bizarre incidents that lead him to cheating his way to the top of a major corporation , making contact with aliens , and acting as a defense lawyer in court . Once the three pieces of the love letter ( the ink , paper , and pen ) are collected , he writes and mails it to the girl . The game 's ending shows the two meeting and kissing beneath the Lover 's Tree , as the protagonist had dreamed . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Chulip is an adventure / simulation game in which the player must improve the hero 's reputation in the community of Long Life Town by kissing its various citizens . The player 's health is represented by a number of hearts . To gain more hearts the player has to find and kiss other characters in the game . Finding out how and when to kiss other characters is a puzzle in of itself . The game and each of its non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) follow a 24 @-@ hour day schedule . In the daytime , many of the NPCs of the game are walking around the streets . To succeed in kissing an NPC , the player is required to wait for the correct time where they will be happy and press the corresponding button . The player must sometimes complete a certain task for that NPC . Choosing the wrong time to kiss will often result in the player getting hit and losing health . Exploring Long Life Town presents the player with numerous environmental hazards discovered by trial and error . For instance , attempting to use the town 's playground equipment or being suddenly shot at by the night @-@ patrolling policeman will cause instant death . One mission ends in the player being struck by lightning , removing more than ten hearts and resulting in a game over if the player does not have sufficient health . 
 Some denizens of Chulip only come out of their underground , living apartments through holes in the ground at certain times of the day . If the player looks through these holes , clues are given in regard to when they come out or when to kiss them . After an NPC comes out of the ground , the player has a very limited opportunity to give them a kiss . If the player successfully kisses enough NPCs and returns home to sleep , the hero 's father will recite his progress and the Lover 's Tree will give the player more hearts and an improved reputation if he advances . Secondary to improving his reputation , the player must track down all the pieces to the " Love Letter Set " by traveling throughout Long Life Town . As the story progresses , the player gains access to new areas of the game world via train , which include many more underground residents and hazards . Saving takes place in various bathrooms . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chulip was developed by a team of 12 to 14 people at Punchline . The game took two and a half years to complete after its initial planning ; one year and three months were devoted to programming . Director <unk> Kimura started work on the project as he helped his colleagues at Love @-@ de @-@ Lic finish that company 's final game , <unk> : Lack of Love . Production of Chulip began in the earliest days of the PS2 , making it a challenge for the development team who only had experience with the original PlayStation . Kimura valued his team members ' opinions and ideas while working on it . " It was challenging and interesting at the same time to program a game for a new console , " he stated . " We were definitely eager to see what we could do with it . " The original idea for Chulip came when Kimura visited Western countries and saw couples kissing in public , a custom not often performed among Japanese people . Kimura came up with game 's title after attending a party in Tokyo . As the intoxicated partygoers talked about video games , they began to humorously say " chu @-@ shite " ( lit . " kiss me " ) . The title Chulip is a play on words : a cross between chu ( the Japanese onomatopoeia for the sound of a kiss ) and the English word lip , as well as the Japanese rendering of the word tulip . 
 Kimura eventually spoke with Marvelous Entertainment 's <unk> Wada about creating a game mixing a " flare of Moon and Japan a little while ago ( say about 40 years ago ) " . Kimura wanted Chulip to be localized to show the world certain aspects of Japanese culture and " all the kind of interesting stuff that you can see every day " . He also wanted to display a real , modern truancy problem for Japanese students with the game 's cast of underground dwellers . <unk> <unk> designed many of the game 's mechanics . According to Kimura , " for efficient procedure , [ <unk> ] set it up so that the personality and the characteristics for each NPC had to be one @-@ by @-@ one " . The character designs were done by Ryuji <unk> , who used items from Kimura 's personal scrapbook and " made them funny " . The musical score to Chulip was composed by Hirofumi Taniguchi , another former member of Love @-@ de @-@ Lic . The soundtrack was released by King Records in Japan on a single disc on November 22 , 2002 . Songs 35 through 44 represent the " Tsurukame Movie Soundtrack " , consisting of music for each of the game 's short films , while songs 45 and 46 are bonus tracks . 
 Publisher Natsume licensed the game for a projected North American release in early 2004 . The game was then shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo that year . Natsume realized early on that it would be an extremely obscure title and thus planned on releasing it at a low retail price . The game was delayed , and Natsume assured that it would be released sometime in 2005 . After more delays , Chulip was ultimately released in North America on February 13 , 2007 , the day before Valentine 's Day , exclusively to GameStop stores . The North American version was supposed to feature updated graphics and an " accurately meticulous " translation of Japanese text . Natsume claimed that Punchline 's busy schedule resulted in such a long delay for the localization and that it also prevented them from making any graphical changes . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Chulip received mostly average critical scores upon its release in North America . The game currently holds a 57 % on the aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic . The ambitious gameplay of Chulip has been almost universally criticized . Ray Barnholt of 1UP.com , Ryan Davis of GameSpot , Micah Seff of IGN , and Gus Mastrapa of X @-@ Play all labeled the often @-@ unclear progression presented to the player as " frustrating " and " tedious " , requiring an excessive amount of patience . Mastrapa summarized , " Since the game is on 24 @-@ hour clock a missed opportunity means having to wait until the next day to take another crack . Add the fact that your inexperienced , young avatar can die from heartbreak , resulting in a ' game over ' screen and the loss of <unk> progress and you 've got a recipe for annoyance . " Barnholt , Davis , and Seff did positively credit Natsume for the inclusion of the mini @-@ strategy guide . Despite faulting the " indistinct objectives " , Davis found gratification in successful kisses . " The whole kissing thing is absolutely fantastic in concept , " Davis stated , " And there 's something unsettling about your character 's encouraged promiscuity . " However , Game Informer writer Ben Reeves described the game as one of the most poorly designed games he has ever played due to its lack of in @-@ game direction and frequency of game overs . In January 2008 , Game Informer listed Chulip one of the worst games of 2007 . 
 Reviewers have praised Chulip for a charming presentation , quirky characters , and absurd , Japanese humor . Admitting that the game had some blurry or pixelated textures and cramped environments , both Seff and Davis noted the peculiar art style of Chulip to be aesthetically pleasing . Seff specifically found the game " surprisingly easy on the eyes " and to feature unique character designs , " wacky " dialogue , and an art style comparable to other titles like the Mother series and Katamari Damacy . Davis was amused by the script and the townsfolk 's gibberish speech , and was satisfied with largely a cappella soundtrack . Seff was unimpressed by the game 's audio , remarking the music as " entirely boring " . 
 According to Media Create information , Chulip sold only 6 @,@ 645 units during its first week of release in Japan . Despite such low sales , Chulip was re @-@ released in Japan two separate times , first as part of the " Victor the Best " selection on April 24 , 2003 and second as part of the " Super Best Collection " on July 6 , 2006 . Many of Chulip 's key development members and their design philosophies were carried over to the 2009 Wii game Little King 's Story . That year , Kimura stated that he would like to make a sequel to Chulip . He was also contemplating creating a version set in an American location such as The Bronx with a protagonist that is African @-@ American , Caucasian , or other ethnicity . 
 = Sinistar : Unleashed = 
 Sinistar : Unleashed is a 1999 action space shooter video game for Microsoft Windows . It was designed by Marc Michalik and Walter Wright and developed at GameFX , a small studio composed of former members of Looking Glass Studios . Originally titled Out of the Void , development of the project began in 1997 and had no relationship with the Sinistar franchise . After licensing the franchise from Midway Games that year , GameFX shifted the focus of the game and developed it as a sequel to the original Sinistar , which was released by Williams in 1982 . 
 Like the previous installment , Sinistar : Unleashed focuses on the destruction of the Sinistar , a large bio @-@ mechanical machine , powered by machines called the Sporg . To achieve this goal , the player has a variety of starships , power @-@ ups and weapons . Unlike its predecessor , the game has full three @-@ dimensional graphics and a wider control scheme . Sinistar : Unleashed features 29 levels , five of which are hidden ; each level has a Sinistar . 
 Sinistar : Unleashed received mixed reception when released . Critics lauded its audacity , as well as the addition of new features into the game . Several journalists felt that GameFX captured all the elements that represented a Sinistar game and stayed true to the franchise by feeling familiar to fans of the original game . However , critics faulted the boss designs and the repetitiveness of the gameplay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessor , Sinistar : Unleashed is an action space shooter video game . While the original Sinistar features graphics and gameplay in a two @-@ dimensional space , the sequel features three @-@ dimensional graphics and gameplay , giving the player the ability to maneuver and roam freely across six different axes . Sinistar : Unleashed features 29 levels , five of which are hidden as a bonus ; each level has a Sinistar . The bonus levels are timed missions that involve destroying or protecting a particular object . 
 The player is given a starship , and the main mission is to fight an alien race called the Distilled Evil and their slaves , the Sporg . The Sporg are mining ships controlled by the Distilled Evil , tasked with powering the jumpgate , a portal through which the Sinistar ( a bio @-@ mechanical monster dedicated to destroying the player ) appears . The jumpgate is stationed at the center of the level , and the Sporg power it with energy crystals collected from the asteroids that appear sparsely along the sector . 
 The player must prevent the Sporg from completely powering the jumpgate . While completing the task , the player encounters several warships that attempt to protect the jumpgate . These enemies are indicated on the radar with a dynamic set of coordinates that turn from white to red as they approach . If the player succeeds , the jumpgate breaks and the level is finished . Otherwise , the Sinistar will arrive through the activated jumpgate , and the player must defeat it to progress further . The player has six different starships to choose from , as well as eight power @-@ ups and nine weapons to destroy the mining ships and the Sinistar . The most powerful weapon is called the <unk> , which is designed to defeat the Sinistar , although it can also be used to destroy the jumpgate . The player obtains <unk> by harvesting crystals from asteroids in the same way Sporg do . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Sinistar : Unleashed , originally titled Out of the Void , began in 1997 . It was handled by GameFX , a small game developer consisting of former members of Looking Glass Studios . At first , the project had no connection , or gameplay similarities , to the Sinistar franchise . When the studio acquired the rights for the Sinistar franchise that year , it decided to refocus the development of the title to fit into the newly acquired property . It altered the game to introduce similarities to Sinistar , although the graphic structure remained unchanged . During development of the game , AGH noted that the final product was expected to be " a combination of Out of the Void 's graphical flash with Sinistar 's fast and frenzied action . " 
 AGH also noted that " according to GameFX , Sinistar : Unleashed 's render @-@ on @-@ the @-@ fly 3D visual effects are said to tower above the [ then- ] current generation of games . Advanced texture @-@ mapping technology , plasma lighting effects , and particle systems make Sinistar : Unleashed much more than just a mere enhancement over the original . " Additionally , the technical capacity of the game allowed " more than 25 uniquely dynamic enemies ... controlled by advanced AI and their own arsenal of weapons , deadly attacks and evil personalities . " THQ revealed that the game was optimized for the then @-@ recently released Pentium III processors from Intel to allow the " lighting and geometry transformation engine to process more detail faster . " In the Computer Gamer 's Bible , Mark L. Chambers and Rob Smith noted the technical design of Sinistar : Unleashed , writing that " developers have added accurate collision physics , and mining the asteroid field will require precise timing and good trigger finger . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Sinistar : Unleashed was announced by THQ in February 1999 , two years after the company licensed the Sinistar franchise from Midway Games . Two demos for the game were produced . The second , released in September 1999 , included several gameplay and technical enhancements over the first , showcasing the initial two levels of the game . 
 When announcing the game , C. Noah Davis , chief technology officer of THQ and general manager of GameFX , said " What made the original a classic is that it was easy to learn , yet difficult to master . " He elaborated : " We are focused on capturing that magic using many elements of the original , while showcasing the universe using our proprietary GameFX Technology . " IGN reported on September 3 , 1999 that the game had gone gold ( its development had concluded ) , and it was released worldwide on September 15 , 1999 . A patch was released on November 22 , 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sinistar : Unleashed received mixed to positive reviews from media outlets , gaining an average score of 65 @.@ 75 % according to review aggregator GameRankings . Critics agreed that the developers stayed true to the original game and lauded the graphic enhancements as " unquestionably beautiful " and a " graphical powerhouse " . Erik Wolpaw , writing for GameSpot , noted that the game suffered mostly from gameplay issues , such as the control design , which he called " overly complex for a mindless shooter " . He added that although the developers succeeded in capturing the arcade essence of the previous game , this was " somewhat to the detriment of the final product . " 
 AllGame 's reviewer was satisfied with the game 's graphics but criticized how its bosses were designed , elaborating that " the <unk> ... simply don 't instill the same sense of sheer panic [ as in the previous game ] . " Vincent Lopez from IGN noted the game 's similarity to its predecessor and complimented its graphics and the addition of a wide variety of weapons as well as other technical features . However , he viewed the weapons as " more of a checklist than an actual asset . " He stated that Sinistar : Unleashed " feels immediately familiar to fans of the original , while adding just enough new features ( and a completely new graphic overhaul ) to make this feel now @-@ dated . " 
 Nash Werner from GamePro shared Lopez 's views , explaining that GameFX , along with THQ , " have released a modern 3D version " of the original Sinistar that " sports some of the best graphics ever seen in a space shooter " , although he added that it had lost " some of the soul " that the original game had . Bob Mandel from The Adrenaline Vault was impressed with the game . Although he agreed that there would " certainly be both buyers and reviewers who will bash this title mercilessly , bemoaning the absence of complicated missions and tactical planning " , he stated that with Sinistar : Unleashed , GameFX and THQ managed to create a " true arcade classic " . He saw it as the only remake of a game from the 1980s to achieve that status . 
 Caryn Law , writing for Computer Games Magazine , applauded THQ for including the original game 's elements and rendering them with " <unk> " graphics . She criticized the plot and gameplay design , stating that " players want games that involve more than simply blowing things up . " She also contended that Sinistar : Unleashed " hearkens back to the days when all you needed was keen hand – eye coordination and a pocket full of quarters . " Chris McMullen from Games Domain discussed the game 's technical aspects in his review , maintaining that it " not only sounds and looks good " but is also " fun to play and strangely addictive . " However , he cited the gameplay 's repetitiveness as a flaw that prevented Sinistar : Unleashed from " being a must @-@ buy game . " 
 PC Zone praised the game , noting that " the rich , organic style lends the game a hypnotic atmosphere " and stating " with the <unk> still taunting you as they did back in 1983 , and the gameplay essentially unchanged , those who enjoyed the ageing classic will find Sinistar : Unleashed a worthy successor . " John Lee , writing for Next Generation , gave a somewhat mediocre review of the game , casting it as " a lot like one of those Baywatch babes — luscious to look at , but not much between the ears . " He added that it was basically " another retro / nostalgia trip . " GameSpy 's Caryn Law concluded that Sinistar : Unleashed was " simply Sinistar dressed up in 3D graphics " and that it offered " nothing new in the way of a challenge . " 
 = J. T. White = 
 John T. " J.T. " White ( July 10 , 1920 – November 21 , 2005 ) was a college football assistant coach , and a second @-@ team 1947 College Football All @-@ American center who played for national championship teams at both the University of Michigan and Ohio State University . White also played basketball for the Ohio State Buckeyes men 's basketball team . Although White was drafted to play professional football , he chose to pursue a career as an assistant football coach for both the Michigan Wolverines and Penn State Nittany Lions football teams . He served as an assistant coach for a national champion at Michigan and three undefeated and untied seasons at Penn State . White served in the United States Army during World War II causing a break in his collegiate education . 
 = = Personal = = 
 White was born in Wadley , Georgia and raised in River Rouge , Michigan . White earned his bachelor 's degree in education from Michigan in 1948 . He earned his master 's degree in education at Michigan . White married the former Verna McQueen , and they had one son , Brian . Verna and White were married for 53 years before she died at 75 in October 1997 of emphysema . 
 = = Athletic career = = 
 At River Rouge High School he played baseball , basketball and football before attending Ohio State . In 1942 , he lettered in both basketball and football at Ohio State as a sophomore . He was a player for national champions on both the 1942 Ohio State Buckeyes football team and the 1947 Michigan Wolverines football team . He is one of only three players ( along with Justin Boren and Howard Yerges ) to have played for the football teams of both Michigan and Ohio State ; this low number can be attributed to the strong rivalry between the two schools . 
 White matriculated at The Ohio State University , where he earned a varsity letter playing for Paul Brown 's 1942 team . White played at Ohio State for two years . He served in the United States Army from 1943 to 1945 during World War II and lettered two years for Fritz Crisler 's Michigan teams . His younger brother , Paul was captain at Michigan when White transferred . J. T. was the starting center for the 1946 and 1947 teams . The Football Writers Association of America named him as their second @-@ team All @-@ American center for the 1947 college football season . White played in the 1948 College All @-@ Star Game , and he was drafted by two pro teams : the Detroit Lions with the first pick of the 21st round ( 186th overall ) in the 1947 NFL Draft and the Brooklyn Dodgers of the All @-@ America Football Conference . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 He chose to join Bennie Oosterbaan 's Michigan coaching staff for six years ( 1948 – 53 ) , including the national champion 1948 Michigan Wolverines football team . Then , for 26 seasons , from 1954 through 1979 , J.T. was a defensive line coach at Penn State , first under Rip Engle and then under Joe Paterno , who took over in 1966 . When White moved to Penn State to work for Engle , the staff included Paterno , Earle Bruce , Sever <unk> , Jim O <unk> and Jim Patrick . His tenure on the staff included three undefeated and untied seasons ( 1968 , 1969 and 1973 ) . Subsequently , from 1980 – 1982 , he served as assistant to the Penn State Athletic Director . 
 = Italian ironclad Sardegna = 
 Sardegna was the third of three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclad battleships built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . The ship , named for the island of Sardinia , was laid down in La Spezia in October 1885 , launched in September 1890 , and completed in February 1895 . She was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns and had a top speed of 20 @.@ 3 knots ( 37 @.@ 6 km / h ; 23 @.@ 4 mph ) — albeit at the cost of armor protection – and she was one of the first warships to be equipped with a wireless telegraph . 
 Sardegna spent the first decade of her career in the Active Squadron of the Italian fleet . Thereafter , she was transferred to the Reserve Squadron , and by 1911 , she was part of the Training Division . She took part in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , where she escorted convoys to North Africa and supported Italian forces ashore by bombarding Ottoman troops . During World War I , Sardegna served as the flagship of the naval forces defending Venice against a possible attack from the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , which did not materialize . After the city became threatened following the Battle of Caporetto in November 1917 , the ship was withdrawn to Brindisi and later Taranto , where she continued to serve as a guard ship . She took part in Allied operations in Turkey in 1919 – 22 , and after returning to Italy in 1923 , she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Sardegna was 130 @.@ 73 meters ( 428 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 23 @.@ 44 m ( 76 @.@ 9 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 84 m ( 29 @.@ 0 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 641 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 426 long tons ; 15 @,@ 037 short tons ) normally and up to 15 @,@ 426 t ( 15 @,@ 182 long tons ; 17 @,@ 004 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eighteen coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . She was the first Italian warship to be equipped with triple expansion engines . Her propulsion system produced a top speed of 20 @.@ 3 knots ( 37 @.@ 6 km / h ; 23 @.@ 4 mph ) at 22 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower ( 17 @,@ 000 kW ) . Specific figures for her cruising radius have not survived , but the ships of her class could steam for 4 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 to 11 @,@ 100 km ; 4 @,@ 600 to 6 @,@ 900 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 794 officers and men . Sardegna was one of the first warships equipped with Marconi 's new wireless telegraph . 
 Sardegna was armed with a main battery of four 13 @.@ 5 in ( 343 mm ) 30 @-@ caliber guns , mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one on either end of the ship . She carried a secondary battery of eight 6 in ( 152 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns placed singly in shielded mounts atop the upper deck , with four on each broadside . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) guns in casemates in the upper deck , eight on each broadside . These were supported by twenty 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 43 @-@ cal. guns and ten 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes in above @-@ water launchers . The ship was lightly armored for her size . She was protected by belt armor that was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick , an armored deck that was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick , and her conning tower was armored with 11 @.@ 8 in ( 300 mm ) of steel plate . The turrets had 4 in thick faces and the supporting barbettes had 13 @.@ 75 in ( 349 mm ) thick steel . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Sardegna was named after the island of Sardinia . She was built by the Arsenale di La Spezia in La Spezia , with her keel being laid down on 24 October 1885 . She was launched on 20 September 1890 , and completed on 16 February 1895 . After entering service , Sardegna was assigned to the 2nd Division of the Reserve Squadron as its flagship , along with the older ironclad Ruggiero di Lauria and the torpedo cruiser Aretusa . At the time , the ships of the Reserve Squadron were based in La Spezia . Sardegna joined the ironclads Re Umberto , Ruggiero di Lauria , and Andrea Doria and the cruisers Stromboli , Etruria , and Partenope for a visit to Spithead in the United Kingdom in July 1895 . Later that year , the squadron stopped in Germany for the celebration held to mark the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . While there , Sardegna accidentally ran aground in front of the canal , blocking the entrance for several days . 
 For 1903 , the Active Squadron was on active service for seven months , with the rest of the year spent with reduced crews . In 1904 – 05 , Sardegna and her sisters were in service with the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for nine months of the year , with three months in reduced commission . The following year , the ships were transferred to the Reserve Squadron , along with the three Ruggiero di Lauria @-@ class ironclads and the ironclad Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . Sardegna was still in the Reserve Squadron in 1908 , along with her two sisters and the two Ammiraglio di Saint Bon @-@ class battleships . By this time , the Reserve Squadron was kept in service for seven months of the year . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . At the time , Sardegna and her two sisters were assigned to the Training Division , along with the old armored cruiser Carlo Alberto , under the command of Rear Admiral Raffaele Borea Ricci D 'Olmo . On 3 – 4 October , Sardegna and her sisters were tasked with bombarding Fort Sultanje , which was protecting the western approach to Tripoli . The ships used their 6 @-@ inch guns to attack the fort to preserve their stock of 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shells . By the morning of the 4th , the ships ' gunfire had silenced the guns in the fort , allowing landing forces to go ashore and capture the city . The ships of the Training Division thereafter alternated between Tripoli and Khoms to support the Italian garrisons in the two cities ; this included repulsing a major Ottoman attack on Tripoli over 23 – 26 October , where Sardegna and Sicilia supported the Italian left flank against concerted Ottoman assaults . During this engagement , Sardegna used a spotter aircraft to help direct the fire of her guns , the first time aircraft had been used in that role . By December , the three ships were stationed in Tripoli , where they were replaced by the old ironclads Italia and Lepanto . <unk> and her sisters arrived back in La Spezia , where they had their ammunition and supplies replenished . 
 In May 1912 , the Training Division patrolled the coast , but saw no action . The following month , Sardegna and her sisters , along with six torpedo boats , escorted a convoy carrying an infantry brigade to Buscheifa , one of the last ports in Libya still under Ottoman control . The Italian force arrived off the town on 14 June and made a landing ; after taking the city , the Italian forces then moved on to Misrata . Sardegna and the rest of the ships continued supporting the advance until the Italians had secured the city on 20 July . The Training Division then returned to Italy , where they joined the escort for another convoy on 3 August , this time to Zuara , the last port in Ottoman hands . The ships covered the landing two miles east of Zuara two days later , which was joined by supporting attacks from the west and south . With the capture of the city , Italy now controlled the entire Libyan coast . On 14 October the Ottomans agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Italy had declared neutrality at the start of World War I , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that the threat from Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and naval mines in the narrow waters of the Adriatic was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the main fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . For their part , the Austro @-@ Hungarians adopted a similar strategy , as they too were unwilling to risk the heavy units of their fleet . She was the flagship for the Northern Adriatic Naval Forces after Italy entered the war . The Northern Adriatic Naval Forces also included the two old Ammiraglio di Saint Bon @-@ class battleships , two cruisers , and several smaller craft . The ships were tasked with defending Venice from Austro @-@ Hungarian attacks ; this service lasted until 15 November 1917 . Since neither the Italians or Austro @-@ Hungarians were willing to risk the main units of their fleets , Sardegna had an uneventful career during the war . 
 The ship was thereafter transferred to Brindisi for use as a harbor defense ship . The reason for her withdrawal was the major Italian defeat at the Battle of Caporetto ; the German and Austro @-@ Hungarian advance threatened to continue to Venice . Here , all of her secondary and light guns were removed , leaving her with only her main battery guns . She was equipped with a small battery of anti @-@ aircraft guns , consisting of four 3 in ( 76 mm ) / 40 guns and two machine guns . On 10 June 1918 , Sardegna was moved to Taranto , where she continued serving as a guard ship . She took part in Allied operations in Constantinople after the end of the war , from 7 November 1919 to 5 April 1922 . The ship did not remain in service long after returning to Italy . She was stricken on 4 January 1923 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Upper and Lower Table Rock = 
 Upper Table Rock and Lower Table Rock are two prominent volcanic plateaus located just north of the Rogue River in Jackson County , Oregon , U.S. Created by an andesitic lava flow approximately seven million years ago and shaped by erosion , they now stand about 800 feet ( 240 m ) above the surrounding Rogue Valley . The Table Rocks are jointly owned ; The Nature Conservancy is responsible for 3 @,@ 591 acres ( 1 @,@ 453 ha ) , while the Bureau of Land Management is responsible for 1 @,@ 280 acres ( 520 ha ) . 
 Native Americans have inhabited the Table Rocks area for at least 15 @,@ 000 years prior to European @-@ American settlement . Starting in the mid @-@ 19th century during a gold rush , the settlers forced the Takelma tribe away from the Table Rocks and into reservations . The surrounding area was quickly developed . The Table Rock post office was established in 1872 , an airstrip was built atop Lower Table Rock in 1948 , and a very high frequency omni @-@ directional range ( VOR ) aviation tower was constructed on Upper Table Rock in the 1960s . The Table Rocks were not protected until the 1970s . 
 The rocks are home to over 70 species of animals and 340 species of plants , which includes over 200 species of wildflowers . Vernal pools atop the plateaus fill during the rainy season in winter and spring because the andesite is impermeable . The dwarf woolly meadowfoam , a species of wildflower , grows around these pools , and is endemic to the rocks . The pools are also one of only a few places where the federally threatened species of fairy shrimp , <unk> <unk> , can be found . To protect these and other threatened species , the Bureau of Land Management has listed the rocks as an Area of Critical Environmental Concern since 1984 . 
 The Table Rocks are one of the most popular hiking locations in the Rogue Valley , with over 45 @,@ 000 visitors annually . Two trails , Lower Table Rock Trail and Upper Table Rock Trail , were cut across the plateaus ' slopes in the early 1980s by the Youth Conservation Corps , Boy Scouts , and the Oregon Department of Forestry . This effort was coordinated by John <unk> , a forester for the Medford Office of the BLM . 
 The plateaus are named for their relatively flat tops . Upper and Lower refer to their location along the Rogue River , not their height . Upper Table Rock , 2 @,@ 091 feet ( 637 m ) above sea level at its highest point , is located upstream , while Lower Table Rock is farther downstream , with an elevation of 2 @,@ 049 feet ( 625 m ) . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 Starting approximately 40 million years ago in the middle Eocene , a braided river system called the " Ancestral Rogue River " flowed through the region where the Rogue Valley is now carved . For about 2 @.@ 1 million years , the river deposited what is now known as the Payne Cliffs Formation by laying down a thin conglomerate , followed by <unk> sandstone and siltstone . Between 10 and 20 million years ago , the uplift that created the nearby Klamath Mountains caused an incision that formed the Rogue River valley . Vertical erosion , or downcutting of the Rogue River continues to keep pace with the recent uplift , with about 690 feet ( 210 m ) of erosion occurring in the past seven million years . 
 Approximately seven million years ago in the upper Miocene , a 44 @-@ mile ( 71 km ) long trachyandesitic lava flow that likely came from Olson Mountain near present @-@ day Lost Creek Lake flowed down the Ancestral Rogue River and its tributaries and spread throughout the valley . This lava formed a hard cap over the Payne Cliffs Formation . At Lost Creek Lake , the lava attained its maximum thickness of 730 feet ( 220 m ) and thinned to about 100 to 200 feet ( 30 to 61 m ) to the north of Medford . 
 Since the Olson eruption , the Rogue River has eroded 90 percent of the solidified lava . Though the andesite prevented much erosion to the caps of the Table Rocks , the andesite @-@ capped cliffs eroded from the side as the softer sedimentary units of the Payne Cliffs Formation gave way . This erosion created expansive talus fields which surround the plateaus on all sides , creating slopes capable of supporting abundant plant and animal life . Upper and Lower Table Rock both stand 800 feet ( 240 m ) above the valley floor , and just over 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) above sea level . There are approximately 300 acres ( 120 ha ) of level ground on Lower Table Rock , and 500 acres ( 200 ha ) on Upper Table Rock . 
 The Table Rocks offer an example of inverted relief , in which previous topographic lows are filled with a resistant rock and become new topographic highs after the erosion of the surrounding region . Each plateau is shaped roughly like a horseshoe because the lava followed the meanders of the Ancestral Rogue River . 
 Two caves and two former gold mines are located at the base of the andesite cap on Upper Table Rock . The caves were created by natural fractures in the cap , and the gold mines were excavated by prospectors searching for gold in the 19th century . Three are large enough to walk into , with an average width of 8 feet ( 2 m ) , while one is a small pit , dropping 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) vertically into a pond of water . 
 = = Human history = = 
 Humans have lived in the Table Rock area for at least 15 @,@ 000 years , based on the age of Clovis points that were discovered nearby . The region surrounding the Table Rocks was home to the Takelma people . They gathered food such as acorns and <unk> seeds , and caught salmon in the nearby Rogue River . The Takelma also used deer hides for clothing . They had several names for the rocks , including Di <unk> ( " rock above " ) , <unk> ( " little Indian plums " ) , and possibly <unk> . The first use of the names Upper Table Rock and Lower Table Rock is unknown , however the first recorded use was by mountain man James <unk> in 1845 . 
 Some of the first European Americans to visit the area were fur trappers led by Peter Skene Ogden in 1827 . In 1841 the United States Exploring Expedition passed through the Rogue Valley . Neither Ogden nor the expedition mentioned the Table Rocks . The gold rush of the early 1850s brought many emigrants to the area , and Table Rock City ( later renamed Jacksonville ) was established several miles south of the rocks . The sudden increase of settlers created conflicts with the Rogue River Indians . These conflicts turned into warfare , and several treaties were signed in an attempt to end the hostilities . In June 1851 , soldiers of the United States Army led by Major Philip Kearny attacked the Takelma near Lower Table Rock , but the Takelma were prepared . One soldier died , and three others were injured . Major Kearny returned with volunteers from Yreka soon after , accompanied by Oregon Territory delegate Joseph Lane . The ensuing Battle of Table Rock lasted 10 days , and 30 Takelma were imprisoned . 
 In September 1853 , the Native Americans signed a peace treaty with Joseph Lane , and the Treaty with the Rogue River with Joel Palmer , which resulted in their ceding 2 @,@ 500 square miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km2 ) of land in exchange for $ 60 @,@ 000 , $ 15 @,@ 000 of which was to be used to repay white settlers for losses sustained in the hostilities and $ 5 @,@ 000 of which was set aside to purchase agricultural implements and other improvements benefitting the Native Americans . The Takelma population underwent their first forced migration into the Table Rock Reservation , located between Upper Table Rock and nearby Evans Creek . This reservation remained open for three years , while the inhabitants were moved to other reservations . In January 1856 , 400 Native Americans were moved to the Grande Ronde Reservation , 263 miles ( 423 km ) to the north . Most of the rest were relocated to the Siletz Reservation in May . 
 Development of the area commenced immediately and in 1872 the Table Rock Post Office was established just south of Upper Table Rock and east of Lower Table Rock . The Table Rock School District was created in 1879 . In 1895 the post office 's name was changed to <unk> , and it was closed in 1906 . Telephones arrived in 1908 , and the Table Rock Mutual Telephone Company was established . The school district was merged with Central Point 's district in 1948 . 
 In November 1948 , John Day , a local cattle rancher and developer , built a 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) airstrip on the surface of Lower Table Rock to impress visiting celebrities from Hollywood . Day funded residential lots near the landmark with the intent of marketing the lots to the celebrities who used the grassy runway . The runway was closed in the late 1980s , but small airplanes still occasionally attempt to land on it . 
 The Federal Aviation Administration has operated a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) tall very high frequency omnidirectional range ( VOR ) aviation tower on Upper Table Rock since the 1960s . The tower 's purpose is to broadcast precise coordinates to nearby aircraft to assist in navigation . The facility is closed to the public due to the threat to the safety of the occupants of the aircraft . However , the structure sustained $ 40 @,@ 000 damage in 1997 when vandals unsuccessfully attempted to steal aluminum antennas from the 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall fiberglass shell on the roof of the building . 
 The Nature Conservancy became concerned about <unk> in 1978 and launched its largest fundraising project to that date . Collecting over $ 500 @,@ 000 they purchased 1 @,@ 881 acres ( 761 ha ) of Lower Table Rock , creating the Lower Table Rock Preserve . Projects include prescribed burning and invasive species removal . In 1981 , the Youth Conservation Corps constructed the Upper Table Rock Trail . A year later , through the efforts of John <unk> , the Lower Table Rock Trail was constructed ; the first 400 feet ( 120 m ) were built by a Central Point Boy Scout troop , and the rest was built by the Oregon Department of Forestry . In 1984 , the Table Rocks were designated an Area of Critical Environmental Concern by the Bureau of Land Management . In May 2009 , The Nature Conservancy bought another 1 @,@ 710 acres ( 690 ha ) of land on the Table Rocks for $ 3 @.@ 9 million , ending private ownership of the rocks . 
 = = Ecological habitats = = 
 Four overlapping ecological regions have been identified on the Table Rocks , with considerable differences in the variety of wildlife found in each . From the outermost base of the rocks , three regions consisting of oak savanna , chaparral , and mixed woodland surround the relatively flat tops . The andesite cap is covered by the fourth region , mounded prairie . This region formed when the caps were slowly eroded by the freezing and thawing of water that seeped into the ground ( ice erosion ) , which created layers of mounded soil . Vernal pools fill in from October to June in the mounded prairie area due to the andesite 's impermeability . The pools support species of plants and animals . 
 Over 340 species of plants grow on the rocks , including approximately 200 species of wildflowers . Some of the most common wildflowers are western buttercups , desert parsley , bicolor lupine , and California goldfields . Camas and death camas also grow on the rocks . Camas produces an edible bulb , while death camas is poisonous and was used by the Takelma as an anesthetic . 
 More than 70 species of animals are known to live on the Table Rocks . Lizards such as the western fence lizard , southern alligator lizard , and western skink have been seen in all four regions of the Table Rocks . Western rattlesnakes and two species of garter snakes also live in all regions . Black @-@ tailed deer , coyotes , and bobcats are some of the mammals that live on the Table Rocks . The rocks are also home to western black @-@ legged ticks , although they are mainly found in the chaparral region . Many species of birds live on the rocks . 
 The Table Rocks experience a Mediterranean climate . The average wind speed in the area is less than 6 miles per hour ( 10 km / h ) , and the annual precipitation is approximately 18 inches ( 460 mm ) due to the rain shadow created by the Klamath Mountains . It rarely snows in the winter . 
 = = = Oak savanna = = = 
 Oak savanna is a type of grassland with scattered oak trees , found on the lowest slopes of the Table Rocks . The Takelma tribe often set fires in the oak savanna and chaparral regions to prevent brush overgrowth , creating foraging areas for animals such as deer and elk . It also prevented large wildfires . Oregon white oak and ponderosa pine are the most common trees found in the region . Buckbrush , sticky whiteleaf manzanita , Pacific madrone , <unk> , <unk> mountain mahogany , and Pacific poison oak are also common . 
 Snakes such as the ringneck snake , western yellow @-@ bellied racer , striped <unk> , and Pacific gopher snake live in the oak savanna region . Birds such as the oak titmouse , ash @-@ throated flycatcher , white @-@ breasted nuthatch , western bluebird , violet @-@ green swallow , acorn woodpecker , black @-@ headed grosbeak , and American kestrel have also been found in this region . The rocks are known to be the northernmost place blue @-@ gray gnatcatchers inhabit . Gall wasps live in this area , often creating galls in oak trees by injecting their larva into their leaves and branches . 
 = = = Chaparral = = = 
 Chaparral is a type of shrubland , receiving very little precipitation . <unk> plants such as manzanita and buckbrush grow in this area , both relying on fire to reproduce . The rare Gentner 's fritillary also grows in this region . 
 American black bears have been spotted in the chaparral region , usually in the fall . The most common birds include titmice and the acorn <unk> blue @-@ gray gnatcatchers , lesser goldfinches , and Anna 's hummingbirds have also been seen . 
 = = = Mixed woodland = = = 
 The mixed woodland region is a dense forest with many species of trees , located near the tops of the plateaus . The forest canopy shades the ground , resulting in a cooler temperature . The canopy also reduces the amount of water evaporation . California black oak , Douglas fir , Pacific madrone , incense cedar , and other plants grow in the mixed woodland . Shrubs such as Oregon grape , honeysuckle , blue elderberry , and Pacific poison oak also grow here . The soil in this area is mostly loam . 
 Rodents such as the California ground squirrel , western gray squirrel , and dusky @-@ footed <unk> live in this region . Birds such as grosbeaks , flycatchers , western tanagers , and lazuli buntings are common in the area . Nine species of warblers , three species of vireos , and two species of thrushes can also be found . The pileated woodpecker has been spotted rarely in large pine trees . 
 = = = <unk> prairie and vernal pools = = = 
 The mounded prairie region is located on top of the plateaus , characterized by many species grasses and wildflowers around the vernal pools , with mounds of soil created by erosion . The dwarf woolly meadowfoam , a plant endemic to the Table Rocks , grows near these pools . They bloom for about ten days in April . When filled in the winter and early spring , the pools are also a known habitat for the vernal pool fairy shrimp ( <unk> <unk> ) , a threatened species . 
 Two types of amphibians are found in the mounded prairie region , typically around vernal pools . The Pacific tree frog lives in large numbers on the rocks , while tadpoles of the rarer western toad can be seen between March and May . Mammals such as California voles , Heermann 's kangaroo rats , raccoons , and long @-@ tailed weasels can also be found in this region . The western meadowlark and two species of sparrows are the most common types of birds that are seen in the area . Turkey vultures , rock wren , three species of hawks , and other birds patrol the cliffs on the sides of the plateaus . 
 = = Trails = = 
 The Table Rocks offer one of the most popular hiking locations in the Rogue Valley , with over 45 @,@ 000 visitors annually . Over 4 @,@ 600 people per year participate in guided hikes through the Table Rock Environmental Education Program , hosted by the Bureau of Land Management and The Nature Conservancy . Lower Table Rock features a walking trail , which climbs approximately 780 feet ( 240 m ) to the top of the plateau over a distance of 1 @.@ 75 miles ( 2 @.@ 8 km ) . It has eight interpretive panels along its length , explaining the history , flora , and fauna of the region . Upper Table Rock also has a walking trail , 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 0 km ) long , ascending approximately 720 feet ( 220 m ) . The trails are the most popular with hikers between March and May , when the wildflowers are in bloom . Another peak occurs in September through October . Landmarks such as Mount McLoughlin , Mount Ashland , Roxy Ann Peak , and Pilot Rock are visible on clear days from the edge of the rocks . 
 The Youth Conservation Corps , Boy Scouts , and the Oregon Department of Forestry built the trails leading to the tops of the Table Rocks in the early 1980s , around the same time the plateaus were being nominated as an Area of Critical Environmental Concern . In June 1999 , only two small trees were cut when Shady Cove contractor Randy Hodges rerouted a 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) section of the Lower Table Rock trail to accommodate the growing number of visitors . The project involved decommissioning the old section , expanding the parking lot , and installing 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 671 m ) of new trail . Measures to protect the trail were implemented , such as installing rock <unk> and a layer of shale gravel over the clay . 
 In 2005 , a program to build an interpretive trail began on Lower Table Rock near the trailhead . Prior to construction , some persons with disabilities , children , or the elderly may have been prevented from using either of the Table Rocks due to the steep terrain and narrow paths . The finished project involved making a 500 @-@ foot ( 150 m ) section of trail accessible and adding a 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 800 m ) long section of new trail for general public use . 
 Both trails lead to spectacular views of the surrounding areas , but have inherent dangers as well . The thick andesite caps are heavily eroded , leaving tall crumbling columns near their edges . At least six people have fallen from the Table Rocks since 2006 , including a man from Central Point who tumbled through a rock shaft on Lower Table Rock to his death in May 2007 and was not found for over nineteen months . Another man from Murray , Utah fell 200 feet ( 61 m ) from Lower Table Rock and died in September 2009 . 
 = Washington State Route 7 = 
 State Route 7 ( SR 7 ) is a state highway in Lewis and Pierce counties , located in the U.S. state of Washington . The 58 @.@ 60 @-@ mile ( 94 @.@ 31 km ) long roadway begins at U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) in Morton and continues north to intersect several other state highways to Tacoma , where it ends at an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and I @-@ 705 . The road has several names , such as Second Street in Morton , the Mountain Highway in rural areas , Pacific Avenue in Spanaway , Parkland and Tacoma and 38th Street in Tacoma . Near the end of the highway there is a short freeway that has been proposed to be extended south parallel to an already existing railroad , owned by Tacoma Rail , which serves as the median of the short freeway . 
 The earliest road to use the current route of SR 7 first appeared in a 1900 map of the Tacoma area and has been part of the state highway system since 1909 , when the Alder @-@ Kosmos Road was added to the system as State Road 18 . State Road 18 became part of two branches of State Road 5 in 1923 and later branches of Primary State Highway 5 . During the 1964 highway renumbering , the branches became SR 7 . In 2002 , an auxiliary route that bypasses Tacoma , SR 704 , was established and construction started in 2008 to connect I @-@ 5 , Fort Lewis , McChord Air Force Base and SR 7 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 7 ( SR 7 ) begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) , a major east – west highway , in Morton . Traveling north as Second Street and paralleling the Morton – Tacoma ( Mountain Division ) route of Tacoma Rail , the street intersects Main Avenue , which continues west out of the city as SR 508 . After leaving Morton , the highway becomes the Mountain Highway and passes through a heavily forested canyon near Mount Rainier and parallel to the Tilton River and <unk> Creek . Bridging the Nisqually River , the highway leaves Lewis County and enters Pierce County . In Elbe , the roadway intersects SR 706 , which goes east to Mount Rainier National Park . Following the Nisqually River , which has become Alder Lake , and Tacoma Rail line , SR 161 branches off towards Eatonville and SR 702 travels west from the plains to McKenna . 
 Passing Elk Plain and suburban areas , the highway enters Spanaway near the Fort Lewis boundary where SR 7 intersects SR 507 , which continues southwest to Chehalis . The Mountain Highway becomes Pacific Avenue and enters Parkland . Shortly after 112th Street , the roadway has a partial cloverleaf interchange with SR 512 , which uses 108th Street South as two ramps . Leaving Parkland and entering Tacoma , Pacific Avenue turns east as 38th Street and then has another partial cloverleaf interchange with a short freeway and the proposed route of SR 7 , which is used by the roadway . The freeway was the busiest segment of the highway in 2007 , with an estimated daily average of 27 @,@ 000 motorists . The median of the freeway is the Tacoma Rail route and at the northern terminus is an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . SR 7 ends at the interchange , located near the Tacoma Dome , but continues north parallel to the railroad to a single @-@ point urban interchange with SR 509 as I @-@ 705 . 
 = = History = = 
 A 1900 map of the Tacoma area showed a roadway extending north from Spanaway to Tacoma that would later become SR 7 . In 1909 , the Alder @-@ Kosmos Road , numbered State Road 18 , was added to the state highway system and ran from Kosmos north through Morton and Elbe to Alder . The National Park Highway was created in 1913 and extended from the Pacific Ocean to Tacoma and south to Elbe , where it turned east into Mount Rainier National Park . Both highways were replaced by two branches of State Road 5 in 1923 , which traveled from Tacoma to Mount Rainier and Elbe to Chehalis . State Road 5 became Primary State Highway 5 ( PSH 5 ) during the creation of the Primary state highways in 1937 and the Tacoma – Mount Rainier branch remained the same , but the Elbe – Chehalis branch was shortened to Kosmos . 
 The Chicago , Milwaukee , St. Paul and Pacific Railroad started to parallel the route by 1951 between Tacoma and Morton . During the 1964 highway renumbering the two branches of PSH 5 became SR 7 . Between 1968 and 2008 , the Chicago , Milwaukee , St. Paul and Pacific Railroad transferred the railroad parallel to the highway to Tacoma Rail . In 2002 , a new auxiliary route of SR 7 , SR 704 was established to provide a bypass of Tacoma to provide direct connections between Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) , Fort Lewis , McChord Air Force Base and SR 7 in Spanaway . On July 30 , 2008 , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) had a groundbreaking ceremony to start construction of SR 704 , which has been predicted to be finished after 2017 . The segment of the highway between SR 507 in Spanaway to SR 512 in Parkland had a very high accident rate , so WSDOT added safety improvements to the roadway in 2007 . Between Morton and Spanaway , WSDOT is currently ( as of 2009 ) developing a route development plan to improve the roadway . The project is divided into three phases , the first phase was completed in 2006 and focused between Morton and Elbe and the second phase will be focused between Elbe and SR 702 while the third will focus between SR 702 to Spanaway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Walnuts & Rain = 
 " Walnuts & Rain " is the thirty @-@ first episode of the sixth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich , from an outline by Herpich , Adam Muto , Kent Osborne , Jack Pendarvis , and Pendleton Ward . The episode debuted on March 5 , 2015 on Cartoon Network , and guest stars Chris Isaak as a bear named Seven and Matt L. Jones as King Huge . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn and Jake stumble into two different holes and meet two different fates : Finn becomes the guest of the unstable King Huge ( voiced by Jones ) , who insists that Finn remain with him and stare at his idiosyncratic cuckoo clock ; whereas Jake meets Seven ( voiced by Isaak ) , a bear whose makeshift air raft has been falling down the hole for years . Eventually , it turns out that the hole Jake and Seven are falling through is the chimney to the kitchen where Finn is being held captive . As such , Jake is eventually able to save Finn . 
 " Walnuts & Rain " marked the first time that Herpich had solo @-@ storyboarded an episode since the third season episode " Thank You " . The episode was seen by 1 @.@ 68 million viewers , and received mixed reviews from critics ; while Andrew Tran of <unk> enjoyed the allegories in the episode , Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club somewhat critically compared " Walnuts & Rain " to episodes from the show 's first and second seasons . For his work on the episode , Herpich won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation ; this was the series 's third win in the category . For his work on this episode , Herpich was later nominated for an Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement , Storyboarding in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production in 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While wandering in the woods , Finn and Jake fall down two separate holes . Finn lands in the Kingdom of Huge , where he is greeted by its sovereign , King Huge . The king lavishes Finn with food and asks that he stay and watch the chiming of his cuckoo clock . However , it soon becomes apparent that King Huge is insane ; he demands that Finn remain and watch every time the clock chimes the hour . Meanwhile , Jake lands on the barge of a bear named Seven . According to Seven , the barge has been falling for years , and he warns Jake not to try and escape , lest he die . 
 Eventually , Finn has enough , and knocks the king 's clock from the wall . It crashes into the kingdom 's huge stove , knocking over a pot of water . The water puts out the fire , which causes the warm updraft going into the chimney to cease ; this updraft was actually holding Seven 's barge in stasis all of this time . The barge comes crashing down into the kingdom , and Jake uses his stretching powers to save Finn . Thence , Finn , Jake , and Seven escape . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Walnuts & Rain " was written and <unk> by Tom Herpich , from an outline by head Adventure Time writer Kent Osborne , series creator Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis , showrunner Adam Muto , and Herpich . Andres Salaff served as the episode 's supervising director , while the art direction was helmed by Nick Jennings . The episode marks Herpich 's first solo storyboard since season three 's ' Thank You " . Near the latter part of season six , Herpich and has storyboard partner Steve Wolfhard each had episode ideas that they wanted to work on . The two decided to temporarily dissolve their partnership and work on episodes individually ( Wolfhard would go on to create " Graybles 1000 + " ) . Herpich had been working on the outline for " Walnuts & Rain " on and off for several months before he finally storyboarded it , and he would later describe the episode as an " allegorical escape story " , similar to the season five episodes " Puhoy " and " Dungeon Train " . This episode guest stars musician Chris Isaak as Seven , and Matt L. Jones as King Huge . Jones had previously appeared in the first season episode " Memories of Boom Boom Mountain " voicing the crying Mountain . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Walnuts & Rain " first aired on March 5 , 2015 on Cartoon Network . The episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 68 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 24 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 0 @.@ 24 percent of all households aged 18 to 49 years old were watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely mixed . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and called it " disappointing " . Despite noting that it is " a totally serviceable episode of Adventure Time " , he argued that the episode felt too much like an episode from the show 's first or second seasons , when installments were often lacking in depth and a bit more uneven across the board . He noted that , " Tonight ’ s episode is for the kids . It ’ s simple and easy to follow , and doesn ’ t contain any unsettling imagery … but that also prevents it from being especially memorable . " Ultimately , he felt that the show 's returned fixation on Finn and Jake proved that the expansion of the show 's universe was " the best thing that could have happened to it . " 
 Andrew Tran of the website <unk> , on the other hand , reacted more positively to the episode . He felt that both King Huge and Seven were representative of a stagnation in mindset ; according to him , they are both stuck in their ways and unwilling to change . However , he notes that the two also differ substantially . Tran argues that King Huge has legions of slaves feeding him the richest of foods . He is comfortable , but unaccustomed to dealing with outsiders , which expresses itself as xenophobia . Seven , on the other hand , lives in abject poverty , and is much more welcoming of strangers . In the end , Seven escapes the episode unscathed , and according to Tran , the moral of the episode is that " the bright side of a crap situation is that [ the situation ] pushes rather than restricts , enriches rather than <unk> . " 
 For his work on this episode , Herpich won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation , making it the series 's third win in this category . Herpich was later nominated for an Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement , Storyboarding in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production in 2016 . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Queer ( song ) = 
 " Queer " is a song written and produced by alternative rock band Garbage for the band 's self @-@ titled debut album . The song started as a demo during sessions between band members Butch Vig , Duke Erikson and Steve Marker , and had its composition finished after singer Shirley Manson joined the band . Manson rewrote the sexualized lyrics to be more ambiguous , and rearranged the song into a subdued trip hop and rock crossover structure . 
 In 1995 , " Queer " was issued as the band 's fourth single in the United Kingdom and second internationally . The song quickly became a modern rock success for the fledgling band , with positive reviews from music journalists , and becoming their first top 20 hit in both the UK Singles Chart and Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . It also earned attention with its music video by Stéphane Sednaoui , which featured Manson detaining , stripping and shaving a man from a first @-@ person perspective . The video earned much airplay on MTV and was nominated for Breakthrough Video at the 1996 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Queer " began as a rough demo around January 1994 , recorded during informal studio sessions between Butch Vig , Duke Erikson and Steve Marker in Marker 's home basement recording studio in Madison , Wisconsin . The band had been jamming using an ADAT eight @-@ track , <unk> samplers , and a small drum kit . The band had written around five songs that they felt were pretentious and lyrically simple and literal . They did not want Erikson to sing , even though he was a competent singer , because they wanted to avoid sounding like their previous band Spooner . Vig and Marker were uncomfortable with their vocals so tended to bury them deep in the mix or distort them with effects ; on " Queer " , Vig recorded a " scratch vocal " consisting of him screaming his way through . The recorded work was later discarded , which Vig explained was because the trio discovered that the musical experiments they were attempting " [ don 't ] work when you 're trying to write a song and put it in a context that works " . Vig 's inspiration for " Queer " came from a novel he had read about " about this woman who was hired to go and make this guy 's son a ' man ' . The kid is missing a few marbles . But then he realizes that the women [ sic ] who came to his room is also fucking his father . " 
 After Marker saw Shirley Manson 's group Angelfish on 120 Minutes , the band invited her to Vig and Marker 's Smart Studios to sing on a couple of songs . One of the compositions was " Queer " , whose incomplete lyrics forced Manson to ad @-@ lib in an audition that was described as " dreadful " . The singer afterwards returned to Angelfish , which folded shortly later . Manson eventually returned to Smart for a successful second audition and then began working on the songs Vig , Marker and Erikson had created . Manson rewrote " Queer " into a trip hop arrangement and added ambiguous lyrics that allowed the listener to make up their own mind about what the song was about . She also re @-@ sang the " Queer " vocal in an understated style . It was then that the band knew that Garbage was going to work . 
 Garbage incorporated a sample of the drumline from Australian band Single Gun Theory 's track " Man of Straw " on " Queer " ; this loop was layered with an additional drum part performed by Madison percussionist Clyde Stubblefield , who was known for being the most sampled drummer in history for his uncredited part on James Brown 's " Funky Drummer " . Vig opted to hire Stubblefield to play on the record rather than sample him as " you don 't use a sample when the genius who played the sample lives down the street from you " , and the drummer also contributed to album cut " Not My Idea " . Bass guitar parts were completed by Milwaukee session bassist Mike Kashou . The band wanted to sample a clarinet part from a Frank Sinatra record , but the licensing for the sample would have been prohibitively expensive . <unk> over some options , such as having a session musician interpolate the part themselves still led to having to pay a large royalties . The idea was dropped . The band still liked the idea of using a clarinet , and recorded a part by Les <unk> on the final mix . 
 Manson later explained , " It 's not , as you might think , to do with being gay , but tolerance . My granny has the expression ' Or 's queer , except thee and me , and sometimes even thee 's queer ' , that is that you think you are normal and the rest of the world is freaky , but we 're all equally to blame " . Garbage did not write the song to particularly appeal to the gay community , however Erikson stated : " As musicians , we 're totally open to [ the song 's gay appeal ] . There 's been enough exposure to gay issues in the mainstream media that people are finally ready to deal with it . Even if it 's something controversial , people are still beginning to open up " . Erikson added : " The song isn 't about sex at all , it 's about the loss of innocence " . 
 = = Single release = = 
 Almo Sounds released " Queer " as the band 's second single to alternative radio in the United States at the end of August 1995 , upfront of August 15 North American release date of Garbage . The song debuted at the end of September on the Modern Rock Tracks chart at number 30 . The following week , Garbage debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 193 , having spent the previous four weeks as a rising Heatseekers title . At the beginning of October , " Queer " debuted at number 62 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart , peaking a week later at number 57 . In mid @-@ November , remixes of " Queer " were sent to clubs . " Queer " peaked at 12th on the Modern Rock chart in its ninth week , but did not earn enough airplay to chart in the Billboard Hot 100 . The song eventually finished its run on the Modern Rock chart in December 1995 , for a total of 14 weeks . 
 On October 23 , 1995 , " Queer " was issued as the band 's second single in Australia and New Zealand . White issued a three @-@ track CD single and cassette single backed with two newly recorded tracks , " Girl Don 't Come " and " Sleep " , which had been recorded for the UK release of " Only Happy When It Rains " . " Queer " peaked at number 55 in Australia , spending twelve weeks on the ARIA top 100 singles chart . In New Zealand , " Queer " debuted on the RIANZ charts at number 45 at the start of November , rising to a number 37 peak three weeks later . Across Europe , " Queer " was issued by BMG in a similarly configured CD single ; a three @-@ track release backed with " Girl Don 't Come " and " Sleep " . In Belgium 's Wallonia @-@ region , " Queer " peaked at number 24 at the end of January 1996 . " Queer " debuted and peaked at 7th in Iceland the following month . In Spain , " Queer " peaked at number 33 on the airplay chart . In April 1996 , performed " Queer " live on French television show <unk> Part <unk> and headlined a show at the Élysée Montmartre in Paris ; BMG France released a three @-@ track CD single of " Queer " featuring " Trip My Wire " and the Rabbit in the Moon remix . 
 Initially , Mushroom Records had scheduled " Queer " to be the lead single for the UK release of the debut album Garbage , matching the international single release strategy . At last minute , it was decided to release " Only Happy When It Rains " upfront of the album , with " Queer " rescheduled to later in 1995 to coincide with the band 's first UK live show . " Queer " was quickly picked up by radio , and was B @-@ listed by Radio One , whose breakfast slot DJ Chris Evans championed it as his " Single of the Week " , and playlisted by Virgin Radio . " Queer " reached number 35 on the airplay chart . Mushroom issued the single on a limited edition 7 " vinyl and a gold and silver CD single set on November 20 , 1995 . Each CD single was backed with a newly recorded track ; " Trip My Wire " on the first and a cover version of The Jam 's " Butterfly Collector " on the second ( the cover later featured in The Jam compilation album Fire and Skill ) . Four remixes of the title track were spread out across the CDs , with one also appearing on the flipside of the vinyl . Early indications showed that the single had a midweek position of 10 , however at the end of its first week on @-@ sale , " Queer " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 13 . That week , Garbage made a live appearance to perform the single on Top of The Pops , and performed both " Queer " and " Only Happy When it Rains " on MTV 's Most Wanted . 
 = = = Collector 's format = = = 
 As the band had received significant attention from the special packaging of their first three releases , " Queer " was also released in this manner . Mushroom 's product manager had a longer time to design the package than the other singles ; this was a result of " Queer " being held back three months so that " Only Happy When It Rains " could launch the album . Garbage 's original suggestion for " Queer " was to create a jade velvet box , but Mushroom vetoed the idea over the cost . The label sourced a plastics company to create the case , which was made from injection @-@ molded polystyrene , similar to the process of manufacturing jewel cases . The company charged Mushroom £ 10 @,@ 000 to have the mould created . The end product was finished with frosted effect for the " G " logo , which was stickered , and within placed the vinyl record in a card picture sleeve ; this cost Mushroom £ 2 @.@ 21 per unit ( a loss of <unk> for each sale ) . This special single had only 5 @,@ 000 copies issued . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon both the release of Garbage and the release of " Queer " as a single , the song received a positive reception from music journalists . Leo Finlay , in a Music Week article highlighting the campaign for the debut album 's release wrote , " ' Queer ' is eerily reminiscent of Magazine 's stranger moments " . A reviewer for NME wrote that the single was " an ode to recognising and tolerating those mis @-@ <unk> ones among us " , and when reviewing the album , their own Shannon O 'Connell wrote , " there is a bit of Pat Benatar in [ this songs ] back @-@ alley swagger " . A reviewer for VOX described " Queer " as " Voice of the Beehive roughing up L7 " , Jackie <unk> of Hot Press wrote that the song was " a slinky work @-@ out against a restrained work @-@ to @-@ rule industrial backing " , and the publication later made it their Single of the Fortnight , describing it as " Almost indecently brilliant . There 's an intelligence at work here in the lyrics and in the music which makes " Queer " a unique proposition , and Garbage utterly indispensable " . A writer for Melody Maker wrote that " Queer " was " sleek , cultivated perversion ... sinister and menacing " , while Raw 's review described it as " brilliant , Seductive and slow @-@ burning " , and the single reviewer for NME considered that Manson 's performance " elevates a sing @-@ song shuffle into a lullaby to sexual non @-@ conformity " . Rolling Stone described the song as a " more roundly shaped tune orchestrated with this same love of junk and command of finesse . " Kerrang ! rated " Queer " as their Single of the Week , stating " an incredible knee @-@ trembling fuck tune ... the dirtiest pop tune you 'll hear all year . [ You 'll be ] sucked into dark satin sexiness and you 'll never want to leave . <unk> decadent and utterly fabulous " ; 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 " Queer " was the first Garbage single to include remixes as a commercial b @-@ side ; Mushroom spread four across the UK formats . These were completed by producers Adrian Sherwood , Danny Saber , Depeche Mode 's Martin Gore and Florida @-@ based group Rabbit in the Moon . In 2007 , the <unk> mix by Rabbit in the Moon was remastered and included on the limited edition of greatest hits collection Absolute Garbage . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Queer " directed by Stéphane Sednaoui for Propaganda Films and was filmed in July 1995 in Los Angeles . <unk> 's video concept developed from his own personal experience of being " shredded into pieces " by a beautiful woman . Garbage loved his storyboard for " Queer " , feeling it matched the ambiguous nature of the song . Manson had chosen Sednaoui as director after she saw the " Big Time Sensuality " music video he directed for Björk , and later said that Sednaoui " doesn 't just take an idea and apply it to different artists , he seems to be able to figure out where the artist is coming from and make the photographs and the videos unique to that group . " 
 The black and white storyline of the video saw a young male 's first person perspective of exiting an elevator onto a Los Angeles street and meeting Manson . She coyly entices him to follow her to her home where the men from Garbage are waiting . They detain him inside , forcing him up onto the second @-@ level of the house , where Manson throws him to the floor , strips him of his clothing and blinds him with gaffer tape . He recovers to find Manson shaving his head , before she drags him outside by his legs . He is then seen strangely happy , and in full colour , leaving the street . 
 Sednaoui operated the camera for the whole shoot . To capture the victim 's struggle , Sednaoui positioned the camera at ground @-@ level facing upwards towards Garbage , who were standing on a rotating platform . To suggest the victim was almost hallucinating , strobe lighting was combined with the rotation of the platform , however the effect caused the band to suffer from vertigo after a number of takes . Manson later claimed that the video helped establish her group ; " He really defined for us who we were visually . Stéphane was able to look at the band and listen to the music and figure out what was the perfect visual partner for the band . People think we 're a very stylish band , and it 's all to do with him " . She added , " I 'm really proud of " Queer " , I think it 's one of our best videos . " 
 The " Queer " video premiered on North American networks on August 14 , 1995 ; where it was given heavy support by MTV , who certified it a Buzz Clip . MTV requested an edit to obscure the shot of Manson blinding the video 's protagonist before <unk> it . The music video for " Queer " was nominated in the Breakthrough Video category at the 1996 MTV Video Music Awards , losing to Smashing Pumpkins ' " Tonight , Tonight " . The silver dress Manson wore in the video was later donated to the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas , Nevada for indefinite display . 
 The " Queer " video was first commercially released , accompanied with out @-@ take footage from the shoot , on 1996 's Garbage Video VHS and Video @-@ CD . A remastered version was included on Garbage 's 2007 greatest hits DVD Absolute Garbage and made available as a digital download via online music services the same year . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Comprehensive charts = = 
 = Adem Jashari = 
 Adem Jashari ( 28 November 1955 – 7 March 1998 ) was one of the founders of the Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) , a Kosovo Albanian separatist organization which fought for the secession of Kosovo from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia during the 1990s . 
 Beginning in 1991 , Jashari participated in attacks against the Serbian police before travelling to Albania to receive military training . Arrested in 1993 , he was released at the behest of the Albanian Army and later returned to Kosovo , where he continued launching attacks against the Yugoslav establishment . In July 1997 , he was convicted of terrorism in absentia by a Yugoslav court . After several unsuccessful attempts to capture or kill him , Serbian police launched an attack against Jashari 's home in Prekaz in March 1998 . The battle that followed resulted in the deaths of 58 members of Jashari 's family , including that of Jashari and his wife and son . 
 Seen as the " father of the KLA " , Jashari is considered a symbol of Kosovan independence by ethnic Albanians . He was posthumously awarded with the title " Hero of Kosovo " following the disputed territory 's declaration of independence in 2008 . The National Theatre in Prishtina and Prishtina International Airport have been named after him . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Adem Shaban Jashari was born in the village of Prekaz , in the <unk> region of the Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo , on 28 November 1955 . Descended from Kosovo Albanian guerrillas who had fought Yugoslav forces decades prior , he was raised on Albanian war stories and was rarely seen without a gun . According to the journalist Tim Judah , Jashari " hated the Serbs , and although he was one of the KLA ’ s early recruits , he was no ideological guerrilla . " Another source recounted : “ He liked to get drunk and go out and shoot Serbs . ” 
 = = = Guerrilla activities = = = 
 <unk> is a hilly region in central Kosovo inhabited almost exclusively by Kosovo Albanians . Prior to the Kosovo War , the government of Yugoslavia considered it " the hotbed of Albanian terrorism . " Jashari was an illiterate farmer . He participated in an armed uprising against Serbian authorities which had erupted in the region in 1991 ( while still all part of SFR Yugoslavia ) . During this period , an Albanian irredentist organization that came to be known as the Kosovo Liberation Army first emerged . 
 From 1991 to 1992 , Jashari and about 100 other ethnic Albanians wishing to fight for the independence of Kosovo underwent military training in the municipality of Labinot @-@ Mal in Albania . Afterwards , Jashari and other ethnic Albanians committed several acts of sabotage aimed at the Serbian administrative apparatus in Kosovo . Attempting to capture or kill him , Serbian police surrounded Jashari and his older brother , <unk> , at their home in Prekaz on 30 December 1991 . In the ensuing siege , large numbers of Kosovo Albanians flocked to Prekaz , pressuring the police to withdraw from the village . 
 While in Albania , he was arrested in 1993 by the government of Sali Berisha and sent to jail in Tirana before being released alongside other Kosovo Albanian militants at the demand of the Albanian Army . With the Yugoslav forces now considering Prekaz a " no @-@ go " area , Jashari launched several attacks over the next several years . These targeted the Yugoslav Army ( VJ ) and Serbian police in Kosovo . Jashari was convicted of terrorism in absentia by a Yugoslav court on 11 July 1997 . Human Rights Watch subsequently described the trial , in which fourteen other Kosovo Albanians were also convicted , as " [ failing ] to conform to international standards . " Pursuing Jashari for the murder of a Serb policeman , Yugoslav forces again attempted to assault the Jashari compound in Prekaz on 22 January 1998 . With Jashari not present , thousands of Kosovo Albanians descended on Prekaz and again succeeded in pushing the Serbs out of the village and its surroundings . The next month , a small unit of the KLA ambushed Serbian policemen . Four Serbs were killed and two were injured in the ensuing clashes . At dawn on 5 March 1998 , the KLA launched an attack against a police patrol in Prekaz . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In response to this attack , the Yugoslavs organized a " full @-@ scale revenge mission " involving tanks , APCs and helicopters . They were backed up by artillery from a nearby ammunition factory . With the intention of " eliminating the suspects and their families , " the police attacked villages that had been identified as KLA strongholds , including <unk> and <unk> . Human Rights Watch noted that " special police forces attacked without warning , firing indiscriminately at women , children and other noncombatants . " KLA members and their families subsequently fled to Jashari 's compound . Here , the police invited Jashari to surrender , giving him a deadline of two hours in which to respond . During this period , a number of families left the compound . Jashari remained , ordering his family members to stay inside and telling his militants to resist to the last man . 
 Once the two @-@ hour deadline had expired , the two sides began exchanging gunfire . In one of the houses , where most of Jashari 's extended family had gathered , a mortar shell fell in through the roof , causing many deaths . After a two or three @-@ day siege , the police captured the Jashari compound . Once inside , they discovered that Jashari and his brother <unk> had been killed . Also killed were Jashari 's wife , <unk> , and his thirteen @-@ year @-@ old son , <unk> . Overall , approximately fifty @-@ eight Kosovo Albanians were killed in the attack , including eighteen women and ten children under the age of sixteen . Goran <unk> , a major in the Serbian Interior Ministry , said that " [ Jashari ] used women , children and the elderly as hostages . " Speaking of the attack , Yugoslav General Nebojša <unk> stated that it was " a normal policing action against a well @-@ known criminal . It was successful . The other details I don 't remember . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The deaths of Jashari and his family resulted in an international backlash against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . As news of the killings spread , armed Kosovo Albanian militias emerged throughout Kosovo , seeking to avenge Jashari 's death as Albanians flocked to join the KLA . 
 Soon after the attack against Prekaz , 46 bodies were taken to a hospital morgue in Prishtina on 7 March before being returned to <unk> the next day . There , they were placed inside a warehouse located on the outskirts of town . Photographs taken during this time revealed that Jashari had received a bullet wound to the neck . On 9 March , the police publicly stated that they would themselves bury the bodies of those killed if they were not quickly claimed and buried by family members . The next day , the police dug a large grave near Donji Prekaz and buried the bodies of fifty @-@ six people , ten of whom could not be identified . On 11 March , the bodies were disinterred by relatives and reburied in accordance with Islamic tradition on a field known as the " field of peace " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Dubbed the " Legendary Commander " ( Albanian : <unk> <unk> ) by Albanians , Jashari is regarded by many in Kosovo as being the " father of the KLA " . Portraits of him carrying an automatic weapon often adorn the walls of homes inhabited by ethnic Albanians . Considered a symbol of independence by Kosovo Albanians , the anniversary of Jashari 's death is annually commemorated in Kosovo and his home has since been transformed into a shrine . The field where he and his family were buried has since become a place of pilgrimage for Kosovo Albanians , and several authors have equated Jashari with Albanian national hero George Kastrioti Skanderbeg as well as Albanian <unk> rebels from the past . Following Kosovo 's declaration of independence in 2008 , Jashari was posthumously awarded the title " Hero of Kosovo " for his role in the Kosovo War . The football stadium in Mitrovica , the National Theatre in Prishtina and Prishtina International Airport have also been named after him . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Chelsea Bridge = 
 Chelsea Bridge is a bridge over the River Thames in west London , connecting Chelsea on the north bank to Battersea on the south bank . There have been two Chelsea Bridges , on the site of what was an ancient ford . 
 The first Chelsea Bridge was proposed in the 1840s as part of a major development of marshlands on the south bank of the Thames into the new Battersea Park . It was a suspension bridge intended to provide convenient access from the densely populated north bank to the new park . Although built and operated by the government , tolls were charged initially in an effort to recoup the cost of the bridge . Work on the nearby Chelsea Embankment delayed construction and so the bridge , initially called Victoria Bridge , did not open until 1858 . Although well @-@ received architecturally , as a toll bridge it was unpopular with the public , and Parliament felt obliged to make it toll @-@ free on Sundays . The bridge was less of a commercial success than had been anticipated , partly because of competition from the newly built Albert Bridge nearby . It was acquired by the Metropolitan Board of Works in 1877 , and the tolls were abolished in 1879 . 
 The bridge was narrow and structurally unsound , leading the authorities to rename it Chelsea Bridge to avoid the Royal Family 's association with a potential collapse . In 1926 it was proposed that the old bridge be rebuilt or replaced , due to the increased volume of users from population growth , and the introduction of the automobile . It was demolished during 1934 – 1937 , and replaced by the current structure , which opened in 1937 . 
 The new bridge was the first self @-@ anchored suspension bridge in Britain , and was built entirely with materials sourced from within the British Empire . During the early 1950s it became popular with motorcyclists , who staged regular races across the bridge . One such meeting in 1970 erupted into violence , resulting in the death of one man and the imprisonment of 20 others . Chelsea Bridge is floodlit from below during the hours of darkness , when the towers and cables are illuminated by 936 feet ( 285 m ) of light @-@ emitting diodes . In 2008 it achieved Grade II listed status . In 2004 a smaller bridge , Battersea Footbridge , was opened beneath the southern span , carrying the Thames Path beneath the main bridge . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Red House Inn was an isolated inn on the south bank of the River Thames in the marshlands by Battersea fields , about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of the developed street of the prosperous farming village of Battersea . Not on any major road , its isolation and lack of any police presence made it a popular destination for visitors from London and Westminster since the 16th century , who would travel to the Red House by wherry , attracted by Sunday dog fighting , bare @-@ knuckle boxing bouts and illegal horse racing . Because of its lawless nature , Battersea Fields was also a popular area for duelling , and was the venue for the 1829 duel between the then Prime Minister the Duke of Wellington and the Earl of Winchilsea . 
 The town of Chelsea , on the north bank of the Thames about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west of Westminster , was an important industrial centre . Although by the 19th century its role as the centre of the British porcelain industry had been overtaken by the West Midlands , its riverside location and good roads made it an important centre for the manufacture of goods to serve the nearby and rapidly growing London . 
 The Chelsea Waterworks Company occupied a site on the north bank of the Thames opposite the Red House Inn . Founded in 1723 , the company pumped water from the Thames to reservoirs around Westminster through a network of hollow elm trunks . As London spread westwards , the former farmland to the west became increasingly populated , and the Thames became seriously polluted with sewage and animal carcasses . In 1852 Parliament banned water from being taken from the Thames downstream of Teddington , forcing the Chelsea Waterworks Company to move upstream to Seething Wells . 
 Since 1771 , Battersea and Chelsea had been linked by the modest wooden Battersea Bridge . As London grew following the advent of the railways , Chelsea began to become congested , and in 1842 the Commission of Woods , Forests , and Land Revenues recommended the building of an embankment at Chelsea to free new land for development , and proposed the building of a new bridge downstream of Battersea Bridge and the replacement of Battersea Bridge with a more modern structure . 
 = = = Battersea Park = = = 
 In the early 1840s Thomas Cubitt and James Pennethorne had proposed a plan to use 150 @,@ 000 tons of rocks and earth from the excavation of the Royal Victoria Dock to infill the marshy Battersea Fields and create a large public park to serve the growing population of Chelsea . In 1846 the Commissioners of Woods and Forests purchased the Red House Inn and 200 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 km2 ) of surrounding land , and work began on the development that would become Battersea Park . It was expected that with the opening of the park the volume of cross river traffic would increase significantly , putting further strain on the dilapidated Battersea Bridge . 
 Consequently , in 1846 an Act of Parliament authorised the building of a new toll bridge on the site of an ancient ford exactly one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) downstream of Battersea Bridge . The approach road on the southern side was to run along the side of the new park , while that on the northern side was to run from Sloane Square , through the former Chelsea Waterworks site , to the new bridge . Although previous toll bridges in the area had been built and operated by private companies , the new bridge was to be built and operated by the government , under the control of the Metropolitan Improvement Commission , despite protests in Parliament from Radicals objecting to the Government profiting from a toll @-@ paying bridge . It was intended that the bridge would be made toll @-@ free once the costs of building it had been recouped . 
 = = Victoria Bridge ( Old Chelsea Bridge ) = = 
 Engineer Thomas Page was appointed to build the bridge , and presented the Commission with several potential designs , including a seven @-@ span stone bridge , a five @-@ span cast iron arch bridge , and a suspension bridge . The Commission selected the suspension bridge design , and work began in 1851 on the new bridge , to be called the Victoria Bridge . 
 = = = Design and construction = = = 
 Page 's design was typical of suspension bridges of the period , and consisted of a wrought iron deck and four 97 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) cast iron towers supporting chains , which in turn supported the weight of the deck . The towers rested on a pair of timber and cast iron piers . The towers passed through the deck , meaning that between the towers the road was seven feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) narrower than on the rest of the bridge . Although work had begun in 1851 delays in the closure of the Chelsea Waterworks , which only completed its relocation to Seething Wells in 1856 , caused lengthy delays to the project , and the Edinburgh @-@ made ironwork was only transported to the site in 1856 . 
 Victoria Bridge was 703 feet ( 214 m ) long with a central span of 333 feet ( 101 m ) , and the roadway was 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) wide with a 7 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) footpath on either side , making a total width of 47 feet ( 14 m ) . Large lamps were set at the tops of the four towers , which were only to be lit when Queen Victoria was spending the night in London . The central span was inscribed with the date of construction and the words " Gloria Deo in Excelsis " ( " Glory to God in the Highest " ) . It took seven years to build , at a total cost of £ 90 @,@ 000 ( about £ 8 @.@ 17 million in 2016 ) . The controversial tolls were collected from octagonal stone tollhouses at each end of the bridge . 
 As with the earlier construction of nearby Battersea Bridge , during excavations workers found large quantities of Roman and Celtic weapons and skeletons in the riverbed , leading many historians to conclude that the area was the site of Julius Caesar 's crossing of the Thames during the 54 BC invasion of Britain . The most significant item found was the Celtic La Tène style bronze and enamel Battersea Shield , one of the most important pieces of Celtic military equipment found in Britain , recovered from the riverbed during dredging for the piers . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 On 31 March 1858 Queen Victoria , accompanied by two of her daughters and en route to the formal opening of Battersea Park , crossed the new bridge and declared it officially open , naming it the Victoria Bridge ; it was opened to the public three days later , on 3 April 1858 . The design met with great critical acclaim , particularly from the Illustrated London News . 
 Shortly after its opening , concerns were raised about the bridge 's safety . Following an inspection by John Hawkshaw and Edwin Clark in 1861 , an additional support chain was added on each side . Despite the strengthening there were still concerns about its soundness , and a weight limit of 5 tons was imposed . At the same time , the name was changed from Victoria Bridge to Chelsea Bridge , as the government was concerned about the reliability of suspension bridges and did not want a potential collapse to be associated with the Queen . 
 Although reasonably well used , it was unpopular with the public , who objected to being obliged to pay tolls to use it . On 4 July 1857 , almost a year before the bridge 's opening , a demonstration against the tolls attracted 6 @,@ 000 residents . Concerns were raised in Parliament that poorer industrial workers in Chelsea , which had no large parks of its own , would be unable to afford to use the new park in Battersea . Bowing to public pressure , shortly after the bridge opened Parliament declared it free to use for pedestrians on Sundays , and in 1875 it was also made toll @-@ free on public holidays . Additionally , because the main lights were only turned on when Queen Victoria was staying in London , it was poorly used at night . Despite this , the new Battersea Park was extremely popular , particularly the sporting facilities ; on 9 January 1864 the park staged the world 's first official game of association football . 
 = = = Abolition of tolls = = = 
 In 1873 the privately owned Albert Bridge , between Chelsea and Battersea bridges , opened . Although Albert Bridge was not as successful as intended at luring customers from Chelsea Bridge and soon found itself in serious financial difficulties , it nonetheless caused a sharp drop in usage of Chelsea Bridge . In 1877 the Metropolis Toll Bridges Act was passed , which allowed the Metropolitan Board of Works ( MBW ) to buy all London bridges between Hammersmith and Waterloo bridges and free them from tolls . Ownership of Chelsea Bridge was transferred to the MBW in 1877 at a cost of £ 75 @,@ 000 ( about £ 5 @.@ 99 million in 2016 ) , and on 24 May 1879 Chelsea Bridge , Battersea Bridge and Albert Bridge were declared toll free by the Prince of Wales in a brief ceremony , after which a parade of Chelsea Pensioners marched across the bridge to Battersea Park . 
 By the early 20th century , Chelsea Bridge was in poor condition . It was unable to carry the increasing volume of traffic caused by the growth of London and the increasing popularity of the automobile ; between 1914 and 1929 use of the bridge almost doubled from 6 @,@ 500 to 12 @,@ 600 vehicles per day . In addition , parts of its structure were beginning to work loose , and in 1922 the gilded finials on the towers had to be removed because of concerns that they would fall off . Architectural opinion had turned heavily against Victorian styles and Chelsea Bridge was now deeply unpopular with architects ; former President of the Royal Institute of British Architects Reginald Blomfield spoke vehemently against its design in 1921 , and there were few people supporting the preservation of the old bridge . In 1926 the Royal Commission on Cross @-@ river Traffic recommended that Chelsea Bridge be rebuilt or replaced . 
 = = New Chelsea Bridge = = 
 In 1931 the London County Council ( LCC ) proposed demolishing Chelsea Bridge and replacing it with a modern six @-@ lane bridge at a cost of £ 695 @,@ 000 ( about £ 42 @.@ 6 million in 2016 ) . Because of the economic crisis of the Great Depression the Ministry of Transport refused to fund the project and the LCC was unable to raise the funds elsewhere . However , in an effort to boost employment in the Battersea area , which had suffered badly in the depression , the Ministry of Transport agreed to underwrite 60 % of the costs of a cheaper four @-@ lane bridge costing £ 365 @,@ 000 ( about £ 22 @.@ 4 million in 2016 ) , on condition that all materials used in the building of the bridge be sourced from within the British Empire . 
 = = = Design and construction = = = 
 In 1934 a temporary footbridge which had previously been used during rebuilding works on Lambeth Bridge was moved into place alongside Chelsea Bridge , and demolition began . The new bridge , also called Chelsea Bridge , was designed by LCC architects G. Topham Forrest and E. P. Wheeler and built by Holloway Brothers ( London ) . Much wider than the older bridge at 64 feet ( 20 m ) wide , it has a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) wide roadway and two 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide pavements cantilevered out from the sides of the bridge . Uniquely in London , Chelsea Bridge is a self @-@ anchored suspension bridge , the first of the type to be built in Britain . The horizontal stresses are absorbed by stiffening girders in the deck itself and the suspension cables are not anchored to the ground , relieving stress on the abutments which are built on soft and unstable London clay . The piers of the new bridge were built on the site of the old bridge 's piers , and are built of concrete , faced with granite above the low @-@ water point . Each side of the bridge has a single suspension cable , each made up of 37 17 ⁄ 8 @-@ inch ( <unk> ) diameter wire ropes bundled to form a hexagonal cable . As was agreed with the Ministry of Transport , all materials used in the bridge came from the British Empire ; the steel came from Scotland and Yorkshire , the granite of the piers from Aberdeen and Cornwall , the timbers of the deck from British Columbia and the asphalt of the roadway from Trinidad . 
 Because the self @-@ anchored structure relies on the roadway itself to absorb stresses , the suspension cables could not be installed until the roadway was built ; however , until the cables were in place the roadway could not be supported . To resolve this problem , Topham had the roadway built in sections , supported on very tall barges . The barges were floated into place at low tide , and the rising tide was used to lift the sections above the height of the piers . As the tide ebbed , the roadway dropped into place . 
 The recently built Battersea Power Station then dominated most views of the area , so it was decided that the bridge 's appearance was unimportant . Consequently , in contrast to the heavily ornamented 1858 bridge , the new bridge has a starkly utilitarian design and the only ornamentation consists of two ornamental lamp posts at each entrance . Each features a gilded galleon on top of a coat of arms . The outward facing sides of all four posts show the LCC coat of arms of the Lion of England , St George 's Cross and the <unk> wavy lines representing the Thames ; the inward faces on the south side show the dove of peace of the Metropolitan Borough of Battersea , that on the northwest corner shows the winged bull , lion , boars ' heads and stag of the Metropolitan Borough of Chelsea , and that on the northeast corner the portcullis and Tudor roses of the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster . 
 The new bridge was completed five months ahead of schedule and within the £ 365 @,@ 000 budget . It was opened on 6 May 1937 by the Prime Minister of Canada , William Lyon Mackenzie King , who was in London for the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth . 
 = = = Temporary wartime bridge = = = 
 Two years after the bridge 's opening the Second World War broke out . Because of their close proximity to Chelsea Barracks it was expected that enemy bombers would target the three road bridges in the area , and a temporary bridge was built parallel to Chelsea Bridge . As with the four other temporary Thames bridges built in this period , it was built of steel girders supported by wooden stakes ; however , despite its flimsy appearance it was a sturdy structure , capable of supporting tanks and other heavy military equipment . As it turned out , no enemy action took place in the area , and all three bridges survived the war undamaged . The temporary bridge was dismantled in 1945 . 
 = = = Motorcycle gangs = = = 
 Beginning in the 1950s Chelsea Bridge became a favourite meeting place for motorcyclists , who would race across the bridge on Friday nights . On 17 October 1970 a serious confrontation took place on Chelsea Bridge between the Essex and Chelsea chapters of the Hells Angels , and rival motorcycle gangs the Road Rats , Nightingales , Windsor Angels and Jokers . Around 50 people took part in the fight ; weapons used included motorcycle chains , flick knives and at least one spiked flail . One member of the Jokers was shot with a sawn @-@ off shotgun and fatally wounded , and 20 of those present were sentenced to between one and twelve years imprisonment . 
 = = Present @-@ day = = 
 In the 1970s Chelsea Bridge was painted bright red and white , prompting a number of complaints from Chelsea F.C. fans that Chelsea Bridge had been painted in Arsenal colours . In 2007 it was redecorated in a less controversial red , blue and white colour scheme . Chelsea Bridge is now floodlit from beneath at night and 936 feet ( 285 m ) of light @-@ emitting diodes strung along the towers and suspension chains , intended to complement the illuminations of the nearby Albert Bridge . Although motorcyclists still meet on the bridge , following complaints from residents about the noise their racing has been curtailed . 
 Chelsea Bridge was declared a Grade II listed structure in 2008 , providing protection to preserve its character from further alteration . Battersea Park still retains Cubitt and Pennethorne 's original layout and features , including a riverfront promenade , a formal avenue through the centre of the park and multiple animal enclosures . 
 On the eastern side of the bridge at the southern end a major new residential development of 600 homes called Chelsea Bridge Wharf has been built , as part of long term plans to regenerate the long @-@ derelict former industrial sites around Battersea Power Station . 
 = = = Battersea Footbridge = = = 
 To link the new developments around Battersea Power Station to Battersea Park , in 2004 a new curved footbridge was built beneath the southern end of Chelsea Bridge . The footbridge was built offsite in four sections , transported by road to the King George V Dock where it was assembled , and the completed structure floated down the river and hoisted into position . It is planned that once the riverfront in the area has been opened to the public , following the completion of the rebuilding of Battersea Power Station into a commercial development , the new bridge will form part of the Thames Path . The new bridge curves out from the bank , overhanging the river bank by 33 feet ( 10 m ) , and cost £ 600 @,@ 000 to build . 
 = = = <unk> Cycle Superhighway = = = 
 Chelsea Bridge is now a major component of the <unk> Cycle Superhighway from Wandsworth to Westminster , with a mandatory blue cycle lane painted in both directions on the bridge . However , the cycle lanes do not cover the whole length of the bridge , forcing cyclists to ride in traffic when entering the bridge from Chelsea . 
 = Duino Elegies = 
 The Duino Elegies ( German : <unk> <unk> ) are a collection of ten elegies written by the Bohemian @-@ Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke ( 1875 – 1926 ) . Rilke , who is " widely recognized as one of the most lyrically intense German @-@ language poets , " began writing the elegies in 1912 while a guest of Princess Marie von Thurn und Taxis ( 1855 – 1934 ) at Duino Castle , near Trieste on the Adriatic Sea . The poems , 859 lines long in total , were dedicated to the Princess upon their publication in 1923 . During this ten @-@ year period , the elegies languished incomplete for long stretches of time as Rilke suffered frequently from severe depression — some of which was caused by the events of World War I and being conscripted into military service . Aside from brief episodes of writing in 1913 and 1915 , Rilke did not return to the work until a few years after the war ended . With a sudden , renewed inspiration — writing in a frantic pace he described as a " boundless storm , a hurricane of the spirit " — he completed the collection in February 1922 while staying at Château de Muzot in <unk> , in Switzerland 's Rhone Valley . After their publication in 1923 and Rilke 's death in 1926 , the Duino Elegies were quickly recognized by critics and scholars as his most important work . 
 The Duino Elegies are intensely religious , mystical poems that weigh beauty and existential suffering . The poems employ a rich symbolism of angels and salvation but not in keeping with typical Christian interpretations . Rilke begins the first elegy in an invocation of philosophical despair , asking : " Who , if I cried out , would hear me among the hierarchies of angels ? " ( Wer , wenn ich <unk> , <unk> mich denn aus der Engel <unk> ? ) and later declares that " every angel is terrifying " ( <unk> Engel ist <unk> ) . While labelling of these poems as " elegies " would typically imply melancholy and lamentation , many passages are marked by their positive energy and " unrestrained enthusiasm . " Together , the Duino Elegies are described as a metamorphosis of Rilke 's " ontological torment " and an " impassioned monologue about coming to terms with human existence " discussing themes of " the limitations and insufficiency of the human condition and fractured human consciousness ... man 's loneliness , the perfection of the angels , life and death , love and lovers , and the task of the poet . " 
