 Rilke 's poetry , and the Duino Elegies in particular , influenced many of the poets and writers of the twentieth century . In popular culture , his work is frequently quoted on the subject of love or of angels and referenced in television programs , motion pictures , music and other artistic works , in New Age philosophy and theology , and in self @-@ help books . 
 = = Writing and publication history = = 
 = = = Duino Castle and the first elegies = = = 
 In 1910 , Rilke had completed writing the loosely autobiographical novel , Die <unk> des Malte <unk> <unk> ( The Notebooks of Malte <unk> <unk> ) in which a young poet is terrified by the fragmentation and chaos of modern urban life . After completing the work , Rilke experienced a severe psychological crisis that lasted for two years . In 1912 , still facing this severe depression and despair , Rilke was invited to Duino Castle by Princess Marie von Thurn und Taxis ( 1855 – 1934 ) ( born Princess Marie zu Hohenlohe @-@ Waldenburg @-@ <unk> ) whom he had met a few years before . The princess ( who was twenty years older than Rilke ) and her husband Prince Alexander ( 1851 – 1939 ) enthusiastically supported artists and writers . 
 While at Duino , Rilke and Princess Marie discussed the possibility of collaborating on a translation of Dante Alighieri 's La Vita Nuova ( 1295 ) . After the Princess left to join her husband at their <unk> estate , Rilke spent the next few weeks at the castle preparing to focus on work . During these weeks , he was writing Marien @-@ Leben ( The Life of Mary ) . While walking along the cliffs overlooking the Adriatic Sea near the castle , Rilke claimed to hear a voice calling to him speaking the words of the first line , Wer , wenn ich <unk> , <unk> mich denn aus der Engel <unk> ? ( " Who , if I cried out , would hear me among the hierarchies of angels ? " ) which he quickly wrote in his notebook . Within days , he produced drafts of the first two elegies in the series and drafted passages and fragments that would later be incorporated into later elegies — including the opening passage of the tenth elegy . 
 Rilke would only finish the third and fourth elegies before the onset of World War I. The third was finished in 1913 in Paris , the fourth in early 1915 in Munich . The effects of the war — particularly his traumatic experiences being conscripted into the Austro @-@ Hungarian army — triggered a severe renewal of his depression that rendered him unable to write for several years . 
 = = = Château de Muzot and the creative hurricane = = = 
 Because of his depression , Rilke was unable to return to writing for several years , and only in 1920 was he motivated to focus towards completing his work on the Duino Elegies . However , for the next two years , his mode of life was unstable and did not permit him the time or mental state he needed for his writing . 
 In 1921 , Rilke journeyed to Switzerland , hoping to immerse himself in French culture near Geneva and to find a place to live permanently . At the time , he was romantically involved with <unk> Klossowska ( 1886 – 1969 ) . At the invitation of Werner Reinhart ( 1884 – 1951 ) , Rilke moved into the Château de Muzot , a thirteenth @-@ century manor house that lacked gas and electricity , near <unk> , Rhone Valley , Switzerland . Reinhart , a Swiss merchant and amateur clarinetist , used his wealth to be a patron to many twentieth @-@ century writers and composers . He bought Muzot to allow Rilke to live there rent @-@ free and focus on his work . Rilke and Klossowska moved there in July 1921 and later in the year Rilke translated writings by Paul Valéry and Michelangelo into German . 
 With news of the death of his daughter 's friend , Wera Knoop ( 1900 – 1919 ) , Rilke set to work on Sonnets to Orpheus . The Sonnets frequently refer to Wera , both directly where he addresses her by name and indirectly in allusions to a " dancer " or the mythical Eurydice . Rilke wrote to the young girl 's mother stating that Wera 's ghost was " commanding and <unk> " him to write . In a rush of inspiration , Rilke worked on the Sonnets and renewed his focus towards completing the remainder of Duino Elegies . In one week , Rilke completed the unfinished elegies , and from 2 February to 23 February 1922 he completed all the 55 sonnets of the two parts of Sonnets to Orpheus . Rilke considered both collections to be " of the same birth " . In a letter to Klossowska on 9 February 1922 , Rilke wrote : " what weighed me down and caused my anguish most is done ... I am still trembling from it . ... And I went out to caress old Muzot , just now , in the moonlight . " Two days later , completing the last of his work on the Elegies in the evening , he wrote to Lou Andreas @-@ Salomé that he had finished " everything in a few days ; it was a boundless storm , a hurricane of the spirit , and whatever inside me is like thread and webbing , framework , it all cracked and bent . No thought of food . " 
 = = = Publication and reception = = = 
 Duino Elegies was published by Insel @-@ Verlag in Leipzig , Germany in 1923 . Prominent critics praised the work and compared its merits to the works of Hölderlin and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . In 1935 , critic Hans @-@ Rudolf Müller was the first to describe the collection as inherently " mystical " and promote Rilke as a " mystic " spiritual guide . 
 In My Belief : Essays on Life and Art , German novelist Hermann Hesse ( 1877 – 1962 ) describes Rilke as evolving within the confines of exploring his existential problems , that " at each stage now and again the miracle occurs , his delicate , hesitant , anxiety @-@ prone person withdraws , and through him resounds the music of the universe ; like the basin of a fountain he becomes at once instrument and ear . " 
 However , during the 1920s , many of the younger generation of German @-@ language poets and writers did not like Duino Elegies because of the poems ' obscure symbols and philosophy . The German poet Albrecht Schaeffer ( who is associated with the literary circle of German lyric poet Stefan George ) dismissed the poems as " mystical blather " and described their " secular theology " as " impotent gossip " . 
 Theodor W. Adorno 's Jargon of Authenticity ( 1964 ) suggested that the poems are essentially evil : " The fact that the <unk> lyric sometimes behaves like the jargon [ of authenticity ] , or at least timidly readies the way for it , should not lead us to look for the evil of the poetry simply in its form . It is not simply grounded , as a much too innocent view might maintain , in the mixture of poetry and prose . The evil , in the <unk> lyric , consists in the fitting out of the words with a theological overtone , which is belied by the condition of the lonely and secular subject who is speaking there : religion as ornament . " Adorno further believed the poems reinforced the German value of commitment that supported a cultural attraction towards the principles of Nazism . 
 = = Symbolism and themes = = 
 Throughout the Duino Elegies , Rilke explores themes of " the limitations and insufficiency of the human condition and fractured human consciousness ... mankind 's loneliness , the perfection of the angels , life and death , love and lovers , and the task of the poet . " Philosopher Martin Heidegger remarked that " the long way leading to the poetry is itself one that inquires poetically , " and that Rilke " comes to realize the destitution of the time more clearly . The time remains destitute not only because God is dead , but because mortals are hardly aware and capable even of their own mortality . " Rilke explores the nature of mankind 's contact with beauty , and its transience , noting that humanity is forever only getting a brief , momentary glimpse of an inconceivable beauty and that it is terrifying . At the onset of the First Elegy , Rilke describes this frightened experience , defining beauty as 
 Rilke depicted this infinite , transcendental beauty with the symbol of angels . However , he did not use the traditional Christian interpretation of angels . He sought to utilize a symbol of the angel that was secular , divorced from religious doctrine and embodied a tremendous transcendental beauty . In this , however , Rilke commented that he was greatly influenced by the depiction of angels found in Islam . For Rilke , the symbol of the angel represents a perfection that is " beyond human contradictions and limitations " in a " higher level of reality in the invisible . " Where there is incongruity that adds to mankind 's despair and anxiety is due to human nature keeping us clinging to the visible and the familiar . As mankind encounters the invisible and unknown higher levels represented by these angels , the experience of the invisible will be " terrifying " ( in German , <unk> ) . 
 As mankind comes in contact with this terrifying beauty represented by these angels , Rilke is concerned with the experience of existential angst in trying to come to terms with the coexistence of the spiritual and earthly . He portrays human beings as alone in a universe where God is abstract and possibly non @-@ existent , " where memory and patterns of intuition raise the sensitive consciousness to a realization of solitude . " Rilke depicts the alternative , a spiritually fulfilling possibility beyond human limitations in the form of angels . Beginning with the first line of the collection , Rilke 's despairing speaker calls upon the angels to notice human suffering and to intervene . There is a deeply felt despair and unresolvable tension in that no matter man 's striving , the limitation of human and earthly existence renders humanity unable to reach out to the angels . The narrative voice Rilke employs in the Duino Elegies strives " to achieve in human consciousness the angel 's presumed plenitude of being " ( i.e. being , or existence , in German : <unk> ) . 
 Rilke uses the images of love and of lovers as a way of showing mankind 's potential and humanity 's failures in achieving the transcendent understanding embodied by the angels . In the Second Elegy , Rilke writes that " Lovers , if they knew how , might utter / wondrous things in the midnight air . " ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> sie 's , in der <unk> / <unk> <unk> . ) He depicts " the inadequacy of ordinary lovers " and contrasts a feminine form of " sublime love " and a masculine " blind animal passion . " At the time the first elegies were written , Rilke often " expressed a longing for human companionship and affection , and then , often immediately afterwards , asking whether he could really respond to such companionship if it were offered to him ... " He notices a " decline in the lives of lovers ... when they began to receive , they also began to lose the power of giving . " Later , during World War I , he would lament that " the world has fallen into the hands of men . " In the face of death , life and love is not cheap and meaningless and Rilke asserted that great lovers are able to recognize all three ( life , love , and death ) as part of a unity . Rilke asserted that the true meaning of love could be understood through death providing love a meaning in this unity — that " the nature of every ultimate love ... is only able to reach the loved one in the infinite . " 
 In a 1923 letter to Nanny von Escher , Rilke confided : 
 " Two inner experiences were necessary for the creation of these books ( The Sonnets to Orpheus and The Duino Elegies ) . One is the increasingly conscious decision to hold life open to death . The other is the spiritual imperative to present , in this wider context , the transformations of love that are not possible in a narrower circle where Death is simply excluded as The Other . 
 The Fifth Elegy is largely inspired by Pablo Picasso 's 1905 Rose Period painting , Les <unk> ( " The <unk> " , also known as " The Family of <unk> " ) in which Picasso depicts six figures pictured " in the middle of a desert landscape and it is impossible to say whether they are arriving or departing , beginning or ending their performance . " Rilke depicted the six artists about to begin their performance , and that they were used as a symbol of " human activity ... always travelling and with no fixed abode , they are even a shade more fleeting than the rest of us , whose fleetingness was lamented . " Further , Rilke in the poem described these figures as standing on a " threadbare carpet " to suggest " the ultimate loneliness and isolation of Man in this incomprehensible world , practicing their profession from childhood to death as playthings of an unknown will ... before their ' pure too @-@ little ' had passed into ' empty too @-@ much . ' " 
 Because of the profound impact that the war had on him , Rilke expressed a hope in an 1919 letter that the task of the intellectual in a post @-@ war world would be to render the world right . It would be " to prepare in men 's hearts the way for those gentle , mysterious , trembling transformations from which alone the understandings and harmonies of a <unk> future will proceed . " Rilke envisioned his Duino Elegies and the Sonnets to Orpheus as part of his contribution . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Rilke 's reputation in the English @-@ speaking world rests largely on the popularity of Duino Elegies . The collection has been translated into English over twenty times since it was first published in 1931 by London 's Hogarth Press in England as <unk> <unk> : Elegies from the Castle of Duino in a translation by Edward and Vita Sackville @-@ West . It was first translated for the American market in 1939 in a translation by J. B. Leishman and Stephen Spender published by New York 's W. W. Norton & Company . Other translations have included those by poet David Young ( 1978 ) , Grateful Dead lyricist Robert Hunter ( 1989 ) , poet Galway Kinnell with Hannah Liebmann ( 1999 ) , Stephen Cohn ( 1989 ) , poet Alfred Poulin ( 1975 ) , and poet Gary Miranda ( 1981 ) . 
 In the United States , Rilke is one of the more popular , best @-@ selling poets — along with thirteenth @-@ century Sufi mystic Rumi ( 1207 – 1273 ) , and 20th century Lebanese @-@ American poet Kahlil Gibran ( 1883 – 1931 ) . In popular culture , Rilke is frequently quoted or referenced in television programs , motion pictures , music and other works when these works discuss the subject of love or angels . Because of his work being described as " mystical , " Rilke 's works have also been appropriated for use by the New Age community and in self @-@ help books . Rilke has been reinterpreted " as a master who can lead us to a more fulfilled and less anxious life . " 
 Rilke 's work , and specifically , the Duino Elegies have been claimed as a deep influence by several poets and writers , including Galway Kinnell , Sidney Keyes , Stephen Spender , Robert Bly , W. S. Merwin , John Ashbery , novelist Thomas Pynchon and philosophers Ludwig Wittgenstein and Hans @-@ Georg Gadamer . Critics and scholars have discussed Pynchon ’ s use of Rilke ’ s lyricism and concepts of transformation in his novel Gravity 's Rainbow . The first lines of Gravity 's Rainbow mirror the first lines of first elegy , portraying the screaming descent of a V @-@ 2 rocket in 1944 London , and the novel has been described as a " serio @-@ comic variation on Rilke 's Duino Elegies and their German Romantic echoes in Nazi culture . " The British poet W. H. Auden ( 1907 – 1973 ) has been described as " Rilke 's most influential English disciple " and he frequently " paid homage to him " or used the imagery of angels in his work . In the 1936 poem cycle Sonnets from China , Auden directly alluded to Rilke 's writing of the Duino Elegies . 
 The reference here to stroking " that little tower " is derived from a series of letters written while Rilke was completing the Elegies including a letter he wrote to Klossowska , and one to his former lover , Lou Andreas @-@ Salomé . In the letter to Andreas @-@ Salomé , he writes " I went out and stroked the little Muzot , which protected it and me and finally granted it , like a large old animal . " 
 In later years , Rilke ’ s Duino Elegies and the Sonnets to Orpheus influenced Hans @-@ Georg Gadamer ’ s theories of hermeneutics — understanding how an observer ( i.e. reader , listener , or viewer ) interprets cultural artifacts ( i.e. works of literature , music , or art ) as a series of distinct encounters . Gadamer , using examples of Rilke 's poetry in his writings , interprets these works as an experience of a divine " totality " that we must approach with a childlike innocence and ignorance — that only through interpreting and reinterpreting can we cope with or solve the existential problems of humanity ’ s significance and impermanence . Gadamer points out that man is in a condition influenced by an anonymous , alienated , and mechanical world that has evolved to stand as an obstacle to his ability to make sense of such experiences . 
 = Birnbeck Pier = 
 Birnbeck Pier is a pier situated on the Bristol Channel in Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , North Somerset , England , approximately 18 miles ( 29 km ) south west of Bristol . It is the only pier in the country which links the mainland to an island , linking to Birnbeck Island , a 1 @.@ 2 hectares ( 3 @.@ 0 acres ) rocky island just to the west of Worlebury Hill . The grade II * listed pier was designed by Eugenius Birch and opened in 1867 . The gothic toll house and pierhead buildings were designed by local architect Hans Price . The pier has been closed to the public since 1994 and is now on the Buildings at Risk Register . 
 During the second half of the 19th and early 20th centuries the pier was popular both with locals and tourists to the town . As a boarding point for steamers plying their trade in the Bristol Channel , it underwent various extensions and modifications over the years . During World War II the pier was commissioned as HMS Birnbeck by the Admiralty as part of the Directorate of Miscellaneous Weapons Development ( DMWD ) for research into new weapons . The pier reopened after the war , but the number of visitors and steamer passengers declined . The final excursion visited the pier in 1979 . 
 Today , the pier is still home to the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare Lifeboat Station . Since its closure , ownership has passed hands many times and it has been subject to a series of proposals for its redevelopment which have all proved fruitless . The pier remains in a largely derelict state . Part of the pier collapsed during storms on 30 December 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 The island was originally called Bearn Back , derived from the Old English words burn and <unk> which means The spring brook island . It was pronounced by locals as Be @-@ <unk> Back which has since become corrupted into the current name Birnbeck . The rock is limestone , giving rise to the geological term " Birnbeck Limestone Formation " . 
 Prior to the construction of the pier , Birnbeck Island could be accessed by a natural causeway at low tide . A proposal was made in 1845 to connect Birnbeck Island to the mainland at the western end of Worlebury Hill . Work commenced on a suspension bridge two years later under a design by James Dredge , architect of the Victoria Bridge in Bath . He patented the ' taper principle ' based on using chains rather than cables , as is more common in suspension bridges . Dredge 's bridge design was considered " a very significant yet relatively short @-@ lived phase in suspension bridge development " . During a strike by stonemasons , what little had been built was damaged during storm , bringing about the end to the suspension bridge scheme . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 In 1864 , a new proposal was made to build a pier across to the island , funded by 2 @,@ 000 shares which raised £ 20 @,@ 000 . Cecil Hugh Smyth Pigott , the four @-@ year @-@ old son of the lord of the manor , laid the foundation stone on 28 October 1864 when a public holiday was declared in the town and a celebratory dinner was held in the Town Hall . 
 The main pier was originally 1 @,@ 150 feet ( 351 m ) long , and it is 20 feet ( 6 m ) wide with a cantilever construction . However the low water jetty was damaged in a storm in 1903 , rebuilt in 1909 and finally dismantled in 1923 meaning that the pier is now 1 @,@ 040 feet ( 317 m ) long , Due to architectural features such as abutments at either end of the pier , the pier resembles a bridge more than other pleasure piers . Fifteen groups of piles support a continuous lattice girder , each set comprising four piles screwed into the river bed at an angle with an X @-@ brace between each adjacent pair . The fitting of screw blades to iron piles , as opposed to the then accepted wooden pile , created a deeper and far more resilient base support . This was one of the innovations brought by Eugenius Birch which have enabled many of the piers he designed to survive . There were problems with oscillations in the structure when bands marched on the pier , both on the opening day and again in 1886 . As a result , further horizontal cross braces were added to the piles , and a law was passed banning marching on the pier . The gothic toll house and pierhead buildings were designed by local architect Hans Price . 
 To allow steamers to bring day trippers to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare from ports on both the English and Welsh side of the Bristol Channel , a landing jetty was extended on the west side of the island . The Severn Estuary has one of the highest tidal ranges in the world , up to 48 ft ( 15 m ) , second only to the Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada . The estuary 's funnel shape , its tidal range , and the underlying geology of rock , gravel and sand , produce strong tidal streams and high turbidity , giving the water a notably brown colouration . The tidal range means that the legs of the pier are largely exposed at low tide and hidden at high tide . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 When the pier opened on 5 June 1867 , again under Cecil Hugh Smyth Pigott , many of the people of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare were given a holiday and a banquet was held in the Town Hall . The toll to walk on the pier was 1d ( an old penny ) , but this was quickly raised to 2d , which was the maximum fee permitted by the General Pier and Harbour Act 1861 . 120 @,@ 000 people paid the toll in the first three months . A tramway system was installed to carry the luggage of passengers arriving at the pier . 
 A new wooden northern jetty was added in 1872 which allowed the removal of the original western landing place . Another jetty was built on the south west corner in 1898 which reached deep water even at low tide , thus allowing steamers to use the pier at all states of the tide . This was damaged in a gale in 1903 , and although it was rebuilt in 1909 , it closed in 1916 and was dismantled in 1923 . The northern jetty had also been damaged in the 1903 storm but was replaced by the present steel structure in 1905 . 
 A second pier , known as the " Grand Pier " , was opened in the centre of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare in 1904 . Although it had the capacity to accommodate for steamers , it was seldom used due to difficult currents around the structure . An electric tram along the seafront ran to and from the pier approach road at Birnbeck . 
 Many visitors arriving on the steamers never left the pier and Birnbeck Island which between them housed the cafe , pavilion , amusements and funfair . These were destroyed by fire on 26 December 1897 and replaced by the present buildings , although these have been altered over the years . The attractions included <unk> , a shooting gallery , merry @-@ go @-@ round , park swings , a theatre of wonders and a licensed bar . In 1891 a telephone was installed only six months after the first one was installed in the town . In 1909 , the amusement area was expanded by an extension on iron supports along the south side of the island . However , this was not built to the proper specifications so was demolished in 1912 ; a larger concrete platform was added in its place in 1932 . 
 The pier was taken over by the Admiralty in 1941 as an outpost of the Directorate of Miscellaneous Weapons Development ( DMWD ) . It was commissioned as HMS Birnbeck and was used for secret weapons development and storage with testing . The " Bouncing bomb " was tested at the Brean Down Fort on the opposite side of Weston Bay . After the war , the pier resumed its role as a tourist attraction , but business declined due to competition from the Grand Pier which opened its amusement arcades in 1946 . 
 In 1962 the Birnbeck Pier Company sold the pier to P & A Campbell , the steamer operators . After the withdrawal of their ships it was sold to John Critchley , who redeveloped it as a " Victorian pleasure centre " which even had special permission to issue its own currency to visitors . There have since been several proposals to make the pier a commercial success again , including converting it into a hotel , casino , residential use , or the centre of a marina . 
 The most successful steamer company serving the Bristol Channel was P & A Campbell 's " White Funnel " fleet . Their operations were suspended during the Second World War , after which the number of passengers decreased with the availability of cheap foreign holidays and the opening of the Severn Bridge in the 1960s . Regular ferries ceased serving Birnbeck in 1971 and the final excursion was made 19 October 1979 . The pleasure " steamers " PS Waverley and MV Balmoral still operate in the Bristol Channel , but any calls at Weston are made by a connecting tender from Knightstone Harbour . 
 = = = Dereliction = = = 
 In 1984 , £ 1 million of damage was caused to the pier by drifting equipment during engineering work in Sand Bay , to the north of the pier . The damage was quickly repaired , despite fears that Birnbeck might become like nearby Clevedon Pier , which at the time was severed by a collapsed span . The pier was again badly damaged by storms in 1990 and was closed for safety reasons in 1994 . Daily trips during the summer months to and from Cardiff , Clevedon , and Penarth were suspended indefinitely . Due to the decline , English Heritage has placed it on the Heritage at Risk register . In 1999 , the lifeboat station installed a walkway across the pier to allow them safe access to the island , at a cost of £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2006 the pier was sold to Manchester company Urban Splash . The new owners launched a competition in August 2007 , inviting people to submit ideas for the regeneration of the pier and island . At the time , the repair work required was estimated at £ 4 million . There were 95 entries for the competition from around the world , whittled down to a shortlist of six . The winner of the design competition , Levitate Architecture and Design Studio Ltd , was announced in March 2008 . The winning design included a dozen luxury apartments and a 50 @-@ room hotel . 
 In August 2008 , the Royal Institute of British Architects ( Riba ) announced a campaign to redesign the buildings on the island , and six designs were submitted . One of the designs removed the existing buildings and piers to replace them with walking paths , and added a large curvilinear concrete building to the island . The design called for many windows in the building to create a large panorama of the surrounding seascape . In September 2010 Urban Splash placed the pier up for sale , citing a downfall in business caused by the recession as their reason . 
 In September 2011 Wahid Samady and Michael Ross were reported to have bought Birnbeck Pier for an undisclosed sum ; Samady had also been awarded planning permission for a new development at the nearby Royal Pier Hotel site , just yards from the pier . In August 2012 further reports suggests the sale had not proceeded and that Urban Splash were still the owners . It was bought by <unk> Estates of which Wahid Samady is Chairman and Michael Ross a Director in 2014 . In 2015 The Victorian Society included the pier on its list of the ten most endangered buildings . 
 Part of the north pier collapsed during storms on 30 December 2015 . 
 = = Weston Lifeboat Station = = 
 Due to the extreme tidal range in the Bristol Channel , finding a suitable launching site for lifeboats proved an arduous task for the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) . <unk> were installed on the pier in 1882 , enabling a lifeboat to be lowered into the water below , even at low tide . A new , larger lifeboat was stationed here in 1889 and a boathouse was built for it on the north east side of the island with a 100 feet ( 30 m ) slipway beside the pier . This facility was replaced in 1902 when a new boathouse was built on the south east side of the island . This had a 368 feet ( 112 m ) slipway which enabled the lifeboat to be launched at most states of the tide and was the longest in England . The slipway was closed in 2007 due to its poor condition , since when the lifeboats have been launched from the north east side of the island . The crews continued to use the 1889 boathouse but the two inshore lifeboats were kept on their launch trolleys in the open air on Birnbeck Island . In April 2011 a new " temporary " boathouse was erected to give them cover . The structure cost £ 70 @,@ 000 but has been designed so that it can be dismantled once permanent facilities are built and transported to be reused elsewhere . In 2015 the RNLI announced that it would seek planning permission for a permanent lifeboat station at Knightstone Harbour along with deep @-@ water anchorage at Anchor Head and the facilities on Birnbeck Pier were closed . 
 Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare is the busiest RNLI station on the south side of the Bristol Channel ; in 2011 its two lifeboats were called out 42 times . Historically , the largest number of people rescued at one time was on 22 September 1884 when 40 passengers were taken off the SS Welsh Prince which got into difficulties after leaving the pier . 
 = Governor of Maryland = 
 The Governor of Maryland heads the executive branch of the government of Maryland , and is the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the state 's National Guard units . The Governor is the highest @-@ ranking official in the state and has a broad range of appointive powers in both the State and local governments , as specified by the Maryland Constitution . Because of the extent of these constitutional powers , the Governor of Maryland has been ranked as being among the most powerful Governors in the United States . 
 The current Governor is Larry Hogan , a Republican who defeated Lt. Governor Anthony Brown on November 4 , 2014 . 
 = = Selection and qualifications = = 
 Like most state chief executives in the United States , the Governor is elected by the citizens of Maryland to serve a four @-@ year term . Under the Constitution of Maryland , the Governor can run any number of times , but not more than twice in a row . This makes it possible for a two @-@ term governor to run for the office again after remaining out of office for at least one term . An eligible candidate for Governor must be at least 30 years old , and also a resident of and a registered voter in Maryland for the five years preceding the election . If a candidate meets this minimum requirement , he or she must file his or her candidacy with the Maryland State Board of Elections , pay a filing fee , file a financial disclosure , and create a legal campaign financial body . The Governor , like all statewide officials in Maryland , is elected in the even @-@ numbered years in which the election for President of the United States does not occur . 
 = = Functions and responsibilities = = 
 As the Chief Executive of the State of Maryland , the Governor heads the executive branch of government , which includes all state executive departments and agencies , as well as advisory boards , commissions , committees , and task forces . The main constitutional responsibility of the Governor of Maryland , and any other State 's chief executive , is to carry out the business of the state and to enforce the laws passed by the Legislature . The Governor also has some say in these laws , since the Governor has the ability to veto any bill sent to his or her desk by the Maryland General Assembly , though the Assembly may override that veto . The Governor is also given a number of more specific powers as relates to appropriations of state funds , the appointment of state officials , and also a variety of less prominent and less commonly utilized powers . 
 = = = Appropriations = = = 
 Every year , the Governor must present a proposed budget to the Maryland General Assembly . After receiving the proposed budget , the Assembly is then allowed to decrease any portion of the budget for the executive branch , but it may never increase it or transfer funds between executive departments . The Assembly may , however , increase funds for the Legislative and Judicial branches of government . The Governor has the power to veto any law that is passed by the Assembly , including a line item veto , which can be used to strike certain portions of appropriations bills . The Legislature then has the power to override a Governor 's veto by vote of three @-@ fifths ( 60 % ) of the number of members in each house . 
 The Governor also sits on the Board of Public Works , whose other two members are the Comptroller and the Treasurer . This Board has broad powers in overseeing and approving the spending of state funds . They must approve state expenditures of all general funds and capital improvement funds , excluding expenditures for the construction of state roads , bridges , and highways . It has the power to solicit loans on its own accord either to meet a deficit or in anticipation of other revenues , in addition to approving expenditures of funds from loans authorized by the General Assembly . 
 = = = Appointment powers = = = 
 The Governor appoints almost all military and civil officers of the State government , subject to advice and consent of the Maryland State Senate . The Governor also appoints certain boards and commissions in each of the 24 Counties and in Baltimore City , such as local Boards of Elections , commissions notaries public , and appoints officers to fill vacancies in the elected offices of Attorney General and Comptroller . Should a vacancy arise in the General Assembly , the Governor also fills that vacancy , though the Governor must choose from among the recommendations of the local party organization to which the person leaving the vacancy belonged . Any officer appointed by the Governor , except a member of the General Assembly , is removable by him or her , if there is a legitimate cause for removal . Among the most prominent of the Governor 's appointees are the 24 secretaries and heads of departments that make up the Governor 's Cabinet , also known as the Executive Council . 
 = = = Executive Council = = = 
 The Governor of Maryland is the Chairman of the Governor 's Executive Council ( or Cabinet ) which coordinates all state government functions . This is composed of the following members , all of whom , except the Lieutenant Governor , are appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland State Senate as heads of executive departments : 
 Lieutenant <unk> Boyd Rutherford 
 Secretary of <unk> John C. <unk> 
 Secretary of <unk> Rona E. Kramer 
 Secretary of <unk> Joe <unk> 
 Secretary of Budget and <unk> David Brinkley 
 Secretary of Business and Economic <unk> R. Michael Gill 
 Secretary of Disabilities @-@ Carol Beatty 
 State Superintendent of Schools ( appointed by the State Board of Education to direct the Maryland State Department of Education ) - Lillian M. Lowery 
 Secretary of <unk> Ben <unk> 
 Secretary of General Services- C. Gail <unk> 
 Secretary of Health and Mental <unk> Van Mitchell 
 Secretary of Housing and Community <unk> Kenneth C. Holt 
 Secretary of Human <unk> Sam <unk> 
 Secretary of Information <unk> David Garcia 
 Secretary of Juvenile Services- Sam J. Abed 
 Secretary of Labor , Licensing , and <unk> Kelly Schulz 
 Secretary of Natural <unk> Mark Belton 
 Secretary of <unk> David R. Craig 
 Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services- Stephen T. Moyer 
 Secretary of State Police ( commanding officer of the Maryland State Police ) - Col. William <unk> 
 Secretary of <unk> Peter Rahn 
 Secretary of Veterans <unk> George W. Owings III 
 Secretary of Higher Education ( head of the Maryland Higher Education Commission ) - Jennie C. Hunter @-@ <unk> 
 Adjutant General ( head of the Maryland Military Department ) - Gen. Linda Singh 
 Other members of the Governor 's Staff may be invited to Cabinet meetings as " attendees " . 
 The Governor also oversees several sub @-@ cabinets that coordinate the activities of a certain function of state government that involves several state departments or agencies . Currently , these are the Base Realignment and Closure Subcabinet , <unk> Subcabinet , Chesapeake Bay cabinet , Children 's Cabinet , Governor 's Subcabinet for International Affairs , Smart Growth Subcabinet , and Workforce Creation Subcabinet . 
 = = = Other powers and responsibilities = = = 
 The Governor is the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the military forces of the State : the Maryland Army National Guard and Air National Guard and the Maryland Defense Force , except when these forces have been called into Federal service , which the Federal government has the authority to do . In times of public emergency , the Governor may exercise emergency powers , including the mobilization of these military forces . In the area of criminal justice , the Governor may grant pardons to criminals , commute the sentences of prisoners , or remit fines and forfeitures imposed on people who have been convicted , jailed , or fined for violations of state laws . 
 In both these areas , and a variety of others , the Governor sits on state and interstate boards and commissions with varying powers . The Governor is also obligated to report on the condition of the state at any time during the year , though this traditionally happens in a State of the State Address each January . 
 = = = The Governor 's Staff = = = 
 In addition to the various departments and agencies under gubernatorial control , the Governor has an executive staff that assist in coordinating the executive duties . This staff is led by a Chief of Staff , and includes five offices : Intergovernmental Relations , Legal Counsel , Legislative and Policy , Press , and the Governor 's Office in Washington , DC . The Chief of Staff has a number of deputies to assist in running these departments . The Governor 's staff is appointed and therefore largely exempt from state civil service laws . 
 = = History and evolution of the office = = 
 = = = 1600s – 1800s = = = 
 During the Colonial period , Maryland 's Proprietors , the Lords of Baltimore , who generally remained in England , chose who would serve as the Governor of Maryland on their behalf . Between 1692 , when the Baltimores lost control , and 1715 , Maryland was a direct Royal Colony , and the Governor was appointed by the British Monarch . The Lords of Baltimore regained their Royal Charter in 1715 , and then they resumed choosing the Governors until the beginning of the American Revolution . The first Governor chosen to break this chain of Colonial Governors was Thomas Johnson ( 1732 – 1819 ) , who took office on March 21 , 1777 . 
 Under the Maryland Constitution of 1776 , the Governor was chosen for one @-@ year terms by both houses of the General Assembly . An 1838 constitutional amendment allowed voters to elect the Governor to three @-@ year terms from one of three rotating gubernatorial districts : eastern , southern , and western . At each election , only voters from a single gubernatorial election district selected the Governor . The Maryland Constitution of 1851 lengthened the Governor 's term of office from three to four years , which brought elections for Governor in line with elections for Federal offices that occur only in even years . Finally , the Constitution of 1864 eliminated the rotating gubernatorial election districts and , since the election of 1868 , the Governor has been elected by all the voters of the state . 
 From 1777 to 1870 , the Governor resided in Jennings House in Annapolis . Since 1870 , the Governor has resided in the Government House , a Georgian mansion adjacent to the Maryland State House . In addition to being the residence for the Governor and his family , Government House has a number of public rooms that are used by the Governor on official occasions . 
 = = = 1900s – present = = = 
 Spiro T. Agnew , who was the Governor of Maryland from 1967 – 1969 , later served as the Vice @-@ President of the United States for a time under President Richard M. Nixon , and Agnew is , thus far , the highest @-@ ranking Marylander in the history of the United States . ( Marylander Roger B. Taney served as Chief Justice of the United States in the 19th century . ) Following his resignation due to charges of corruption , Agnew 's official gubernatorial portrait was removed <unk> memoriae from the Maryland State House Governor 's Reception Room from 1979 until 1995 . Then @-@ Governor Parris Glendening stated that in re @-@ including Agnew 's portrait that it was not up to anyone to alter history , whether for good or bad , citing Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four . A potential factor leading to Agnew 's corruption was , at the time he took office , the governor 's salary was only $ 15 @,@ 000 per year , leading to the " need " to supplement his income through kickbacks . 
 As of 2015 , Maryland has yet to have been served by a female Governor . However , women were the runners @-@ up in four gubernatorial elections ( in 1974 , 1994 , 1998 , and 2002 ) . In addition , one woman has served as the Lieutenant Governor , Kathleen Kennedy Townsend , under Gov. Parris Glendening from 1995 to 2003 . Another woman , Kristen Cox , who was the Secretary of Disabilities , unsuccessfully ran for Lieutenant Governor as the running mate of the incumbent Governor Robert Ehrlich , when the Lieutenant Governor at that time , Michael Steele , left office to run for the U.S. Senate . Cox was a unique person to run for that office , not only because she is a woman , but also because she is legally blind . 
 = = Lieutenant Governor = = 
 In 1971 , the office of Lieutenant Governor of Maryland , which had existed for only a few years in the 1860s , was re @-@ instituted by an amendment to the Maryland Constitution . The Lieutenant Governor is a weak office compared to other counterparts ( in other states including Texas , the Lieutenant Governor is the President of the State 's Senate , while in California the Lieutenant Governor assumes all of the Governor 's powers when the sitting Governor is out of the state ) , as it only possesses the powers and duties that the Governor assigns to him or her . The Lieutenant Governor is elected on the same ballot with the Governor , and to the same term @-@ of @-@ office as the Governor . The Lieutenant Governor succeeds to the Governorship only if there is a vacancy in that office . 
 Despite the Governor and Lieutenant Governor being elected on the same party ticket , very often there have been public rifts between the two ; for instance Gov. Marvin Mandel and Lt. Gov. Blair Lee IV ; Gov. Harry R. Hughes and Lt. Gov. Samuel W. <unk> III ; Gov. Schaefer and Lt. Gov. Melvin A. Steinberg . , and Gov. Parris Glendening and Lt. Gov. Kathleen Kennedy Townsend . No Lieutenant Governor of Maryland has yet been elected as the Governor in future elections , or permanently succeeded to the Governor 's office due to a vacancy ( which would be created by the resignation , death , or removal of the sitting Governor ) , although Blair Lee III served as acting Governor from June 4 , 1977 until January 15 , 1979 while Governor Marvin Mandel was serving a sentence for mail fraud and racketeering ( consequently , in a modern example of <unk> memoriae , Mandel 's official gubernatorial portrait was not hung in the Maryland State House Governor 's Reception Room until 1993 ) . 
 = SMS Königsberg ( 1905 ) = 
 SMS Königsberg ( " His Majesty 's Ship Königsberg " ) was the lead ship of her class of light cruisers built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . Named after Königsberg , the capital of East Prussia , she was laid down in January 1905 , launched in December of that year , and completed by June 1906 . Her class included three other ships : Stettin , Stuttgart , and Nürnberg . Königsberg was armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and had a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 After her commissioning , Königsberg served with the High Seas Fleet 's reconnaissance force . During this period , she frequently escorted Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht on visits to foreign countries . In April 1914 , the ship was sent on what was to have been a two @-@ year deployment to German East Africa , but this was interrupted by the outbreak of World War I in August of that year . Königsberg initially attempted to raid British and French commercial traffic in the region , but only destroyed one merchant ship in the course of her career . Coal shortages hampered her ability to attack shipping . On 20 September 1914 , she surprised and sank the British protected cruiser HMS Pegasus in the Battle of Zanzibar . 
 Königsberg then retreated into the Rufiji River to repair her engines . Before the repairs could be completed , British cruisers located Königsberg , and , unable to steam into the river to destroy her , set up a blockade . After several attempts to sink the ship during the Battle of Rufiji Delta , the British sent two monitors , Mersey and Severn , to destroy the German cruiser . On 11 July 1915 , the two monitors got close enough to severely damage Königsberg , forcing her crew to scuttle the ship . The surviving crew salvaged all ten of her main guns and joined Lieutenant Colonel Paul von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck 's guerrilla campaign in East Africa . Königsberg was partially broken up in 1963 – 65 for scrap , and the remains sank into the riverbed . 
 = = Design = = 
 Königsberg and her sisters were designed to serve both as fleet scouts in home waters and in Germany 's colonial empire . This was a result of budgetary constraints that prevented the Kaiserliche Marine from building more specialized cruisers suitable for both roles . 
 Königsberg was 115 @.@ 3 meters ( 378 ft 3 in ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft 4 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 29 m ( 17 ft 4 in ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 814 t ( 3 @,@ 754 long tons ; 4 @,@ 204 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines powered by eleven coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers rated at 13 @,@ 020 indicated horsepower ( 9 @,@ 709 kW ) . These provided a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) and a range of approximately 5 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 650 km ; 6 @,@ 620 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Königsberg had a crew of 14 officers and 308 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . There were two side by side forward on the forecastle , six amidships , three on either side , and two side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . Königsberg also carried ten 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK guns in single mounts . She was also equipped with a pair of 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower sides were 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Königsberg was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Meteor " and was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel on 12 January 1905 . She was launched on 12 December 1905 , when the Oberbürgermeister of Königsberg , Siegfried <unk> , christened the ship , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet for sea trials on 6 April 1907 . Her trials were interrupted at the beginning of June when she was tasked with escorting Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern during three sailing regattas including Kiel Week . The two ships then cruised the North Sea and stopped at Nordkapp , where from 3 to 6 August , Wilhelm II met Czar Nicholas II of Russia . After returning to Germany , Königsberg resumed her sea trials , which lasted from 9 August to 9 September . She visited her namesake city from 21 to 23 September and was later assigned to the fleet scouting forces to replace the cruiser Medusa on 5 November . At this time , Königsberg was again used to escort Wilhelm II 's yacht , this time in company with the new armored cruiser Scharnhorst and the dispatch boat Sleipner on a visit to Britain . The ships stopped in Portsmouth and the Thames , and were visited by Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands . 
 On 17 December , Königsberg was tasked with another goodwill visit , this time escorting the Kaiser 's brother , Prince Heinrich , and a delegation of naval officers to Malmö , Sweden to meet King Oscar II . The visit lasted until 20 December . Königsberg participated in the normal peacetime routine of individual and squadron training for 1908 without incident . The year ended with a major training cruise , first in the Baltic and North Sea and later into the Atlantic , that ended in early December . The ship then went into drydock over the winter of 1908 – 09 for periodic maintenance , emerging for service again in early February 1909 . A typical training routine followed for the next two years , interrupted only by a collision with the new cruiser Dresden on 16 February 1910 in the Kiel Bay , and two trips escorting the Kaiser in 1910 ; the first to Helgoland on 9 – 13 March and the second to Britain from 8 to 27 May . The collision with Dresden caused significant damage to both ships , though no one on either vessel was injured . Both ships were repaired in Kiel . Dresden also won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery in the reconnaissance force during this period . From December 1909 to September 1910 , Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Adolf von Trotha served as the ship 's commander . 
 From 8 March to 22 May 1911 , Königsberg cruised in the Mediterranean Sea with Wilhelm II aboard Hohenzollern . On 10 June , Königsberg was replaced in the reconnaissance force by the new cruiser Kolberg ; Königsberg was transferred to Danzig , where she was placed out of service on 14 June for modernization work . On 22 January 1913 , the ship was recommissioned for service with the fleet , to replace the cruiser Mainz which was also being modernized . This service lasted until 19 June , when Königsberg was again placed in reserve in Kiel . During this period of active service , she was assigned to the training squadron from 1 to 18 April . In early 1914 , the high command decided to send Königsberg to German East Africa , where she would replace the current station ship , the old unprotected cruiser Geier . 
 On 1 April 1914 , Fregattenkapitän Max Looff took command of the ship . Königsberg left Kiel on 25 April , stopped in Wilhelmshaven , and then left three days later for a two @-@ year deployment to German East Africa . She steamed into the Mediterranean Sea and stopped in Spanish and Italian ports before entering the Suez Canal . After passing through the canal , she stopped briefly in Aden before arriving in Dar es Salaam , the capital of German East Africa , on 5 June . Two days later , the Schutztruppe ( Protection Force ) celebrated their 25th anniversary in the colony ; the deputy commander of the Schutztruppe presented Looff with a model of the cruiser Schwalbe , which had been the longest serving warship with the unit . Königsberg surveyed the harbor at Bagamoyo later in the year . The African colonial subjects considered the ship to be quite impressive , particularly her three funnels , which were assumed to signify a warship more powerful than one with only two funnels . The ship acquired the nickname <unk> na bomba tatu , or " the man of war with three pipes " . 
 As tensions in Europe rose in the aftermath of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria , Looff decided to abandon the normal peacetime training schedule and returned to Dar es Salaam on 24 July to replenish his coal and other stores . He also made efforts to organize a coast watcher network to report enemy ships and to protect German shipping in the area . On 27 July , Looff received a message from the Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) informing him of the worsening political situation in Europe . Concurrently , the cruisers of the British Cape Squadron , HMS Astraea , Hyacinth , and Pegasus , arrived with the intention of bottling up Königsberg at the colony 's capital Dar es Salaam . Looff got his ship ready to sail and left port on the afternoon of 31 July 1914 , with the three slower British ships shadowing him . Looff used a rain squall and his ship 's superior speed to break contact with his British pursuers the following day . Königsberg steamed off Aden until 5 August , when word of the outbreak of hostilities between Britain and Germany belatedly reached the ship . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Königsberg was ordered to attack British commerce around the entrance to the Red Sea . A lack of coal hampered Looff 's efforts ; the British prevented his collier Koenig from leaving Dar es Salaam and purchased all the coal in Portuguese East Africa to deny it to Königsberg . Looff then radioed the German steamer Zieten to warn her against using the Suez Canal , where she would have been confiscated . Königsberg chased after the German freighter Goldenfels , whose officers mistook the ship for a British cruiser and refused to stop . Königsberg was forced to fire a warning shot across the bow of Goldenfels to force the ship to stop so that Looff could warn her captain of the state of war . 
 On 6 August , Königsberg found a British ship off the coast of Oman , the freighter City of Winchester . A prize crew took the ship along with Königsberg , and the two vessels met Zieten four days later in the <unk> <unk> Islands , where coal from City of Winchester was transferred to Königsberg . The freighter was thereafter sunk . The British crew was taken aboard Zieten , which departed the following day and stopped in Mozambique . Meanwhile , the steamer Somali , under the command of Korvettenkapitän ( Corvette Captain ) Zimmer , had left Dar es Salaam with a cargo of 1 @,@ 200 t ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ; 1 @,@ 300 short tons ) of coal on the night of 3 – 4 August to resupply Königsberg ; the two ships met ten days later . By the time Looff rendezvoused with Somali , his ship was down to a mere 14 t ( 14 long tons ; 15 short tons ) of coal . Somali transferred some 850 t ( 840 long tons ; 940 short tons ) of coal to the cruiser , which permitted a sweep to Madagascar . No British or French ships were found , however , and so Königsberg met Somali again on 23 August and took on coal for four days of cruising . 
 In the meantime , British warships bombarded Dar es Salaam and destroyed the German wireless station there . By this time , Königsberg 's engines required a thorough overhaul , and Looff needed to find a secluded area where the work could be completed . He settled on the Rufiji Delta , which had recently been surveyed by the survey ship Möwe . On 3 September 1914 at high tide , Königsberg passed over the bar at the mouth of the Rufiji and slowly made her way up the river . Coast watchers were stationed at the mouth of the river and telegraph lines were run to ensure the Germans would not be surprised by British ships searching for them . Zimmer , who was sending small coastal steamers to resupply Königsberg , observed a British cruiser — Pegasus — patrolling the coast for two weeks . He deduced that the ship would likely have to coal at Zanzibar on Sundays , and so Looff decided to attack the ship in port before he began his overhaul . He considered the action justified , since Britain had rejected a German proposal to keep central Africa neutral according to the Congo Act of 1885 . 
 On 19 September , Königsberg left the Rufiji and arrived off Zanzibar the following morning . She opened fire at a range of about 7 @,@ 000 meters ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) at 05 : 10 , starting the Battle of Zanzibar ; within 45 minutes , Pegasus caught fire , rolled over to port , and sank . Crewmen aboard Pegasus had raised a white flag , but it could not be seen aboard Königsberg due to the heavy smoke . Pegasus 's crew suffered 38 dead and 55 wounded , while Königsberg was undamaged and had no casualties . After sinking Pegasus , Königsberg bombarded the wireless station and dumped barrels filled with sand into the harbor entrance to simulate mines . While leaving the harbor , Königsberg spotted the picket ship Helmut and sank her with three shells . 
 The cruiser then returned to the Rufiji River so work could begin on overhauling her engines ; the parts would need to be transported overland to the shipyard in Dar es Salaam where they could be rebuilt . While moored in the town of <unk> , the ship was heavily camouflaged and defensive arrangements were erected . These included positioning soldiers and field guns to defend the approaches to the cruiser and establishing a network of coast watchers and telegraph lines to watch for hostile ships . An improvised minefield was also laid in the delta to keep the British ships from entering the river . 
 Concerned with the threat Königsberg posed to troop transports from India , the British reinforced the flotilla tasked with tracking down the elusive German raider , and placed the ships under the command of Captain Sidney R. Drury @-@ Lowe . The sinking of Pegasus convinced the British that Königsberg must still be in German East Africa . On 19 October , the cruiser Chatham found the German East Africa Line ship <unk> at Lindi . A boarding party searched the ship and discovered documents indicating she had supplied Königsberg with coal in the Rufiji the previous month . On 30 October , the cruiser Dartmouth located Königsberg and Somali in the delta . The cruisers Chatham , Dartmouth , and Weymouth blockaded the Rufiji Delta to ensure Königsberg could not escape . 
 = = = = Battle of Rufiji Delta = = = = 
 On 3 November , the British began a bombardment in an attempt to destroy or neutralize Königsberg and Somali . Königsberg was protected by the thick mangrove swamps , which concealed the ship and offered a degree of cover from British shellfire , especially while the British ships remained outside the river . A collier , Newbridge , was converted into a blockship to be sunk in the main channel of the delta to prevent Königsberg 's escape . Despite heavy German fire from both sides of the river , the British successfully sank Newbridge across one of the delta mouths on 10 November , though the German raider could still put to sea via other channels . Looff decided to move his ship further upriver , to make it more difficult for the British to destroy her . In doing so , his ship would occupy a disproportionate number of British vessels that could otherwise have been employed elsewhere . In the course of the campaign , the British reinforced the squadron blockading the Rufiji with additional cruisers , including Pyramus and the Australian HMAS Pioneer . 
 A civilian pilot , Denis Cutler of Durban , South Africa , was commissioned into the Royal Marines and persuaded to make his private Curtiss seaplane available for the British Empire . The Royal Navy requisitioned the passenger ship Kinfauns Castle to serve as a makeshift tender for Cutler 's aircraft . On his first attempt to locate the cruiser , Cutler , who did not have a compass , got lost and was forced to land on a desert island . On his second flight , he successfully located Königsberg , and a third flight with a Royal Navy observer confirmed his observations . His aircraft 's radiator was damaged on the flight and he was grounded until replacement parts could be brought from Mombasa . A pair of Royal Naval Air Service Sopwiths were brought up with the intention of scouting and even bombing the ship . They soon fell apart in the tropical conditions . A trio of Short seaplanes fared a little better , though they too were quickly disabled by the conditions . 
 Also in November , the British sought to use the 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns of the old battleship Goliath to sink the cruiser . The attempt was unsuccessful , once again because the shallow waters prevented the battleship from getting within range . In December , Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Paul von Lettow @-@ Vorbeck requested as many crew members from the ship as possible for the East Africa Campaign against the British ; a total of 220 men were left aboard to keep the ship in fighting condition . This was not enough , however , to permit the ship to go to sea . Königsberg moved further up the river on 18 December . On 23 December , the British used a pair of shallow @-@ draft ships to sail up the delta . They hit Somali once before German defensive fire forced them to retreat . 
 In the meantime , conditions were deteriorating on Königsberg . There were shortages of coal , ammunition , food , and medical supplies . Although safe from the British , the crew was ravaged by malaria and other tropical ailments . Generally cut off from the outside world , the morale of the sailors fell . However , the situation was marginally improved with a scheme to resupply the ship and give her a fighting chance to return home . A captured British merchant ship , Rubens , was renamed Kronborg . It was given a Danish flag , papers , and a crew of German sailors selected for their ability to speak Danish . It was then packed with coal , field guns , ammunition , small arms , and various supplies . As the freighter approached East Africa , Königsberg prepared to sortie to meet the ship and attempt to break out and return to Germany . Instead , Königsberg was trapped in the river by two cruisers and several smaller vessels . Hyacinth intercepted Kronborg as she approached , and chased her to <unk> Bay . The trapped ship was forced aground and set on fire , but the Germans salvaged much of her cargo and put it to use later in the East Africa Campaign . 
 Finally , in April 1915 , the British Admiralty agreed to a plan submitted by Drury @-@ Lowe the previous November , which envisioned attacking the German cruiser with shallow @-@ draft monitors , capable of navigating the Rufiji River . Two of the warships , Mersey and Severn , armed with a pair of 6 in ( 152 mm ) guns each , were brought from Britain . Königsberg had in the meantime been moved a third time , even further upriver . On 6 July 1915 , the two monitors crossed the outer sandbar and steamed up the river , despite heavy fire from German positions on the river banks . They stopped at a point they thought to be 10 @,@ 000 yd ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) from Königsberg , which would be in range of their own guns but farther than the smaller German guns could reply . Aircraft were used to spot the fall of shot . The monitors ' navigation was faulty , however , and after opening fire , they found themselves to be within range of Königsberg 's guns . She hit Mersey twice in the engagement ; one shell disabled the forward 6 @-@ inch gun , and another holed the ship below the waterline . Königsberg was hit four times in return , one shell striking beneath the waterline and causing some flooding . In the span of three hours , Königsberg forced both British ships to withdraw . 
 They returned again on 11 July , after having repaired the damage sustained in the first attempt . The two monitors conducted a five @-@ hour bombardment . Königsberg opened fire at 12 : 12 , initially with four guns , but only three guns remained in action after 12 : 42 , two guns after 12 : 44 , and one gun after 12 : 53 . The two monitors did not respond until 12 : 31 , once they had been anchored into their firing positions , and scored several serious hits that caused a major fire at the ship 's stern and inflicted heavy casualties . By 13 : 40 , Königsberg had run low on ammunition and her gun crews had suffered very heavy casualties , and so Looff ordered the crew to abandon ship and to drop the breech blocks for the guns overboard to disable them . Two torpedo warheads were detonated in the ship 's bow to scuttle her ; the ship rolled over slightly to starboard and sank up to the upper deck with her flags still flying . Nineteen men had been killed in the battle , with another forty @-@ five wounded , including Looff . 
 Later that day , the crew returned to haul down the ship 's flag and gave three cheers for the Kaiser . The guns and other usable equipment were salvaged from the wreck starting the following day . The guns were converted into field artillery pieces and coastal guns ; together with the ship 's crew , they went on to see service in the East African land campaign under Lettow @-@ Vorbeck . All ten guns were repaired in Dar es Salaam over the next two months ; one was mounted on the converted ferry Götzen of the inland Lake Tanganyika fleet . The surviving sailors , organized as the Königsberg @-@ Abteilung ( Königsberg @-@ Detachment ) , eventually surrendered on 26 November 1917 and were interned in British Egypt . In 1919 , after the war , the men took part in a parade through the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin to celebrate their service and that of their ship . 
 In 1924 , John Ingle , the former captain of Pegasus , was tasked with clearing wrecks from the harbor in Dar es Salaam . At that time , he bought the salvage rights to Königsberg for the price of £ 200 ; he sent divers to extract non @-@ ferrous scrap metal from the wreck and in turn sold the rights . Salvage work continued into the 1930s , and by the 1940s the hull had rolled over to her starboard side . As late as 1965 , salvage work continued , but in 1966 the wreck collapsed and finally sank into the riverbed . Three of the ship 's 10 @.@ 5 cm guns are preserved , one in Pretoria , South Africa , one in Jinja , Uganda , and one in Mombasa , along with a gun from Pegasus . 
 = Cory Booker = 
 Cory Anthony Booker ( born April 27 , 1969 ) is an American politician and the junior United States Senator from New Jersey , in office since 2013 . Previously he served as mayor of Newark from 2006 to 2013 . 
 He attended Stanford University , where he played college football and received a Bachelor of Arts in political science and a Master of Arts in sociology , before earning a Rhodes Scholarship to attend the University of Oxford . Upon returning home , he received his Juris Doctor from Yale Law School . 
 Booker began his political career as a Newark city councilor from 1998 to 2002 . He ran for mayor in 2002 , but lost to incumbent Sharpe James ; he ran again in 2006 and won against deputy mayor Ronald Rice . During his tenure as mayor , Booker 's priorities were reducing crime and encouraging economic development projects . He gained a national reputation for his personal involvement in public service , particularly through his use of social media tools such as Twitter to connect with constituents . 
 Considered one of the most prominent Democrats in New Jersey , he became a candidate for the United States Senate in the 2013 special election to succeed Frank Lautenberg , who died in office . He won the Senate Democratic primary on August 13 , 2013 , and then won the general election against Steve Lonegan on October 16 , 2013 , becoming the first black U.S. Senator from New Jersey . Booker subsequently won the next regular election for the Senate seat against Jeff Bell in 2014 . 
 = = Early life , education , and early career = = 
 Booker was born on April 27 , 1969 , in Washington , D.C. , and grew up in Harrington Park , New Jersey , 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Newark , New Jersey . His parents , Carolyn Rose ( née Jordan ) and Cary Alfred Booker , were among the first black executives at IBM . Booker has stated that he was raised in a religious household , and that he and his family attended a small African Methodist Episcopal Church in New Jersey . One of Booker 's maternal great @-@ grandfathers was white , and Booker also has other European and Native American ancestry . 
 Booker graduated from Northern Valley Regional High School at Old Tappan and was named to the 1986 USA Today All @-@ USA high school football team . Booker went on to Stanford University , receiving a Bachelor of Arts in political science in 1991 and a Master of Arts in sociology the following year . While at Stanford , he played football as a tight end and was teammates with Brad Muster and Ed McCaffrey , and also made the All – Pacific @-@ 10 Academic team and was elected senior class president . In addition , Booker ran The Bridge Peer Counseling Center , a student @-@ run crisis hotline , and organized help from Stanford students for youth in East Palo Alto , California . 
 After Stanford , Booker was awarded a Rhodes Scholarship to study at the University of Oxford , where he earned an honors degree in United States history in 1994 as a member of The Queen 's College . He earned his Juris Doctor in 1997 from Yale Law School , where he operated free legal clinics for low @-@ income residents of New Haven , Connecticut . At Yale , Booker was a founding member of the Chai Society ( now the Eliezer Society ) , was a Big Brother with Big Brothers Big Sisters of America , and was active in the National Black Law Students Association . 
 = = Newark City Council = = 
 Contemplating advocacy work and a run for city council in Newark after graduation from law school , Booker lived in the city during his final year at Yale . After graduation , he served as staff attorney for the Urban Justice Center in New York and program coordinator of the Newark Youth Project . In 1998 , Booker won an upset victory for a seat on the Newark City Council , defeating four @-@ term incumbent George Branch . To draw attention to the problems of open @-@ air drug dealing and associated violence , he went on a 10 @-@ day hunger strike and lived in a tent and later in a motor home near drug @-@ dealing areas of the city . Booker proposed council initiatives that impacted housing , young people , law and order , and the efficiency and transparency of city hall , but was regularly outvoted by all of his fellow councilors . 
 = = Mayor of Newark = = 
 = = = Mayoral campaigns = = = 
 = = = = 2002 election = = = = 
 On January 9 , 2002 , Booker announced his campaign for mayor of Newark rather than running for re @-@ election as councilman ; this pitted him against longtime incumbent Sharpe James . James , who had easily won election four consecutive times , saw Booker as a real threat , and responded with mudslinging , at one campaign event calling him " a Republican who took money from the KKK [ and ] Taliban ... [ who 's ] collaborating with the Jews to take over Newark " . In the campaign , James ' supporters questioned Booker 's suburban background , calling him a carpetbagger who was " not black enough " to understand the city . Booker lost the election on May 14 , garnering 47 % of the vote to James ' 53 % . 
 = = = = 2006 election = = = = 
 Booker announced on February 11 , 2006 , that he would again run for mayor . Although incumbent Mayor Sharpe James filed paperwork to run for reelection , shortly thereafter he announced that he would instead cancel his bid to focus on his work as a State Senator , which he was originally elected to in 1999 . At James 's discretion , Deputy Mayor Ronald Rice decided to run as well . Booker 's campaign outspent Rice 's 25 to 1 , for which Rice attacked him . In addition to raising over $ 6 million for the race , Booker attacked Rice as a " political crony " of James . Booker won the May 9 election with 72 % of the vote . His slate of city council candidates , known as the " Booker Team " , swept the council elections , giving Booker firm leadership of the city government . 
 = = = = 2010 election = = = = 
 On April 3 , 2010 , Booker announced his campaign for reelection . At his announcement event , he remarked that a " united government " was crucial to progress , knowing his supporters in the city council faced tough <unk> . Heavily favored to win , Booker faced former judge and Essex County prosecutor Clifford J. Minor , as well as two minor candidates . On May 11 , Booker won reelection with 59 % of the vote , but with only seven of his nine council supporters winning reelection . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Before taking office as mayor , Booker sued the James administration , seeking to terminate cut @-@ rate land deals favoring two redevelopment agencies that had contributed to James 's campaigns and listed James as a member of their advisory boards . Booker argued that the state 's " pay @-@ to @-@ play " laws had been violated and that the land deals would cost the city more than $ 15 million in lost revenue . Specifically , Booker referenced a parcel at Broad and South Streets that would generate only $ 87 @,@ 000 under the proposed land deals yet was valued at $ 3 @.@ 7 million under then @-@ current market rates . On June 20 , 2006 , Superior Court Judge Patricia Costello ruled in favor of Booker . 
 In late June 2006 , before Booker took office , New Jersey investigators foiled a plot to assassinate Booker led by Bloods gang leaders inside four New Jersey state prisons . The motive for the plot was unclear , but was described variously as a response to the acrimonious campaign and to Booker 's campaign promises to take a harder line on crime . 
 = = = = First term = = = = 
 Booker assumed office as mayor of Newark on July 1 , 2006 . After his first week in office , he announced a 100 @-@ day plan to implement reforms in Newark . The proposed changes included increasing police forces , ending background checks for many city jobs to help former offenders find employment in the city , refurbishing police stations , improving city services , and expanding summer youth programs . 
 One of Booker 's first priorities was to reduce the city 's crime rate . In furtherance of this , he appointed Garry McCarthy , former deputy commissioner of operations of the New York City Police Department , as director of the Newark Police Department . Crime reduction was such a central concern to the Booker administration that Booker , along with his security team , was known to personally patrol the streets of Newark until as late as 4 a.m. 
 Booker is a member of the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition , a bipartisan group with a stated goal of " making the public safer by getting illegal guns off the streets " . Booker was honored in October 2009 by the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence with the Sarah Brady Visionary Award for his work in reducing gun violence . During his mayoralty , crime dropped significantly in Newark , which led the nation in violent crime reduction from 2006 to 2008 . March 2010 marked Newark 's first murder @-@ free month in over 44 years , although murder and overall crime rates began to rise again after 2008 . In addition to his crime @-@ lowering initiatives , Booker doubled the amount of affordable housing under development and quadrupled the amount under pre @-@ development , and reduced the city budget deficit from $ 180 million to $ 73 million . 
 After taking office , Booker voluntarily reduced his own salary twice , reducing his salary by 8 % early in his first year as mayor . He also raised the salaries of many city workers . However , his administration imposed one @-@ day @-@ a @-@ month furloughs for all non @-@ uniformed employees from July through December 2010 , as well as 2 % pay cuts for managers and directors earning more than $ 100 @,@ 000 a year . In 2008 and 2009 the City of Newark received the Government Finance Officers Association 's Distinguished Budget Presentation Award . In an effort to make government more accessible , Booker has held regular open office hours during which city residents can meet with him personally to discuss their concerns . In 2010 , Booker was among the finalists for the World Mayor prize , ultimately placing seventh . He was an unsuccessful candidate for the 2012 award . 
 = = = = Second term = = = = 
 On October 10 , 2010 , Booker established Let 's Move ! Newark as part of First Lady Michelle Obama 's national Let 's Move ! initiative against childhood obesity . In October 2011 he expanded the program to include Let ’ s Move ! Newark : Our Power , a four @-@ month fitness challenge for Newark public school students run by public health advocate Jeff Halevy . 
 Booker gained national attention when , on December 28 , 2010 , a constituent used Twitter to ask him to send someone to her father 's house to shovel his driveway because her elderly father was going to attempt to do it himself . Booker responded by tweeting , " I will do it myself ; where does he live ? " Other people volunteered , including one person who offered his help on Twitter , and 20 minutes later Booker and some volunteers showed up and shoveled the man 's driveway . On April 12 , 2012 , Booker saved a woman from a house fire , suffering smoke inhalation and second @-@ degree burns on his hands in the process . Newark Fire Chief John <unk> said that Booker 's actions possibly saved the woman 's life . After Hurricane Sandy destroyed much of the shoreline areas of New Jersey and New York in late October 2012 , Booker invited <unk> without power to eat and sleep in his home . In February 2013 , responding to a Twitter post , Booker helped a nervous constituent propose to his girlfriend . Booker rescued a dog from freezing temperatures in January 2013 and another dog that had been abandoned in a cage in July 2013 . 
 On November 20 , 2012 , a melee occurred at a Newark City Council meeting attended by Booker . The nine @-@ seat council was to vote on the successor to the seat vacated by newly elected U.S. Representative Donald M. Payne , Jr . Booker 's opponents on the council , including Ras Baraka , sought to appoint John Sharpe James , son of the former mayor , while Booker and his supporters favored <unk> Speight . Booker attended the meeting to deal with the eventuality of the lack of a quorum or a tie vote , in which state law would allow him to cast a deciding vote . After Baraka was refused an opportunity to address the council by acting Council President Anibal Ramos , Jr . , Baraka and two other council members walked away in protest . Booker cast the deciding vote for Speight . Supporters of James stormed the stage and were held back by riot police , who eventually used pepper spray on some members of the crowd . Baraka later blamed Booker for inciting the disturbance , while Booker refused comment to the media after the vote . 
 In December 2012 , after discussions with a constituent about New Jersey 's Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) , Booker began a week @-@ long challenge attempting to live on a food budget of $ 30 per week — the amount SNAP recipients receive . When critics noted that the very name of the SNAP program shows that it is intended to " supplement " an individual 's food budget , not be its sole source , Booker replied that his aim was to spark a discussion about the reality that many Americans rely solely on food stamps to survive . 
 = = = = Newark Watershed = = = = 
 The Newark Watershed comprises 35 @,@ 000 acres of reservoirs and water treatment systems for more than 500 @,@ 000 customers in northern New Jersey , including Newark and neighboring Belleville , Elizabeth , Bloomfield , and Nutley . It is considered one of the city 's greatest assets . A New Jersey State Comptroller report issued in February 2014 revealed irregularities and corruption within the Newark Watershed and Development Corporation , which is in the process of being dismantled after being taken over by the city while on Booker 's watch . 
 = = = Public opinion polling = = = 
 Throughout Booker 's mayoralty , Fairleigh Dickinson University 's public opinion poll PublicMind asked New Jersey residents statewide whether or not they had heard of Mayor Booker and whether they had a favorable or unfavorable opinion of him . The results are as follows : 
 March , 2014 
 Name recognition : 88 % 
 Favorable opinion : 47 % 
 Unfavorable opinion : 23 % 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Booker 's mayoralty and personal celebrity drew much media attention to Newark . While he enjoyed high ratings from city residents , his legacy has received mixed reviews . Since his election there has been millions of dollars of investment in downtown development , but persistent underemployment and high murder rates continue to characterize many of the city 's neighborhoods . Despite legal challenges initiated during his term , Newark Public Schools has remained under control of the state for nearly twenty years . Newark received $ 32 million in emergency state aid in 2011 and 2012 , requiring a memorandum of understanding between Newark and the state that obligates the city to request and the state to approve appointments to city hall administrative positions . 
 While mayor of Newark , Booker claimed in an interview that Newark ’ s unemployment rate had fallen by two percentage points . This statement was rated " false " by Politifact because the actual rate was 0 @.@ 7 percentage points . 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 = = = 2013 election = = = 
 On December 20 , 2012 , Booker announced that he would explore running for the U.S. Senate seat that was then occupied by Frank Lautenberg in the 2014 election , ending speculation that he would challenge Governor Chris Christie in the 2013 gubernatorial election . On January 11 , 2013 , Booker filed papers to form a campaign committee , without announcing whether or not he would run . Roughly one month after declaring his interest in running for the Senate , incumbent Lautenberg announced that he would not seek reelection . 
 On June 3 , Lautenberg died of viral pneumonia ; five days later Booker announced his intention to run for Lautenberg 's seat in the 2013 special election . Booker announced his candidacy at two events : one in Newark and the other in Willingboro . 
 On August 13 , 2013 , Booker was declared the winner of the Democratic primary , with approximately 59 % of the vote . On October 16 , 2013 , he defeated Republican Steve Lonegan in the general election 55 % to 44 % , making him the first African @-@ American U.S. Senator from New Jersey and the first African @-@ American to be elected to the Senate since Barack Obama in 2004 . The night before his victory , Booker visited the gravesite of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson , where he offered his prayers and lit a vigil in memory of his father . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 On October 31 , 2013 , Booker was sworn into the Senate . 
 In November 2013 , Booker co @-@ sponsored and voted for the Employment Non @-@ Discrimination Act . In December 2013 , he was one of the original cosponsors of Bob Menéndez 's Nuclear Weapon Free Iran Act of 2013 , which would toughen sanctions against Iran . He also voted for the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 . In January 2014 , he cosponsored the Respect for Marriage Act . In February 2014 , Booker voted against the Federal Agriculture Reform and Risk Management Act of 2013 
 Booker has pledged to meet with each of his Republican colleagues in the Senate in order to find common ground . In March , he was spotted having dinner with Senator Ted Cruz in Washington . 
 Booker has faced criticism on the left . Salon called him an avatar of the wealthy elite , a camera hog , and a political cipher . 
 Leading up to the 2016 presidential election , Booker endorsed Hillary Clinton for the Democratic nomination . He was speculated as a potential vice presidential candidate during the primary and as the general election began , though Booker stated on June 16 , 2016 that he was not being vetted . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Committee on Commerce , Science , and Transportation 
 Subcommittee on Aviation Operations , Safety , and Security 
 Subcommittee on Communications , Technology , and the Internet 
 Subcommittee on Consumer Protection , Product Safety , and Insurance 
 Subcommittee on Space , Science , and Competitiveness 
 Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine Infrastructure , Safety , and Security ( Ranking Member ) 
 Committee on Environment and Public Works 
 Subcommittee on Oversight 
 Subcommittee on Superfund , <unk> and Environmental Health 
 Subcommittee on Water and Wildlife 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 
 Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship 
 = = = 2014 election = = = 
 After being defeated in the 2013 special election , Steve Lonegan announced that he would not run again for the seat in the 2014 race . Presumed candidates for the Republican primary were Thomas Kean Jr . , Jay Webber , Jon <unk> , and Michael J. Doherty . On January 9 , 2014 , Brian D. Goldberg , a West Orange resident and New Jersey businessman , announced that he would seek the Republican nomination . 
 On February 4 , 2014 , conservative political consultant Jeff Bell announced his bid for the nomination . Bell won the Republican Primary and received significant support from the conservative American Principles Fund , which ran a direct mail operation costing over $ 80 @,@ 000 , and the National Organization for Marriage , an anti @-@ same @-@ sex marriage group , which paid for $ 6 @,@ 000 of automated calling . 
 Booker defeated Bell , capturing 55 @.@ 8 % of the vote to Bell 's 42 @.@ 4 % . Brendan W. Gill was Booker 's campaign manager . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Booker has been described by many as a liberal , a moderate , and a neoliberal . In a July 2013 Salon interview , Booker said that " there 's nothing in that realm of progressive politics where you won 't find me . " However , in a September 2013 interview with The <unk> , when asked if he considered himself a progressive , he avoided the term , saying he is a Democrat and an American . George Norcross III described Booker as " a new Democrat — a Democrat that 's fiscally conservative yet socially progressive . " In May 2012 , Booker defended Bain Capital 's record and criticized Obama 's attack on private equity . In response , the Republican National Committee created a petition called I Stand With Cory Booker . Booker has also received criticism from both progressives and liberals , such as Ronald Rice and Rush Holt . 
 On social issues , Booker supports abortion rights , affirmative action , and same @-@ sex marriage . He supports ending the War on Drugs . On economic issues , he supports long @-@ term deficit reduction efforts to ensure economic prosperity , Cap and Trade taxation to combat climate change , and increased funding for education . Booker is a supporter of the DREAM Act and the Patriot Act , stating the abolition of the latter would be " a little irresponsible " , although he does support some reform of it . 
 On foreign policy , Booker supports scaling down U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and is against intervention in Syria . He supports a two @-@ state solution to the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict . On Iran , Booker has stated the country poses a direct threat to American and Israeli security and feels all options should be on the table for dealing with the conflict . However , his decision to back the Iran nuclear deal framework damaged his long @-@ term relationship with Jewish voters and supporters . In an attempt to reduce the damage , Booker initiated an emergency summit for Jewish leaders , which some of his longstanding supporters did not attend . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 = = = Obama association = = = 
 In 2009 , after Barack Obama became President of the United States , Booker was offered the leadership of the new White House Office of Urban Affairs . He turned the offer down , citing a commitment to Newark . 
 Booker generated controversy on May 12 , 2012 , when he appeared on Meet The Press as a surrogate for the reelection campaign of Barack Obama and made remarks that were critical of that campaign . Booker said that the attacks on Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney 's record at Bain Capital were " nauseating to me on both sides . It 's nauseating to the American public . Enough is enough . Stop attacking private equity . Stop attacking Jeremiah Wright . " The comments were subsequently used by the Romney campaign against Obama . Booker made follow @-@ up comments clarifying that he believed Obama 's attacks on Romney 's record at Bain were legitimate but did not retract his point about attacking private equity in general . Two weeks later , Booker 's communications director Anne Torres tendered her resignation , although she maintained it was unrelated to Meet the Press . 
 = = = Affiliations and honors = = = 
 Booker sits on the board of advisers of the political action committee Democrats for Education Reform . He is currently a member of the board of trustees at Teachers College , Columbia University , and was formerly a member of the Executive Committee at Yale Law School and the Board of Trustees at Stanford University . 
 In 2010 , Booker received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official , an award given out annually by the Jefferson Awards . 
 In May 2009 , Booker received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from the Newark @-@ based New Jersey Institute of Technology for " his outstanding career in public service as the Mayor of Newark " . In May 2009 , he received an honorary doctorate from Brandeis University , and was a commencement speaker that year as well . Booker received another honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree in December 2010 from Yeshiva University for " his bold vision for Newark and setting a national standard for urban transformation " . In June 2011 , Booker received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree and served as that year 's commencement speaker at Williams College for the urban transformation of Newark . In May 2012 , Booker received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Bard College and gave the commencement speech at the graduation . In 2010 , Booker delivered the commencement addresses at Pitzer College in Claremont , California , on May 15 , Columbia University 's Teachers College in New York City on May 17 , and Suffolk University Law School in Boston , Massachusetts , a week later on May 23 , 2010 . Booker gave the commencement address to New York Law School graduates on May 13 , 2011 , at Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center . Booker also gave the commencement address at the University of Rhode Island in May 2011 ; he also received an Honorary doctorate in Human Letters . He delivered a commencement address to Stanford University graduates on June 17 , 2012 , at Stanford Stadium . He also received an honorary degree at Fairleigh Dickinson 's 69th Commencement Ceremony in May 2012 . In May 2013 , Booker gave the commencement address at Washington University in St. Louis and received an honorary doctorate of law . On May 16 , 2014 , Booker gave the commencement speech for Ramapo College of New Jersey graduates at the IZOD Center . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Booker 's 2002 mayoral campaign , which he lost , was chronicled by filmmaker Marshall Curry in his documentary Street Fight . The film was nominated in 2005 for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature . 
 Since 2009 , Booker has starred in the documentary series Brick City . The series focuses on Booker and his efforts to improve Newark by reducing crime and bringing about economic renewal . Brick City won a Peabody Award in 2009 and was nominated for a Primetime Emmy in 2010 . 
 Booker contributed to the 2011 documentary Miss Representation and commented on the representations of women in politics within mass media . 
 Booker appeared in a scene in the Parks and Recreation episode " Ms. Ludgate @-@ Dwyer Goes to Washington " alongside Orrin Hatch . 
 = = = Mark Zuckerberg donation = = = 
 In July 2010 , Booker attended a dinner at a conference in Sun Valley , Idaho , where he was seated with Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg . Zuckerberg , who had no known ties to Newark , announced in September 2010 that he was donating $ 100 million of his personal fortune to the Newark school system . According to an article in the New York Times , Booker and Zuckerberg continued their conversation about Booker 's plans for Newark . The initial gift was made to start a foundation for education . The gift was formally announced when Booker , New Jersey Governor Chris Christie , and Zuckerberg appeared together on The Oprah Winfrey Show . The timing of Zuckerberg 's donation was questioned by some as a move for damage control to his image , as it was announced on the opening day of the movie The Social Network , a film that painted an unflattering portrait of Zuckerberg . On her show , however , Winfrey told the audience that Zuckerberg and Booker had been in talks for months and had actually planned the announcement for the previous month , and that she and Booker had to force Zuckerberg to put his name to the donation , which he had wanted to make anonymously . 
 = = = Conan O 'Brien " feud " = = = 
 In the fall of 2009 , Tonight Show host Conan O 'Brien engaged in a satirical on @-@ air and YouTube feud with Booker , with O 'Brien jokingly insulting the City of Newark and Booker responding that he would ban O 'Brien from the Newark airport . Then @-@ Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called for the feud to end during a prepared comedy bit , telling Booker to chalk it up to a head injury suffered by O 'Brien less than two weeks earlier . Booker then appeared on O 'Brien 's show and assured viewers that the feud was over and that he was actually a big fan of O 'Brien , who agreed that every time he made a joke about Newark , he would donate $ 500 to the City of Newark , and also made a $ 50 @,@ 000 donation to the Newark Now charity , which was matched by NBC Universal . 
 = = = Waywire = = = 
 In 2012 , Booker and tech executives Sarah Ross and Nathan Richardson formed Waywire , a company focused on video sharing technology . Early investors included Oprah Winfrey , Eric Schmidt , Jeff Weiner , and Troy Carter . After Booker 's relationship to Waywire was discussed in a front @-@ page New York Times story , board member Andrew Zucker stepped down from his position . Shortly thereafter , Waywire CEO Nathan Richardson departed the business as the company shifted its focus from content creation to content curation . In August 2013 , Booker told NBC News he intended to resign from the Waywire board and put his holdings in a trust if elected to the Senate ; by September , he had resigned his place on the board and donated his share of the company to charity . Waywire was sold to another video curation business the following month . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Booker regularly exercises and has been a vegetarian since 1992 , when he was a student at Oxford . He abstains from alcohol and " has no known vices or addictions " other than books and coffee . In 2014 , Booker began practicing a vegan diet and has expressed his vegan ethical philosophy and advocacy for animals . 
 Booker has never been married , and in 2013 he was named one of Town & Country ’ ’ s " Top 40 Bachelors " . Although he has generally tried to keep his personal life private , Booker has in the past described himself as a " straight male " and has said that he is trying to date more in hopes of finding someone to settle down with . In a 1990 column in the Stanford Daily , Booker admitted regretfully that as a teenager he had " hated gays " . Booker has himself been the target of rumors about being gay and has generally refused to address these on principle , which he explained in 2013 : " Because I want to challenge people on their homophobia . I love seeing on Twitter when someone says I ’ m gay , and I say , ' So what does it matter if I am ? So be it . I hope you are not voting for me because you are making the presumption that I 'm straight . ' " 
 From 1998 to 2006 , Booker lived in Brick Towers , a troubled housing complex in Newark 's Central Ward . In November 2006 , as one of the last remaining tenants in Brick Towers , Booker left his apartment for the top unit in a three @-@ story rental on Hawthorne Avenue in Newark 's South Ward , an area described as " a <unk> and gang @-@ plagued neighborhood of boarded @-@ up houses and empty lots " . Brick Towers has since been demolished , and a new mixed @-@ income development was built there in 2010 . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Szczerbiec = 
 Szczerbiec ( Polish pronunciation : [ <unk> ͡ <unk> ͡ s ] ) is the coronation sword that was used in crowning ceremonies of most Polish monarchs from 1320 to 1764 . It is currently on display in the treasure vault of the Royal Wawel Castle in Kraków as the only preserved piece of the medieval Polish Crown Jewels . The sword is characterized by a hilt decorated with magical formulas , Christian symbols and floral patterns , as well as a narrow slit in the blade which holds a small shield with the coat of arms of Poland . Its name , derived from the Polish word szczerba meaning a gap , notch or chip , is sometimes rendered into English as " the <unk> Sword " or " the Jagged Sword " , although its blade has straight and smooth edges . 
 A legend links Szczerbiec with King Bolesław I the Brave who was said to have chipped the sword by hitting it against the Golden Gate , Kiev ( now in Ukraine ) during his intervention in the Kievan succession crisis in 1018 . However , the Golden Gate was only constructed in 1037 and the sword is actually dated to the late 12th or 13th century . It was first used as a coronation sword by Władysław I the Elbow @-@ high in 1320 . <unk> by Prussian troops in 1795 , it changed hands several times during the 19th century until it was purchased in 1884 for the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg , Russia . The Soviet Union returned it to Poland in 1928 . During World War II , Szczerbiec was evacuated to Canada and did not return to Kraków until 1959 . In the 20th century , an image of the sword was adopted as a symbol by Polish nationalist and far @-@ right movements . 
 = = Description = = 
 Szczerbiec is a 98 cm @-@ long ( 39 in ) ceremonial sword bearing rich Gothic ornamentation , dated to the mid @-@ 13th century . It is classified as a type XII sword with a type I pommel and a type 6 crossguard according to the Oakeshott typology , although the blade may have changed its shape due to centuries of corrosion and intensive cleaning before every coronation . 
 = = = Hilt = = = 
 The hilt consists of a round pommel , a flat grip and an arched crossguard . The grip is 10 @.@ 1 cm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) long , 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) thick , and from 2 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide . It is rectangular in cross @-@ section and its hard edges make it difficult to handle and impractical for fighting , which is indicative of the sword 's purely ceremonial usage . The pommel is 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter and 2 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , with a chamfered outer ring that is 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide . The crossguard forms an arch that is 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 7 in ) wide in the middle and widens up to 3 @.@ 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) at both ends . It is 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick near the grip and measures 20 cm ( 8 in ) in length along its upper edge . 
 The pommel and the crossguard are made of silver . The core of the grip is a brass chest encasing the tang of the blade . It was probably made in the 19th century to replace an original organic core , which had decomposed . At the same time the tang was riveted to the top of the pommel . The head of the rivet , which is 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter , rests atop a rectangular washer measuring 1 @.@ 1 cm × 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 43 in × 0 @.@ 55 in ) . 
 All parts of the hilt are covered with golden plates , which are engraved with sharp or rounded styli and decorated with niello , or black metallic inlay that contrasts against the golden background . Each plate is 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) thick and made of about 18 @-@ carat gold . The niello designs include inscriptions written in late Romanesque majuscule ( with some uncial additions ) , Christian symbols , and floral patterns . The floral ornaments are in negative , that is , golden against a black , <unk> background . 
 On the obverse side of the hilt , the pommel bears a large stylized letter T on top of a letter C or G ( the latter could be just a decorative element of the letter T ) between the Greek letters Α and ω ( alpha and omega ) surmounted with little crosses . Below the letter T , there is another cross placed within a cloud or flower with twelve petals . On the chamfered edge around this design runs a circular Latin inscription in two rings which reads : Rec <unk> <unk> ad <unk> regum / et principum <unk> <unk> ( " This sign rouses the love of kings and princes , the wrath of judges " ) . The grip bears the symbols of two of the Four Evangelists : the lion of Saint Mark and the ox of Saint Luke , as well as an Agnus Dei ( Lamb of God ) . The crossguard bears the following Latin inscription : <unk> <unk> / nomina <unk> <unk> tu / <unk> <unk> periculum / ei <unk> <unk> ( " Whoever will carry these names of God with him , no danger will harm him " ) . 
 The reverse side of the pommel is decorated with a vine bush surrounded by a wreath of vine leaves . On the reverse of the grip , there are the eagle of Saint John and the angel of Saint Matthew , and another Agnus Dei . The crossguard bears , above another pattern of vine leaves , an inscription in corrupted Hebrew in Latin script : Con <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " <unk> faith incite the names of God : <unk> and <unk> " ) . On the opposite ends of the crossguard , there are again the symbols of Saints John and Matthew . 
 The circumference of the pommel is decorated with a rhombic pattern , while the upper side of the crossguard – with a similar triangular pattern . The narrow sides of the grip used to be embellished with inscribed silver plates , which , however , were lost in the 19th century . These lost inscriptions are partly known from graphical documentation made by King Stanislaus Augustus 's court painter , Johann Christoph Werner , in 1764 and by Jacek Przybylski in 1792 . One of the plates had already been broken by that time with only part of the inscription preserved : Liste est <unk> ... h <unk> Duc ... ( " This is a sword of ... Duke Boleslaus ... " ) ; the inscription on the other plate continued : Cum quo ei D [ <unk> ] n [ us ] SOS [ Salvator <unk> Salvator ] <unk> ad [ ver ] sus partes amen ( " With whom is the Omnipotent Lord and Savior , to help him against his enemies . Amen " ) . The missing part of the first inscription is only known from an old replica of Szczerbiec which once belonged to the Radziwiłł family ( see Historical replicas below ) . The full inscription read : <unk> est gladius <unk> et <unk> <unk> <unk> Poloniae et <unk> , <unk> ( " This is a sword of Hereditary Prince Boleslaus , Duke of Poland , Masovia , and Łęczyca " ) . The identity of this Duke Boleslaus is uncertain . 
 Use @-@ wear analysis indicates that the plates on the pommel and the crossguard were made by the same artist , while the plates on the grip were added later . The latter – obverse and reverse – were probably decorated in the same workshop and using the same tools , but by two different craftsmen . Moreover , a side plate with a rhombic pattern was added in the 19th century to replace one of the lost <unk> side plates . 
 Preserved images of Szczerbiec from various points in time indicate that the decorative plates were several times dismounted and placed again on the hilt in variable configurations . The current composition , with the symbols of the Evangelists duplicated on each side of the hilt , matches that known from the earliest preserved depiction drafted by Johann Christoph Werner in 1794 . It is possible , though , that the original placement of the golden plates was different , with the symbols of Saints John and Matthew on the obverse of the grip , so that each side of the hilt displayed the symbols of all four of the Evangelists . 
 = = = Blade = = = 
 The blade is 82 cm ( 32 in ) long , up to 5 cm ( 2 in ) wide ( about 5 cm from the crossguard ) and 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The fuller is about 74 cm ( 29 in ) long and , on average , 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . <unk> analysis has shown that the blade was forged from unevenly <unk> semi @-@ hard bloomery steel . Apart from iron , the material contains , by weight , 0 @.@ 6 percent of carbon , 0 @.@ 153 percent of silicon , 0 @.@ 092 percent of phosphorus , and other elements . Numerous slag inclusions found in the steel are typical for medieval iron smelting technology . Part of the blade was hardened by quenching . Unlike the hilt , the blade would have been fully functional as a weapon of war . The surface of the blade is covered with deep scratches along its length , a result of intensive cleaning from rust before every coronation , probably with sand or brick powder . Inactive spots of corrosion may be also found on the entire surface . 
 Just below the hilt , there are three perforations in the fuller of the blade . The largest is a rectangular slot that is 64 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) long and 8 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 33 in ) wide . This opening , known in Polish as <unk> or szczerba , was originally caused by rust and , in the 19th century , polished into a regular shape . A small heraldic shield colored with oil paint is fastened to the slot . It is roughly triangular in shape , with the sides measuring from 4 to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 8 in ) . The shield , bearing the White Eagle of Poland , was originally attached to the scabbard , or sheath . The Gothic scabbard , with a golden or silver locket and <unk> , was probably created in 1320 and lost between 1819 and 1874 . The shield is the only preserved element of the sheath . It was tilted to the left – from the onlooker 's point of view – while it was fastened to the scabbard 's locket , but today it is aligned with the blade . The eagle on the red field of the shield is white , with a golden crown , bands across the wings , ring on the tail , and talons . The two other perforations are round holes , 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) apart . The upper one , just below the slot , is 28 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , while the other measures only 1 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 055 in ) . They were probably punched in the 19th century to fasten the heraldic shield to the blade . 
 = = Location = = 
 Szczerbiec is owned by the Wawel Royal Castle National Art Collection ( inventory number 137 ) in Kraków , the former capital city of Poland . As the only preserved of Polish medieval coronation insignia , it is a prominent part of the museum 's Treasury and Armory permanent exhibition . The sword is suspended horizontally inside a glass case in the middle of the Jagiełło and Hedwig Vault located on the ground floor in the northeastern corner of the Wawel Castle . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Szczerbiec of Boleslaus the Brave = = = 
 Historical accounts related to the early history of the Polish coronation sword are scant and often mixed with legend . The earliest known use of the name " Szczerbiec " appeared in the Chronicle of Greater Poland at the turn of the 14th century . According to this source , the sword was given to King Boleslaus the Brave ( reigned 992 – 1025 ) by an angel ; Polish kings were supposed to always carry it in battle to triumph over their enemies . During Boleslaus 's invasion of Kievan Rus ' , he hit it against the Golden Gate of Kiev while capturing the city . It was the notch that appeared on the edge of the blade which gave the sword its name . This account , written three centuries after the events it describes , is implausible not only because of the customary reference to the sword 's supernatural origin ( compare Excalibur ) , but also because Boleslaus 's intervention in the Kievan succession crisis took place in 1018 , or about 19 years before the actual construction of the Golden Gate in 1037 . 
 It is plausible , though , that Boleslaus did chip his sword by striking it against an earlier gate in Kiev . His great @-@ grandson , Boleslaus the Bold ( r . 1058 – 1079 ) , hit the Golden Gate with a sword in 1069 , which would indicate that it was a customary gesture of gaining control over a city . It is also possible that this sword was preserved as a souvenir of past victories venerated by Boleslaus the Brave 's successors . According to Wincenty Kadłubek 's Chronicle , Boleslaus <unk> ( r . 1107 – 1138 ) had a favorite sword he called <unk> or Grus ( " Crane " ) . A scribe who copied the chronicle in 1450 added the word <unk> above the word <unk> , but whether these two swords were one and the same is uncertain . 
 According to the Chronicle of Greater Poland , the sword was kept in the treasury of the Wawel Cathedral . The ultimate fate of the original Szczerbiec is unknown . It may have been taken to Prague , together with other royal insignia , by King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia after his coronation as king of Poland in Gniezno in 1300 . What happened with these insignia thereafter remains a mystery . Although Boleslaus the Brave 's notched sword has not been preserved and even its very existence is doubtful , its legend had a great impact on Polish historical memory and the treatment of its successor , the modern Szczerbiec . 
 = = = From a sword of justice to a coronation sword = = = 
 The sword currently known as Szczerbiec was forged and decorated in a style characteristic of the late 12th and 13th centuries , so it could not have belonged to any of the three great <unk> of the 11th and early 12th centuries . Additionally , it is a purely ceremonial sword which , unlike the original Szczerbiec , was never used in combat . It was originally used as a sword of justice ( gladius <unk> ) , or insignia of the sovereign 's judicial power , by one of the many local dukes during Poland 's Age of Fragmentation . A silver plate , now lost , on the sword 's grip bore an inscription which indicated a duke by the name Boleslaus as its original owner . An inscription on the <unk> ' replica of Szczerbiec , now also lost , could provide an additional hint as to the duke 's identity : " Boleslaus , Duke of Poland , Masovia , and Łęczyca " – except that no duke of this name and titles ever existed . Historians have variously identified the duke in question as Boleslaus the Curly ( r . 1146 – 1173 ) , Boleslaus the Chaste ( r . 1226 – 1279 ) , Boleslaus I of Masovia ( r . 1229 – 1248 ) or Boleslaus the Pious of Greater Poland ( r . 1239 – 1247 ) . 
 As a coronation sword , Szczerbiec was first specifically mentioned by Jan Długosz in his account of the crowning of King Casimir IV ( r . 1447 – 1492 ) , but it was probably first used in a coronation ceremony by King Vladislaus the Elbow @-@ High ( r . 1288 – 1333 ) in 1320 , by which time he had reunited most of the core territories of Poland . If Szczerbiec had previously belonged to his uncle , Boleslaus I of Masovia , or his father @-@ in @-@ law , Boleslaus the Pious , then he could have inherited it . If it had belonged to any of the two <unk> who had ruled from Kraków as high dukes of all Poland , then Vladislaus could have simply found it in the Wawel Cathedral . Thereafter , Szczerbiec became an integral part of the Polish Crown Jewels , shared their fate , and was the principal ceremonial sword used in coronations of all Polish kings until 1764 , except Vladislaus II Jogaila ( 1386 ) , Stephen Báthory ( 1576 ) , Stanislaus I Leszczyński ( 1705 ) , and Augustus III Wettin ( 1734 ) . 
 Szczerbiec , together with other crown jewels , was removed from the Wawel Hill on several occasions during that period . After his Polish coronation in 1370 , King Louis I of Hungary took the crown jewels with him to Buda ; his successor on the Hungarian throne , Emperor Sigismund , rendered them to Poland in 1412 . On two occasions , in mid @-@ 17th and early 18th centuries , they were evacuated across Poland 's southern border to protect them from invading Swedish armies . In 1733 , during the War of the Polish Succession , supporters of King Stanislaus I concealed the jewels in a Warsaw church for three years to prevent Augustus III from using them in his coronation . In 1764 , they were sent to Warsaw again , to be used in a coronation for the last time – that of Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski . They were returned to Kraków afterwards . 
 During a typical Polish coronation ceremony in the times of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , the king @-@ elect received Szczerbiec after his anointment and before being crowned and enthroned . The primate of Poland , that is the archbishop of Gniezno , picked up the unsheathed sword from the altar and handed it to the kneeling king . At the same time , he recited a formula which asked the monarch to use the sword to rule justly , defend the Church , fight evil , protect widows and orphans , and to " rebuild what is damaged , maintain what is rebuilt , avenge what is unjust , reinforce what is well managed , " etc . Then , the king handed the sword to the Crown sword @-@ bearer ( <unk> koronny ) , who slid it into the scabbard and passed on to the primate . The primate , aided by the Crown and Lithuanian sword @-@ bearers , fastened the scabbard to the king 's belt . The king stood up and , facing onlookers , withdrew Szczerbiec , made three times the sign of the cross with it , and wiped it against his left arm before replacing it in the scabbard . The king 's sword @-@ wielding abilities were closely watched by his new subjects during this part of the ritual . When Augustus III betrayed his poor fencing skills at his coronation , nobles joked that they were going to have " a peaceful lord " . After Szczerbiec , a bishop handed the sovereign the Grunwald Swords symbolizing the monarch 's reign over the two constituent nations of the Commonwealth . 
 Throughout the period from Casimir the Great ( r . 1333 – 1370 ) to Stanislaus Augustus , Polish crown jewels were commonly believed to date back to the times of Boleslaus the Brave . This conviction helped maintain a sense of continuity of Polish statehood and provide legitimacy for the nation 's kings , implicitly making each Polish monarch a successor of the ancient and glorious legacy of the first king of the House of Piast . Accordingly , the coronation sword took over the name and the legend of the original Szczerbiec . The corrosion @-@ induced slit in the blade became associated with the fabled szczerba , or notch that Boleslaus had purportedly made on his sword in Kiev . The power of tradition was so strong that when Stanislaus Augustus 's court painter , Marcello Bacciarelli , who had made detailed studies of Polish crown jewels , painted an imaginary portrait of Boleslaus the Brave , he chose to depict Szczerbiec so that its appearance agreed with legend rather than reality . The images of the coronation crown and sword are overall meticulously accurate , but Bacciarelli 's Szczerbiec lacks the slit and has a chipped edge instead . 
 = = = In foreign hands = = = 
 In 1794 , during the failed Kościuszko Uprising which led to the final partition of Poland a year later , Prussian troops captured Kraków . In the following year , on King Frederick William II 's orders , the treasure vault of the Wawel Castle was looted and the crown jewels taken to Breslau ( now Wrocław in Poland ) , then to Berlin , and finally to Königsberg ( now Kaliningrad in Russia ) . Between 1809 and 1811 most of the jewels were melted down , but some , including Szczerbiec , were put up for sale . The coronation sword was acquired by the future Russian minister of justice , Prince Dmitry Lobanov @-@ Rostovsky , who probably hoped to resell it to one of Polish aristocrats . In 1819 , he approached General Wincenty Krasiński , speaker of the Sejm ( parliament ) of the " Congress " Kingdom of Poland . The prince did not disclose the actual source of the sword and claimed to have bought it in Moscow from an Armenian merchant who had found the weapon somewhere between Belgrade and <unk> ( now Ruse in Bulgaria ) during the recent Russo – Turkish War . Krasiński , who was a known antique weapon collector , suspected it could be Szczerbiec , but asked Prof. Sebastiano Ciampi , a historian of the Warsaw University , for opinion . Ciampi examined the lithography Krasiński had had made of the sword , but was unsure whether it was the actual Szczerbiec . As a consequence , Krasiński declined Lobanov @-@ Rostovsky 's offer . 
 Lobanov @-@ Rostovsky ultimately sold Szczerbiec to Prince Anatole Demidov who kept it together with the rest of the Demidov collection in his Villa San Donato near Florence . In 1870 , the sword was bought for 20 @,@ 000 French francs by Alexander <unk> , Russian ambassador to France and great art collector . In 1878 , he displayed Szczerbiec at the World 's Fair in Paris . By that time , the scabbard had been lost and the sword itself was presented as of Teutonic origin . It was seen by several Polish visitors who speculated whether it could be the Polish coronation sword . In 1884 , the entire <unk> collection was purchased by Emperor Alexander III of Russia for the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg . Both Polish and other experts at the time expressed doubts as to the authenticity of Szczerbiec held in Russia 's largest museum ( see Historical replicas below ) . An international museum congress held in Saint Petersburg in 1913 pronounced the sword a 17th @-@ century replica . 
 In 1917 , as a result of the October Revolution , Russia became a communist state . In the aftermath of World War I , Poland reemerged as an independent country in the following year . From 1919 to 1921 , the two states fought the Polish – Soviet War which was concluded with the Peace of Riga . Article 11 of the peace treaty required that the Soviet side return all culturally significant collections and items that had been removed from Poland since the First Partition in 1772 . A special bilateral committee was set up to carry out the restitution of cultural goods . In 1928 , the committee 's efforts resulted in the return to Poland of , among other national treasures , Szczerbiec , which , after 133 years , was deposited back in the Wawel Castle . 
 = = = Evacuation in World War II = = = 
 On 3 September 1939 , two days after Germany invaded Poland triggering the Second World War , began the evacuation of the most precious national treasures , including Szczerbiec , from the Wawel Castle . The cargo was transported on barges , wagons , buses and trucks to Romania . From there , it was shipped by sea to France and later to Britain . On the way from Bordeaux to Falmouth , the ship carrying Polish national treasures came under fire from the Luftwaffe . Karol <unk> , who oversaw the evacuation , decided then to remove Szczerbiec from a chest and sandwich it between two wooden planks , and to attach to them an explanatory message in a bottle – so that in the event that the ship was sunk , at least the coronation sword could be salvaged . When the German bombing of Britain began in July 1940 , the valuables were transported aboard the Polish ocean liner MS Batory to Canada and finally deposited at the Polish consulate and then other locations in Ottawa . After the war , one of the custodians of the national treasures , who remained loyal to the London @-@ based Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile , was reluctant to return them to Poland , which had fallen under communist rule and Soviet influence . After lengthy negotiations , the first batch of the most important objects , including Szczerbiec , was ultimately returned in 1959 ; the rest followed in 1961 . Since then , the Polish coronation sword has been on permanent display in the treasure vault of the Wawel Castle . 
 = = Historical replicas = = 
 A treasury inventory of the Radziwiłł family 's Nieśwież Castle ( now Nesvizh in Belarus ) made in 1740 includes a detailed description of a sword decorated with symbols of the Evangelists and inscriptions identical to those on Szczerbiec . According to the inventory , it was a gift from Crown Prince Jakub Sobieski to Prince Michał Radziwiłł , but the original source of the supposed replica was not given . An inventory made in 1738 of the treasure vault of the Sobieski family 's Żółkiew Castle ( now <unk> in Ukraine ) mentions " an <unk> ( <unk> ) covered with golden plates bearing images of the Four Evangelists ; <unk> 's . " Based on this record , historian Aleksander <unk> hypothesized that a replica of Szczerbiec was forged as early as 1457 and awarded to George Kastrioti Skanderbeg , the national leader of Albania , in recognition of his victory over the Ottoman forces ( see Battle of Ujëbardha ) . After King John III Sobieski defeated the Ottomans in the Battle of Vienna in 1683 , Albanians presumably returned the sword to him . His son , Jakub , possibly passed it on to Michał Radziwiłł as a present . 
 There are doubts , however , whether the swords known to have been at Żółkiew in 1738 and at Nieśwież two years later , were in fact the same sword . The <unk> ' castle was plundered by the Russian army in 1812 and the subsequent fate of their replica of Szczerbiec is unknown . This fact cast doubts over the authenticity of Szczerbiec held in the Hermitage . Some experts suspected that the sword possessed by the Russian imperial museum was in fact the Nieśwież replica , not part of the original royal insignia . 
 Another historically notable replica of Szczerbiec was produced probably in Dresden , Saxony , at the time when the original was in Prussian hands . It is modest and inexact ; the handle is carved in bovine bone and the niello is imitated with black paint . Designs on the handle are patterned on those of the genuine Szczerbiec , except that the crosses and letters on the pommel were replaced with the coat of arms of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . The blade was initially shorter than that of the original , actually typical for a stiletto . It was purchased in Dresden by art historian Edward <unk> , who in 1869 donated it to the archeological collection of the Jagiellonian University of Kraków . The university lost it during the German occupation in World War II . After the war , the replica found itself in the hands of Tadeusz Janowski who smuggled it to the United States in 1947 . At around that time , the short stiletto blade was replaced with a long blade of a 16th @-@ century German sword . To imitate Szczerbiec , a slit was cut in the blade and small heraldic shields were attached to it on both sides . During the communist rule in Poland , the Polish American community of Chicago treated the replica as a symbol of Poland 's independence . In 1968 , it was demonstrated to U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy while he was meeting with Polish Americans during his presidential campaign . Janowski returned the sword to the Jagiellonian University in 2003 . 
 = = Modern symbolism = = 
 In the interwar period , a simplified image of Szczerbiec wrapped three times in a white @-@ and @-@ red ribbon was adopted as a symbol of Polish nationalist organizations led by Roman Dmowski – the Camp of Great Poland ( Obóz <unk> Polski ) , the National Party ( Stronnictwo Narodowe ) , and the All @-@ Polish Youth ( <unk> <unk> ) . Their members wore it as a badge called Mieczyk Chrobrego , or " Little Sword of [ Boleslaus ] the Brave " . The symbol was also sewn onto the left sleeve of the sand shirt which was part of the Camp of Great Poland uniform . Among the politicians who wore the badge before World War II were Roman Dmowski , Władysław Grabski , Wojciech <unk> , Roman <unk> , and Wojciech Jaruzelski . During World War II , the badge was used by right @-@ wing anti @-@ Nazi and anti @-@ Soviet military resistance groups , the National Armed Forces ( Narodowe <unk> <unk> ) and the National Military Organization ( Narodowa Organizacja Wojskowa ) . After the fall of communism in Poland , the Mieczyk Chrobrego symbol was readopted by new or reactivated nationalist and far @-@ right organizations , including League of Polish Families ( Liga Polskich <unk> ) , All @-@ Polish Youth and the Camp of Great Poland . Additionally , Szczerbiec is the title of a periodical published since 1991 by a minor radical nationalist party , the National Revival of Poland ( Narodowe <unk> Polski ) . 
 In 2005 , the Polish Football Association , in an attempt to fight racism among Polish football fans , prepared a blacklist of most common racist and fascist symbols to be banned from Polish football stadiums . The catalogue , co @-@ authored by independent anti @-@ fascist organization Never Again ( <unk> <unk> ) , listed the Mieczyk Chrobrego as one of the extreme right symbols that are often displayed at the Polish stadiums . The catalogue listed other racist and fascist symbols like the Nazi swastika , the Celtic cross , and the Confederate Flag . After a protest by MEP Sylwester <unk> of the League of Polish Families , additional consultations were held with historians , academic researchers and other experts and as a result the symbol is still listed in the catalogue of extreme @-@ right symbols banned at Polish football stadiums . It was also banned by UEFA during Euro 2008 and 2012 . 
 The symbolic use of Szczerbiec became a bone of contention again in 2009 . After a monument to the Ukrainian Insurgent Army ( <unk> 'ka <unk> 'ka Armiya ) on the <unk> Mountain in southeastern Poland was vandalized , authorities of the Ukrainian city of Lviv demanded the removal of an image of Szczerbiec from the local Polish military cemetery . The Ukrainians , recalling the legendary use of the original sword in a Polish invasion of Kiev , argued it was a Polish nationalist , militaristic and anti @-@ Ukrainian symbol . 
 = 1959 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1959 Atlantic hurricane season had a then record @-@ tying number of tropical cyclones – five – develop before August 1 . The season was officially to begin on June 15 , 1959 and last until November 15 , 1959 , the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin , however in actuality the season began early when Tropical Storm Arlene formed on May 28 . Tropical Storm Arlene struck Louisiana and brought minor flooding to the Gulf Coast of the United States . The next storm , Beulah , formed in the western Gulf of Mexico and brought negligible impact to Mexico and Texas . Later in June , an unnamed hurricane , nicknamed the Escuminac disaster , caused minor damage in Florida and devastated coastal Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , after becoming extratropical . Hurricane Cindy brought minor impact to The Carolinas . In late July , Hurricane Debra produced flooding in the state of Texas . Tropical Storm Edith in August and Hurricane Flora in September caused negligible impact on land . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Gracie , which peaked as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . After weakening slightly , Gracie made landfall as a Category 3 hurricane in South Carolina on August 29 . It brought strong winds , rough seas , heavy rainfall , and tornadoes to the state , as well as North Carolina and Virginia . Overall , Gracie caused 22 fatalities and $ 14 million in damage . Following Hurricane Gracie was Hurricane Hannah , a long @-@ lived storm that did not cause any known impact on land . The last two tropical cyclones , Tropical Storm Irene and Hurricane Judith , both caused minor coastal and inland flooding in Florida . The storms of the 1959 Atlantic hurricane season were collectively attributed to $ 24 million ( 1959 USD ) and 64 fatalities . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The 1959 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 , 1959 , and it ended on November 15 , 1959 . Eleven tropical depressions developed during the season . All eleven of the depressions attained tropical storm status , which was slightly above the 1950 – 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms . Of the eleven systems , seven of them attained hurricane status , which was also slightly above the average of 5 @.@ 9 . Furthermore , two storms reached major hurricane status – Category 3 or greater on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Five tropical storms and three hurricanes made landfall during the season and caused 64 fatalities and about $ 24 million ( 1959 USD ) in damage . 
 Season activity began with the development of Tropical Storm Arlene on May 28 . In the month of June , Tropical Storm Beulah and an unnamed hurricane formed , the latter becoming a hurricane on June 19 . Another pair of hurricanes , Cindy and Debra , formed in the month of July . Collectively , the five tropical cyclones that formed in May , June , and July made the 1959 season the one of the most active seasons before August 1 , tied with 1887 , 1933 , 1936 , 1966 , 1995 and 1997 . The record was later surpassed in 2005 when seven tropical cyclones formed before August 1 . However , tropical cyclogenesis slowed down in August , with only Tropical Storm Edith forming during the month . Next , three tropical cyclones formed in September – Flora , Gracie , and Hannah – all of which attained hurricane status . Furthermore , in October , Tropical Storm Irene and Hurricane Judith , the 1959 season 's final storm , developed . The latter storm dissipated on October 21 , almost a month before the official end of the season on November 15 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 77 , which is slightly below the 1950 – 2000 average of 94 @.@ 7 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Arlene = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into the first tropical depression of the season on May 28 , while located in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico . The depression strengthened and , early on the following day , was upgraded to Tropical Storm Arlene . The storm slowly intensified and reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on May 29 . Rapid weakening took place as the storm approached land . By late on May 30 , Arlene made landfall near Lafayette , Louisiana with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Early on the following day the storm weakened to a tropical depression while barely inland . The system eventually curved east @-@ northeastward and meandered across the Southern United States until dissipating over South Carolina on June 2 . 
 In Louisiana , a state maximum rainfall of 13 @.@ 13 in ( 334 mm ) fell in Houma . As a result , a few towns along the coast reported downed trees and electrical lines from high winds , which caused scattered power outages . In New Orleans , several roads were shut down due to inundation . Additionally , at least 100 homes within the city were flooded . In Baton Rouge , dozens of people were evacuated from a flooded home via ambulance and wagon to safer areas . Overall , damage was light , reaching $ 500 @,@ 000 . One death was related to Arlene ; a man drowned in rough surf off the coast of Galveston , Texas . After storm dissipated over the Southeastern United States , the extratropical remnants of Arlene brought moderate rainfall to parts of the Mid @-@ Atlantic States and New England . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Beulah = = = 
 A cold front became stationary as it began to move across the Gulf of Mexico on June 13 . After the SS Hondo reported winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , it is estimated that a tropical depression developed at 1800 UTC on June 15 , while located in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico . By June 16 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Beulah . Further deepening occurred and the storm peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on June 17 . As Beulah neared the Gulf Coast of Mexico , a building ridge of high pressure forced the storm southward . It then began to encounter stronger upper level winds and weakened to a tropical depression on June 18 . Shortly thereafter , the storm dissipated about 20 miles ( 32 km ) northeast of Tuxpan , Veracruz . Tides of 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal occurred along the Texas coast , though no impact was reported in Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression while situated in the central Gulf of Mexico on June 18 . It headed rapidly northeastward and made landfall near the Tampa Bay Area of Florida later that day . The storm dropped moderately heavy rainfall in Florida , which caused damage to crops . A tornado near Miami and high tides on the west coast of the state also resulted in damage . Losses in Florida were around $ 1 @.@ 7 million . Shortly thereafter , in entered the Atlantic Ocean and strengthened into a tropical storm later on June 18 . By the following day , it had strengthened into a hurricane ; the storm simultaneously peaked with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . 
 The storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on June 19 . The remnants struck Atlantic Canada , once in Nova Scotia and again in Newfoundland before dissipating on June 21 . After becoming extratropical , the storm caused significant effects in Atlantic Canada . About 45 boats were in the Northumberland Strait between New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island , and they did not have radio to receive warning of the approaching storm . Rough seas of up to 49 ft ( 15 m ) in height damaged or destroyed many boats . At least 22 fishing boats capsized over water with their crew , causing 35 deaths . High winds also disrupted communications in some areas , and several houses were damaged , with losses reaching about $ 781 @,@ 000 . The New Brunswick Fishermen 's Disaster Fund was created to assist victims . The fund raised $ 400 @,@ 000 in a few months from donations from throughout Canada , as well as Pope John XXIII and Queen Elizabeth II , the latter who was on a tour of the country at the time . 
 = = = Hurricane Cindy = = = 
 An low @-@ pressure area associated with a cold front developed into a tropical depression on July 5 , while located east of Florida . Tracking north @-@ northeastward , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Cindy by the next day . Cindy turned westward because of a high @-@ pressure area positioned to its north , and further intensified into a hurricane offshore the Carolinas on July 8 . Cindy made landfall near McClellanville , South Carolina early on July 9 , and re @-@ curved to the northeast along the fall line as a tropical depression . It re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic on July 10 and quickly restrengthened into a tropical storm . On July 11 , Cindy passed over Cape Cod , while several other weather systems helped the storm maintain its intensity . Cindy transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on July 12 while approaching Atlantic Canada . 
 Overall structural damage from Cindy was minimal . One driver was killed in Georgetown , South Carolina after colliding with a fallen tree , and five deaths were caused by poor road conditions wrought by the storm in New England . Many areas experienced heavy rains , and several thousand people evacuated . Damage was mainly confined to broken tree limbs , shattered windows and power outages . Cindy brought a total of eleven tornadoes with it , of which two caused minor damage in North Carolina . The heaviest rainfall occurred in northern South Carolina , where rainfall amounted to 9 @.@ 79 inches ( 249 mm ) . Tides ranged from 1 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal along the coast . As drought @-@ like conditions were present in The Carolinas at the time , the rain that fell in the area was beneficial . After becoming extratropical over Atlantic Canada , the cyclone produced heavy rains and strong winds that sunk one ship . Damage caused by Cindy was estimated at $ 75 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Hurricane Debra = = = 
 On July 23 , interaction of a cold @-@ core low and a tropical wave spawned a tropical depression located south of Louisiana . The depression meandered westward while steadily intensifying , becoming a Tropical Storm on July 24 . A turn towards the northwest became evident as it attained Category 1 hurricane status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale on the following day . Strength was maintained as the hurricane curved northward at a slow forward speed , and it approached the coast of Texas as a minimal hurricane . Debra made landfall between Freeport and Galveston , Texas early on July 25 . Debra rapidly weakened into a tropical storm and later a depression as it moved inland , and it dissipated on July 28 . The remnant moisture later sparked upper @-@ level thunderstorms in late July and early August . 
 Torrential rains were produced in southeastern Texas , peaking at 15 @.@ 89 inches ( 404 mm ) in Orange . This led to widespread flooding on highways , including portions of Farm Road 518 , Highway 6 , Highway 146 , and U.S. Route 75 . Sea vessels took the brunt of the storm , with many becoming stranded or damaged . Air , rail , and road transportation were significantly interrupted or even shut down . High winds from the storm caused expansive damage to buildings , windows , signs , and roofs . The hurricane resulted in 11 injuries but no human deaths , although approximately 90 cattle drowned . Damage in Brazoria , Galveston , and Harris counties surmounted $ 6 @.@ 685 million . Additionally , impact in other areas increased the total losses to $ 7 million . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Edith = = = 
 A tropical wave was tracked east of the Lesser Antilles in mid @-@ August . At 1530 UTC on August 17 , a reconnaissance aircraft reported a weak center and winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Less than three hours later , a tropical depression developed while located east of the Windward Islands . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Edith early on August 18 . The storm moved west @-@ northwestward at a relatively quick pace and passed through the Leeward Islands near Guadeloupe later that day . By 1800 UTC on August 18 , Edith peaked with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . It curved westward and accelerated on August 19 . Edith weakened to a tropical depression at 1200 UTC , hours before dissipating near the southern tip of Dominican Republic . There was " considerable doubt " if a circulation ever existed . <unk> weather and gusty winds were reported in some areas , including Guadeloupe , the Virgin Islands , Puerto Rico , and Hispaniola . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 = = = Hurricane Flora = = = 
 A tropical wave passed through the islands of Cape Verde on September 6 and tracked westward at about 19 mph ( 31 km / h ) . Early on September 9 , a tropical depression developed while located about midway between Cape Verde and the Lesser Antilles . The depression moved northeastward and by September 10 it strengthened into Tropical Storm Flora . A reconnaissance aircraft flight into the storm on September 11 recorded winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) ; thus , Flora became a hurricane . Around the time , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of the same velocity and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . Flora then accelerated northeastward toward the Azores . During another reconnaissance flight on September 12 , no evidence of a tropical cyclone was reported . Thus , Flora became extratropical at 1200 UTC that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Gracie = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression north of Hispaniola on September 20 . The depression remained offshore the island and moved west @-@ northwestward . By September 22 , it curved northeastward and became Tropical Storm Gracie . The storm then moved through The Bahamas , producing 8 @.@ 4 inches ( 210 mm ) on Mayaguana . Later on September 22 Gracie intensified into a hurricane . It deepened further to a Category 2 , on September 23 , before weakening later that day . Gracie then meandered slowly and erratically while northeast of The Bahamas , before curving northwestward on September 27 . It became a Category 2 hurricane again by September 28 . During the next 24 hours , Gracie deepened significantly and peaked as a 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane . However , it weakened back to a Category 3 hurricane before making landfall on Edisto Island , South Carolina at 1625 UTC on September 29 . Gracie was the one of the strongest tropical cyclones to strike South Carolina until Hurricane Hugo in 1989 . It rapidly weakened inland , becoming extratropical on September 30 . 
 Along the coast of South Carolina , the highest tide recorded was 9 @.@ 7 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above mean low water at Charleston Harbor . On Folly Beach , all waterfront houses sustained some damage , while roads on the east side of the island were washed away . Gracie brought wind gusts as high as 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) to the Beaufort area . Inland , 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) winds lashed <unk> . As much as 75 % of Charleston County was left without electricity . Farther north , a tornado damaged homes in Garden City . Throughout the South Carolina Lowcountry , 48 homes were destroyed , 349 homes suffered major damage , and 4 @,@ 115 homes suffered minor damage . The remnants dropped rainfall and spawned tornadoes in several other states as it headed northeastward across the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England regions . In Virginia , three tornadoes in Albemarle , Greene , and Fluvanna Counties collectively caused 11 fatalities . Precipitation from the storm peaked at 13 @.@ 2 inches ( 340 mm ) in Big Meadows . Overall , Gracie was attributed to 22 deaths and $ 14 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Hannah = = = 
 After ships reported a low @-@ level circulation , it was estimated that a tropical depression developed at 26 @.@ 8 ° N , 49 @.@ 9 ° W on September 27 . Early on the following day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Hannah . Reconnaissance aircraft flew into the storm late on September 28 and indicated that Hannah intensified into a Category 1 hurricane . Hannah moved generally westward at about 16 mph ( 26 km / h ) . By September 30 , the storm became a Category 2 hurricane , and it curved northwestward later that day . Hannah deepened to a Category 3 hurricane on October 1 , hours before the storm reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 959 mbar ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) . The storm maintained this intensity for about 48 hours and curved northeastward on October 2 . 
 Hannah began to a weaken late on October 3 . By the following day , the storm fell to Category 2 hurricane intensity . It accelerated eastward or east @-@ southeastward across the central Atlantic , starting on October 4 . Hannah re @-@ strengthened slightly to a 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on October 5 , but then slowly began weakening again . The final advisory on the storm was issued early on October 7 , while it was centered about 200 miles ( 320 km ) south @-@ southwest of the Azores , however Hannah remained a tropical cyclone and crossed through the Azores later that day . No impact was reported in the islands . It weakened to a Category 1 hurricane early on October 8 , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over the far northeastern Atlantic several hours later . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Irene = = = 
 In early October , a cold front drifted through Texas and entered the Gulf of Mexico . On October 5 the front dissipated while a related trough persisted . Upper @-@ level air temperatures were generally warm , and a minimal anticyclone was situated over the Gulf . At this time , a Colorado low drew polar air into the Mississippi Valley , suggesting extratropical characteristics of the developing system . A tropical depression formed on October 6 ; it meandered in a north @-@ northeasterly direction for the next two days . The storm intensified into Tropical Storm Irene around 1800 UTC on October 7 . Around this time , a Hurricane Hunters flight indicated that the circulation was indistinct , although it was gradually evolving . On October 8 , Irene made landfall near Pensacola , Florida as a well @-@ organized tropical storm . The storm rapidly weakened to a tropical depression , before dissipating early on October 9 . 
 The highest tides , 4 @.@ 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) above normal , were reported at Cedar Key , Florida , while the strongest gust recorded , 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) , was measured at Pensacola International Airport . Heavy rainfall from Irene spread across much of the Southern United States , peaking at 10 @.@ 96 inches ( 278 mm ) in Neels Gap , Georgia . In Florida , flooding from rainfall associated with Irene caused damage around the Lake Okeechobee area . Losses in Florida was limited to uncollected crops , mainly peanuts and corn , that were in bales in the process of being dried . Several floods were flooded along the coast at Shalimar near Fort Walton Beach . The winds downed trees and a telephone pole , causing a short power outage in Ocean City . Red tides were ongoing in western Florida ; winds from the storm 's precursor blew thousands of dead fish ashore . Local residents complained that the odor from the rotting fish were unbearable . 
 = = = Hurricane Judith = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into Tropical Storm Judith on October 17 , near the Yucatán Channel . It strengthened quickly , and by early on October 18 the storm was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . However six hours later Judith had weakened back to a tropical storm . Around 1800 UTC on October 18 the storm made landfall near Boca Grande , Florida , with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . After emerging into the Atlantic Ocean on the following day , Judith began re @-@ strengthening while heading east @-@ northeastward , reaching hurricane status several hours later . It peaked with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) early on October 20 , before weakening back to a tropical storm again on October 21 . Judith weakened further , before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone later that day . 
 Impact from Judith was generally minor and limited mostly to Southwest Florida . Wind gusts up to 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) toppled several trees on Sanibel Island and a few power poles ; a man was injured when his car struck a fallen pole . Rough seas caused erosion on Captiva Island and in Fort Myers , while also inundating several roads in the area . A combination of locally heavy rainfall and tides caused minor flooding in low @-@ lying areas . Precipitation from the storm peaked at 7 @.@ 90 inches ( 201 mm ) in Miles City . The Imperial River overflowed near Bonita Springs , flooding pasture lands and washing out crops , most of which were recently planted . A portion of U.S. Route 41 was inundated by up to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water in Bonita Springs . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1959 . All names in this list were first time in 1959 . Gracie was later removed from the list for unknown reasons . 
 = Madeira firecrest = 
 The Madeira firecrest , Madeira kinglet , or <unk> ( Regulus madeirensis ) is a very small passerine bird endemic to the island of Madeira . It is a member of the kinglet family . Before it was recognised as a separate species in 2003 , it was classified as a subspecies of the common firecrest . It differs in appearance and vocalisations from its relative , and genetic analysis has confirmed it as a different species . The Madeiran bird has green upperparts , whitish underparts and two white wingbars , and a distinctive head pattern with a black eye stripe , short white supercilium , and a crest that is mainly orange in the male and yellow in the female . 
 The female Madeira firecrest builds a spherical nest from cobwebs , moss and small twigs , and she incubates the eggs and broods the chicks on her own . Both parents feed the young . This species forages for insects and other small invertebrates in tree heath , laurisilva and other woodland . It is common within its restricted range , and is not considered to be threatened . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Madeira firecrest is a small plump bird , of 9 – 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) length and weighing about 5 g ( 0 @.@ 18 oz ) . It has bright olive @-@ green upperparts with a bronze @-@ coloured patch on each shoulder , and whitish underparts washed with brownish grey on the breast and flanks . It has two white wingbars , a tiny black bill and brownish @-@ black legs . The head pattern is striking , with a black eye stripe , white supercilium and a crest which is yellow in the female and mainly orange in the male . Juveniles have a grey tinge to the duller upperparts , and lack the crown and eye stripes and supercilium ; by their first winter , only the flight and tail feathers remain <unk> , and the young birds are virtually indistinguishable from the adults in the field . This kinglet usually hops with its body held horizontally , and its flight is weak and whirring , with occasional jinking . 
 Compared to the common firecrest , the Madeiran firecrest has a longer bill and legs , a shorter white supercilium , more black on the wings and a deeper golden @-@ bronze shoulder patch ; the male 's crest is duller orange . Juveniles have plainer heads , lacking the dull supercilium shown by the young of the European species . 
 The vocalisations of Madeiran and common firecrests both consist of high @-@ pitched notes , but the Madeiran bird has its song divided into three distinct parts , whereas that of the more widespread species just accelerates gradually and covers a much smaller frequency range . The calls of both species include high @-@ pitched fine vocalisations <unk> zu @-@ zi @-@ zi , although the Madeiran firecrest also has a distinctive shrill <unk> and a whistled peep . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The kinglets are a small group of birds sometimes included in the Old World warblers , but frequently given family status , especially as recent research showed that , despite superficial similarities , the crests are taxonomically remote from the warblers . The names of the family , Regulidae , and its only genus , Regulus , are derived from the Latin regulus , a diminutive of rex , " a king " , and refer to the characteristic orange or yellow crests of adult kinglets . The species name madeirensis is derived from the island on which this bird is found . The Madeira firecrest was first described by English naturalist Edward Vernon Harcourt in 1851 . Until recently , it was considered to be a subspecies , R. i. madeirensis , of the common firecrest R. ignicapillus . A phylogenetic analysis based on the cytochrome b gene showed that the Madeiran form is distinct at the species level from the firecrest nominate subspecies R. i. ignicapillus . Cytochrome b gene divergence between the Madeira firecrest and the European bird is 8 @.@ 5 % , comparable with the divergence level between other recognised Regulus species , such as the 9 % between the goldcrest and the golden @-@ crowned kinglet . The split was accepted by the Association of European Rarities Committees ( AERC ) in 2003 , but some authorities , such as Clements , have not yet recognised the new species . The International Ornithological Congress ' recommended English name for this species was " <unk> " , but this has been changed to " Madeira firecrest " . 
 The songs of the four subspecies of common firecrest ( nominate R. i. ignicapillus , Mediterranean R. i. balearicus , southeastern R. i. caucasicus and North African R. i. <unk> ) show a number of different song forms , but in general are very similar to each other , whereas the Madeiran firecrest has only one song type , which is divided into three phrases , two of them consisting of modified display and anger calls . Its display calls use a larger frequency range and more harmonics than the continental subspecies . Male common firecrests do not show a territorial response to recordings of the songs or calls of the Madeiran taxon , although Madeiran firecrests do react strongly to playback of the calls of the mainland birds . The island form was recognized as a separate species on the basis of differences from the mainland form in morphology , vocalisations , and genetics . 
 The Atlantic archipelagos of the Canaries , Azores , and Madeira have a volcanic origin and they have never been part of a continent . The formation of Madeira started in the Miocene and the island was substantially complete 700 @,@ 000 years ago . In the distant past the major islands of these archipelagos were all colonised by Regulus species , which evolved on their respective islands isolated from mainland populations . The firecrest descendant evolved in Madeira and goldcrest subspecies evolved on the other islands . Cytochrome b gene divergence between common firecrests from Europe and Madeira firecrests suggests an evolutionary separation roughly 4 million years ago , considerably earlier than the 2 @.@ 2 million years ago maximum estimate for the goldcrest radiations in the Canaries and Azores . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Madeira firecrest is endemic to the main island of Madeira . It occurs mainly at higher levels from 600 – 1 @,@ 550 m ( 1 @,@ 950 – 4 @,@ 900 ft ) in all types of forests and scrub , but with a preference for tree heaths . Although it is strongly adapted to endemic tree heaths , it also breeds in broom , relict laurel forest , oak @-@ dominated deciduous forest and stands of the introduced Japanese cedar , Cryptomeria japonica . It is absent from the alien eucalyptus and acacia plantations which have replaced much of the endemic Madeiran laurel forest . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The male Madeira firecrest sings during the breeding season , often with its crest raised , and has a display which involves pointing its bill at another bird , showing the crest and strong face pattern . This differs from the display of the plainer @-@ faced goldcrest , which bows its head to emphasize the crest . The Madeira firecrest is monogamous . As is typical for the family , the nest is a closed cup built in three layers with a small entrance hole near its top . The nest 's outer layer is made from moss , small twigs , cobwebs and lichen , the spider webs also being used to attach the nest to the thin branches that support it . The middle layer is moss , and this is lined with feathers ( up to 3 @,@ 000 ) and hair . It is constructed by the female alone , although the male will accompany the female while she builds the nest over a period of a few days to three weeks . 
 The eggs are described as like those of a Phylloscopus warbler ( white with some brown speckles ) , unlike the eggs of the common firecrest , which are pink with very indistinct reddish markings at the broad end . The clutch size is unknown , but believed to be smaller than the 7 – 12 of the nominate race of common firecrest . The female incubates the eggs for 14 @.@ 5 to 16 @.@ 5 days to hatching , and broods the chicks , which fledge 19 to 20 days after hatching . Both parents feed the chicks and fledged young . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 All Regulus species are almost exclusively insectivorous , preying on small arthropods with soft cuticles , such as springtails , aphids and spiders . They also feed on the cocoons and eggs of spiders and insects , and occasionally take pollen . The Madeira firecrest feeds in trees , exploiting mainly the upper surface of branches in coniferous habitat and of leaves in deciduous trees . This is in contrast to the goldcrest , which frequently feeds on the undersides of branches and leaves . The Madeira firecrest also forages in the moss and lichen which often covers the branches and trunks of laurel and oak trees . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 The limited species diversity of Madeira means that there are relatively few potential predators . Of the three birds of prey , the common buzzard and common kestrel take mainly mammalian prey ; however , the dark Macaronesian subspecies of the Eurasian sparrowhawk , Accipiter nisus granti , is a specialist predator of woodland birds . 
 Other than bats , there are no native land mammals , although there are a number of introduced species , two of which will take birds or chicks . These are brown rats and feral domestic cats . Even the high mountain nest sites of the endangered Zino 's petrel are at risk from these predators . 
 Data on specific parasites of the Madeira firecrest is lacking , but the widespread flea Dasypsyllus gallinulae has been recorded in a related Regulus species , and significant infection by non @-@ native pathogens such as avian pox and avian malaria has been detected in another Macaronesian bird , the Berthelot 's pipit . 
 = = Status = = 
 The Madeira firecrest 's range consists of a single island , on which it appears to be fairly common to very common , although its population has not been evaluated . It is therefore classed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . It may be declining because of fragmentation and loss of native forest habitat , but its ability to occupy plantations of some of the non @-@ native tree species has ameliorated this factor to some extent . 
 = University College , Durham = 
 University College , informally known as Castle , is a college of the University of Durham in England . Centred on Durham Castle on Palace Green , it was founded in 1832 and is the oldest of Durham 's colleges . As a constituent college of Durham University , it is listed as a higher education institution under section 216 of the Education Reform Act 1988 . Almost all academic activities , such as research and tutoring , occur at a university level . 
 University College moved into its current location in 1837 . Around 150 students are accommodated within Durham Castle . Other college buildings , including converted 18th century houses and purpose @-@ built accommodation from the 1950s , 1970s and 1980s , are within five minutes ' walk of the castle . The college has 700 undergraduates and is currently the most over @-@ subscribed college of the University . In 1987 it admitted women undergraduates for the first time , having previously had an all @-@ male student body . 
 As of January 2012 the Master of the college is political theorist David Held . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 University College was formed upon the creation of University of Durham in 1832 . It was the first college of the university , and is therefore known as the " foundation college " , but the university was founded explicitly on the Oxbridge model , and the intention was already for the university to develop along collegiate lines in the manner of Oxford and Cambridge , as indeed it has . Durham Castle had been the home of the Prince Bishops of Durham , and William van <unk> , one of the founders of the university , had intended for the castle to be given to the college . Temporary accommodation for students was provided at the Archdeacon 's Inn ( part of Cosin 's Hall ) on Palace Green until University College moved into its permanent home . Castle moved to its current location at Durham Castle in 1837 after van <unk> 's successor , Edward Maltby , completed renovations of the building . The castle 's keep , formerly a ruin , was redeveloped for student accommodation ; in particular , the college 's chapels and Great Hall have been restored . Since then high levels of maintenance have been , and still are , necessary to preserve the buildings of the castle . 
 The university 's second college , Hatfield Hall , was formed in 1846 as a response to the high costs of maintaining Castle . These costs arose from the students ' expectations of being provided with servants and room furnishings . The university struggled for the rest of the 19th century , held back by a lack of prestige and a distance from the centres of power in the UK . By 1882 , Castle contained some 79 undergraduates out of 205 at the university as a whole . Despite the university largely failing to gain recognition and prestige , a number of other colleges had opened by the end of the nineteenth century . Of these , Cosin 's Hall failed to become financially viable and was absorbed into University College in 1864 . Enrolment numbers continued to fluctuate . 
 = = = 1919 – 38 = = = 
 The inter @-@ war years were transformative for Castle . The college was the smallest in Durham university , with just 34 undergraduates in 1928 , and was struggling to meet maintenance costs . The Castle , situated on the banks of " The Peninsula " , was in danger of collapsing into the River Wear and many of its internal structures were weak . The combination of high costs and low undergraduate numbers meant that the college was often threatened with closure or merger with Hatfield . Castle was saved largely through charitable donations . A visit in the 1920s from Edward , Prince of Wales ( later Edward VIII ) , helped increase the profile of the cause . In the 1920s , the castle 's foundations were secured through reinforcement with concrete . Following these and other extensive building refurbishments of the 1920s and 1930s the college was now able to expand . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 One of its most successful periods followed during the Second World War when personnel of the Durham University Air Squadron were posted in the castle , doing short courses before joining the Royal Air Force . Those from the college who died during World War II were commemorated by the redevelopment of the Norman Gallery area of the Castle in the 1950s . This period also saw the launch of Castellum , an annual journal of the Castle Society , created to keep former students in touch with college life . In order to continue this expansion , the college purchased Lumley Castle in 1946 to house students , and by 1948 seventy five students were housed there . This section of the college developed a spirit of its own and is still remembered today through activities such as the Lumley Run . 
 During the 1950s and 1960s the college expanded through developments at Owengate and Bailey Court , both around Palace Green . In the 1970s , the college sold Lumley Castle . The proceeds were used to fund the development of Moatside Court , and meant that all the college 's students were now housed within five minutes of the main castle . During this period there was rapid change in the size and structure of the college , which expanded to over 300 undergraduates by 1979 . 
 Female students were admitted to the college for the first time in 1987 ; until then it had been single sex . Since this time the college has become fully mixed , with undergraduate numbers expanding to nearly seven hundred . Expansion caused a strain on college numbers , however , and in 2004 the college was unable to provide accommodation for all of its fresher students for the first time in its history . Following the foundation of Josephine Butler , Durham 's first new college to be opened since 1972 , pressure from the university to take on additional students has lessened , and undergraduate numbers have been intentionally reduced in recent years . 
 = = Buildings and architecture = = 
 Construction of Durham Castle began in 1072 , which makes it the oldest building in use at any University in the world . The castle retains much of its original design and structure , and is part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site with Durham Cathedral . 
 The castle 's northern wing originally contained a dining hall , but this was later divided up to make more luxurious quarters for the Prince Bishop . This area is also home to the two chapels of the college . The Norman Chapel dates from the 11th century and is the oldest accessible part of the castle , and retains its original Saxon architectural style . The <unk> Chapel is the larger of the two ; it dates from the 15th century and is named after Cuthbert <unk> . Both chapels are used for worship within the college . 
 To the east of the courtyard lies the Keep . It was re @-@ built in the 1830s , having previously lain in ruins . This area has the largest concentration of students living in the castle . To the south of the courtyard is the Gatehouse , built originally by Hugh de Puiset in the 12th century and re @-@ developed in the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries . Around this are the college 's more modern offices . 
 The college 's other buildings are at Moatside Court , Owengate and Bailey Court . The developments at Moatside Court and Bailey Court date from the 1960s and 1970s , whilst Owengate was formed from a series of old houses in the 1950s . Of these , Moatside Court 's rooms were of a notoriously poor quality , but have recently been renovated at the cost of over £ 1 million . 
 = = = Great Hall = = = 
 To the west of the courtyard is the medieval Great Hall , still used as a dining room by students and staff . It was built during the time of Anthony Bek in the 13th century . For two hundred years this was the largest Great Hall in Great Britain ; however , it was shortened by Richard Foxe . It still stands some 14 m ( 46 ft ) high and 30 m ( 98 ft ) long . The black staircase that leads from the Great Hall to the Senior Common Room dates from 1662 , and is another of the older sections of the college still in use . Underneath the Hall is the college bar , located in an 11th @-@ century undercroft . Around these are student accommodation , the Lowe Library , and kitchens . 
 = = = Lowe Library = = = 
 The Lowe Library is the college 's library . It was formed from a bequest from Colonel <unk> , an officer of the Durham University Officers ' Training Corps . He later became a Classics tutor at the university and rowing coach for University College , staying until his death in 1921 . The library was opened in 1925 , extended into the college 's wine cellar in 1997 , and now contains over 10 @,@ 000 books . It acts as a support to the central university library , providing access to core textbooks . 
 = = Role and activities = = 
 University College is the most over @-@ subscribed college at the university ; for entry in 2006 , there were 2 @,@ 858 applications for just 170 places ( approximately 17 applicants for every place ) . As with all colleges at Durham , students study for degrees with Durham University , not their college , and teaching takes place in academic departments . University College is a " listed body " under the Education Reform Act ( 1988 ) . 
 Although colleges are largely concerned with welfare , leisure and accommodation , University College has been running the ' Durham Castle Lecture Series ' since 2012 . Past and forthcoming speakers include Saskia Sassen , Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak , Rowan Williams , Anthony Giddens , Justin Welby and Martin Wolf . 
 Within Durham 's colleges , there is a strong competitive rivalry . Castle 's main rival is Hatfield College , which is Durham 's second oldest college , having separated from Castle in the 1850s . The rivalry is maintained by student pranks and tricks and in various intercollegiate sporting events . 
 The college has a commercial arm , taking advantage of the attractive nature of the college 's buildings . It hosts corporate events , conferences and weddings during the university vacations . 
 The Castle is open to tourists only via guided tours . These occur daily outside of term time , but are more restricted during the term due to potential conflicts with the running of the college . Furthermore , events in the university timetable may result in their cancellation . Tourists are not otherwise permitted entry to the college or any common areas . There is relatively little conflict between students and tourists , with many of the guided tours done by students themselves . 
 = = Student body = = 
 Some 700 undergraduates attend Castle , making it slightly smaller than the average Durham college . Of these students , around 100 live in the castle itself , while another 250 are housed in the college 's surrounding buildings . It remains the most popular college in Durham for applications , with around 23 students applying for every available place . 
 The undergraduate student body ( Junior Common Room or JCR ) is governed by an elected Executive Committee headed by the Senior Man ( even when a female student holds the role ) and supported by several other officers . Regular JCR meetings are held to discuss and vote on important issues . There are several other elected non @-@ executive officers such as Returning Officer , <unk> Rep and Sports Captain who organise other important college functions . The Senior Man meets regularly with college and university authorities to represent the JCR . 
 The JCR runs three balls every year for its students , with one held during each term . The largest is the end of year June Ball , which is the social highlight of the academic year . Tradition dictates that its theme remains closely hidden until the doors to the Castle open . 
 The graduate community at Castle forms the Middle Common Room ( MCR ) , which is based in the Maurice Tucker ( previously William de St @-@ Calais ) Room . However , due to size restrictions , no members of the MCR are currently able to live in the college grounds . The MCR , like the JCR , organises a number of social events and activities , such as the college 's entry into the inter @-@ collegiate University Challenge competition , which acts as trials for the University 's team . The Senior Common Room ( SCR ) , is an organisation of academics and tutors connected to the college . The SCR also organises formal meals with guest speakers . 
 The student bar of University College is called the Undercroft Bar ( known colloquially as The <unk> ) , due to its location in an 11th @-@ century Undercroft . It developed from the original Junior Common Room , which opened in the early 1950s . It is currently run by the Food and Beverage Services Manager ( Jamie Short ) with the help of the JCR Bar Chairman ( Matthew Kemp ) and the Vice Bar Chairman ( Barnaby Hodgkins ) . 
 = = = Societies = = = 
 University College JCR also supports many societies run exclusively for Castle students . The most popular societies include University College Boat Club ( <unk> ) , Castle Theatre Company , Castle Football Club and Castle Hockey Club . 
 There are a number of arts societies within the college . Most notable is Castle Theatre Company , which produces a play each term . These plays are usually performed on the college 's grounds , although they sometimes tour nationally . They have also appeared at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe . 
 = = Castle Society = = 
 The Castle Society was formed in 1947 by Castle Alumni . It was originally named the Durham Castleman 's Society . Membership is open to anyone with academic ties to the college , and its aim is create a wider Castle community beyond its immediate students . The society makes regular donations to the college library , chapel , student bursaries , and various college societies . It has helped fund a number of projects in the college , including the accommodation at Moatside Court and Fellows Garden , as well as the West Courtyard Common Room . The Castle Society produces the annual journal " Castellum " , which chronicles life at the Castle and reports on activities of Castle alumni . Since 1990 , it has contributed towards the University College Durham Trust , the college 's charitable fund . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Castle alumni are active through organisations and events such as the two annual reunion dinners , which cater for the more than 7 @,@ 000 living alumni . A number of Castle alumni have made significant contributions in the fields of government , law , science , academia , business , arts , journalism , and athletics , among others . 
 = = = List of masters = = = 
 The college is run by a " Master " , the most senior position in the SCR . As the first master of University College , Archdeacon Charles Thorp , also held the post of university warden . Following Thorp 's death in 1862 the mastership was created as a separate position , and has been held by thirteen people : 
 Charles Thorp 1832 – 1862 
 Joseph Waite 1865 – 1873 
 Herbert Booth 1873 – 1875 
 Alfred Plummer 1875 – 1902 
 Henry Gee 1902 – 1919 
 Henry Ellershaw 1919 – 1930 
 J. H. How 1930 – 1939 
 Angus Macfarlane @-@ Grieve 1939 – 1954 
 Len Slater 1954 – 1973 
 D. W. McDowall 1973 – 1978 
 Edward Salthouse 1979 – 1998 
 Maurice Tucker 1998 – 2011 
 Eva Schumacher @-@ Reid 2011 ( Acting Master ) 
 David Held 2012 – present 
 = Taboo ( Kumi Koda song ) = 
 " Taboo " ( capitalized as " TABOO " ) is a song by Japanese recording artist Kumi Koda , taken from her seventh studio album Trick ( 2009 ) . It was written by Koda , and co @-@ written and produced by Hiro . " Taboo " is a dance @-@ pop song that lyrically discusses several taboo subjects including sex and homosexuality . It contains numerous elements including electropop and hip @-@ hop , and employs use of vocoder . It was released as the second single from the album on October 8 , 2008 by Rhythm Zone . 
 Critical reception towards " Taboo " has been positive , with a majority of the critics commending the catchy chorus and its production . Several critics have highlighted " Taboo " as the album 's and Koda 's career stand out track . In Japan , " Taboo " became Koda 's fifth number one single , and reached number six on the Asian – Taiwanese Singles Chart . It has sold over 88 @,@ 000 units in Japan , and " Taboo " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . " Taboo " has been professionally remixed twice , and included on her remix albums Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's ( 2009 ) and Beach Mix ( 2012 ) . 
 A music video for " Taboo " was directed by Takashi Tadokoro , and features Koda in a mansion . Based on themes and exploration of homosexuality and sexual content , the video has Koda dancing in different rooms with female and male companions . Another video version was edited with longer bathroom and dancing scenes . " Taboo " was included on the set list of the singer 's 2009 Trick tour , and the Premium Night : Love & Songs tour . " Taboo " and its music video has been widely considered an emphasis of Koda 's self @-@ described style " Ero <unk> " , and has been notified as one of her " sexiest " and most well @-@ known videos . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Taboo " was written by Koda , and co @-@ written , produced , and composed by Hiro . Hiro was in charge of arranging the song , which included instrumentation of synthesizers , keyboards , and a drum machine . " Taboo " was one of two songs from Koda 's album Trick ( 2009 ) to be co @-@ written , produced , and composed by Hiro ; the other song was " Your Love " . It was selected as the second single from Trick and was released in Japan on October 8 , 2008 by Rhythm Zone , a sub @-@ label from Avex Trax . The Maxi CD version of the single contains the B @-@ side " <unk> " , and includes the two songs instrumental versions . A bonus DVD format was released , featuring the music video , an alternative video , and making video to " Taboo " . A third format , entitled the " Playroom Edition " , was released with the radio and instrumental version of " Taboo " on a CD single . The Playroom Edition includes a special notebook and clear file designed by Koda . The CD versions feature Koda in a black dress with Koda and the song title placed on the side of the image ; the DVD version features Koda in a mini jumpsuit . 
 " Taboo " is an R & B song that borrows influences from numerous genres including hip @-@ hop , Japanese pop , and dance @-@ pop . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Express noted elements of 80s pop and disco music . Koda 's vocals are heavily processed through vocoder pyrotechnics , and are delivered during the chorus and parts of the bridge section . The lyrics to " Taboo " emphasize the term with the same name , discussing taboo nature and exploring it . Regarding homosexuality , Koda commented to Oricon ; " Instead of trying stuff out and experiencing it , we put up a ' No ' sign , we never try to break the taboos " and " Sometimes we shouldn 't retreat into safety , we should have courage to do things . Those are the feelings kin the song . " In terms of musical depth and lyrical diversity , Koda found that " Taboo " was one of her most " widen " tracks throughout her entire music career . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Taboo " received favourable reviews from most music critics . Chris True , who had written her extended biography at AllMusic , highlighted the song as an album and career stand out track . Adam Greenburg from the same publication reviewed Trick , and was fairly positive ; he found the first half was complimented by the " thumping dance track " " Taboo " , and Trick album tracks " Show Girl " and " Stay With Me " . Hiraga praised the song 's production and Koda 's delivery in the track . He complimented how Koda delivered in " full force " , and created a " masterpiece " that was " violently and comfortably danceable " and " catchy " . Hiraga then praised Koda 's and Hiro 's song writing for portraying homosexuality in a " erotic " , " cool " , and " emotional " way . A reviewer from CD Journal was very positive , commended Koda 's and Hiro 's song writing . The reviewer went on to say that " Taboo " is a " classic party song " and of Koda 's most " exhibited works " to date . The reviewer also review the B @-@ side " Always " , labelling it a " pleasant eternal love song " and noted its " feminine " and " family " traits . Paige Lim from Strait Times labelled " Taboo " as a " hard @-@ hitting dance song " . 
 Greg from Selective @-@ Hearing was favourable towards the quality and use of synthesizers , but criticized the House of Nation remix for being " crappy " and " disposable " . A staff reviewer from Amazon.co.jp was positive , comparing Koda 's " sexy and cool " single " But " and the " R & B dance tune " of " Freaky " to " Taboo " . The reviewer went on to commended Koda 's courage in writing a song about " forbidden acts " . Connie from Jame @-@ <unk> was positive in her review , stating " The singles ( from Trick ) took her onto a new path in her niche in the Japanese music industry , particularly TABOO : it is sleek and edgy , while still maintaining her usual coy showmanship . " She concluded by stating that " Taboo " alongside " This Is Not a Love Song " and ' Driving " on Trick " bring Koda Kumi into the new territory previously mentioned . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , " Taboo " debuted at number one on the Japanese Oricon Daily Chart with an estimated 24 @,@ 000 units sold on its first day ; it then reached number one on the weekly Oricon Singles Chart with over 65 @,@ 569 units sold . " Taboo " became Koda 's fifth number single , and her first number single since her 2007 single " Freaky " . " Taboo " also became Koda 's lowest @-@ selling number one single , but was surpassed by her following single " Stay with Me " with 66 @,@ 000 units . " Taboo " lasted thirteen weeks in the chart , and sold nearly 90 @,@ 000 units . " Taboo " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . " Taboo " charted at number seven on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart , and peaked at number two . " Taboo " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for digital shipments of 250 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Taboo " was directed by Takashi Tadokoro . The video opens with Koda 's name and the song title superimposed on a dining table . It shows several guests inside a mansion dancing and drinking at the table , and then shows Koda singing in a maid outfit . Small inter cut scenes features Koda kissing two woman ; one on the cheek , and one on the lips . This emphasizes the homosexual themes that Koda explained to World Journal and Oricon . Koda starts to sing in a living room , surrounded by several guests . She walks into a bathroom , and her maid outfit transforms into a small black jumpsuit , similar to the look from the CD cover sleeve of " Taboo " . Several guests appear in the bathroom dancing and grinding each other , occasionally touching Koda until she runs away . 
 The second chorus has Koda walking into a small room , transforming her black jumpsuit into a cadet uniform . Koda becomes seduced by two women on the couch , and inter cut scenes feature Koda and the women dance to the song . As Koda is about to kiss one of the woman , a man see her and walks out of the room . Koda goes to find him , only to see him seducing a man in a small room . Smiling , Koda returns to the dining room in her maids outfit and accompanies the guests . The final chorus features Koda dancing in the dining room with the guests . The final scenes feature guests in the bathroom dancing , and Koda sitting down on a toilet . 
 An alternative version , under the title " Another Video " , was directed by Tadokoro . This version features longer scenes of Koda in the bathroom and her dancing . This version was included on the DVD version of " Taboo " . The original video has been included on the DVD version of Trick , released in Japan and China . The music video was also included on the DVD version of Koda 's greatest hits album , Best : Third Universe . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Several critics and publications online believed the music video and lyrics to " Taboo " was the reason for Koda 's transition to a more sexual image , respectively . Tony Sokol from <unk> listed " Taboo " alongside " Juicy " , " V.I.P. " , " Shake It Up " , and " Lollipop " as her sexiest videos to date . Regarding " Taboo " , Sokol felt that the music video emphasized Koda 's self @-@ described style " Ero <unk> " . Ero Kawaii was first established by Koda in her music video for " Cutie Honey " where she became the first Japanese musician to wear lingerie in a music video . J.R. Taylor from Coed said that " Freaky " and " Taboo " were " important contributions " to Koda 's sexual image and Japanese music . Regarding Japanese music , Taylor felt " Freaky " and " Taboo " help regain sexual imagery in music videos and the Japanese scene , and that " many would believe that Koda 's image is more important than her Urban tunes " . 
 Despite this , " Taboo " left a controversial legacy towards Koda 's sexual image and use of homosexual themes in future years . Her single " Ko @-@ So @-@ Ko @-@ So " , which featured Koda in bed with a woman was banned in several Asian countries . In a review for Koda 's third greatest hits Best : Third Universe , which " Taboo " was included on , Ian Martin from AllMusic said in retrospect of the included tracks ; " Kumi Koda is a performer who divides opinion in her homeland , mocked and hated openly by many in Japan , and with many of her fans reluctant to admit to liking her . " The feat of Koda in lingerie and her sexual imagery in " Cutie Honey " , " Freaky " , and " Taboo " was inspired in other Japanese musicians ; in 2011 , Japanese band AKB48 released their single " Heavy Rotation " , which caused local and global controversy for its use of lingerie and other sexual content . In July 2015 , after Koda publicly announced that she had low self @-@ esteem , Tan Kee Yun from The New Paper stated that while " Taboo " and " Loaded " , from her 2014 album Bon Voyage , focus on a sexual image , many of her songs focus on inner beauty . In March – April 2012 , an online poll was hosted on Popjustice by fans ranking their favourite single by Koda . With over 70 singles from her back @-@ catalogue listed , " Taboo " topped the list with thirteen people rating it ten points , and two people rating it the lowest score at eight . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 On September 22 , 2008 , Koda performed " Taboo " for the first time at a special event called " Let 's Party " . The song has been included on several concert tours by Koda ; it was first performed on her 2009 Trick Tour , where it appeared in the opening segment of the concert . Since then , " Taboo " has been included in the medley sections for her 2009 Taiwan concert tour , the 2010 Universe tour , and Koda 's 10th Anniversary Tokyo concert . A remix version was included on Koda 's Premium Night : Love & Songs concert tour . The song was then included on Koda 's two concert tours ; her 2014 Bon Voyage tour , and her recent 2015 Walk of My Life concert tour . " Taboo " has been included on two of Koda 's remix albums : the <unk> Lucas Valentine remix on Beach Mix ( 2012 ) , and the House Nation Sunset in Ibiza remix on the bonus track edition of Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 5 ( 2013 ) . The song has appeared on one of Koda 's greatest hits , this being Best : Third Universe ( 2010 ) . 
 " Taboo " was used as the theme song for the Nintendo DS Japanese video game , <unk> Yo Yukue . The video game was released on 23 October 2008 . The song was used as the theme song for the NTV broadcast of the 2008 FILA Wrestling World Championships . The use of the song was to celebrate the 2008 championships which includes only the female freestyle event . It was used as the theme song to Avex Trax 's <unk> <unk> , MTI 's <unk> website commercial , and Koei 's Future of Helm commercial . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = Playroom Edition = = = 
 Digital music video 
 " Taboo " ( Music video ) 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Kumi Koda – vocals , background vocals , song writing 
 Hiro – composer , producer , arranger , song writing , programmer , engineer 
 Daisuke " <unk> " Imai – composer , producer , arranger , song writing , programmer , engineer 
 Yuka Koizumi – mastering 
 Sunset In Ibiza – remixing , arrangement , composing 
 Takashi Tadokoro – director 
 Rhythm Zone - management , label 
 Avex Trax - parent label , management 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Alternate Versions = = 
 TABOO 
 TABOO : Found on the single ( 2008 ) and corresponding album , <unk> ( 2009 ) 
 TABOO [ HOUSE <unk> Sunset In Ibiza Remix ] : Found on the single ( 2008 ) and Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's ( 2009 ) 
 TABOO [ Instrumental ] : Found on the single ( 2008 ) 
 TABOO [ <unk> Remix <unk> ・ <unk> ™ ] : Found on Beach Mix ( 2012 ) 
 = Treehouse of Horror VII = 
 " Treehouse of Horror VII " is the first episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 27 , 1996 . In this seventh annual " Treehouse of Horror " episode , Bart discovers his long @-@ lost twin , Lisa grows a colony of small beings , and Kang and Kodos impersonate Bill Clinton and Bob Dole in order to win the 1996 Presidential election . It was written by Ken Keeler , Dan Greaney , and David S. Cohen , and directed by Mike B. Anderson . Phil Hartman provided the voice of Clinton . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " The Thing and I " = = = 
 In a parody of the horror stories The Hunchback of Notre @-@ Dame ( 1831 ) and Basket Case ( 1982 ) , Bart and Lisa begin to hear strange noises , and think there is something in the attic . Homer claims not to know what they are talking about , although he is later seen grabbing a bucket of fish heads and heading into the attic . Bart and Lisa investigate , and discover there really is a monster . Homer and Marge go into the attic , and Homer says : " Oh no , it escaped " . Marge immediately calls Dr. Hibbert , who explains that Bart had a conjoined twin brother named Hugo . The two were separated at birth , but it was discovered that Hugo was too evil to live in society , so the Simpsons did the " only humane thing to do " : they kept Hugo chained in the attic , where Homer fed him a platter of fish heads once a week . The rest of the family leaves to find Hugo , leaving Bart behind , but he soon discovers that Hugo never left the house . Hugo takes Bart up to the attic and ties Bart up , so that he can reattach himself . Suddenly , Dr. Hibbert finds them and knocks out Hugo , commenting that the evil twin is always on the left side . But then he realizes that Hugo 's scar is on the wrong side , and Bart is the evil twin . In a failed attempt to correct their wrong , Dr. Hibbert and the Simpson family sit down to a turkey dinner with Hugo , leaving Bart locked up in the attic eating fish heads . 
 = = = " The Genesis Tub " = = = 
 In a parody of The Twilight Zone episode , " The Little People " , Lisa performs a science experiment to see if cola will dissolve a tooth , and Bart shocks Lisa as part of his project to prove that nerds conduct electricity . The tooth is also shocked ; it undergoes an unusual reaction and creates a race of miniature beings . Lisa discovers this the next day and marvels at how the people in her universe evolve at a rapid rate , going through the various ages humans have gone through into modern times and eventually , a society more advanced than current humanity . Bart destroys some of the ecosystem in Lisa 's tub universe , and the people respond , sending a squadron of space ships to attack Bart , who vows revenge on the small universe as Lisa wonders what to do . Suddenly , she is shrunk and beamed down into the tub , where the citizens explain that they regard her as God , and they want her to do something about Bart , whom they regard as the Devil . She says she can help them if they can <unk> her , but they tell her they have not figured out the technology to do that . This angers Lisa , since they should have had both technologies figured out before shrinking her . At the same time , Bart grabs the tub and submits it in the science fair , and Lisa is forced to watch from within as Bart wins first prize . Realizing that she is now stuck in the small universe forever and having somehow lost her slippers , the very bitter Lisa orders her citizens to grovel and bring her some shoes , with one of the citizens adding that he will get some socks for her , too . 
 = = = " Citizen Kang " = = = 
 While out fishing , Homer is abducted by the two aliens Kang and Kodos . When they demand that Homer point them towards Earth 's leader , Homer informs them of the then @-@ upcoming presidential election and says the winner could be either Bill Clinton or Bob Dole . Kang and Kodos kidnap both Dole and Clinton , placing them in suspended animation tubes and assuming their forms through " bio @-@ duplication " to ensure that one of them will become the next leader . Before returning Homer to Earth , the aliens soak him in rum , so nobody will believe him . As the election nears , the impostor candidates are seen to be acting strangely , holding hands in public and making bizarre declarations in <unk> monotone . Later on , Homer stumbles upon the badly hidden spaceship and tries to save the real Dole and Clinton , with both candidates agreeing they should join forces to defeat the aliens ; however , Homer accidentally ejects them into space , killing them . On the day before the election , Homer crashes the spaceship into the Capitol and successfully reveals the candidates ' real identities . However , despite being exposed , Kang and Kodos declare to the people that they have to choose between one of them because " it 's a two @-@ party system " , since it is too late to get new candidates . One man in the crowd announces that he will vote for a third @-@ party candidate , but Kang and Kodos mockingly encourage him to " go ahead [ and ] throw your vote away , " prompting a bout of displeasure from Ross Perot . As such , Kang is subsequently elected President and quickly enslaves all of humanity into building a giant ray gun to aim at an unknown planet , while Homer smugly states that at least he voted for Kodos . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode does not feature any wraparound segments , which are normally used in Treehouse of Horror episodes . The wraparounds had been cut from the previous year 's episode , so the writers did not bother writing one for this episode . " The Thing and I " was written by Ken Keeler , " The Genesis Tub " was written by Dan Greaney and " Citizen Kang " was written by David X. Cohen . Despite the similarities , " The Thing and I " was not based on the plot of Basket Case . " The Genesis Tub " was originally pitched by Cohen and it was later referenced in the South Park episode " Simpsons Already Did It " , when they pointed out that The Simpsons had earlier gotten the idea from the 1962 Twilight Zone episode called " The Little People . " The sequence where tiny spaceships attack Bart in " The Genesis Tub " marks one of the first uses of computers in The Simpsons animation . The computer was used to build models for reference and the animators later retraced it . The 1996 Presidential election occurred a few days after the airing of this episode . According to Cohen , the " Citizen Kang " short violated every rule of The Simpsons as it locked the episode in one time and named specific candidates . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Homer sings " Fish Heads " , a 1980 novelty song by Barnes & Barnes , during " The Thing and I " . 
 Homer 's crashing the flying saucer into Capitol dome is a nod to Earth vs. the Flying Saucers ( 1956 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Treehouse of Horror VII " finished 31st in ratings for the week of October 21 – 27 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 2 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Millennium and The X @-@ Files . 
 In 2006 , IGN.com voted " Citizen Kang " as the seventh best segment of the Treehouse of Horror episodes . 
 A.V. Club named Kang / Bob Dole 's line , " <unk> for some , miniature American flags for others ! " , one of the best lines in the history of the show . 
 The ska punk band named I Voted for Kodos takes its name from Homer 's line , " Don 't blame me , I voted for Kodos " , at the end of " Citizen Kang " . In a 2000 Entertainment Weekly article , Matt Groening ranked it as his seventh favorite in the history of the show . " We 've reached the limits of what rectal probing can teach us " is one of Matt Groening 's favorite lines . 
 = Psylliodes luridipennis = 
 Psylliodes luridipennis , commonly known as the Lundy cabbage flea beetle or the bronze Lundy cabbage flea beetle , is a species of flea beetle endemic to the island of Lundy , where it lives and feeds upon the endemic Lundy cabbage ( Coincya wrightii ) . Along with the true weevil Ceutorhynchus contractus var. pallipes and an undescribed race of flea beetle Psylliodes napi , it is known only from the Lundy cabbage . The species was first recorded by Thomas Vernon Wollaston in the 1840s , and was named by the Austrian entomologist Franz <unk> in 1864 . 
 Adult Lundy cabbage flea beetle measure around 3 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) in length . They have brassy @-@ green heads and bodies , with reddish @-@ brown elytra . The adults feed upon the leaves of the Lundy cabbage , while the larvae mine into the plants to feed . The species is threatened by fluctuating numbers of Lundy cabbages , particularly due to invasive common rhododendrons ( Rhododendron ponticum ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The species was first collected by Thomas Vernon Wollaston , who visited Lundy in 1844 and 1845 . He collected specimens of 153 species of beetle , including a specimen of the species that later became known as P. luridipennis . Charles Owen Waterhouse listed the species in volume 2 of the Entomologist 's Monthly Magazine as " Psylliodes 6 sp . — ? " , and it was formally described and named by Austrian entomologist Franz <unk> in the journal Wiener <unk> <unk> in 1864 . 
 The ancestors of the modern P. luridipennis population would have been unable to survive on Lundy during the ice age . As such , the species must either be a relict species ( a species once more widespread ) , a species which is not unique to Lundy with other undiscovered populations , or the result of comparatively recent speciation on or near Lundy . One climactic and geological study suggests " that the ancestors of Lundy cabbage and its beetles may have had the opportunity to colonise Lundy across land during a few hundred years around 10 @,@ 800 years ago or may subsequently have been aided by [ now gone ] ' stepping stone ' land to the north east " of the island . 
 = = Description = = 
 Psylliodes luridipennis adults are oblong @-@ ovate , and the same size and build as P. <unk> , but not as broad , measuring between 2 @.@ 8 and 3 @.@ 6 mm in length . They have a brassy @-@ green head and thorax , shining reddish @-@ brown elytra and brassy @-@ green legs . The hind femora are brassy in colour but paler at the base , and the antennae are brick @-@ red . The adults are fully winged , and are capable of flight . 
 Its brassy colour , smaller size , and more finely and closely punctate @-@ striate elytra distinguish it from its ally , P. <unk> , which is also found on Lundy . P. luridipennis is sometimes called the " bronze Lundy cabbage flea beetle " to differentiate it from another beetle found on the Lundy cabbage . This latter beetle , the " blue Lundy cabbage flea beetle " , is a short @-@ winged form of the widespread P. napi . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 Adult Psylliodes luridipennis beetles are invariably found on the Lundy cabbage ( Coincya wrightii ) , a species endemic to the island of Lundy , where they feed on the leaves . They are not found on other locally occurring plants . However , researchers were also able to lure the beetles onto other <unk> taken from gardens . Two other taxa are known only from Lundy cabbages — the true weevil Ceutorhynchus contractus var. pallipes and an undescribed race of the flea beetle Psylliodes napi — making the plant unique to Britain as the only endemic species which is the exclusive host to endemic insect species . However , the Lundy cabbage is also host to a diverse variety of other invertebrate species . 
 Psylliodes luridipennis is found throughout the highly limited range of the Lundy cabbage , including sheer sea cliffs and further inland at Millcombe House . The insects also found their way to Lundy cabbages artificially seeded within the cabbage 's range within a year . It had been hypothesised that P. luridipennis and Ceutorhynchus contractus var. pallipes may help pollinate the Lundy cabbage , but observations of the taxa indicate that neither visit flowers . While there are no honey bees on Lundy , other species of winged insects are present . The plant may rely primarily upon pollen beetles of the genus <unk> and the wind for pollination . 
 Psylliodes luridipennis females lay their eggs on Lundy cabbage leaf stalks . The white larvae are leaf miners , digging into the petioles and stems . After emerging in late summer , they pupate in soil . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Along with the Lundy cabbage , Psylliodes luridipennis has been listed in the United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan , and an action plan for its conservation , along with the conservation of other endemic species , has been prepared . This plan revolves mostly around the control of Rhododendron ponticum , an alien species which threatens the Lundy cabbage . The beetle is threatened by fluctuating numbers of Lundy cabbages . Though it is quicker than P. napi to recolonise new growth after bad years for the cabbage , it is slower to recover than the cabbage itself . 
 The Joint Nature Conservation Committee recognise Psylliodes luridipennis as a " priority species " for conservation purposes , due to the fluctuating numbers of Lundy cabbages . Though the committee notes that " [ h ] ost plant numbers have been low , but relatively stable since 2001 " , it claims that P. luridipennis " has been noticeably difficult to find in recent years " . Based on pre @-@ 1994 IUCN Red List guidelines , the species was informally deemed as " vulnerable " . 
 = Montana Highway 48 = 
 Montana State Highway 48 ( MT 48 ) is a short state maintained highway located in Deer Lodge County , in the southwestern region of the U.S. state of Montana . The highway is 6 @.@ 839 miles ( 11 @.@ 006 km ) long , and connects MT 1 to Interstate 90 , passing mainly through rural mining areas . MT 48 was first designated in 1938 , although portions of a highway existed in the location of MT 48 by at least 1924 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MT 48 begins at an intersection with MT 1 as a two @-@ lane , paved road . The highway proceeds northeastward through rural mining land for a short distance before intersecting S @-@ 273 . The roadway continues northeast , running parallel to Spring Creek . After a short distance , the highway passes Bowman Field and several small reservoirs that were created for mining . The road proceeds northeastward through more rural mining land before slightly bending eastward . The highway continues in a slight northeastward direction near the town of Warm Springs , crossing the Montana Western Railway . The highway proceeds to its eastern terminus at an intersection with Interstate 90 's frontage road near exit 201 . 
 The Montana Department of Transportation 's average daily traffic count for MT 48 is 1445 vehicles , of which 113 are trucks . No portion of the highway is listed as part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 A short stretch of MT 48 near what would become MT 1 existed by at least 1924 . By 1927 , a short , dirt , unimproved connector road existed near the location of MT 48 . By at least 1937 , that route had been paved , and connected U.S. Route 10 ( US 10 , now MT 1 ) to US 10S ( now I @-@ 90 ) . MT 48 was officially designated on May 16 , 1938 . By 1949 , all but 0 @.@ 046 miles ( 0 @.@ 074 km ) of MT 48 had been reconstructed along its current route . US 10 had been renumbered as US 10A by 1951 . Since then , both segments of US 10 have been redesignated and improved . In 1978 , the final 0 @.@ 046 miles ( 0 @.@ 074 km ) of the highway was reconstructed . MT 48 has not been worked on since . 
 = = Major junctions = = 
 The entire route is in Deer Lodge County . 
 = Izzy Westbury = 
 Isabelle Mary Geraldine , " The " Westbury ( born 8 March 1990 ) is an international cricketer and former president of the Oxford Union . She is captain of Middlesex women 's first team , was a member of the England Women 's Academy until 2011 and represented the Netherlands in one One Day International ( ODI ) in 2005 . A right @-@ handed batsman and off break bowler , she played for Somerset until 2012 . She was President of the Oxford Union in Michaelmas term 2011 and has been described as " the most engaging president that the Oxford Union has had in years " . 
 Beginning her career in the Netherlands , Westbury progressed quickly within the national side , appearing at both the 2004 and 2006 Women 's European Under @-@ 21 Championships , and made her senior international debut at the 2005 Women 's European Championship . During this tournament , she also made her only ODI appearance , playing for the Netherlands against Ireland . She moved to England in 2006 to study , and joined Somerset for the 2007 season , where played until joining Middlesex . In 2010 , she was selected as part of the England Women 's Academy , travelling to India for the High Performance Camp . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early years : In the Netherlands = = = 
 Born in Hammersmith , London , Isabelle Westbury experienced a nomadic childhood , living in Mongolia , Malaysia and Syria before arriving in the Netherlands . She attended The British School in the Netherlands from 2001 – 2006 . It was in the Netherlands that she first started playing cricket , as she was not allowed to play football at the " very traditional club " near her house . During her time in the country , she played domestic cricket for The Hague Cricket Club . She made her first international appearances at the 2004 Women 's European Under @-@ 21 Championships for the Netherlands Under @-@ 21s , making her debut for the side at the age of 14 . Playing as wicket @-@ keeper , she claimed one catch and then scored 15 not out batting from number nine as Ireland won by 98 runs . In the Netherlands ' second match of the competition , she moved down to number eleven , and remained unbeaten without scoring when England secured a 219 @-@ run victory with over 10 overs remaining . Another loss in the final match of the competition ensured that the Netherlands finished bottom of the table — Westbury scored five runs as no Dutch batsman managed to reach double figures against Scotland . 
 In 2005 , aged 15 , Westbury represented the senior Netherlands side for the first time during the 2005 Women 's European Championship in Wales . Unlike her appearances for the Under @-@ 21s , which she made as wicket @-@ keeper , Westbury played as a bowler for the duration of the tournament , batting in the lower order . She claimed three wickets during the tournament at an average of 46 @.@ 66 . Only required to bat twice , she scored 1 and 0 * , made during losses against England Development Squad and Ireland respectively . Unlike the rest of the matches in the tournament , the match against Ireland was given One Day International ( ODI ) status , giving Westbury her first — and only — ODI cap . 
 The 2006 Women 's European Under @-@ 21 Championships saw Westbury reprise her role as wicket @-@ keeper batsman for the youth side . The Netherlands were much improved from the 2004 tournament ; after a heavy loss to England in a warm @-@ up match , the Netherlands won their final match to finish runners @-@ up behind England . She scored 30 in the second match , a loss to Ireland , as only herself and Lotte <unk> reached double figures for the Netherlands . She made her highest total for the Under @-@ 21s in the final match of the competition , scoring 75 before being run out as the Netherlands reached 180 off their 50 overs , and then bowled Scotland out , achieving a 95 run victory . She finished the competition as the leading run @-@ scorer and won the Player of the Tournament for her achievements . 
 = = = Move to England = = = 
 Westbury started at Millfield School in Street , Somerset in 2006 . She joined Somerset for the 2007 County Championship . After her first match , in which she batted at number nine , and was 19 not out at the close of the innings , she opened the innings for the county for the remainder of the season . She enjoyed mixed success in the role , and finished the season with a batting average of 19 @.@ 75 , the third @-@ best among Somerset batsmen behind Elwyn Campbell and Becky Williams . 
 Remaining with Somerset in 2008 , she claimed her first wicket for the county during their first match of the season , having Surrey opener Ebony @-@ Jewel Rainford @-@ Brent caught . She appeared in the Super Fours — a competition in which the England selectors place the 48 leading players into four teams — for the first time in 2008 , representing the Diamonds in both the 50 @-@ over and 20 @-@ over forms of the game . She bowled economically in the Twenty20 semi @-@ final , helping to limit the Sapphires to 123 , which Diamonds chased down successfully with a ball to spare . She remained economical in the final , but despite restricting the Rubies to 110 , Diamonds could only reach 106 in their reply . In three 50 @-@ over Super Fours matches , she was less effective ; her only wicket coming in the first match . Returning to the County Championship , Westbury dropped down into the lower order batting , while at the same time seeing her workload with the ball increasing . Somerset were rewarded in the match against Lancashire when she claimed five @-@ wickets in the innings for the first time to set up a 132 run win . She continued her form in the following match , claiming four wickets against Warwickshire , conceding only four runs . She finished the season as Somerset 's leading wicket @-@ taker , claiming her twelve wickets at an average of 6 @.@ 41 . Westbury also competed in the Junior Super Fours — for 16- to 19 @-@ year @-@ old female cricketers — towards the end of the 2008 season . Appearing for Junior Emeralds , she improved as the tournament progressed , following up scores of 18 and 27 with the tournament 's highest score , 89 , in the final match . She finished as the competition 's second @-@ highest run @-@ scorer , her 134 runs trailing only Lauren <unk> 's 138 . 
 The 2009 County Championship campaign saw Westbury 's form dip from the previous season . Playing in five of Somerset 's ten matches , she scored 18 runs at an average under four , and her three wickets came at 38 @.@ 66 . Her performances in the Junior Super Fours , however , continued to improve with both bat and ball . Named as captain of the Junior Emeralds , Westbury led by example in the opening match , taking three wickets and limiting the Rubies to 21 runs off her eight overs , and then top @-@ scoring with 37 for her side in their successful chase . She bowled even more economically in the following match , conceding 12 runs off 10 overs , once again claiming three wickets . Opening the batting for the Emeralds in their reply — as she had done in the first match — she made 46 runs , sharing a partnership of 102 with fellow opener Beth MacGregor to help set up a seven wicket victory . The Emerald 's final match saw the Sapphires score more effectively off her bowling , totalling 30 runs from her 10 overs , but Westbury replied with an unbeaten century to propel her side to another seven wicket win . Her 187 runs and 7 wickets ensured she finished the tournament as the most prolific batsman and bowler , as the Emeralds won after remaining undefeated . 
 In January 2010 , Westbury was named as part of the England Academy squad for the High Performance Camp in Bangalore , India . Despite her earlier appearances for the Netherlands , Westbury has indicated her desire to appear for England in the future . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Westbury attended Hertford College , Oxford where she studied Physiology ( Natural Sciences ) . In addition to her cricket career , she also played hockey at Oxford , achieving her Blue by playing in the Varsity Hockey Match against Cambridge University in March 2010 . In Michaelmas term 2011 , she was President of the Oxford Union , having earlier served as Secretary . 
 = Cosmo Gordon Lang = 
 William Cosmo Gordon Lang , 1st Baron Lang of Lambeth , GCVO , PC ( known as Cosmo Gordon Lang ; 31 October 1864 – 5 December 1945 ) was a Scottish Anglican prelate who served as Archbishop of York ( 1908 – 1928 ) and Archbishop of Canterbury ( 1928 – 1942 ) . His rapid elevation to Archbishop of York , within 18 years of his ordination , is unprecedented in modern Church of England history . As Archbishop of Canterbury during the abdication crisis of 1936 , he took a strong moral stance , his comments in a subsequent broadcast being widely condemned as uncharitable towards the departed king . 
 The son of a Scots Presbyterian minister , Lang abandoned the prospect of a legal and political career to train for the Anglican priesthood . Beginning in 1890 , his early ministry was served in slum parishes in Leeds and Portsmouth , except for brief service as an Oxford college chaplain . In 1901 he was appointed suffragan Bishop of Stepney in London , where he continued his work among the poor . He also served as a canon of St Paul 's Cathedral , London . 
 In 1908 Lang was nominated as Archbishop of York , despite his relatively junior status as a suffragan rather than a diocesan bishop . His religious stance was broadly Anglo @-@ Catholic , tempered by the liberal Anglo @-@ Catholicism advocated in the Lux Mundi essays . He consequently entered the House of Lords as a Lord Spiritual and caused consternation in traditionalist circles by speaking and voting against the Lords ' proposal to reject David Lloyd George 's 1909 " People 's Budget " . This radicalism was not , however , maintained in later years . At the start of the First World War , Lang was heavily criticised for a speech in which he spoke sympathetically of the German Emperor . This troubled him greatly and may have contributed to the rapid ageing which affected his appearance during the war years . After the war he began to promote church unity and at the 1920 Lambeth Conference was responsible for the Church 's Appeal to All Christian People . As Archbishop of York he supported controversial proposals for the revision of the Book of Common Prayer but , after acceding to Canterbury , he took no practical steps to resolve this issue . 
 Lang became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1928 . He presided over the 1930 Lambeth Conference , which gave limited church approval to the use of contraception . After denouncing the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935 and strongly condemning European anti @-@ semitism , Lang later supported the appeasement policies of the British government . In May 1937 he presided over the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth . On retirement in 1942 Lang was raised to the peerage as Baron Lang of Lambeth and continued to attend and speak in House of Lords debates until his death in 1945 . Lang himself believed that he had not lived up to his own high standards . Others , however , have praised his qualities of industry , his efficiency and his commitment to his calling . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and family = = = 
 Cosmo Gordon Lang was born in 1864 at the manse in Fyvie , Aberdeenshire , the third son of the local Church of Scotland minister , the Reverend John Marshall Lang , and his wife Hannah Agnes Lang . Cosmo was baptised at Fyvie church by a neighbouring minister , the name " William " being added inadvertently to his given names , perhaps because the local laird was called William Cosmo Gordon . The additional name was rarely used subsequently . In January 1865 the family moved to Glasgow on John Lang 's appointment as a minister in the Anderston district . Subsequent moves followed : in 1868 to Morningside , Edinburgh and , in 1873 , back to Glasgow when John Lang was appointed minister to the historic Barony Church . 
 In Glasgow , Lang attended the Park School , a day establishment where he won a prize for an essay on English literature and played the occasional game of football ; otherwise , he recorded , " I was never greatly interested in [ the school 's ] proceedings . " Holidays were spent in different parts of Scotland , most notably in Argyll to which , later in life , Lang would frequently return . In 1878 , at the age of 14 , Lang sat and passed his matriculation examinations . Despite his youth , he began his studies at the University of Glasgow that autumn . 
 Whilst Lang was Archbishop of Canterbury , his younger brother Marshall was elected Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1935 - the only case of two brothers both holding the leading offices in both the Church of England and the Church of Scotland . 
 = = = University of Glasgow = = = 
 At the university some of the leading academics in Scotland were among Lang 's tutors : the Greek scholar Richard Claverhouse Jebb , the physicist William Thomson ( who was later created Lord Kelvin ) and the philosopher Edward Caird . Long afterwards Lang commented on the inability of some of these eminent figures to handle " the Scottish <unk> who formed a large part of their classes " . Lang was most strongly influenced by Caird , who gave the boy 's mind " its first real awakening " . Lang recalled how , in a revelation as he was passing through Kelvingrove Park , he expressed aloud his sudden conviction that : " The Universe is one and its Unity and Ultimate Reality is God ! " He acknowledged that his greatest failure at the University was his inability to make any progress in his understanding of mathematics , " to me , then and always , unintelligible " . 
 In 1881 Lang made his first trip outside Scotland , to London where he heard the theologian and orator Henry Parry Liddon preach in St Paul 's Cathedral . He also heard William Ewart Gladstone and Joseph Chamberlain debating in the House of Commons . Later that year he travelled to Cambridge to stay with a friend who was studying there . A visit to King 's College Chapel persuaded Lang that he should study at the College ; the following January he sat and passed the entrance examination . However , when he discovered that as part of his degree studies he would be examined in mathematics , his enthusiasm disappeared . Instead , he applied to Balliol College , Oxford , and was accepted . In the summer of 1882 he ended his studies at Glasgow with a Master of Arts degree , and was awarded prizes for essays on politics and church history . 
 = = = Oxford = = = 
 Lang started at Balliol in October 1882 . In his first term he successfully sat for the <unk> Scholarship , described by his biographer John Gilbert Lockhart as " the Blue Ribbon of history scholarship at any University of the British Isles " . In February 1883 his first speech at the Oxford Union , against the disestablishment of the Church of Scotland , was warmly received ; the chairman likened his oratory to that of the Ancient Greek statesman , Demosthenes . He became the Union 's president in the Trinity term of 1883 , and the following year was a co @-@ founder of the Oxford University Dramatic Society ( <unk> ) . 
 Although Lang considered himself forward @-@ thinking , he joined and became secretary of the Canning Club , the university 's principal Conservative society . His contemporary Robert Cecil recorded that Lang 's " progressive " opinions were somewhat frowned upon by traditional Tories , who nevertheless respected his ability . Lang later assisted in the founding of the University settlement of Toynbee Hall , a mission to help the poor in the East End of London . He had been first drawn to this work in 1883 , after listening to a sermon in St Mary 's Church , Oxford , by Samuel Augustus Barnett , Vicar of St Jude 's , Whitechapel . Barnett became the settlement 's first leader , while Lang became one of its first undergraduate secretaries . He spent so much time on these duties that he was chided by the Master of Balliol , Benjamin Jowett , for neglecting his studies . In 1886 Lang graduated with first @-@ class honours in History ; in October of that year he failed to secure a Fellowship of All Souls College , blaming his poor early scholastic training in Glasgow . 
 = = = Towards ordination = = = 
 Lang 's career ambition from early in life was to practise law , enter politics and then take office in some future Conservative administration . In 1887 he began his studies for the English Bar , working in the London chambers of W.S. Robson , a future Attorney @-@ General , whose " vehement radicalism was an admirable stimulus and corrective to [ Lang 's ] liberal Conservatism " . During these years Lang was largely aloof from religion , but continued churchgoing out of what he termed " hereditary respect " . He attended services at the nonconformist City Temple church and sometimes went to St Paul 's Cathedral . Of his life at that time he said : " I must confess that I played sometimes with those external temptations that our Christian London flaunts in the face of its young men . " 
 In October 1888 Lang was elected to an All Souls Fellowship and began to divide his time between London and Oxford . Some of his Oxford friends were training for ordination and Lang was often drawn into their discussions . Eventually the question entered Lang 's mind : " Why shouldn 't you be ordained ? " The thought persisted , and one Sunday evening in the spring of 1889 , after a visit to the theological college at Cuddesdon , Lang attended evening service at the Cuddesdon parish church . By his own account , during the sermon he was gripped by " a masterful inward voice " which told him " You are wanted . You are called . You must obey . " He immediately severed his connection with the Bar , renounced his political ambitions and applied for a place at Cuddesdon College . With the help of an All Souls contact , the essential step of his confirmation into the Church of England was supervised by the Bishop of Lincoln . Lang 's decision to become an Anglican and seek ordination disappointed his Presbyterian father , who nevertheless wrote to his son : " What you think , prayerfully and solemnly , you ought to do – you must do – we will accept . " 
 = = Early ministry = = 
 = = = Leeds = = = 
 After a year 's study at Cuddesdon , Lang was ordained as deacon . He rejected an offer of the chaplaincy of All Souls as he wanted to be " up and doing " in a tough parish . Lang identified with the Anglo @-@ Catholic tradition of the Church of England , in part , he admitted , as a reaction against his evangelical upbringing in the Church of Scotland . His sympathies lay with the progressive wing of Anglo @-@ Catholicism represented by the Lux Mundi essays , published in 1888 by a group of forward @-@ looking Oxford theologians . Among these was Edward Stuart Talbot , Warden of Keble , who in 1888 had become Vicar of Leeds Parish Church . Talbot had contributed the essay entitled " The Preparation for History in Christ " in Lux Mundi . Lang jumped at the offer of a curacy under Talbot , and arrived in Leeds in the autumn of 1890 . 
 Leeds Parish Church , rebuilt and reconsecrated in 1841 after an elaborate ceremony , was of almost cathedral size , the centre of a huge parish ministered by many curates . Lang 's district was the <unk> , one of the poorest areas , many of whose 2 @,@ 000 inhabitants were prostitutes . Lang and his fellow curates fashioned a clergy house from a derelict public house . He later moved next door , into a condemned property which became his home for his remaining service in Leeds . In addition to his normal parish duties , Lang acted temporarily as Principal of the Clergy School , was chaplain to Leeds Infirmary , and took charge of a men 's club of around a hundred members . On 24 May 1891 he was ordained to full priesthood . 
 Lang continued to visit Oxford when time allowed and on a visit to All Souls in June 1893 he was offered the post of Dean of Divinity at Magdalen College . Other offers were open to him ; the Bishop of Newcastle wished to appoint him vicar of the cathedral church in Newcastle and Benjamin Jowett wished him to return to Balliol as a tutor in theology . Lang chose Magdalen ; the idea of being in charge of young men who might in the future achieve positions of responsibility was attractive to him and , in October 1893 , with many regrets , he left Leeds . 
 = = = Magdalen College = = = 
 As Magdalen 's Dean of Divinity ( " college chaplain " in ordinary parlance ) , Lang had pastoral duties with the college 's undergraduates and responsibility for the chapel and its choir . Lang was delighted with this latter obligation ; his concern for the purity of the choir 's sound led him to request that visitors " join in the service silently " . In 1894 Lang was asked to add to his workload by acting as Vicar of the University Church of St Mary the Virgin , where John Henry Newman had begun his Oxford ministry in 1828 . The church had almost ceased to function when Lang took it over , but he revived regular services , chose preachers with care and slowly rebuilt the congregation . In December 1895 he was offered the post of Vicar of Portsea , a large parish within Portsmouth on the south coast , but he was not ready to leave Oxford and refused . Some months later he had further thoughts ; the strain of his dual appointment in Oxford was beginning to tell and , he claimed , " the thought of this great parish [ of Portsea ] and work going a @-@ begging troubled my conscience . " After discovering that the Portsea offer was still open , he decided to accept , though with some <unk> . 
 = = = Portsea = = = 
 Portsea , covering much of the town of Portsmouth , was a dockside parish of around 40 @,@ 000 inhabitants with a mixture of housing ranging from neat terraces to squalid slums . The large , recently rebuilt church held more than 2 @,@ 000 people . Lang arrived in June 1896 to lead a team of more than a dozen curates serving the five districts of the parish . He quickly resumed the kind of urban parish work he had carried out in Leeds ; he founded a Sunday afternoon men 's conference with 300 men , and supervised the construction of a large conference hall as a centre for parish activities . He also pioneered the establishment of parochial church councils long before they were given legal status in 1919 . Outside his normal parish duties , Lang served as chaplain to the local prison , and became acting chaplain to the 2nd Hampshire Royal Artillery Volunteer Corps . 
 Lang 's relationship with his curates was generally formal . They were aware of his ambition and felt that he sometimes spent too much time on his outside interests such as his All Souls Fellowship , but were nevertheless impressed by his efficiency and his powers of oratory . The Church historian Adrian Hastings singles out Portsea under Lang as an example of " extremely disciplined pastoral professionalism " . Lang may have realised that he was destined for high office ; he is reported to have practised the signature " Cosmo Cantuar " during a relaxed discussion with his curates ( " Cantuar " is part of the Archbishop of Canterbury 's formal signature ) . In January 1898 he was invited by Queen Victoria to preach at Osborne House , her Isle of Wight home . Afterwards he talked with the Queen who , Lang records , suggested that he should marry . Lang replied that he could not afford to as his curates cost too much . He added : " If a curate proves unsatisfactory I can get rid of him . A wife is a fixture . " He was summoned on several more occasions and in the following January was appointed an Honorary Chaplain to the Queen . These visits to Osborne were the start of a close association with the Royal Family which lasted for the rest of Lang 's life . As one of the Queen 's chaplains , he assisted in the funeral arrangements after her death in January 1901 . 
 = = Bishop and canon = = 
 In March 1901 Lang was appointed suffragan Bishop of Stepney and a canon of St Paul 's Cathedral . These appointments reflected his growing reputation and recognised his successful ministry in working @-@ class parishes . He was consecrated bishop by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Frederick Temple , in St Paul 's Cathedral , on 1 May ; his time would subsequently be divided between his work in the Stepney region and his duties at St Paul 's . The University of Oxford honoured him with the degree of Doctor of Divinity in late May 1901 . 
 = = = Stepney = = = 
 Lang 's region of Stepney within the Diocese of London extended over the whole area generally known as London 's East End , with two million people in more than 200 parishes . Almost all were poor , and housed in overcrowded and insanitary conditions . Lang knew something of the area from his undergraduate activities at Toynbee Hall , and his conscience was troubled by the squalor that he saw as he travelled around the district , usually by bus and tram . 
 Lang 's liberal conservatism enabled him to associate easily with Socialist leaders such as Will Crooks and George Lansbury , successive mayors of Poplar ; he was responsible for bringing the latter back to regular communion in the Church . In 1905 he and Lansbury joined the Central London Unemployed Body , set up by the government to tackle the region 's unemployment problems . That same year Lang took as his personal assistant a young Cambridge graduate and clergyman 's son , Dick Sheppard , who became a close friend and confidante . Sheppard was eventually ordained , becoming a radical clergyman and founder of the Peace Pledge Union . Lang believed that socialism was a growing force in British life , and at a Church Congress in Great Yarmouth in 1907 he speculated on how the Church should respond to this . His remarks reached The New York Times , which warned that modern socialism was often equated with unrest , that " the cry of the demagogue is in the air " and that the Church should not heed this cry . 
 Much of the work in the district was supported by the East London Church Fund , established in 1880 to fund additional clergy and lay workers in the poorest districts . Lang preached in wealthier parishes throughout Southern England , and urged his listeners to contribute to the Fund . He extended his ministry to the army when , in 1907 , was appointed Honorary Chaplain to the City of London Imperial Yeomanry ( Rough Riders ) . He became chairman of the Church of England Men 's Society ( <unk> ) , which had been founded in 1899 by the merger of numerous organisations doing the same work . Initially he found it " a very sickly infant " , but under his leadership it expanded rapidly , and soon had over 20 @,@ 000 members in 600 branches . Later he became critical of the Church 's failure to use this movement effectively , calling it one of the Church 's lost opportunities . 
 = = = St Paul 's Cathedral = = = 
 Lang 's appointment as a canon of St Paul 's Cathedral required him to spend three months annually as the canon in residence , with administrative and preaching duties . Following his appointment as canon , he was also appointed Treasurer of the Cathedral . His preaching on Sunday afternoons caught the attention of William Temple , Lang 's future successor at both York and Canterbury , who was then an undergraduate at Oxford . Temple observed that , in contrast to the Bishop of London 's sermons , listening to Lang brought on an intellectual rather than emotional pleasure : " I can remember all his points , just because their connexion is inevitable .... And for me , there is no doubt that this is the more edifying by far . " Lang was a member of the cathedral 's governing body , the Dean and Chapter , and was responsible for the organisation of special occasions , such as the service of thanksgiving for King Edward VII 's recovery from appendicitis in July 1902 . 
 = = Archbishop of York = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 In the autumn of 1908 Lang was informed of his election as Bishop of Montreal . Letters from the Governor General of Canada and the Canadian High Commissioner urged him to accept , but the Archbishop of Canterbury asked him to refuse . A few weeks later a letter from Herbert Asquith , the prime minister , informed Lang that he had been nominated Archbishop of York . Lang was only 44 years old , and had no experience as a diocesan bishop . On the issue of age , the Church Times believed that Asquith deliberately recommended the youngest bishop available , after strong political lobbying for the appointment of the aged Bishop of Hereford , John Percival . Such a promotion for a suffragan , and within so short a period after ordination , was without recent precedent in the Church of England . Lang 's friend Hensley Henson , a future Bishop of Durham , wrote : " I am , of course , surprised that you go straight to an archbishopric ... But you are too meteoric for precedent . " The appointment was generally well received , although the Protestant Truth Society sought in vain to prevent its confirmation . Strong opponents of Anglo @-@ Catholic practices , they maintained that as Bishop of Stepney Lang had " connived at and encouraged flagrant breaking of the law relating to church ritual " . 
 = = = First years = = = 
 Lang was enthroned at York Minster on 25 January 1909 . In 18 years since ordination he had risen to the second @-@ highest position in the Church of England . In addition to his diocesan responsibilities for York itself , he became head of the entire Northern Province , and a member of the House of Lords . Believing that the Diocese of York was too large , he proposed reducing it by forming a new Diocese of Sheffield , which after several years ' work was inaugurated in 1914 . In the years following his appointment , Lang spoke out on a range of social and economic issues , and in support of improved working conditions . After taking his seat in the House of Lords in February 1909 , he made his maiden speech in November in the debate on the controversial People 's Budget , advising the Lords against their intention to reject this measure . He cast his first Lords vote against rejection , because he was " deeply convinced of the <unk> of the course the Lords proposed to take " . Although his speech was received with respect , Lang 's stance was politely reproved by the leading Conservative peer Lord Curzon . 
 Despite this seemingly progressive approach , Lang 's instincts remained conservative . He voted against the 1914 Irish Home Rule Bill and opposed liberalisation of the divorce laws . After playing a prominent role in King George V 's coronation in 1911 , Lang became increasingly close to the Royal Family , an association which drew the comment that he was " more courtier than cleric " . His love of ceremony , and concern for how an archbishop should look and live , began to obscure other aspects of his ministry ; rather than assuming the role of the people 's prelate he began , in the words of his biographer Alan Wilkinson , to act as a " prince of the church " . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 When war broke out in August 1914 , Lang concluded that the conflict was righteous . Younger clergy should be encouraged to serve as military chaplains , but it was not their duty to fight . He thereafter was active in recruiting campaigns throughout his province . At a meeting in York in November 1914 he caused offence when he spoke out against excessive anti @-@ German propaganda , and recalled a " sacred memory " of the Kaiser kneeling with King Edward VII at the bier of Queen Victoria . These remarks , perceived as pro @-@ German , produced what Lang termed " a perfect hail of denunciation " . The strain of this period , coupled with the onset of alopecia , drastically altered Lang 's relatively youthful appearance to that of a bald and elderly @-@ looking man . His friends were shocked ; the king , meeting him on the Royal train , apparently burst into guffaws of laughter . 
 Public hostility against Lang was slow to subside , re @-@ emerging from time to time throughout the war . However , Lang continued his contribution to the war effort , paying visits to the Grand Fleet and to the Western Front . He applied all his organisational skills to the Archbishop of Canterbury 's National Mission of Repentance and Hope , an initiative designed to renew Christian faith nationwide , but it failed to make a significant impact . 
 As a result of the Battle of Jerusalem of December 1917 , the British Empire 's Egyptian Expeditionary Force captured the Holy City , bringing it under Christian control for the first time since the Crusades . As Prelate of the Venerable Order of Saint John , Lang led a service of celebration on 11 January 1918 at the Order 's Grand Priory Church , Clerkenwell . He explained that it was 917 years since the Order 's hospital had been founded in Jerusalem , and 730 years since they were driven out by Saladin . " London is the city of the Empire 's commerce , but Jerusalem is the city of the soul , and it is particularly fitting that British Armies should have delivered it out of the hands of the infidel . " 
 Early in 1918 , at the invitation of the Episcopal Church of the United States , he made a goodwill visit to America , praising the extent and willingness of America 's participation in the war . The Westminster Gazette called this " one of the most moving and memorable visits ever paid by an Englishman [ sic ] to the United States " . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 After the war , Lang 's primary cause was that of church unity . In 1920 , as chairman of the Reunion Committee at the Sixth Lambeth Conference , he promoted an " Appeal to all Christian People " , described by Hastings as " one of the rare historical documents that does not get forgotten with the years " . It was unanimously adopted as the Conference 's Resolution 9 , and ended : " We ... ask that all should unite in a new and great endeavour to recover and to manifest to the world the unity of the Body of Christ for which He prayed . " Despite initial warmth from the English Free Churches , little could be achieved in terms of practical union between episcopal and non @-@ episcopal churches , and the initiative was allowed to lapse . Historically , however , the Appeal is considered the starting @-@ point for the more successful ecumenical efforts of later generations . 
 Lang was supportive of the Malines Conversations of 1921 – 26 , though not directly involved . These were informal meetings between leading British Anglo @-@ Catholics and reform @-@ minded European Roman Catholics , exploring the possibility of reuniting the Anglican and Roman communions . Although the discussions had the blessing of Randall Davidson , the Archbishop of Canterbury , many Anglican evangelicals were alarmed by them . Ultimately , the talks foundered on the entrenched opposition of the Catholic <unk> . A by @-@ product of these conversations may have been the awakening of opposition to the revision of the Anglican Prayer Book . The focus of this revision , which Lang supported , was to make concessions to Anglo @-@ Catholic rituals and practices in the Anglican service . The new Prayer Book was overwhelmingly approved by the Church 's main legislative body , the Church Assembly , and by the House of Lords . However , partly through the advocacy of the fervently evangelical Home Secretary , Sir William Joynson @-@ Hicks , the revision was twice defeated in the House of Commons , in December 1927 by 238 votes to 205 and , in June 1928 , by 266 – 220 . Lang was deeply disappointed , writing that " the gusts of Protestant convictions , suspicions , fears [ and ] prejudices swept through the House , and ultimately prevailed . " 
 On 26 April 1923 King George V awarded Lang the Royal Victorian Chain , an honour in the personal gift of the Sovereign After the marriage of the Duke of York in 1923 , Lang formed a friendship with the Duchess which lasted for the rest of Lang 's life . In 1926 he baptised Princess Elizabeth , the future Elizabeth II , in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace . In January 1927 Lang took centre @-@ stage in the elaborate ceremonies which marked the 1,300th anniversary of the founding of York Minster . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 = = = In office = = = 
 Archbishop Davidson resigned in July 1928 ( he is believed to have been the first Archbishop of Canterbury ever to retire voluntarily ) . On 26 July Lang was notified by the Prime Minister , Stanley Baldwin , that he would be the successor ; William Temple would succeed Lang at York . Lang was enthroned as the new Archbishop of Canterbury on 4 December 1928 , the first bachelor to hold the appointment in 150 years . A contemporary Time magazine article described Lang as " forthright and voluble " and as looking " like George Washington " . Lang 's first three years at Canterbury were marked by intermittent illnesses , which required periods of convalescence away from his duties . After 1932 , however , he " had almost unbroken health " for the rest of his life . 
 Lang avoided continuation of the Prayer Book controversy of 1928 by allowing the parliamentary process to lapse . He then authorised a statement permitting use of the rejected Book locally if the parochial church council gave approval . The issue remained dormant for the rest of Lang 's tenure at Canterbury . He led the 1930 Lambeth Conference , where further progress was made in improving relations with the Orthodox Churches and the Old Catholics , although again no agreement could be reached with the non @-@ episcopal Free Churches . On an issue of greater concern to ordinary people , the Conference gave limited approval , for the first time , to the use of contraceptive devices , an issue in which Lang had no interest . Through the 1930s Lang continued to work for Church unity . In 1933 the Church of England assembly formed a Council on Foreign Relations and , in the following years , numerous exchange visits with Orthodox delegations took place , a process only halted by the outbreak of war . Lang 's 1939 visit to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is regarded as the high point of his ecumenical record . George Bell , Bishop of Chichester , maintained that no one in the Anglican Communion did more than Lang to promote the unity movement . 
 In 1937 the Oxford Conference on Church and Society , which later gave birth to the World Council of Churches , produced what was according to the church historian Adrian Hastings " the most serious approach to the problems of society that the Church had yet managed " , but without Lang 's close involvement . By this time Lang 's identification with the poor had largely vanished , as had his interest in social reform . In the Church Assembly his closest ally was the aristocratic Lord Hugh Cecil ; Hastings maintains that the Church of England in the 1930s was controlled " less by Lang and Temple in tandem than by Lang and Hugh Cecil " . However , Lang got on well with Hewlett Johnson , the pro @-@ communist priest who was appointed Dean of Canterbury in 1931 . 
 = = = International and domestic politics = = = 
 Lang often spoke in the House of Lords about the treatment of Russian Christians in the Soviet Union . He also denounced the anti @-@ semitic policies of the German government , and he took private steps to help European Jews . In 1933 , having commented on the " noble task " of assisting India towards independence , he was appointed to the Joint Committee on the Indian Constitution . He condemned the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935 , appealing for medical supplies to be sent to the Abyssinian troops . However , as the threat of war increased later in the decade , Lang became a strong supporter of the government 's policy of appeasing the European dictators , declaring the Sunday after the Munich Agreement of September 1938 to be a day of thanksgivings for the " sudden lifting of this cloud " . Earlier that year , contrary to his former stance , he had supported the Anglo @-@ Italian agreement to recognise the conquest of Abyssinia , because he believed that " an increase of appeasement " was necessary to avoid the threat of war . Lang also backed the government 's non @-@ intervention policy in regard to the Spanish Civil War , saying that there were no clear issues that required the taking of sides . In October 1937 Lang 's condemnation of Imperial Japanese Army actions in China provoked hostile scrutiny by the Japanese authorities of the Anglican Church in Japan , and caused some in that church 's leadership to publicly disassociate themselves from the Church of England . 
 On the domestic front , Lang supported campaigns for the abolition of the death penalty . He upheld the right of the Church to refuse the remarriage of divorced persons within its buildings , but he did not directly oppose A.P. Herbert 's Matrimonial Causes Bill of 1937 , which liberalised the divorce laws – Lang believed " it was no longer possible to impose the full Christian standard by law on a largely non @-@ Christian population . " He drew criticism for his opposition to the reform of the ancient tithe system , whereby many farmers paid a proportion of their income to the Church ; in the subsequent " Tithe Wars " , demonstrators at Ashford , Kent ceremonially burned his effigy . Near the end of his term in office Lang led a deputation from several church groups to the Ministry of Education , to present a five @-@ point plan for the teaching of religion in state schools . These points were eventually embodied in the 1944 Education Act . 
 = = = Abdication crisis = = = 
 Lang was responsible for drafting King George V 's silver jubilee broadcast message in 1935 , and the king 's last two Christmas messages . However , this closeness to the throne was not maintained when the king died in January 1936 and was succeeded by his son , Edward VIII . The new king was wary of Lang , whom he had once admired . He now found him " rather ... accustomed to the company of princes and statesmen , more interested in the pursuit of prestige and power than the abstractions of the human soul " . 
 Lang believed that , as Prince of Wales , Edward had not always been wise in his choice of friends and acquaintances , whose standards Lang was later to condemn as " alien to all the best instincts and traditions of his people " . The archbishop had been aware for some time of the king 's relationship with the American Wallis Simpson , then married to her second husband Ernest Simpson . During the summer of 1936 it became clear that the king intended to marry Mrs Simpson either before or shortly after his impending coronation , depending on the timing of her divorce from Simpson . Lang agonised over whether he could , with good conscience , administer the Coronation Oath to the king in such circumstances , bearing in mind the Church 's teaching on marriage . He confided to his diary his hopes that circumstances might change , or that he might be able to persuade the king to reconsider his actions , but the king refused to meet him . Lang , however , kept close contact with the king 's mother , Queen Mary , the prime minister and the king 's private secretary . The king believed that Lang 's influence was strong , later recalling how from beginning to end he felt the archbishop 's " shadowy , hovering presence " in the background . 
 The matter became public knowledge on 2 December 1936 when the Bishop of Bradford made an indirect comment on the king 's " need for Divine Grace " . By then the king had unalterably decided that he would abdicate rather than give up Wallis Simpson . All attempts to dissuade him failed , and on 11 December he gave up his throne in favour of his brother , George VI . Two days later Lang broadcast a speech , in which he said : " From God he received a high and sacred trust . Yet by his own will he has ... surrendered the trust . " The king 's motive had been " a craving for private happiness " that he had sought " in a manner inconsistent with the Christian principles of marriage " . The speech was widely condemned for its lack of charity towards the departed king and provoked the writer Gerald <unk> to publish a satirical rhyme : 
 My Lord Archbishop , what a scold you are ! 
 And when your man is down , how bold you are ! 
 Of charity how oddly scant you are ! 
 How Lang O Lord , how full of Cantuar ! 
 According to the writer Compton Mackenzie , Lang 's broadcast " dealt a disastrous blow to religious feeling throughout the country " . 
 Lang did not disguise his relief that the crisis was over . He wrote of George VI : " I was now sure that to the solemn words of the Coronation there would now be a sincere response . " On 12 May 1937 , Lang crowned George VI with full pomp in Westminster Abbey . It was the first coronation to be broadcast . Time magazine recorded : " All through the three @-@ hour ceremony , the most important person there was not the King , his nobles or his ministers , but a hawk @-@ nosed old gentleman with a cream- & <unk> cope who stood on a dais as King George approached : The Rt. Hon. and Most Reverend Cosmo Gordon Lang , <unk> .. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury , Primate of All England . " Supposedly the archbishop fumbled with the Crown but Lang himself was fully satisfied : " I can only be thankful to God 's over @-@ ruling Providence and trust that the Coronation may not be a mere dream of the past , but that its memories and lessons will not be forgotten . " 
 = = = War = = = 
 When the Second World War began in September 1939 , Lang saw his main duty as the preservation of spiritual values during what he deemed to be an honourable conflict . He opposed strategies such as indiscriminate bombing , and on 21 December 1940 , in a letter to The Times signed jointly with Temple and Cardinal Hinsley , Lang expressed support for the pope 's Five Peace Points initiative . Lang was sympathetic to the Sword of the Spirit campaign , founded by Cardinal Hinsley in 1940 to combat anti @-@ democratic tendencies among Catholics . In May 1941 Lambeth Palace , Lang 's London home , was hit by bombs and made uninhabitable . 
 After Germany 's attack on Russia in June 1941 , Lang said that the Russians must now be regarded as allies , without forgetting or condoning the excesses of the past . His relations with Winston Churchill , prime minister since May 1940 , were difficult because " he [ Churchill ] knows nothing about the Church , its life , its needs or its personnel " . There was therefore " uncertainty as to what motives or how much knowledge may determine his decisions [ on Church matters ] " . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Throughout the summer of 1941 Lang considered retirement . His main concern was that a Lambeth Conference – " perhaps the most fateful Lambeth Conference ever held " – would need to be called soon after the war . Lang felt that he would be too old to lead it and that he should make way for a younger man , preferably William Temple . On 27 November he informed the prime minister , Winston Churchill , of his decision to retire on 31 March 1942 . His last official act in office , on 28 March , was the confirmation of Princess Elizabeth . 
 On his retirement Lang was raised to the peerage as Baron Lang of Lambeth in the County of Surrey . He was thus able to remain in the House of Lords , where he attended regularly and contributed to debates . He worried about money , despite a pension of £ 1 @,@ 500 per year ( approximately £ 63 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , a large rent @-@ free house at Kew , and some generous cash gifts from well @-@ wishers . In 1943 he spoke in the House of Lords in support of the Beveridge Report on social insurance , and on 9 February 1944 he reiterated his earlier opposition to obliteration bombing . In October 1944 Lang was greatly distressed by the sudden death of William Temple , his successor at Canterbury , writing : " I don 't like to think of the loss to the Church and Nation ... But ' God knows and God reigns ' . " 
 On 5 December 1945 Lang was due to speak in a Lords debate on conditions in Central Europe . On his way to Kew Gardens station to catch the London train , he collapsed and was taken to hospital , but was found to be dead on arrival . A post @-@ mortem attributed the death to heart failure . In paying tribute the following day , Lord Addison said that Lang was " not only a great cleric but a great man ... we have lost in him a Father in God . " His body was cremated and the ashes taken to the Chapel of St Stephen Martyr , a side chapel at Canterbury Cathedral , where they were buried under the altar table . The chapel was subsequently refurbished in 1950 , the work dedicated to Lang 's memory . 
 The probate value of Lang 's estate was £ 29 @,@ 541 ( approximately £ 1 @,@ 150 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Lang was a bishop in England for longer than anyone else in the twentieth century , Hastings says that " of no other is it so hard to address his true significance " . According to biographer Lockhart he was a complex character in whom " a jangle of warring personalities ... never reached agreement among themselves . " Lockhart writes that while Lang 's many years of high office saw progress in the cause of Christian reunion , the mark he left on the Church was relatively small ; many believed it could have been larger and deeper . While Lang 's oratorical and administrative gifts were beyond doubt , Hastings nevertheless claims that as Archbishop of Canterbury , Lang displayed no effective leadership or guidance , turning away from reform and content to be the " final sentinel to the ancien régime " . Wilkinson says that Lang dealt conscientiously with problems as they arose , but without any overall strategy . 
 In Hastings 's view , Lang was probably more sympathetic to Rome than any other Church of England archbishop of modern times , responsible for a discreet <unk> of the Church of England 's practices . A small outward indication of this was his decision to use a cassock as everyday dress and to wear a mitre on formal occasions , the first archbishop since the English Reformation to do so . However , Lang believed that in relation to the supreme truths of the church , rituals and dress were of small account , but that if people 's worship was assisted by such customs they should be allowed . 
 Despite Lang 's long involvement with the poorest of society , after becoming Archbishop of York he increasingly detached himself from everyday life . The historian Tom Buchanan wrote that Lang 's sympathy with ordinary people was replaced by " an upper class affectation and a delight in the high society in which his office allowed him to move " . No archbishop has been as close as Lang to the Royal Family ; a Channel Four television history of the British monarchy maintained that Lang " held a view of Christianity in which the monarchy , rather than the cross , stood centre stage as the symbol of the nation 's faith " . Successive generations of the Royal Family considered him their friend and honoured him . King George V appointed him to the largely ceremonial post of Lord High Almoner , and after the 1937 Coronation George VI created him a Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order ( GCVO ) , a rare honour which , like the Royal Victorian Chain , lay in the private gift of the Sovereign . A friend , commenting on the transformation of Lang 's perspective , said of him : " He might have been Cardinal Wolsey or St Francis of Assisi , and he chose to be Cardinal Wolsey . " 
 Lang also received numerous honorary doctorates from British universities . His portrait was painted many times ; after sitting for Sir William Orpen in 1924 , Lang reportedly remarked to Bishop Hensley Henson of Durham that the portrait showed him as " proud , <unk> and pompous " . Henson 's recorded reply was " To which of these epithets does Your Grace take exception ? " 
 At an early stage in his priesthood Lang decided to lead a celibate life . He had no objection to the institution of marriage , but felt that his own work would be hindered by domesticity . Years after Lang 's death , his sexual orientation was questioned , first by the historian A.L. Rowse in his 1989 autobiography , later by Lang 's ODNB biographer Alan Wilkinson and , finally , by the historian David Starkey who , in his 2001 television programme Reinventing the Royals , asserted that Lang was a repressed homosexual : " [ He ] paid the price for this repression with lifelong insomnia and an extraordinary episode of premature ageing . " Lang had close friendships with colleagues such as Dick Sheppard and Wilfrid Parker , his one @-@ time domestic chaplain to whom he wrote admitting his personal loneliness and of his need for " someone in daily nearness to love " . However , he clearly enjoyed the company of women and confessed in 1928 , after a visit to the Rowntree 's chocolate factory , that the sight of the girls there had " stirred up all the instincts of my youth ... very little subdued by the passage of years " . 
 George Bell , the Bishop of Chichester who had earlier praised Lang 's work for church unity , said that Lang 's failure to take a lead after the Prayer Book rejection of 1928 meant that the Church of England had been unable to revise its forms of worship or take any effective control of its own affairs . Others , however , have argued that Lang 's laissez @-@ faire approach to the Prayer Book controversy helped to defuse a potentially explosive situation and contributed to an eventual solution . Lang himself was gloomy about his legacy ; he believed that since he had not led his country back into an Age of Faith , or marked his primacy with a great historical act , he had failed to live up to his own high standard . Others have judged him more charitably , praising his industry , his administrative ability and his devotion to duty . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers and periodicals = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 = Hoylande Young = 
 Hoylande <unk> Young <unk> ( June 26 , 1903 – January 12 , 1986 ) was an American chemist . During World War II she worked at the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory . After the war she became the first woman to be appointed as a division head at the Argonne National Laboratory , and the first female to chair the Chicago Section of the American Chemical Society . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Hoylande <unk> Young was born in Columbus , Ohio , on June 26 , 1903 . She had a sister , Hilda . She became interested in chemistry when she was in high school , where there were separate boys ' and girls ' chemistry classes . Due to course scheduling conflicts she was permitted to take the more challenging boys ' course , although she had to sit up the back of the class . She entered Ohio State University , from which she received a Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry in 1924 . She then went on to earn a Doctor of Philosophy at the University of Chicago , writing her thesis on " <unk> <unk> <unk> " under the supervision of Julius Stieglitz . 
 After graduating , Young became an industrial research chemist , working in the lacquer industry at Van Schaack Brothers Chemical Works in Chicago . In 1930 , she became an assistant professor of chemistry at the Texas State College for Women , where she taught nutrition and biochemistry . In 1934 , she resigned to take up an offer from Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago , but when she arrived the director found out that she was a woman , and refused to hire her . Jobs were hard to find during the Great Depression , and she was a consultant with no regular employment until 1938 , when she took a position with Pure Oil . There she worked with Cary R. Wagner , Jr . , on a book on petroleum refining . The project went on for six years , but it was interrupted by the outbreak of World War II , and the book was never published . 
 With the United States at war , Young took a job in 1942 as a scientific librarian with the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) at the University of Chicago 's Toxicity Laboratory , compiling American , British and Canadian reports on chemical warfare , and preparing an index of toxic chemicals . In 1945 , she transferred to the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory as a chemist . There she edited papers that would later be published by the Atomic Energy Commission as part of its National Nuclear Energy Series . She later served on the editorial board of the National Nuclear Energy Series , representing the Argonne National Laboratory . 
 In 1946 , Young joined the newly created Argonne National Laboratory in 1946 as Director of Technical Information , the first woman to be appointed a division head . She would remain at Argonne until she retired in 1964 . In 1956 , she became the first woman to be appointed chair of the Chicago Section of the American Chemical Society . She was involved in setting up its Distinguished Service Award , and later received it herself in 1975 . She was also a fellow of the American Institute of Chemists , the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the Atomic Scientists of Chicago . She was a charter member of the American Nuclear Society and the president of Iota Sigma Pi , a national honor society for women in chemistry . In 1959 , the Chicago Tribune named her as one of the city 's most distinguished women in business or the professions , and the Argonne National Laboratory established the Hoylande D. Young lecture series in her honor in 1963 . 
 Young married Crawford <unk> , whom she had known in the Toxicity Laboratory . She died at her home in Hyde Park , Chicago , on January 12 , 1986 , and was buried in the Riverside Cemetery , Columbus , Ohio . She was survived by her sister , Hilda Young . 
 = Amphibian = 
 Amphibians are ectothermic , tetrapod vertebrates of the class Amphibia . Modern amphibians are all Lissamphibia . They inhabit a wide variety of habitats , with most species living within terrestrial , fossorial , arboreal or freshwater aquatic ecosystems . Amphibians typically start out as larvae living in water , but some species have developed behavioural adaptations to bypass this . The young generally undergo metamorphosis from larva with gills to an adult air @-@ breathing form with lungs . Amphibians use their skin as a secondary respiratory surface and some small terrestrial salamanders and frogs lack lungs and rely entirely on their skin . They are superficially similar to reptiles but , along with mammals and birds , reptiles are amniotes and do not require water bodies in which to breed . With their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins , amphibians are often ecological indicators ; in recent decades there has been a dramatic decline in amphibian populations for many species around the globe . 
 The earliest amphibians evolved in the Devonian period from sarcopterygian fish with lungs and bony @-@ limbed fins , features that were helpful in adapting to dry land . They diversified and became dominant during the Carboniferous and Permian periods , but were later displaced by reptiles and other vertebrates . Over time , amphibians shrank in size and decreased in diversity , leaving only the modern subclass Lissamphibia . The three modern orders of amphibians are Anura ( the frogs and toads ) , Urodela ( the salamanders ) , and Apoda ( the caecilians ) . The number of known amphibian species is approximately 7 @,@ 000 , of which nearly 90 % are frogs . The smallest amphibian ( and vertebrate ) in the world is a frog from New Guinea ( Paedophryne amauensis ) with a length of just 7 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 in ) . The largest living amphibian is the 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 ft 11 in ) Chinese giant salamander ( Andrias davidianus ) , but this is dwarfed by the extinct 9 m ( 30 ft ) <unk> from the middle Permian of Brazil . The study of amphibians is called <unk> , while the study of both reptiles and amphibians is called herpetology . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The word " amphibian " is derived from the Ancient Greek term <unk> ( <unk> ) , which means " both kinds of life " , <unk> meaning " of both kinds " and <unk> meaning " life " . The term was initially used as a general adjective for animals that could live on land or in water , including seals and otters . Traditionally , the class Amphibia includes all tetrapod vertebrates that are not amniotes . Amphibia in its widest sense ( sensu lato ) was divided into three subclasses , two of which are extinct : 
 Subclass Lepospondyli † ( small Paleozoic group , which may actually be more closely related to amniotes than Lissamphibia ) 
 Subclass Temnospondyli † ( diverse Paleozoic and early Mesozoic grade ) 
 Subclass Lissamphibia ( all modern amphibians , including frogs , toads , salamanders , newts and caecilians ) 
 Salientia ( frogs , toads and relatives ) : Jurassic to present — 6 @,@ 200 current species in 53 families 
 Caudata ( salamanders , newts and relatives ) : Jurassic to present — 652 current species in 9 families 
 Gymnophiona ( caecilians and relatives ) : Jurassic to present — 192 current species in 10 families 
 The actual number of species in each group depends on the taxonomic classification followed . The two most common systems are the classification adopted by the website <unk> , University of California , Berkeley and the classification by herpetologist Darrel Frost and the American Museum of Natural History , available as the online reference database " Amphibian Species of the World " . The numbers of species cited above follows Frost and the total number of known amphibian species is over 7 @,@ 000 , of which nearly 90 % are frogs . 
 With the phylogenetic classification , the taxon Labyrinthodontia has been discarded as it is a <unk> group without unique defining features apart from shared primitive characteristics . Classification varies according to the preferred phylogeny of the author and whether they use a stem @-@ based or a node @-@ based classification . Traditionally , amphibians as a class are defined as all tetrapods with a larval stage , while the group that includes the common ancestors of all living amphibians ( frogs , salamanders and caecilians ) and all their descendants is called Lissamphibia . The phylogeny of Paleozoic amphibians is uncertain , and Lissamphibia may possibly fall within extinct groups , like the Temnospondyli ( traditionally placed in the subclass Labyrinthodontia ) or the Lepospondyli , and in some analyses even in the amniotes . This means that advocates of phylogenetic nomenclature have removed a large number of basal Devonian and Carboniferous amphibian @-@ type tetrapod groups that were formerly placed in Amphibia in Linnaean taxonomy , and included them elsewhere under cladistic taxonomy . If the common ancestor of amphibians and amniotes is included in Amphibia , it becomes a paraphyletic group . 
 All modern amphibians are included in the subclass Lissamphibia , which is usually considered a clade , a group of species that have evolved from a common ancestor . The three modern orders are Anura ( the frogs and toads ) , Caudata ( or Urodela , the salamanders ) , and Gymnophiona ( or Apoda , the caecilians ) . It has been suggested that salamanders arose separately from a <unk> @-@ like ancestor , and even that caecilians are the sister group of the advanced <unk> amphibians , and thus of amniotes . Although the fossils of several older proto @-@ frogs with primitive characteristics are known , the oldest " true frog " is Prosalirus <unk> , from the Early Jurassic Kayenta Formation of Arizona . It is anatomically very similar to modern frogs . The oldest known caecilian is another Early Jurassic species , <unk> <unk> , also from Arizona . The earliest salamander is <unk> <unk> from the Late Jurassic of northeastern China . 
 Authorities disagree as to whether Salientia is a superorder that includes the order Anura , or whether Anura is a sub @-@ order of the order Salientia . The Lissamphibia are traditionally divided into three orders , but an extinct salamander @-@ like family , the <unk> , is now considered part of Lissamphibia alongside the superorder Salientia . Furthermore , Salientia includes all three recent orders plus the Triassic proto @-@ frog , Triadobatrachus . 
