 = = = Background = = = 
 Bach is believed to have written Christ lag in Todes Banden in 1707 . He was a professional organist aged 22 , employed from 1703 in Arnstadt as the organist of the New Church ( which replaced the burned <unk> , today known as the Bach Church ) . At age 18 , he had inspected the new organ built by Johann Friedrich Wender , was invited to play one Sunday , and was hired . The organ was built on the third tier of a theatre @-@ like church . Bach 's duties as a church musician involved some responsibility for choral music , but the exact year he began composing cantatas is unknown . Christ lag in Todes Banden is one of a small group of cantatas that survive from his early years . 
 In Arnstadt , the Kantor ( church musician ) <unk> was responsible for church music in the Upper Church ( <unk> ) , and the New Church where Bach was the organist . He typically conducted music in the Upper Church and would appoint a choir prefect for vocal music in the New Church . Wolff notes that " subjecting his works to the questionable leadership of a prefect " was not what Bach would have done . Therefore , most cantatas of the period are not for Sunday occasions , but restricted to special occasions such as weddings and funerals . Christ lag in Todes Banden is the only exception , but was most likely composed not for Arnstadt but for an application to a more important post at the Divi Blasii church in Mühlhausen . 
 = = = Bach 's early cantatas = = = 
 Bach 's early cantatas are " <unk> " ( chorale concertos ) in the style of the 17th century , different from the recitative and aria cantata format associated with Neumeister that Bach started to use for church cantatas in 1714 . Wolff points out the relation of Bach 's early cantatas to works by Dieterich Buxtehude , with whom Bach had studied in Lübeck . Christ lag in Todes Banden shows similarities to a composition of Johann Pachelbel based on the same Easter chorale . Although there is no evidence that Bach and Pachelbel met , Bach grew up in Thuringia while Pachelbel was based in the same region , and Bach 's elder brother and teacher Johann Christoph Bach studied with Pachelbel in Erfurt . Another of Pachelbel 's works appears to be referenced in the early Bach cantata , Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich , BWV 150 , and there has been recent speculation that Bach wanted to pay tribute to Pachelbel after his death in 1706 . 
 The texts for the early cantatas were drawn mostly from biblical passages and hymns . Features characteristic of his later cantatas , such as recitatives and arias on contemporary poetry , were not yet present , although Bach may have heard them in oratorios by Buxtehude , or even earlier . Instead , these early cantatas include 17th @-@ century elements such as motets and chorale concertos . They often begin with an instrumental sinfonia or sonata ( <unk> ) . The following table lists the seven extant works composed by Bach until 1708 , when he moved on to the Weimar court . 
 Bach uses the limited types of instruments at his disposal for unusual combinations , such as two recorders and two viole da gamba in the funeral cantata Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit , also known as Actus Tragicus . He uses instruments of the continuo group as independent parts , such as a cello in Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich and a bassoon in Der Herr <unk> an uns . The cantata for the inauguration of a town council is richly scored for trumpets , woodwinds and strings . Wolff notes : 
 The overall degree of mastery by which these early pieces compare favourably with the best church compositions from the first decade of the eighteenth century ... proves that the young Bach did not confine himself to playing organ and <unk> , but , animated by his Buxtehude visit , devoted considerable time and effort to vocal composition . The very few such early works that exist , each a masterpiece in its own right , must constitute a remnant only ... of a larger body of similar compositions . 
 The Bach scholar Richard D. P. Jones notes in The Creative Development of Johann Sebastian Bach : 
 " His remarkable flair for test illustration is evident even in the early cantatas , particularly the two finest of them , the Actus tragicus , BWV 106 , and Christ lag in Todes Banden , BWV 4 . We already sense a powerful mind behind the notes in the motivic unity of the early cantatas , in the use of reprise to bind their mosaic forms together ... " 
 = = = Readings and chorale = = = 
 The prescribed readings for the feast day were from the First letter to the Corinthians ( " Christ is our Easter lamb " – 1 Corinthians 5 : 6 – 8 ) and from the Gospel of Mark ( the Resurrection of Jesus – Mark 16 : 1 – 8 ) . 
 The reformer Martin Luther wrote several hymns in German to be used in church services . His hymn " Christ lag in Todes Banden " was based on the Latin hymn " Victimae <unk> Laudes " , and first published in 1524 . It became a main Easter hymn in German Lutheranism . The hymn stresses the struggle between Life and Death . The third stanza refers to the " sting of death " , as mentioned in 1 Corinthians 15 . The fifth stanza relates to the " <unk> " , the Paschal Lamb . The sacrificial " blood " ( " Its blood marks our doors " ) refers to the marking of the doors before the exodus from Egypt . The final stanza recalls the tradition of baking and eating Easter Bread , with the " old leaven " alluding again to the exodus , in contrast to the " Word of Grace " , concluding " Christ would ... alone nourish the soul . " In contrast to most chorale cantatas that Bach composed later in Leipzig , the text of the chorale is retained unchanged , which he did again only in late chorale cantatas . 
 = = = Performances = = = 
 Christ lag in Todes Banden survives in a version from the 1720s when Bach held the position of Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig . There is documentary evidence suggesting that this Easter Sunday cantata was premiered in 1707 . It is known that Bach performed a cantata of his own composition at Easter in 1707 as a part of his application for the post of organist of Divi Blasii church in Mühlhausen , and this may have been Christ lag in Todes Banden . By this time , Bach was already demonstrating ingenuity in keyboard music , as known from the early works in the Neumeister Collection . Christ lag in Todes Banden is a significant milestone in his vocal music . It was completed seven years before his sequence of Weimar cantatas , begun in 1714 with Himmelskönig , sei willkommen , BWV 182 , and 17 years before he started a complete annual cycle of chorale cantatas in Leipzig in the middle of 1724 with O Ewigkeit , du Donnerwort , BWV 20 . 
 Bach would have been attracted to Mühlhausen for its status as a free imperial city and its several churches and tradition of vocal music . Wolff notes that Bach possibly sent two other cantata scores with his application , and once he knew the date of the audition may have composed Christ lag in Todes Banden in addition . A month after Easter , on 24 May 1707 , an agreement was reached to hire Bach , who seems to have been the only candidate considered seriously . 
 Bach performed the cantata again while Thomaskantor in Leipzig , notably at his first Easter there on 9 April 1724 . He also performed it the following year on 1 April 1725 , in his second cycle of Leipzig cantatas , a cycle of chorale cantatas based on Lutheran hymns . It followed in the cycle some forty newly composed cantatas . This early work fits the cycle in the sense that it is based on a chorale , but its style is different from the others . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Scoring and structure = = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in eight movements : an instrumental sinfonia and seven vocal movements corresponding to the stanzas of the hymn . The duration is given as 22 minutes . 
 The title of the original parts of the first Leipzig performance is ( in Johann Christoph <unk> 's handwriting ) : " Feria <unk> / Christ lag in Todes Banden / <unk> Voc : / Cornetto / 3 <unk> . / 2 Violini / 2 Viole / con / Continuo / Di Sign . <unk> " , In this late version , Bach scored the work for four vocal parts ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) , and bass ( B ) ) , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble consisting of strings , brass and continuo . The brass parts , a choir of cornetto ( Ct ) and three trombones ( Tb ) playing colla parte with the voices at times , may have been added in the 1720s . They may also possibly represent the original scoring , in the style of the 17th @-@ century polychoral tradition . 
 The scoring of the cantata Christ lag in Todes Banden has been described as " archaic " and its style " medieval " : 
 The string section consists of two violin parts ( Vl ) and two viola parts ( VA ) ; this indicates an older practice as for instance found in 17th @-@ century church cantatas by Bach 's ancestors ( see <unk> Archiv ) , and in Jesus Christus ist um <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , a Passion setting from the early 18th century ( or older ) which Bach had performed a few years after composing the cantata Christ lag in Todes Banden . In the first half of the 18th century the standard for a string section soon evolved to two violin parts , one viola part and continuo . 
 The cornett used in the cantata was an instrument that belonged to an earlier age : by the second quarter of the 18th century it had almost entirely disappeared from Bach 's compositions . 
 Choral singing is less distinguished from sections of the cantata where vocal soloists sing in ensemble : compared to the clear demarcation between choral movements and movements for vocal soloists in Bach 's later works . 
 The harmony is often modal , instead of the modern tonal system . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring and keys follow the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) and alla breve ( 2 / 2 ) . The continuo , played throughout , is not shown . 
 = = = Hymn tune = = = 
 Luther 's hymn is based on the 12th @-@ century Easter hymn " Christ ist <unk> " ( Christ is risen ) , which relies both in text and melody on the sequence for Easter , " Victimae paschali laudes " . A new version was published by Luther in 1524 and adapted by Johann Walter in his Wittenberg hymnal for choir , Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn ( 1524 ) . A slightly modified version appeared in 1533 in a hymnal by Kluge . This chorale tune would have been familiar to Bach 's congregations . Bach composed other arrangements during his career , including the two chorale preludes BWV 625 and BWV 718 , and the " Fantasia super Christ lag in Todes Banden " , BWV 695 . Bach 's organ works and the version in the cantata use the passing notes and regular rhythmic patterns of the 1533 version . 
 = = = Movements = = = 
 Unlike in Bach 's later cantatas , all movements are in the same key . The cantata begins with an instrumental sinfonia . The seven stanzas are treated in seven movements as chorale variations " per omnes versus " ( for all stanzas ) , with the melody always present as a cantus firmus . All stanzas end on the word Halleluja . 
 The symmetrical sequence of the seven stanzas is a feature more often found in Bach 's mature compositions : chorus – duet – solo – chorus – solo – duet – chorus . The musicologist Carol Traupman @-@ Carr notes the variety of treatment of the seven stanzas , while retaining the same key and melody : 
 Polyphonic chorale fantasia 
 Duet , with " walking bass " in continuo 
 Trio sonata 
 Polyphonic and imitative , woven around chorale melody 
 <unk> with elaborate continuo line 
 Duet , using trio sonata texture with extensive imitation 
 Four @-@ part chorale setting ( Leipzig version ) 
 John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , calls Bach 's setting of Luther 's hymn " a bold , innovative piece of musical drama " , observing that Bach was " drawing on medieval musical roots ( the hymn tune derives from the eleventh @-@ century plainsong ' Victimae paschali laudes ' ) " , and noting Bach 's " total identification with the spirit and letter of Luther 's fiery , dramatic hymn " . Bach could follow " Luther 's ideal in which music brings the text to life " . 
 = = = = Sinfonia = = = = 
 The cantata begins with an instrumental sinfonia a work in the style of an overture to a contemporary Venetian opera , with chordal passages and occasional polyphony . It introduces the first line of the melody , The mood is sombre , recalling the " Death 's bonds " of the first line of the hymn : Christ 's death on the cross and burial . 
 = = = = Versus 1 = = = = 
 The opening stanza , " Christ lag in Todes Banden " ( Christ lay in death 's bonds ) is treated as a chorale fantasia . Without instrumental opening , the movement starts with the chorale tune sung by the soprano in very long notes , with all other parts entering soon after the soprano begins each choral statement . The alto line is derived from the chorale tune , while the viola parts principally reinforce the alto and tenor voices . The violin parts are independent and , as Traupman @-@ Carr notes " further activate the texture with a virtually continuous exchange of sixteenth @-@ note snippets " . The figure in the violins known as <unk> ( sigh ) reflects " Christ 's suffering in the grip of death " . 
 The final Halleluja is faster , giving up the fantasia format for a four @-@ part fugue and in motet style , with all instruments doubling the voices . The style of the movement recalls the 16th @-@ century stile antico , although the style is still unmistakably Bach 's . 
 = = = = Versus 2 = = = = 
 The second stanza , Aria <unk> , is a duet of soprano and alto , " Den Tod <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( No one could defeat death ) , over an ostinato continuo . It deals with " humanity helpless and paralysed as it awaits God 's judgement against sin " . Bach has the music almost freeze on the first words " den Tod " ( death ) , and the word " <unk> " ( imprisoned ) is marked by a sharp dissonance of the soprano and alto . In the Halleluja , the voices imitate each other on long notes in fast succession , creating a sequence of suspensions . 
 = = = = Versus 3 = = = = 
 The third stanza , " Jesus Christus , Gottes Sohn " ( Jesus Christ , God 's Son ) , is a trio of the tenor , two obbligato violins and continuo . The tenor sings the chorale melody almost unchanged . The violins illustrate first how Christ slashes at the enemy . The music stops completely on the word " nichts " ( nothing ) . The violins then present in four notes the outline of the cross , and finally the tenor sings a joyful " Halleluja " to a virtuoso violin accompaniment . 
 = = = = Versus 4 = = = = 
 " Es war ein <unk> Krieg , da Tod und Leben <unk> " ( It was a strange battle , that death and life waged ) , is the center of the symmetrical structure . It is sung by the four voices , accompanied only by the continuo . The alto sings the cantus firmus , transposed by a fifth to B @-@ Dorian , while the other voices follow each other in a fugal stretto with entries just a beat apart until they fall away one by one . In the final Halleluja in all four voices , the bass descends nearly two octaves . 
 = = = = Versus 5 = = = = 
 Stanza five , " Hier ist das <unk> <unk> " ( Here is the true Easter @-@ lamb ) , is sung by the bass alone , accompanied at first by a descending chromatic line in the continuo which has been compared to the Crucifixus of the Mass in B minor , but changing to " a dance @-@ like passage of continuous eighth notes " when the voice enters . For every line of the stanza , the bass sings a chorale tune , then repeats the words in counterpoint to the part of the tune repeated in the strings , sometimes transposed . Taruskin describes this : " With its antiphonal exchanges between the singer and the massed strings ... this setting sounds like a parody of a passacaglia @-@ style Venetian opera aria , vintage 1640 " . The bass sings the final victorious <unk> , spanning two octaves . 
 = = = = Versus 6 = = = = 
 " So <unk> wir das <unk> Fest " ( So we celebrate the high festival ) , is a duet for soprano and tenor accompanied only by the ostinato continuo . The chorale is shared by the voices , with the soprano singing it in E minor , the tenor in B minor . The movement is a dance of joy : the word " <unk> " ( joy ) is rendered in figuration that Gardiner finds reminiscent of Purcell . Bach incorporates the solemn rhythms of the French overture into this verse , reflecting the presence of the word <unk> ( celebrate ) in the text . It may be the first time that Bach used these rhythms . 
 = = = = Versus 7 = = = = 
 Bach 's original setting of the final stanza , " Wir essen und leben wohl " ( We eat and live well ) , is lost ; it may have been a repeat of the opening chorus . In Leipzig , he supplied a simple four @-@ part setting . 
 = = Manuscripts and publication = = 
 The original autograph parts are kept in the Bach @-@ Archiv Leipzig . They were copied from the lost autograph score by six scribes , four of them known by name , including the composer . 
 A manuscript score by Franz Hauser , dating from c . 1820 – 1839 , is held by the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin – <unk> <unk> . It bears a comment on page 178 : " Nach den auf der Thomasschule <unk> / Original / : Autograph : / Stimmen in <unk> <unk> . / <unk> d 16 . Oct. 33 . / <unk> " ( After the original autograph parts in the Thomasschule , rendered in a score , Leipzig , 16 October 1833 ) . 
 The cantata was first published in 1851 as No. 4 in the first volume of the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft Ausgabe ( BGA ) , edited by Moritz Hauptmann . Half a century later a vocal score of the cantata appeared in Novello 's Original Octavo Edition , under the title Christ Lay in Death 's Dark Prison . The piano reduction was by John E. West , and the translation of the cantata 's text by Paul England . In 1905 this vocal score was republished in the United States by H. W. Gray . Henry S. Drinker 's translation Christ lay by death enshrouded appeared in a score edited by Arnold Schering and published by Eulenburg in 1932 . In 1967 Schering 's score edition was republished by W. W. Norton with an extended introduction and bibliography by Gerhard Herz . Breitkopf & Härtel , the publisher of the BGA , produced various editions of the cantata separately , for instance in 1968 a vocal score with Arno <unk> 's piano reduction and Charles Sanford Terry 's translation ( Christ lay in Death 's grim prison ) . 
 The New Bach Edition ( Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe , NBA ) published the score in 1985 , edited by Alfred Dürr , with the critical commentary published the next year . In 1995 Carus produced a revised edition of Hänssler 's 1981 Christ lag in Todesbanden , edited by Reinhold <unk> . Both the Hänssler and the Carus edition contained Jean Lunn 's Christ lay in death 's cold prison translation . Carus followed the NBA 's ... in Todes Banden spelling for the German title . In 2007 Carus republished their score edition with an introduction by Hans @-@ Joachim Schulze . Bach @-@ <unk> published high @-@ resolution facsimile images of the manuscript parts from the first quarter of the 18th century ( partly in Bach 's handwriting ) , and of an early 19th @-@ century score manuscript derived from these performance parts . Also in the 21st century , Serenissima Music published a vocal score of Christ lag in Todesbanden compatible with Kalmus ' performance material based on the BGA . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 Christ lag in Todes Banden was recorded early , and has been recorded often ; as of 2016 , the Bach @-@ Cantatas website lists 77 different complete recordings , the earliest dating from 1931 when Lluís Millet conducted the Orfeó Català in Francesc Pujol 's Catalan version of the cantata . The performance was recorded by La Voz de su Amo ( His Master 's Voice ) and appeared on three 78 rpm discs . It was recorded twice under the direction of Nadia Boulanger , a 1937 version recorded in Paris and a 1938 version recorded in Boston . 
 There are several recordings from the decades immediately after the war . Robert Shaw recorded the cantata in 1946 and again in 1959 . Günther Ramin conducted the Thomanerchor in 1950 , the anniversary of Bach 's death . The same year , Fritz Lehmann conducted the choir of the <unk> Frankfurt with soloists Helmut Krebs and Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau . Karl Richter and his Münchener Bach @-@ Chor first recorded it in 1958 . 
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt recorded Christ lag in Todes Banden in 1971 in a historically informed performance with original instruments and male singers ( the upper two parts are sung by boys and the countertenor Paul <unk> ) . This was at the start of the first project to record all Bach 's sacred cantatas , " J. S. Bach – Das Kantatenwerk " on Teldec . Christ lag in Todes Banden has since been included in the other " complete sets " , conducted by Rilling , Gardiner , Koopman , Leusink , and Suzuki ( details of these recordings are given in the table below ) . 
 The entries in the following sortable table are taken from the listings by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Some recordings rely on choir without ( or with few ) solo voices . Choirs are roughly marked as large by red background to one voice per part ( OVPP ) by green background , orchestras from large ( red ) to period instruments in historically informed performances ( green ) . 
 = = Transcriptions = = 
 In 1926 Walter Rummel published a piano arrangement of the cantata 's fourth movement , " Jesus Christus , Gottes Sohn " . George Copeland recorded this transcription in 1938 ( re @-@ issued on CD 2001 ) , and Jonathan Plowright recorded it in 2005 . 
 After he had recorded his orchestration of the chorale prelude Christ lag in Todesbanden , BWV 718 , in 1931 , Leopold Stokowski recorded his arrangement for symphonic orchestra of BWV 4 's fourth movement in 1937 . As Chorale from the Easter cantata Christ lag in Todesbanden the arrangement 's score was copyrighted in 1950 and published by Broude Brothers . Later the arrangement was also recorded by José <unk> and Robert <unk> . 
 = = Recent performances = = 
 In 2000 the cantata was performed at Eisenach , in the church where Bach was baptised , as part of the Monteverdi Choir 's Bach Cantata Pilgrimage ( the live recording was released in 2007 ) . The Monteverdi Choir also performed the cantata in 2013 in the Royal Albert Hall . This performance , which had audience participation , was part of a nine @-@ hour " Bach marathon " . 
 The cantata was successfully staged by English Touring Opera in 2012 . It was paired with the opera The Emperor of Atlantis and arranged by Iain Farrington for the same instrumental forces as the opera ( chamber ensemble including instruments not available to Bach such as saxophone ) . 
 = 11th New York Infantry = 
 The 11th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment was an infantry regiment of the Union Army in the early years of the American Civil War . The regiment was organized in New York City in May 1861 as a Zouave regiment , known for its unusual dress and drill style , by Colonel Elmer E. Ellsworth , a personal friend of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln . Drawn from the ranks of the city 's many volunteer fire companies , the unit was known alternately as the Ellsworth Zouaves , First Fire Zouaves , First Regiment New York Zouaves , and U.S. National Guards . 
 The unit was among the first to occupy the territory of a Confederate state when it captured Alexandria , Virginia on May 24 , 1861 , less than 24 hours after the Commonwealth seceded from the Union . The regiment suffered extensive casualties during the First Battle of Bull Run during the fighting on Henry House Hill and while serving as the rear guard for the retreating Union Army . 
 The regiment would later be stationed near Hampton Roads during the Peninsula Campaign , but experienced little fighting . Sent back to New York City in May 1862 , the regiment was mustered out of service on June 2 , 1862 . There were several attempts to reorganize as a light infantry regiment through the summer of 1863 , and many new enlistees were involved in suppressing the New York Draft Riots but those efforts failed and the enlistees were transferred to the 17th New York Veteran Volunteer Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Organization and muster = = 
 On April 15 , 1861 , President Lincoln issued an Executive Order calling for 75 @,@ 000 ninety @-@ day enlistments to “ repossess the forts , places , and property which have been seized from the Union . ’ ’ That day , Lincoln wrote Ellsworth asking for his assistance in raising a regiment . Ellsworth had known the president well , from having assisted in organizing his campaign for the presidency in 1860 and received a commission to organize the 11th New York Infantry as a 90 @-@ day regiment . To the enlistees , a common yet often unknown stipulation included 90 days of service to the Federal government and up to two years of service to the state . This was not always communicated to the men who enlisted , including those of the 11th New York . 
 Ellsworth 's military knowledge came from a lifetime of studying military tactics , history , and manuals ; and later as colonel of Chicago 's National Guard Cadets . He never achieved his dream of attending West Point , as he could not gain the needed sponsorship . He was introduced to the famous French Zouaves through the teachings of his fencing instructor , Charles <unk> , a former French Zouave . Ellsworth introduced this drill team to the flashy Zouave uniforms and drill that emulated French colonial troops in Algeria and turned the group , renamed the U.S. Zouave Cadets , into a national champion drill team . A national tour in 1860 brought Ellsworth to the attention of Abraham Lincoln , for whom the unit performed hundreds of military drill movements with their muskets and bayonets . 
 When a civil war seemed unavoidable , Ellsworth proceeded to New York City to recruit his own regiment from the city 's volunteer fire companies , stating : " I want the New York Firemen , for there are no more effective men in the country , and none with whom I can do so much . They are sleeping on a volcano at Washington and I want men who can go into a fight now . " Two days after his arrival , Ellsworth awarded officer commissions to several foremen of the volunteer fire companies and began recruiting in earnest . 
 Within four days , 2 @,@ 300 men had answered Ellsworth 's call . A selection of only the most desirable men cut that number to 1 @,@ 100 , which was considered a regiment 's full strength . When the state could not afford to supply the new troops , fundraisers were successful in raising $ 60 @,@ 000 for the regiment , enough to provide uniforms , several different models of Sharps rifles , and provisions . 
 News media covered the regiment 's formation : 
 More work has been done in six days than seemed possible . The men have been mustered into service ; the officers elected ; the uniforms made , and on Sunday afternoon eleven hundred as efficient and hardy soldiers as ever handled a gun , will start for the scene of rebellion . Col. Ellsworth arrived in this city on Thursday of last week . On Friday he called together a number of the principal men of the department . On Saturday he selected his officers . On Sunday he mustered one thousand men . On Monday he drilled them . 
 Like most Zouave regiments , the men of the 11th New York were fashioned in uniforms not typical of the standard ensemble of a Union soldier . During their service , the 11th New York wore two different style of uniforms , the first issued during the forming of the regiment and the second shortly before the Battle of Bull Run . The initial uniforms were purchased with funds donated by the Union Defense Committee . They were based on Ellsworth 's own design . The consisted of light gray jackets of a chasseur style , with dark blue and red trim along with gray trousers of a <unk> material with a blue stripe running down the seam , and tan leather leggings . Along with their gray uniforms , they wore red kepis with a blue band and also received a red fez with a blue tassel , military @-@ issue shirt and / or overshirts . Many Zouaves went off to war wearing the fire badge of their respective fire company . Contrary to modern art prints , the Fire Zouaves did not go off to war wearing fireman 's belts or paint mottos on their fezzes . The second uniform was issued when the first , not made of quality materials , fell apart on most men . This uniform was issued by the federal government , and to the disgust of the men , was not of the true Zouave style , but an American Zouave style . The new uniform had a dark blue Zouave jacket with red cuffs and red trimming with sky blue trimming inside the red . Blue fezzes with blue tassels were issued to provide greater flair to the uniform , as well as dark blue sashes , an issue of red overshirts ( not firemen 's shirts ) , and dark blue trousers . Before the First Battle of Bull Run , most of the Zouaves left their jackets in camp due to the July heat , however , they all retained their blue and red fezzes , and their red blue banded kepis . A number of <unk> were also issued to the regiment . Before the regiment departed from New York City on April 29 , 1861 , its members were reviewed by General John Adams Dix , Ambassador Cassius Marcellus Clay of Kentucky , as well as other notable members of the city and its fire department . Soon after , they marched through the streets escorted by 5 @,@ 000 firemen . Along the way , they received from the fire department a large white flag measuring 68 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) by 54 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) to serve as the regimental colors . The wife of John Jacob Astor II also presented the unit with a flag . Unbeknownst to the regiment , Washington D.C. had postponed their departure because they did not comply with army regulations . John E. Wool , commander of the Department of the East , knew of the postponement , but allowed the men to disembark , unaware the steamer Baltic carried no provisions . Quartermaster Arthur quickly purchased five @-@ day rations , by paying a higher price , and hired three tug boats to catch the steamer to deliver them . The Baltic arrived in Annapolis , Maryland where the men boarded a train to Washington , D.C .. 
 In Washington , men in the regiment broke into taverns , frightened women , <unk> on meals and pursued imagined Confederates . They were returned to New York City and quartered in Battery Park . Their public antics and insubordination continued . Arthur had arrested any Fire Zouave found on the streets and jailed them on a steamer . When the number jailed reached 400 the steamer embarked to Hampton Roads where the men were banded with another regiment . 
 = = Early action = = 
 The regiment arrived in Washington , D.C. , on the evening of May 2 . There , they completed additional training and performed picket duty throughout the district . While quartered on the floor of the United States House of Representatives , the enlisted men took it upon themselves to set up a mock session , passing a law first abolishing the House of Representatives , then the Union and reconstituting both in a manner of their liking . The more embarrassing and lawbreaking actions by the regiment included the burning of fences , which resulted in a letter of reprimand from Brigadier General Joseph K. Mansfield along with six enlisted men being removed and sent back to New York . On May 7 , the 11th New York was officially sworn into Federal service by Brig. Gen. Irvin McDowell on the East Front of the unfinished Capitol in the presence of Lincoln , his son Tad and personal secretary John Hay . 
 On May 9 , the regiment had an opportunity to apply their experience as firefighters when asked to help extinguish a blaze at the Willard Hotel . Upon receiving word from General Mansfield , commander of the Department of Washington , Ellsworth dispatched ten men from each company to attend to the fire . Soon however , the entire regiment responded to the blaze . With Ellsworth having more men on the scene than the Washington Fire Department , he claimed the fire chief 's trumpet and assumed command of the incident . When the fire was extinguished , Henry Willard , owner of the hotel , invited the regiment to breakfast and money was collected providing them with $ 500 . 
 After nine days quartered at the capitol , the men of the 11th New York were moved to the heights near the Insane Asylum to Camp Lincoln . This move would allow for easy transport across the Potomac and into Virginia when necessary . While just five miles ( 8 km ) from the capitol , the standard of living the men were used to had changed dramatically , as their usual foodstuffs were replaced with beef steak , dry bread , and coffee . Ellsworth wrote to his fiance that they had not had butter in a week . 
 When the Commonwealth of Virginia seceded from the Union on May 23 , the regiment was ordered to assist in the occupation of Arlington Heights and Alexandria , Virginia , directly across the Potomac River from Washington . On May 24 , the regiment boarded the steamers Baltimore and Mount Vernon and was transported across the Potomac , landing at the Alexandria wharves under the guard of the gunboat Pawnee . The 11th New York was one of eight to enter Virginia , and Ellsworth 's men met no resistance as they moved through the streets . 
 After landing , members of Company E under Captain <unk> were sent to take the railroad station , while Ellsworth , Major Charles Loeser , Lieutenant H. J. Winser and several men from Company A set out to secure the telegraph office . On the way there , Ellsworth spotted a Confederate flag atop the Marshall House inn . It was the same flag Ellsworth had seen for weeks from the White House during his visits with Lincoln . Ellsworth 's group entered the inn and quickly cut down the flag , but they encountered the proprietor , James Jackson , as they descended the stairs . Jackson killed Ellsworth with a shotgun blast to the chest , and Cpl. Francis Brownell responded in kind by fatally shooting the innkeeper . 
 After the death of Ellsworth , Noah L. Farnham , the regiment 's lieutenant colonel , was the obvious choice to take command . He was reluctant , however , labeling it an " unwelcome responsibility " . His appointment was graded as temporary , he was not commissioned as the regiment 's colonel and remained at rank while in its command . Regardless , he was a popular choice both with the enlisted men and in New York . One enlisted wrote in a letter home , " We have great faith in Colonel Farnham , having known him long and intimately as one deserving the confidence and esteem of his associates , and fully deserving of the position that he now occupies . " Several of the officers recruited by Ellsworth , however , did not approve and caused a small controversy by resigning their commissions . 
 The regiment remained on guard duty in and around Alexandria until July 15 , 1861 , when orders were received attaching the regiment to Orlando B. Willcox 's brigade , of Samuel P. Heintzelman 's division , in Brig. Gen. Irvin McDowell 's Army of Northeast Virginia . They were to march out the next morning . From July 16 to 21 , the regiment advanced to intercept Brig. Gen. P. G. T. Beauregard 's Confederate Army of the Potomac . Three of McDowell 's five divisions advanced towards Bull Run , outside the railroad junction at Manassas , Virginia . The 11th New York expected to first engage Confederates at Fairfax Court House on July 17 , only to find that they had pulled back towards Centreville , leaving Quaker Guns in their place . These movements were to precipitate the first large @-@ scale battle of the Civil War . 
 = = First Bull Run = = 
 The Zouaves ' first major combat experience occurred during the First Battle of Bull Run . On the morning of July 21 , Farnham 's men were awoken at 2 : 00 a.m. to begin their march to intercept the Confederate army . McDowell 's plan for the day was for divisions under Colonel Daniel Tyler and Brig. Gen. Heintzelman to cross Bull Run at Sudley Ford , expected to be only several miles north of their camp . Poor scouting by Union chief engineer John G. Barnard resulted in a 14 @-@ mile ( 23 km ) march for men entering battle that morning . During the march , lead units engaged skirmishers east of Sudley 's Ford with artillery in the early dawn . McDowell had divided his three divisions , sending Heintzelman to the north , sweeping down to cover the Union right , and thus his was the last division to engage . The other two divisions , under Tyler and David Hunter , engaged first on the Union left and center , at Matthews Hill . With those divisions facing heavy resistance , Heintzelman 's division with the 11th New York was called forward at the double @-@ quick . One observer commented that the 11th New York looked more like firemen randomly running to a fire than soldiers marching towards the front . 
 As the fight moved from Matthews Hill to Henry House Hill , the 11th New York fought beside the 1st Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment and a battalion of US Marines . These units were ordered to support two batteries of cannon on the Federal right flank led by Captains Charles Griffin and James B. Ricketts . The 11th New York and 1st Minnesota were directed into position at the top of Henry House Hill by Major William Farquhar Barry , McDowell 's chief of artillery , and ordered to assault the Confederate line . On the initial confrontation with the 33rd Virginia Infantry on the left of Confederate General Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson 's line , both the Union and Confederate forces were initially confused because the some of 11th New York were wearing several colors of shirts and the Virginians were clad in dark blue frock coats and dark blue trousers . The Virginians fired a volley that took down several men and the Zouaves and Marines broke and ran , but a few of the men remained . 
 As the 11th New York and 1st Minnesota were regrouping along the Manassas @-@ Sudley Road , they were encountered by Confederate Colonel J. E. B. Stuart and his 150 cavalrymen . Stuart mistook the New Yorkers for retreating Confederates in the smoke and quickly rode forward , shouting , “ Don ’ t run , boys ; we are here . ” But after seeing a color bearer passing with the United States flag , he realized his mistake . Stuart ordered a small band of " Black Horse " cavalry , led by R. Welby Carter and the men of his Loudoun Company , to charge from the right and strike the 11th 's rear guard . The 11th New York saw them coming and shifted formations to meet Carter 's men . The 11th 's volleys quickly killed eight of the riders and wounded nine with the rest escaping back into the woods ; the charge had little effect on the organization of Fire Zouaves . While repulsing the cavalry charge , Colonel Farnham was wounded , but remained on the field aided by Lt. Colonel John <unk> and Major Loeser . 
 By 2 : 00 p.m. , the 11th New York and 1st Minnesota were joined by the 14th Brooklyn Regiment and again took their place behind the Union guns . However , soon confusion again erupted on the battlefield in front of them . As the gunners confronted the blue @-@ clad 33rd Virginia , Major Barry ordered Ricketts to hold his fire , allowing the Virginians to charge the batteries and capture the guns . While the 14th Brooklyn was able to quickly retake the guns , the Union regiments supporting the cannon were unable to withstand the near constant barrage from Confederate artillery and infantry and fell back again to the Manassas @-@ Sudley Road . The 11th New York , the Irish 69th New York Militia and 14th Brooklyn would charge Henry Hill four times , first in an effort to retake Ricketts ' and Griffin 's cannon , but each attempt failed . In the wild melee , the 69th 's color bearers were killed and its colors lost , but an officer of the 11th , Captain John <unk> , was able to recapture the Irish color , and then handed it back to the grateful Irishmen . 
 When the order to withdraw from the field came later that evening from General McDowell , the 11th New York served as a rearguard . It was during this retreat that the regiment saw its heaviest casualties . Although accounts of the battle differ , most sources list 177 men lost at Bull Run , with 35 men killed , 74 wounded , and another 68 missing and presumed captured . Those that were taken prisoner were initially confined in Richmond . In September , they were transferred to Castle Pinckney , South Carolina , where they remained until they were paroled the following May . 
 = = After Bull Run = = 
 On August 12 , 1861 , the remaining members of the regiment were sent back to New York City to disband , in preparation to reorganize , obtain equipment and replacements . On September 14 , 1861 , after reorganizing , they were ordered by Governor Edwin D. Morgan , at the request of Secretary of War Simon Cameron , to return to Virginia with two days ' cooked rations . They were to be encamped at Fort Monroe on the tip of the Virginia Peninsula . Morgan must not have been quick to follow up with Cameron , as two days later Cameron sent him a cable pleading for an update , asking , " Did you send the Fire Zouaves to Fort Monroe , as indicated in your message of the 14th ? " 
 An entry from January 31 , 1862 , of the Official Records places the 11th New York as a unit of the Department of Virginia at Camp Butler under the command of Brig. Gen. Joseph Mansfield . On March 8 , 1862 , they watched from shore as the USS Monitor and CSS Virginia dueled off the coast of Hampton Roads . Two members of the regiment were detailed to the nearby USS Cumberland and manned its cannons until they were forced to abandon ship . With manpower further depleted as a result of injury and disease , the regiment was returned to New York City on May 7 . There , it was mustered out of service on June 2 , 1862 . 
 = = Draft Riots and disbanding = = 
 On May 18 , 1863 , Colonel James C. Burke received authority to reorganize the original regiment as a three @-@ years regiment to be known as the J. T. Brady Light Infantry . Burke was required to raise 250 men for the effort but failed . His authorization was revoked on June 7 and transferred to Colonel Henry F. O 'Brien . O 'Brien was required to raise 250 men by August 1 , 250 others by September 1 , and an additional 250 men by November 1 . These recruiting efforts were hampered by the draft riot in New York City of July 1863 . 
 As the 11th New York Regiment had experienced first hand , the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861 had taken a heavy toll on Union forces , including those from New York City . As the war dragged on , a military manpower shortage occurred in the Union and Congress passed the first conscription act in United States history on March 3 , 1863 , authorizing the President to draft male citizens between the ages of 18 and 35 for a three @-@ year term of military service . 
 Initially intended to express anger at the draft , the protests deteriorated into " a virtual racial pogrom , with uncounted numbers of blacks murdered on the streets " . The conditions in the city were such that Major General John E. Wool stated on July 16 , " Martial law ought to be proclaimed , but I have not a sufficient force to enforce it " . 
 States ' militias and Federal troops attached to the Army of the Potomac , including the newly reorganized 11th New York , were dispatched to quell the riots . Other regiments utilized included the 152nd New York , the 26th Michigan , the 27th Indiana and the 7th Regiment New York State Militia , which arrived from Frederick , Maryland after a forced march . In addition , New York governor Horatio Seymour sent the 74th and 65th regiments of the New York state militia , which had not been federalized , and a section of the 20th Artillery from Fort Schuyler in Throgs Neck . At the height of the violence , Colonel O 'Brien , the 11th Regiment 's commanding officer , was seized by the mob , beaten , and killed . In the wake of the riots , the reorganization produced few recruits and stalled . On October 1 , 1863 , the reorganization was discontinued and the men who had enlisted were transferred to the 17th Veteran Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 During its limited but intense combat experience , the regiment saw 51 members killed , including three officers and 48 enlisted men . Among these was the regiment 's first commander , Colonel Elmer E. Ellsworth , who was the first conspicuous casualty of the Civil War . Private Francis E. Brownell became the first soldier in the Civil War to be awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions in killing Col. Ellsworth 's murderer . 
 Following Ellsworth 's death , Remember Ellsworth ! and Avenge Ellsworth became Union rallying cries . The 44th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment was raised by the People 's Ellsworth Committee and were known as the " People 's Ellsworth Regiment " , or more commonly " Ellsworth 's Avengers " , under the command of Stephen W. Stryker , a former lieutenant in the 11th New York . 
 Apart from those who died of battle wounds , three officers and 12 enlisted men succumbed to disease , including its second colonel , Noah Farnham , who died as a result of his wounds sustained at Bull Run and a bout of typhoid . A total of 66 men of the 11th New York Infantry Regiment died in the course of the war . 
 In 1903 , the flag for which Ellsworth gave his life , taken down from the top of Marshal House , was presented to the War Department by its custodian , the Ellsworth Post , Grand Army of the Republic . The flag had been carried by the regiment throughout the war and afterward maintained at their post headquarters . It was added to the war flag collection in Cullum Memorial Hall at West Point . 
 Historian David <unk> has argued that the fame that surrounds the 11th New York is misplaced . During its time in service , the 11th New York Regiment saw little fighting compared to other well @-@ known regiments such as the 69th New York , 20th Maine , and 28th Massachusetts . The 11th New York was often overshadowed by the 73rd New York , also known as the Second Fire Zouaves , which fought at Antietam , Gettysburg , and Appomattox . In addition , Ellsworth failed to consider that the New York City fire companies from which his troops were drawn often competed against each other at blazes . The cohesion he sought in firefighters did not exist and would not be created when they joined the regiment . In that respect , 11th New York was no different than many regiments , North and South . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Battle of Gang Toi = 
 The Battle of Gang Toi ( 8 November 1965 ) was fought during the Vietnam War between Australian troops and the Viet Cong . The battle was one of the first engagements between the two forces during the war and occurred when A Company , 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 1 RAR ) struck a Viet Cong bunker system defended by Company 238 in the Gang Toi Hills , in northern Bien Hoa Province . It occurred during a major joint US @-@ Australian operation codenamed Operation Hump , involving the US 173rd Airborne Brigade , to which 1 RAR was attached . During the latter part of the operation an Australian rifle company clashed with an entrenched company @-@ sized Viet Cong force in well @-@ prepared defensive positions . Meanwhile , an American paratroop battalion was also heavily engaged in fighting on the other side of the Song Dong Nai . 
 The Australians were unable to concentrate sufficient combat power to launch an assault on the position and consequently they were forced to withdraw after a fierce engagement during which both sides suffered a number of casualties , reluctantly leaving behind two men who had been shot and could not be recovered due to heavy machine @-@ gun and rifle fire . Although they were most likely dead , a battalion @-@ attack to recover the missing soldiers was planned by the Australians for the next day , but this was cancelled by the American brigade commander due to rising casualties and the need to utilise all available helicopters for casualty evacuation . The bodies of the two missing Australian soldiers were subsequently recovered more than 40 years later , and were finally returned to Australia for burial . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 Although the initial American commitment to the war in Vietnam had been limited to advice and materiel support , by 1964 there were 21 @,@ 000 US advisors in South Vietnam . However , with the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) weakened by successive defeats at the hands of the communists , the South Vietnamese government faltering , and Saigon threatened with a major offensive , the situation led to a significant escalation of the war in 1965 , with a large @-@ scale commitment of US ground troops under the command of General William Westmoreland . At first the Americans had adopted a cautious strategy , applied to the strictly limited role of base defence by US Marine units . This was abandoned in April 1965 , and replaced by a new " enclave strategy " of defending key coastal population centres and installations . This strategy required the introduction of nine additional US battalions , or 14 @,@ 000 troops , to bring the total in Vietnam to 13 . Allied nations of the Free World Military Forces were expected to contribute another four battalions . 
 Westmoreland planned to develop a series of defensive positions around Saigon before expanding operations to pacify the South Vietnamese countryside and as a result a number of sites close to Viet Cong dominated areas were subsequently chosen to be developed into semi @-@ permanent divisional @-@ level bases . Such areas included Di An which was intended to become the headquarters of the US 1st Infantry Division , while the US 25th Infantry Division would be based in the vicinity of Cu Chi . However , large @-@ scale military operations to clear the intended base areas had to wait until the dry season . Yet the allied enclave strategy proved only transitory and further setbacks led to additional troop increases to halt the losing trend . With the situation reaching a crisis point during the Viet Cong wet season offensive in June 1965 , Westmoreland requested further reinforcement and US and allied forces increased to 44 battalions which would be used to directly bolster the ARVN . 
 Australia 's growing involvement in Vietnam reflected the American build @-@ up . In 1963 , the Australian government had committed a small advisory team , known as the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam ( AATTV ) , to help train the South Vietnamese forces . However , in June 1965 the decision to commit ground troops was made , and the 1st Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment — originally commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Ivan ' Lou ' Brumfield — was dispatched . Supporting 1 RAR was the 1 Troop , A Squadron , 4th / 19th Prince of Wales 's Light Horse equipped with M113 armored personnel carriers , artillery from the 105th Field Battery , Royal Australian Artillery and 161st Battery , Royal New Zealand Artillery , and 161st Reconnaissance Flight operating Cessna 180s and Bell H @-@ 13 Sioux light observation helicopters ; in total 1 @,@ 400 personnel . The Australian units and New Zealand artillery were attached to the US 173rd Airborne Brigade under the command of Brigadier General Ellis W. Williamson in Bien Hoa and operated throughout the III Corps Tactical Zone ( III <unk> ) to help establish the Bien Hoa – Vung Tau enclave . Although logistics and resupply were primarily provided by the Americans , a small logistic unit — 1st Australian Logistics Company — was situated at Bien Hoa airbase . Unlike later Australian units that served in Vietnam , which included conscripts , 1 RAR was manned by regular personnel only . 
 Attached to US forces , 1 RAR was primarily employed in search and destroy operations using the newly developed doctrine of airmobile operations , utilising helicopters to insert light infantry and artillery into an area of operations , and to support them with aerial mobility , fire support , casualty evacuation , and resupply . The battalion commenced operations in late June 1965 and initially focussed on defeating the Viet Cong 's wet season offensive . During this time US 173rd Brigade , including 1 RAR , conducted a number of operations into War Zone D — a major communist base area at the junction of Phuoc Long , Long Khanh , Bien Hoa and Binh Duong provinces — as well as in the Iron Triangle in November . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 By late @-@ 1965 the junction of the Song Be and Song Dong Nai rivers had become a major communist staging area for men , equipment , and supplies for units based around Saigon and the Mekong Delta . Communist communications and resupply routes between War Zone C and D also met the Ho Chi Minh Trail in this area . Westmoreland planned to use the US 173rd Airborne Brigade to keep the Viet Cong off balance and to target their base areas , and consequently a search @-@ and @-@ destroy operation codenamed " Operation Hump " was planned . Operation Hump marked the half @-@ way point in the twelve @-@ month tour of duty of the US 173rd Airborne Brigade and was named accordingly . The concept of operations envisioned 1 RAR and 1st Battalion , US 503rd Infantry Regiment being inserted by helicopter during an airmobile operation into War Zone D , in an area about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) north @-@ east of the US airbase at Bien Hoa . The Australian and American area of operations ( AO ) was to be separated by the Song Dong Nai , with 1 RAR to deploy into a landing zone ( LZ ) to the south , while the US 1 / 503rd Battalion would conduct a helicopter assault onto a LZ northwest of the Song Dong Nai and Song Be . Meanwhile , the US 173rd Airborne Brigade 's second battalion — 2nd Battalion , US 503rd Infantry Regiment — would be left to defend Bien Hoa airbase . 
 The area was thought to be a Viet Cong stronghold and American intelligence initially identified <unk> Main Force Regiment and <unk> Main Force Battalion as being nearby . However , unknown to the allied force , the Viet Cong 9th Division had likely received forewarning of the operation and had deployed one of its most experienced regiments , supported by a number of local force battalions , determined for a test of allied strength . The 271 VC Main Force Regiment ( also known as <unk> Main Force Regiment ) subsequently took up defensive positions in the area , while the communist U1 headquarters protected by Company 238 , was situated on the plateau atop the Gang Toi Hills in an area which formed part of 1 RAR 's objective . U1 was responsible for co @-@ ordinating the Viet Cong regional defence against the Bien Hoa air base and for developing anti @-@ government resistance and had been tasked with rebuilding the covert organisation in Bien Hoa city and the surrounding villages up to the Dong Nai , as well as re @-@ establishing the link between Bien Hoa city and War Zone D , and for planning and executing attacks against the air base itself . Yet having relocated to the rainforest two months earlier , its presence was also unknown to the Australians and Americans . Regardless , A Company 1 RAR was scheduled to conduct a search of the plateau on the fourth day of the operation . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Insertion and patrolling , 5 – 7 November 1965 = = = 
 On 5 November 1 RAR began the routine search @-@ and @-@ destroy operation , inserting by helicopter south of the Song Dong Nai at 08 : 00 , while the US 1 / 503rd Battalion was inserted onto LZ King north @-@ west of the Song Dong Nai and Song Be rivers at 11 : 00 . The operation started badly for the Australians and Americans with the fly @-@ in delayed . Despite a lengthy preparation by fire , a large Viet Cong force had been observed in the vicinity of LZ Queen prior to the insertion of the lead Australian rifle company — D Company under the command of Captain Peter Rothwell . The escorting helicopter gunships began taking small arms fire as they attempted to provide suppressing fire and Rothwell made the decision to activate the alternate landing zone to the north @-@ east , LZ Princess . D Company was subsequently inserted safely and swept back to LZ Queen , securing it for the remainder of the battalion . By mid @-@ morning 1 RAR occupied LZ Queen , with the 105 mm L5 pack howitzers of 105 Field Battery also flying @-@ in to provide direct support . Augmenting the Australian gunners , the US 3 / 319 Artillery Battalion and 161st Battery , Royal New Zealand Artillery occupied FSB Ace 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) further south . 
 The scheme of manoeuvre adopted by 1 RAR dictated that each company undertake a dispersed patrol program in their own tactical area of responsibility , a fact which would allow them to search more ground , but limit their ability to concentrate combat power in the event of contact . A Company , under Major John Healy , patrolled east ; B Company moved north along the Song Be to <unk> <unk> , while D Company patrolled south . C Company remained at LZ Queen to protect 105 Field Battery which had established a fire support base ( FSB ) . Over the next two days the Australians patrolled relentlessly through the leech @-@ infested swamps and dense jungle . At midday on 6 November A Company received two mortar rounds which failed to do any damage , but marked the start of a series of minor clashes . A Company had a number of contacts during this time , with the Australians killing a Viet Cong scout for the loss of two wounded in one skirmish . A further contact soon after resulted in two more Viet Cong killed and one wounded . Intelligence gained from these incidents indicated the presence of a Viet Cong Main Force Regiment in the area , while documents recovered contained plans for attacks on ARVN outposts near Bien Hoa Airbase . 
 By nightfall on 7 November , despite the earlier contacts , no major actions had occurred in the Australian AO . With the rifle companies now several kilometres apart , A Company had patrolled into a network of well used roads and tracks that formed part of a branch of the Ho Chi Minh Trail . Healy 's men spent the night astride the tracks and would resume patrolling the following day along a track which led to Hill 82 . Meanwhile , although unknown to them at the time , the US 1 / 503rd Battalion across the Song Dong Nai had patrolled to within 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) of a major Viet Cong bunker system sited on two spur lines in the vicinity of Hill 65 . 
 = = = Hill 82 , 8 November 1965 = = = 
 Brumfield arrived by helicopter on the morning of 8 November , just as A Company was preparing to depart from its night location at 08 : 00 . With contact now seeming unlikely to the Australians , Healy was instructed to move to a rendezvous from which the battalion would be extracted back to Bien Hoa the following day . A Company subsequently set out on a compass bearing which would take them across the northern edge of the Gang Toi plateau . By 10 : 30 the Australians moved out in single file but had not gone far before a lone Viet Cong scout was observed shadowing them ; he was subsequently shot and killed by the rear section . Crossing a creek line the Australians uncovered a company @-@ sized camp of dugouts and trenches , before being fired upon at 15 : 40 by a single Viet Cong soldier who then fled . A Company halted briefly , and at this time two Viet Cong approached their position , before being killed by 1 Platoon . 
 The Australians continued in single file towards the top of the plateau , with 1 Platoon — under Sergeant Gordon Peterson — leading , followed by 2 and then 3 Platoon . The going was slow in the dense jungle and visibility was limited . By 16 : 30 the lead section was nearing the top of the hill having gone just 250 metres ( 270 yd ) , while the last platoon — 3 Platoon — was still leaving the harbour . Suddenly , 1 Platoon was hit by heavy small arms fire from at least three Viet Cong machine @-@ guns in well @-@ sited bunkers , supported by rifles and grenades . The fire engulfed the lead section and platoon headquarters , causing five casualties in the opening minute . Pinned down , the Australians went to ground and began returning fire , allowing all except one of the wounded to crawl to safety . Private Richard Parker , who had fallen directly in front of the bunker system , was unable to be recovered . Failing to respond to the shouts of his comrades , Parker was exposed to further hits , although was probably already dead . To support the beleaguered platoon , Healy subsequently ordered the support section from company headquarters to move forward to provide covering fire , while 3 Platoon moved up on the left flank . However , due to the dispersed patrolling plan adopted , the remaining companies were unable to provide any assistance . 
 Still at the bottom of the hill , 3 Platoon — under Second Lieutenant Clive Williams — had just shot and killed two Viet Cong moving along the creek line . Reaching the top of the hill to the left of company headquarters , Williams turned to the right towards the Viet Cong positions . Moving into extended line on a 120 metres ( 130 yd ) front the Australians had advanced just 50 metres ( 55 yd ) before the left flank was engaged by a number of machine @-@ guns from another sector of the Viet Cong position . In danger of being outflanked , 3 Platoon continued to advance regardless , using fire and movement . Just 15 metres ( 16 yd ) from the bunkers Private Peter Gillson , the machine @-@ gunner in the forward section , was shot as he tried to move around the twisted roots of a tall tree . As he fell two Viet Cong rushed forward to take the M60 machine @-@ gun ; however , Gillson was still conscious and they were killed at point blank range before he collapsed . Williams radioed Healy of the increasing danger while his platoon sergeant — Sergeant Colin Fawcett — had crawled forward under heavy fire to Gillson , whose body was wedged in the buttress of a large tree . Unable to find a pulse , Fawcett attempted to extract Gillson , but was unable to do so due to heavy fire . Two other attempts to recover the body were also beaten back , and although unsuccessful , Fawcett was later awarded the Military Medal for his actions . 
 Taking heavy fire from both the front and flanks , Williams had little choice but to withdraw . With the Viet Cong moving rapidly to encircle them , and unable to move forward , the Australians had to fight using small arms fire and grenades to extract themselves back to company headquarters without further casualties . However , by this time the artillery was beginning to have an impact as A Company 's forward observer , Captain Bruce Murphy , a New Zealander , directed the fires . The Australians had unavoidably been placed in the worst possible position to their supporting artillery , with 105 Battery firing on a line directly towards them from their gun @-@ line 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) on the other side of the Gang Toi plateau . Consequently , Murphy was unable to observe the fall of shot , and had to walk the rounds onto target by sound . A slight miscalculation could have sent a round over the hill into the Australian positions , regardless , and despite persistent rifle and machine @-@ gun fire , Murphy calmly directed the artillery throughout the battle . For his skill and bravery he was later awarded the Military Cross . 
 By 18 : 30 , more than two hours since the fighting began , darkness was approaching . The battalion would be unable to concentrate against the Viet Cong position until the following day , and Healy subsequently made the decision to withdraw . With the artillery falling as close as possible , the weight of the indirect fires provided the Australians with a degree of protection and an opportunity to extricate themselves . Lieutenant Ian Guild 's 2 Platoon was subsequently moved into position to cover the withdrawal , and carrying their wounded the Australians successfully broke contact without suffering further losses . A Company initially moved to a landing zone 120 metres ( 130 yd ) below the ridgeline which had been cleared to allow the casualties to be evacuated , yet there were no helicopters available . As a result , the Australians had to look after their casualties until the following morning , and they proceeded further north to a night harbour as the area was pounded by artillery , aerial bombing and helicopter gunships . 
 Healy assessed that his company had encountered a force of at least company @-@ size . Later it became apparent that they had indeed contacted Company 238 which was tasked with protecting the U1 headquarters and to carry out operations in the Bien Hoa region . Throughout the day Viet Cong reconnaissance parties , perhaps including those that had been contacted intermittently , had observed the approaching Australian force on a line leading directly to the U1 headquarters . During the fighting the Viet Cong company commander — Nguyen Van Bao — had split his force into two , allocating one platoon to fight the advancing Australians , and the other two to protect the headquarters . Following the Australian withdrawal Van Bao had also withdrawn , pre @-@ empting the ensuing barrage , yet the U1 base remained in communist hands . 
 = = = Fighting across the Song Dong Nai = = = 
 Meanwhile , across the river in the American AO the US 1 / 503rd Battalion had uncovered a large Viet Cong bunker system and became involved in fierce fighting that had included desperate hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , with both sides resorting to using bayonets . Throughout the morning the Australians had heard the increasing crescendo of firing as the battle raged ; however , as neither they nor the US 2 / 503rd Battalion had been called on to reinforce the US 1 / 503rd Battalion they had pressed on . The American paratroopers had contacted a well @-@ equipped Viet Cong Main Force regiment , complete with khaki uniforms , steel helmets and Soviet automatic weaponry and small arms . The fighting across the Song Dong Nai continued into the afternoon , before subsiding into sporadic sniper and small arms fire in the later afternoon and early evening . During the fighting , Specialist Lawrence Joel — a medic — distinguished himself tending to his wounded comrades while under heavy fire . He was subsequently awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 Brumfield demanded the right to return to Hill 82 in order to destroy the bunker system and to recover the bodies of Parker and Gillson , and he and Major John Essex @-@ Clark — the operations officer — began planning a battalion attack . However , with American casualties rising and all available helicopters required for casualty evacuation , the planned operation was cancelled . The thick jungle canopy compounded the issue , and Williamson decided to stage the casualties through an area secured by the Australians at LZ Princess . Operation Hump concluded on 9 November , with the US 1 / 503rd Battalion and 1 RAR being extracted by helicopter and returning to Bien Hoa in the late afternoon . Following 1 RAR 's return to Bien Hoa , Brumfield continued to petition for permission to conduct the operation . A battalion attack was subsequently planned for 14 November , but Williamson later deferred it dependent on the availability of air and helicopter support , and the start date of the upcoming Operation New Life . Ultimately it was never conducted . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The Battle of Gang Toi was the first set @-@ piece action between Australian and Viet Cong forces in the Vietnam War . Australian casualties included two missing ( presumed killed ) and six wounded , and despite the efforts of their comrades , the bodies of the Australian dead were unable to be recovered . Against these losses the Viet Cong had suffered at least six killed , one wounded and five captured . Confronted by an equal sized force , dug @-@ in in well @-@ prepared defences , the Australians had performed creditably enough even if they had been forced to withdraw , leaving the battlefield to the Viet Cong . Despite inflicting heavier casualties on the communists than they had suffered themselves , many of the Australians were depressed at having left two soldiers behind , and they longed for the opportunity to return to Gang Toi . In 2007 , more than 40 years after the fighting , an Australian Vietnam veteran — Jim Bourke , MG — and a team of volunteers successfully located the remains of both Parker and Gillson . They had been hastily buried together in a weapon pit the day after the battle by Viet Cong soldiers , and with the assistance of the Australian and Vietnamese governments they were subsequently returned to Australia for burial . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 Although A Company , 1 RAR had been mauled , the experience of the Australians at Gang Toi was relatively minor when compared to that of the Americans . During fierce fighting the US 1 / 503rd Battalion had suffered nearly a 100 casualties , including 40 killed and 51 wounded , while more than 400 Viet Cong were believed killed . American claims were later raised to over 700 killed when captured documents revealed the losses caused by artillery and air strikes . Yet it was questionable as to whether such battles of attrition would be viable , while equally the American battalion had taken casualties far beyond what would have been politically acceptable for 1 RAR . Indeed , their losses had been significant , and although claimed as a victory , the Americans had failed to secure the area even if the Viet Cong had temporarily surrendered control of the battlefield . Ultimately , the communists continued to use the Bien Hoa area as a major supply route for the rest of the war . 
 Brumfield considered Operation Hump to be the least successful operation in which the Australian battalion had participated , and he criticised it as being badly conceived from the start , and mounted with too little intelligence or prior reconnaissance . Indeed , from the initial landing zone being occupied by the Viet Cong , failures in the passage of information , the heavy losses suffered by the US 1 / 503rd Battalion and the subsequent difficulties with casualty evacuation , the operation had not run smoothly . The Australians were vengeful for their losses and wanted to return to collect their dead ; however , with 1 RAR absorbed into other operations the planned battalion attack on Hill 82 never occurred . Regardless , further operations followed in the months afterwards , with 1 RAR subsequently employed on Operation New Life in November and December , and later Operation Crimp in the Ho Bo Woods in January 1966 . Operation Hump was Brumfield 's last , with an old football injury forcing his evacuation to Australia in mid @-@ November . He was subsequently replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Alex Preece . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 At the strategic level the ARVN and the South Vietnamese government had both rallied after appearing on the verge of collapse and the communist threat against Saigon had subsided , yet additional troop increases were required if Westmoreland was to adopt a more offensive strategy , with US troop levels planned to rise from 210 @,@ 000 in January 1966 to 327 @,@ 000 by December 1966 . The Australian government increased its own commitment to the ground war in March 1966 , announcing the deployment of a two battalion brigade — the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) — with armour , aviation , engineer and artillery support ; in total 4 @,@ 500 men . Additional Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) and the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) force elements would also be deployed and with all three services total Australian strength in Vietnam was planned to increase to 6 @,@ 300 personnel . 1 RAR was subsequently replaced by 1 ATF which was allocated its own area of operations in Phuoc Tuy Province , thereby allowing the Australians to pursue operations more independently using their own counter @-@ insurgency tactics and techniques . The task force arrived between April and June 1966 , constructing a base at Nui Dat , while logistic arrangements were provided by the 1st Australian Logistic Support Group which was established at the port of Vung Tau . 
 = U.S. Route 62 in Oklahoma = 
 In Oklahoma , U.S. Highway 62 runs diagonally across the state , from the Texas state line in far southwestern Oklahoma to the Arkansas state line near Fayetteville . US @-@ 62 spends a total of 402 @.@ 48 miles ( 647 @.@ 73 km ) in the Sooner State . The highway passes through fifteen of Oklahoma 's counties . Along the way the route serves two of Oklahoma 's largest cities , Lawton and Oklahoma City , as well as many regionally important cities , like Altus , Chickasha , Muskogee , and Tahlequah . Despite this , US @-@ 62 has no lettered spur routes like many other U.S. routes in Oklahoma do . 
 US @-@ 62 has been part of the Oklahoma highway network since 1930 . With the advent of the Interstate system , the portion of its route through Oklahoma City was revised several times to adapt to the presence of the new freeways . The present @-@ day route of US @-@ 62 includes concurrencies with I @-@ 44 , I @-@ 240 , I @-@ 35 , and I @-@ 40 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Southwestern Oklahoma = = = 
 US @-@ 62 enters Oklahoma in Harmon County , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of Hollis . It then passes through that town , the county seat , where it serves as the southern terminus of State Highway 30 . US @-@ 62 meets the northern terminus of SH @-@ 5 in Gould . The highway passes through unincorporated McQueen 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) and then enters Jackson County . Just east of Duke , the route crosses SH @-@ 34 . Nine miles ( 14 @.@ 5 km ) later , US @-@ 62 becomes a multilane highway and begins a concurrency with SH @-@ 6 . The two highways travel together into Altus , where they intersect US @-@ 283 . SH @-@ 6 follows US @-@ 283 northward out of town , while US @-@ 62 heads east towards Headrick . US @-@ 62 runs just north of that town before crossing the North Fork of the Red River onto the Kiowa – Tillman County line . 
 US @-@ 62 continues eastward , sending US @-@ 62 BUS north to Snyder , which was the original US @-@ 62 alignment in the area . The county line then turns south of US @-@ 62 , and the route has an interchange with US @-@ 183 . US @-@ 62 heads farther east , meeting the other end of US @-@ 62 BUS 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) later . US @-@ 62 serves as the southern terminus of the northern State Highway 54 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of this . The road then enters Comanche County , where it serves as the southern border of Fort Sill . It serves as the southern terminus of another Oklahoma state highway , SH @-@ 115 , near Cache . A few miles of the highway east of SH @-@ 115 is freeway @-@ grade . Continuing east , US @-@ 62 becomes an expressway , Rogers Lane , that serves the north side of Lawton ( along with several Ft . Sill gates ) . In eastern Lawton , the highway has an interchange with Interstate 44 and begins a concurrency with it ( joining at Exit 40B ) , along with US @-@ 277 and US @-@ 281 . 
 I @-@ 44 / US @-@ 62 / 277 / 281 head northward through Fort Sill . At Exit 45 , the freeway serves as the eastern terminus of State Highway 49 . The three U.S. routes split off at Exit 46 , with I @-@ 44 continuing onto the northern section of the H. E. Bailey Turnpike . US @-@ 277 splits off to the east 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) later . US @-@ 62 / 281 then meet SH @-@ 19 in Apache . SH @-@ 9 begins overlapping the two U.S. routes 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Apache . The three routes continue into Anadarko , where State Highway 8 briefly joins the concurrency . US @-@ 283 and SH @-@ 8 split off to the north , while US @-@ 62 / SH @-@ 9 head out of town to the east . 
 = = = Central Oklahoma = = = 
 US @-@ 62 / SH @-@ 9 cross into Grady County just west of Verden . At the western limits of Chickasha , US @-@ 81 joins the concurrency . In downtown Chickasha , US @-@ 81 splits off to the south , and US @-@ 277 once again joins with US @-@ 62 . In far eastern Chickasha , the routes have an interchange with I @-@ 44 ( the H.E. Bailey Turnpike ) . US @-@ 62 / 277 / SH @-@ 9 serve as the southern terminus of SH @-@ 92 and the western terminus of SH @-@ 39 . The three highways then angle northeast towards Blanchard , where they are briefly joined by State Highway 76 . Northeast of Blanchard , they are carried by an expressway . SH @-@ 9 splits off at a diamond interchange that also serves as the eastern terminus of the H.E. Bailey Turnpike Spur . The two U.S. routes continue north into Newcastle , running through town on a five @-@ lane ( two lanes in each direction plus center turn lane ) alignment . On the northern rim of Newcastle , the two routes encounter I @-@ 44 once again , at the northern terminus of the Bailey Turnpike . US @-@ 62 joins eastbound I @-@ 44 toward Oklahoma City , while US @-@ 277 terminates at the interchange . 
 I @-@ 44 / US @-@ 62 pick up State Highway 37 at Exit 107 , and the three highways cross the Canadian River into Cleveland County and Oklahoma City . SH @-@ 37 then splits off at Exit 110 . Just north of the Oklahoma County line , I @-@ 44 has an interchange at the western terminus of Interstate 240 at Exit 115 , and US @-@ 62 follows it east to Exit 4B , where it begins to concur with I @-@ 35 / US @-@ 77 . I @-@ 35 / US @-@ 62 / 77 head northward to the Fort Smith Junction . US @-@ 77 splits off to join with Interstate 235 , while I @-@ 35 / US @-@ 77 join with eastbound I @-@ 40 / US @-@ 270 . I @-@ 35 / US @-@ 62 split off to the north after just over a mile . US @-@ 62 leaves I @-@ 35 at Exit 130 , turning east onto N.E. 23rd St. , an at @-@ grade street 
 US @-@ 62 serves some of Oklahoma City 's eastern suburbs , including far northern Midwest City , far southern Spencer , <unk> Park , and Choctaw . In eastern Harrah , the route meets the west terminus of State Highway 270 . The highway then crosses into far southern Lincoln County , where it crosses SH @-@ 120 at Midway . US @-@ 62 runs through two more unincorporated communities , Fowler and <unk> ; the latter is the site of the US @-@ 62 / US @-@ 177 junction . US @-@ 62 enters Meeker 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) later , where it meets up with SH @-@ 18 . 12 miles ( 19 km ) further east , in Prague , it encounters US @-@ 377 / SH @-@ 99 . 
 = = = Green Country = = = 
 US @-@ 62 enters eastern Oklahoma 's Green Country as it crosses into <unk> County west of Paden . It begins to turn southeast , intersecting State Highway 48 west of Castle , before joining once again with I @-@ 40 near Okemah , at Exit 221 . US @-@ 75 also joins the interstate , 10 miles ( 16 km ) farther east at Exit 231 . The two U.S. routes split off at Exit <unk> , where they continue the mainline of the Indian Nation Turnpike , which terminates at I @-@ 40 . The two U.S. routes serve eastern Henryetta , and west of Dewar , they are the western terminus of U.S. Highway 266 . In Okmulgee , US @-@ 62 turns east while US @-@ 75 continues north toward the Tulsa area . US @-@ 62 heads through Morris , where it intersects SH @-@ 52 . The highway then has a 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) overlap with SH @-@ 72 , after which it begins a concurrency with US @-@ 64 . 
 US @-@ 62 / 64 split up in Muskogee , where US @-@ 62 briefly shares pavement with US @-@ 69 . On the east side of town , it has an interchange with the Muskogee Turnpike / SH @-@ 165 freeway . Near Ft . Gibson , US @-@ 62 begins to concur with State Highway 10 , and the two routes stay joined through Tahlequah . US @-@ 62 starts to overlap State Highway 51 in Tahlequah as well ; the two highways split up near Eldon . The route enters Adair County near Proctor . It intersects with US @-@ 59 in Westville before US @-@ 62 crosses the state line into Arkansas . 
 = = History = = 
 When US @-@ 62 first appeared on the state highway map in 1930 , it had the same basic routing as it did today . In 1930 , most of the highway was of gravel or earthen construction . The only portions of the highway that were paved were from Chickasha to Tabler , from Newcastle to Oklahoma City and Meeker , from Okemah to Morris , and from just south of the US @-@ 64 junction to Fort Gibson . By 1948 , the entire stretch of US @-@ 62 through Oklahoma had been paved . 
 = = = Oklahoma City routing = = = 
 On 1950 @-@ 03 @-@ 06 , US @-@ 62 was rerouted through Oklahoma City . US @-@ 62 followed Newcastle Boulevard into the city and turned eastbound onto S.E. 29th Street , which it followed to Robinson Avenue . It then turned north onto Robinson , which was also US @-@ 77 , towards downtown . Through downtown , US @-@ 62 followed Robinson , while US @-@ 77 paralleled it one block to the east on Broadway . At N.E. 23rd Street , US @-@ 62 turned east , concurring with US @-@ 270 , US @-@ 66 CITY , and the second State Highway 1 . US @-@ 77 also ran along 23rd Street from Broadway to Lincoln Boulevard , where it split off to the north , along with US @-@ 66 CITY . US @-@ 62 / 270 / SH @-@ 1 then continued along 23rd Street to Spencer . 
 US @-@ 62 was realigned once again on April 6 , 1955 . 
 US @-@ 62 was realigned for a third time on September 4 , 1961 . This routing was only meant to be temporary , following Agnew , Exchange , and Reno Avenues to downtown . This change was followed up by the September 4 , 1963 rerouting , which put US @-@ 62 onto its present @-@ day routing ( though I @-@ 240 did not exist yet , and I @-@ 44 still ended at I @-@ 35 ) . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = David Jacobs ( table tennis ) = 
 Dian David Michael Jacobs ( born 21 June 1977 ) , commonly referred to as David Jacobs , is an Indonesian athlete who competes in table tennis , currently Class 10 para table tennis . Born in Ujung <unk> , he took up table tennis at the age of ten and rose quickly through national tournaments . He was training to play internationally by 2000 , and in 2001 he won his first gold medal , at the <unk> Games in Singapore . Since 2010 he has competed in para table tennis , having spent most of his career competing against athletes with full functionality . He competed in the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , winning a bronze medal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jacobs was born in Ujung <unk> ( now Makassar ) on 21 June 1977 . He is of Ambonese descent . He began playing table tennis at age ten , with the support of his parents Jan and Nell , as well as his brothers Rano , <unk> , and Joe ; as of 2012 his three brothers also play table tennis . In 1989 his parents registered him with the <unk> Club in Semarang ; in his two years with the club he became a national champion at the elementary @-@ school level . 
 When Jacobs was ready to begin his junior high school , the family moved to Jakarta . Jacobs was signed with UMS 80 Club . He continued to improve and joined the provincial team . In 1997 he was sent to Beijing to train at the Shi Cha Hai Sports School . By 2000 Jacobs was already being prepared to compete at the international level by the Indonesian Table Tennis Association . As of January 2012 Jacobs is married to <unk> Palar , with whom he has one child . 
 = = Table tennis career = = 
 While earning a degree in management from the <unk> School of Economics , Jacobs continued training . He participated in his first Southeast Asian Games ( SEA Games ) in 2001 . Together with Yon <unk> , in 2001 Jacobs won Indonesia 's only gold medal at the <unk> table tennis championship in Singapore . In the men 's doubles competition they defeated the Thai duo <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> in three matches , scoring 11 @-@ 4 , 11 @-@ 4 , and 11 @-@ 6 . Paired with <unk> for the first time for this tournament , Jacobs told The Jakarta Post that they " were determined not to let ourselves be dominated " . 
 Jacobs continued to play at the SEA Games , competing in Vietnam ( 2003 ) , the Philippines ( 2005 ) , and Thailand ( 2007 ) . He won the 2004 <unk> <unk> Nasional competition for table tennis , which led to him receiving an honorary position at the Department of Sport ; he became a full @-@ time employee there in 2008 . In 2008 , Jacobs served as a coach for the Indonesian men 's table tennis team , and in 2009 he competed at the SEA Games in Kuala Lumpur . 
 = = Para table tennis career = = 
 Jacobs began playing in para table tennis tournaments later that year , becoming a member of the National Paralympic Committee in 2010 . He competes in Class 10 , which is the highest level of functionality in the system . He usually trains with opponents who maintain full functionality . Jacobs himself has a problem with one of his hands . 
 At the 2010 Asian Para Games in Guangzhou , China , Jacobs won a bronze medal . Before the competition he had only a month to train . He competed in several international tournaments , winning a gold in Thailand , silver in Beijing , bronze in the Czech Republic , silver in the United Kingdom , and gold in Taiwan . At the 2011 ASEAN <unk> in Surakarta , Jacobs won seven gold medals : men 's singles ( open ) , men 's doubles ( open ) , mixed doubles ( open ) , men 's doubles , mixed doubles , team , and single . In January of the following year Jacobs took on Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in a three @-@ game series . Although the president won one game with a score of 13 @-@ 11 , Jacobs took the series , winning two games with the scores 11 @-@ 7 and 11 @-@ 9 . After the competition , Yudhoyono gave a speech of the need to support Indonesia 's disabled athletes . 
 In March 2012 Jacobs won two gold medals at the <unk> <unk> Tennis <unk> Open in Italy . In the men 's singles he defeated Ivan <unk> of the Czech Republic with a score of 11 @-@ 9 , 11 @-@ 7 , and 11 @-@ 8 , while in the men 's team play he was paired with Komet Akbar and defeated teams from the Netherlands and Czech Republic . In June he won the Slovakian Table Tennis Tournament , ranking him among the top three in the world . 
 Jacobs is one of several athletes who represented Indonesia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , with Ni <unk> <unk> ( powerlifting ) , the swimmer Agus <unk> , and an athletics competitor , <unk> Budi <unk> . Jacobs won the bronze medal in the Table Tennis Men 's Individual C10 classification . It was the nation 's first Paralympic medal in over twenty years . 
 = My Life with Master = 
 My Life with Master is an independently published role @-@ playing game written by Paul Czege and published by Half Meme Press ( it was first released at the 2003 Gen Con gaming convention ) . My Life with Master is a game about role @-@ playing the servants or minions of an evil Master or Mistress . 
 The game is still in print ( as of May 2012 ) , and is available in printed book format or as a PDF file download from the publisher . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The prototypical setting of the role @-@ playing game is in an unspecified Central European country in the early 19th century . Players in the game portray the Igor @-@ like minions of an evil Master ( or Mistress ) who preys on the nearby Townsfolk . 
 Like most role @-@ playing games , there is a <unk> ( GM ) . In this case the GM plays the part of the Master . However , the GM and players together are supposed to " design " the Master , in terms of defining his " Wants " , " Needs " , " Aspect " , and " Type " . These traits have no explicit mechanical effect , but are used to define the desires and mannerisms of the Master and how he interacts with the Townsfolk and his minions . Masters have two game statistics , " Fear " ( a measure of his power over minions ) and " Reason " ( how much minions and Townsfolk can resist the Master 's control over them ) . 
 In contrast , the Master 's minions , the characters portrayed by the players , are defined ( in terms of game statistics ) by their levels of " Weariness " and " Self @-@ loathing " , and the connections of " Love " that they have ( successfully or unsuccessfully ) tried to make with the Townsfolk . Self @-@ loathing is a measure of the power that a minion has to intimidate the Townsfolk , while Weariness limits their abilities to complete their tasks . Love allows minions to resist their Master and his demands on them . 
 Gameplay is generally resolved through a series of " scenes " . A player describes what their minion is trying to do , be it carrying out their Master 's wishes or trying to resist him , interacting with the Townsfolk , attempting an act of Love ( which could result in increasing their " Love " trait , or increasing their " Self @-@ loathing " if the attempt fails ) , etc . A series of dice rolls are used to determine success or failure , and then the scene is played out according to that outcome . 
 Unlike other role @-@ playing games that may have long campaigns , My Life with Master games are typically designed to end after a small number of playing sessions . As one reviewer stated , My Life with Master " strives to tell a story , and stories have endings . " Usually , a game culminates with the death of the Master at the hands of one ( or more ) of his minions . Sometimes , the Master dies because the Townsfolk are " sick of his predations " and " storm his domicile -- pitchforks in hand and torches aflame " . Some or all of the players ' characters might also meet their end in the hands of the Townsfolk , or the Master kills them as they try to resist his commands and suffer the consequences of their failure . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 My Life with Master won the 2004 Diana Jones Award . In addition , it also won the 2003 Out of the Box Award for Best Sui <unk> RPG and the 2003 Indie Roleplaying Game of the Year . 
 Steve Darlington , in his review , stated that " even if you never play this game , you will be smarter simply for having read it " since " it quickly becomes hard to distinguish [ Czege 's ] choice of attributes from a high @-@ level academic deconstruction of the character tropes in gothic horror films at a level which could easily be found on a college reading list . " He also said that it is " one of the very few horror games that may actually need disclaimers , and maybe even safe words too " for its " darker subtext " about escaping from abusive relationships . 
 According to Heather <unk> " Czege writes with wit and doesn 't fear to let his understanding of game theory shine through . Colin Theriot 's illustrations evoke exactly the right mood for the setting and are enjoyable as stand @-@ alone art . " 
 Reviewer Matthew Pook warned that " Despite the simplicity of the [ game ] mechanics ... they are not as clearly written as they need to be ... The GM will need to make a close read of the otherwise well @-@ written text to help grasp how the outcome of a scene will alter a minion 's statistics . " He concluded his review stating " although not going to be everyone 's cup of tea , My Life With Master is the most interesting roleplaying game released this year [ 2003 ] and perhaps the most challenging . " 
 Game designer Greg Costikyan has praised My Life with Master for the way it " evokes emotions and feelings rare in games " , and considers it to work in part because the Gothic horror theme has " a defined narrative arc : hubris and terror , followed by a fall " . 
 = Internet Watch Foundation and Wikipedia = 
 On 5 December 2008 , the Internet Watch Foundation ( IWF ) , a British watchdog group , blacklisted content on the English Wikipedia related to Scorpions ' 1976 studio album Virgin Killer , due to the presence of its controversial cover artwork , depicting a young girl posing nude , with a faux glass shatter obscuring her genitalia . The image was deemed to be " potentially illegal content " under English law which forbids the possession or creation of indecent photographs of children . The IWF 's blacklist are used in web filtering systems such as Cleanfeed . 
 The URL to the image 's description page , which depicts the cover art , was also blacklisted ; however thumbnails and the image itself remained accessible . The album cover had been deemed controversial at the time of its release , and was replaced in some markets with an alternate cover image featuring a photo of the band members . The IWF described the image as " a potentially illegal indecent image of a child under the age of 18 " . Wikipedia 's policies state that it does not censor content " that some readers consider objectionable or offensive , even exceedingly so " , although it does remove content that is " obviously inappropriate " , violates other Wikipedia policies , or is illegal in the United States . 
 As well as the direct consequence of censoring the article and image for UK @-@ based readers of the English Wikipedia through the affected ISPs ( a censoring that could be circumvented ) , and that the album cover was being made available unfiltered on other major sites including Amazon.co.uk ( from which it was later removed ) , and available for sale in the UK , the action also had some indirect effects on Wikipedia , namely temporarily preventing all editors using said ISPs in the UK from contributing to any page of the encyclopaedia , and preventing anonymous edits from these ISPs while the URL remained on the blacklist . This was described by the IWF as unintended " collateral damage " . This was due to the proxies used to access Wikipedia , as Wikipedia implements a blocking policy whereby contributors can be blocked if they vandalise the encyclopaedia . Therefore , all vandalism coming from one ISP would be directed through one proxy — hence one IP — and all of the ISP 's customers using that proxy would be barred from editing . 
 After invoking its appeals procedure and reviewing the situation , the IWF reversed their blacklisting of the page on 9 December 2008 , and announced that they would not blacklist other copies of the image hosted outside the UK . 
 = = Background = = 
 The album art of the Scorpions ' album Virgin Killer , featuring a young girl fully nude with a " smashed glass " effect covering her genitalia , was deemed controversial at the time of its release . The cover was replaced in some markets with an alternate cover image featuring a photo of the band members . RCA Records refused to sell the controversial album cover in the United States . The cover was not the only Scorpions ' cover which caused controversy however , as the covers for Taken by Force and <unk> have also caused controversy with their content . 
 In the United Kingdom , access to illegal content ( such as child pornography ) was strictly self @-@ regulated by individual internet service providers . This began when BT Group introduced Cleanfeed , a server @-@ side filtering system which uses data obtained from the Internet Watch Foundation . The IWF is a <unk> organisation that operates a website where users can report web pages containing illegal or dubious content to be added to their blacklists . This was implemented in order to prevent users from accessing this material , since it is illegal to possess an indecent image of a child under the age of 18 per the Protection of Children Act . British ISPs were later obligated by the government to implement filters for illegal content by the beginning of 2007 . 
 = = Addition to IWF blacklist = = 
 On 5 December 2008 the Internet Watch Foundation added the Wikipedia URLs for the Virgin Killer article and the description page of the image to its blacklist . After the blacklisting , users of major UK ISPs , including BT , Vodafone , Virgin Media / <unk> , Be / O2 , <unk> / UK Online / Sky Broadband , Orange , Demon , and TalkTalk ( Opal Telecom ) , were unable to access the content . 
 Sarah Robertson , director of communications for the IWF , said that the image was rated " 1 on a scale of 1 to 5 , where 1 is the least offensive " . She described the picture as " erotic posing with no sexual activity " . While the image itself has not been flagged as " illegal " , IWF determined it to be a " potentially illegal indecent image of a child under the age of 18 " . 
 The IWF said they were first notified of the Wikipedia URL on 4 December 2008 . This followed the May 2008 reporting of the cover image on Wikipedia by U.S.-based social conservative site WorldNetDaily to the Federal Bureau of Investigation . An officer of the Concerned Women for America , a conservative Christian advocacy group , commented , " By allowing that image to remain posted , Wikipedia is helping to further facilitate perversion and paedophilia " . <unk> magazine subsequently reported that the discussion page associated with the article declared " Prior discussion has determined by broad consensus that the Virgin Killer cover will not be removed " , and asserted that Wikipedia contributors " favour inclusion in all but the most extreme cases " . However , according to The Guardian because " the IWF doesn 't talk to people outside of the UK they weren 't able to appreciate what was going on " . Internet security expert Richard Clayton explained that " We see this borderline stuff all the time ; it 's a no @-@ win " , before adding that the decision seems to have been based on taking the image out of context , particularly " given that you can go into HMV and buy a copy on the high street " . On 9 December 2008 the IWF reversed its blacklist of the Wikipedia pages on the basis of the " contextual issues involved in this specific case and , in light of the length of time the image has existed and its wide availability " . 
 = = Effects on Wikipedia = = 
 The blacklisting of Virgin Killer also caused other inadvertent issues for Wikipedia users in the United Kingdom . Usually most Internet users have a unique IP address visible to websites . However , as a result of ISPs using the IWF blacklist implemented through Cleanfeed technology , traffic to Wikipedia via those affected ISPs was then routed through a small number of proxy servers . This caused problems for users of the site . Since Wikipedia allows users to anonymously edit its encyclopaedia articles , these individuals are identified only through their IP addresses , which are used to selectively block users who vandalise the site or otherwise break its rules . The proxy filtering makes it impossible to uniquely distinguish users , and to prevent vandalism Wikipedia " instituted a blanket ban on anonymous edits from the six ISPs , which account for 95 % of British residential internet users " . This had the immediate effect of requiring nearly all registered users in the UK to request the lifting of IP <unk> on their accounts before they could edit again , and the de facto permanent effect of barring any contribution from people without user accounts on the site , who contribute merely under an IP address and not a user name . 
 The MediaWiki software that Wikipedia runs on can interpret X @-@ <unk> @-@ For ( <unk> ) headers , allowing Wikipedia to identify a user 's main IP address rather than the proxy IP address , allowing the ability to block proxy users individually by their client 's IP rather than the proxy server IP ( avoiding the need to block the whole proxy due to the actions of a single user ) . However , none of the ISPs subscribing to this system pass <unk> information to Wikipedia , having the impact of reversing the normal method of identification and blocking on Wikipedia . IP addresses assumed to be assigned to an individual person or organisation were assigned instead to millions of people and thousands of registered editors . Wikipedia servers saw them all as the IP of the proxy rather than each as the IP of their own machine . 
 Due to erroneous use of Border Gateway Protocol ( BGP ) and other routing technology to redirect the connections to the filtering proxies , users of some networks were temporarily prevented from accessing or editing any content hosted by Wikimedia , a problem reminiscent of Pakistan 's accidental blocking of YouTube for much of the world instead of only their own citizens . 
 = = Responses = = 
 On 7 December 2008 , the Wikimedia Foundation , a non @-@ profit organisation which supports Wikipedia , issued a press release about the blacklisting of their sites by the IWF stating that they had " no reason to believe the article , or the image contained in the article , has been held to be illegal in any jurisdiction anywhere in the world " , and noting that not just the image but the article itself had been blocked . 
 On 9 December 2008 , Jimmy Wales , who holds the board @-@ appointed " community founder " seat on the Wikimedia Board of Trustees , told the UK 's Channel 4 News that he had briefly considered legal action . After the block had been removed , Mike Godwin , general counsel for the Wikimedia Foundation , stated " there is still plenty to be troubled by in the operations of the Internet Watch Foundation and its blacklist " . 
 On 9 December 2008 , the IWF rescinded the block , issuing the following statement : 
 [ ... ] the image in question is potentially in breach of the Protection of Children Act 1978 . However , the IWF Board has today ( 9 December 2008 ) considered these findings and the contextual issues involved in this specific case and , in light of the length of time the image has existed and its wide availability , the decision has been taken to remove this webpage from our list . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The incident was commented in some countries implementing or considering to implement Internet filtering or censorship plans . In Australia , Electronic Frontiers Australia vice @-@ chairman Colin Jacobs said that " [ the ] incident in Britain , in which virtually the entire country was unable to edit Wikipedia because the country 's Internet Watch Foundation had blacklisted a single image on the site , illustrated the pitfalls of mandatory ISP filtering " . The Sydney Morning Herald has commented that " Ironically , the banning of the image has only made it visible to more people as news sites publicise the issue and the image spreads across sites other than Wikipedia . " an example of the Streisand effect . 
 At the time of the incident Amazon US were also displaying the image on their site and the IWF stated that it " might yet add Amazon US to its list of ' blocked ' sites for hosting the picture " ; however , Amazon subsequently took the decision to remove the image from their site . In an impact study preparing a bill dealing with cybercrime , the Cabinet of France listed the Virgin Killer block as an example of indiscriminate filtering . 
 The Electronic Frontier Foundation criticised the IWF 's reasoning : 
 We agree with their decision [ to reverse the ban ] , but they have the wrong reasoning [ for the reversal ] : they had no business censoring that article in the first place — the community of Wikipedia editors is if anything the more legitimate , reliable and grown @-@ up adjudicator of which images are appropriate subject matter for an encyclopaedia . 
 The IWF continues to assert that the image is indeed child porn , and asserts that the image would be blocked if it were on a British server . 
 = Window of Opportunity ( Stargate SG @-@ 1 ) = 
 " Window of Opportunity " is the sixth episode from season 4 of the science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 , and first aired on the American subscription channel Showtime on August 4 , 2000 . The episode is based on a time loop scenario , with SG @-@ 1 team members Colonel O 'Neill and Teal 'c repeatedly reliving the same ten hours after a mission on a planet . Since the rest of their team and all personnel at Stargate Command are unaware of the happenings and do not remember the time resets , O 'Neill and Teal 'c are forced to find a solution on their own . 
 Penned by Joseph Mallozzi and Paul Mullie , " Window of Opportunity " was the writing duo 's second script , and their first episode to air . Mallozzi and Mullie later became executive producers of both Stargate SG @-@ 1 and Stargate Atlantis . The episode 's unique story style caused an unexpected shortage of footage during filming , which director Peter DeLuise compensated for by shooting additional scenes , many of which were humorous . " Window of Opportunity " is widely regarded as a fan favorite . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a mission on <unk> @-@ 639 , a planet experiencing strong solar activity , the SG @-@ 1 team encounters an alien archaeologist named Malikai ( Robin Mossley ) . When a geomagnetic disturbance hits its peak , the Stargate activates simultaneously on the planet and on Earth , and a flash strikes Malikai , Colonel O 'Neill ( Richard Dean Anderson ) and Teal 'c ( Christopher Judge ) near an Ancient altar . Moments later , O 'Neill finds himself in the Stargate Command ( SGC ) cafeteria in the middle of a breakfast conversation with Dr. Daniel Jackson ( Michael Shanks ) and Major Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) , who claim to have no knowledge of the planet . O 'Neill and Teal 'c later express familiarity with the events , and they are checked and certified to be in perfect health . Before SG @-@ 1 can resume their planned mission to the planet , an unscheduled offworld activation of the Earth Stargate , accompanied by flashes , transports O 'Neill back to breakfast . 
 While the events at the SGC repeat themselves , Daniel makes first progress in the translation of writings in the photos of the ancient altar . SG @-@ 1 return to the planet where Malikai lets slip he too remembers what 's happening , but O 'Neill finds himself back at breakfast before the altar 's activation can be stopped . With the help of O 'Neill 's and Teal 'c's explanations , Carter devises a plan to break the time loop by preventing an incoming wormhole , which fails . Meanwhile , Daniel attempts to translate the altar 's writing loop after loop , but his memory is reset each time along with everyone else 's , and he cannot possibly translate it all within just a few hours . Ultimately , O 'Neill and Teal 'c realize the only solution is to learn and remember the alien language themselves . After many loops of teaching , Daniel makes an offhand remark about events that occur during each loop having no consequences once the loop is over , which inspires O 'Neill and Teal 'c to indulge in wildly outrageous behavior as a means of dealing with the boredom and frustration of being caught in repeating time . The pair play golf through the active Stargate ( much to General Hammond 's irritation in at least one loop ) , Teal 'c takes action against the painful starts of his loops by slamming the door back in the face of the airman who accidentally hit him with it in the beginning of each loop , O 'Neill tries pottery @-@ making ( clearly improving with each progressive loop ) , bicycles through the base , and just before the end of one loop , resigns from the Air Force whilst wearing an outrageous sweatshirt for the sole purpose of grabbing Carter and kissing her in the seconds before the loop resets . 
 After what is later believed to have been at least three months , Daniel is finally able to reconstruct the planet 's history with the finished translations : the Ancients had attempted to escape a mysterious plague by building a time machine but never got it to work properly . Upon returning to the planet , SG @-@ 1 learn of the death of Malikai 's wife , whom Malikai wants to visit in the past with the help of the time machine . O 'Neill 's experience of his son 's death convinces Malikai to shut down the device before yet another new loop can start . Back at the SGC , O 'Neill , Carter , and Daniel have their first breakfast after the loops , and O 'Neill answers Daniel 's question about unusual activities in the loops with a long look at Carter . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Window of Opportunity " was the second Stargate SG @-@ 1 script by Joseph Mallozzi and Paul Mullie , and their first episode to air . The writing duo 's first script , " Scorched Earth " , would air three episodes later . Choosing " Ad <unk> " as the episode 's working title , Mallozzi and Mullie originally pitched " Window of Opportunity " as a darker story from the finished episode . SG @-@ 1 would encounter a world whose scientists work feverishly on preventing an imminent apocalypse , but after being unable to find a solution in time , they initiate a time loop that would trap the SG @-@ 1 team . Executive producer Brad Wright however noted the similarities to the Star Trek : The Next Generation episode " Cause and Effect " , and writer Robert C. Cooper suggested a lighter direction similar to the feature film Groundhog Day , which O 'Neill would briefly reference in the episode . To simplify continuity in the shooting process , Brad Wright encouraged chaos @-@ theory @-@ type fluctuations in the story as early as in the episode 's concept meeting . Director Peter DeLuise asked the prop department to glue the Froot Loops to O 'Neill 's breakfast spoon to have the same loops in the same spots in each take . 
 According to Paul Mullie , having Froot Loops as O 'Neill 's breakfast was not scripted , and he is unsure if the loop reference was intentional . This was contradicted by Script coordinator Cath @-@ Anne Ambrose who said " I had to get Fruit Loops cleared [ by the company that makes them ] , and so the guy calls me back and says , ' Well how do you feel about Eggo Waffles ? Would you consider using Eggo Waffles instead of Fruit Loops ? ' So I go to these guys [ the writing department ] and ask , ' How do you feel about waffles ? ' And they 're like , ' No ! It 's Fruit Loops ! It 's a time loop ! No ! ' Waffle sales were down . " 
 The off @-@ world scenes were filmed on an interior sound stage , using occasional lens flares and off @-@ camera fans to simulate weather . A matte painting by the in @-@ house visual effects department later served as a sky replacement for the used greenscreen . The Vancouver @-@ based company <unk> was responsible for almost all visual effects shots , some of which were re @-@ used within the episode to save money . Other visual effects clips were re @-@ used from previous episodes . " Window of Opportunity " was the first episode to feature a rear @-@ screen projection in the briefing room . To speed up the shooting process , scenes were filmed in thematic blocks instead of in a story @-@ chronological order , and short sequences were re @-@ used to help the audience with a visual recall in new scenes . Sound effects were later added to give the wooden altar prop the impression of being made of stone . 
 It became evident by the third day of production that the episode was going to run significantly short , partly caused by the time @-@ efficient filming style . The scene in which Daniel informs Jack and Teal 'c of the opportunity to do whatever they like , was a late pitch by Brad Wright , who had also had the idea for some time to show someone golfing through the Stargate . Preliminary discussions about computer @-@ generating the golf ball to not break the US $ 100 @,@ 000 Stargate prop were later overturned , and the actors used a real golf ball . Many of the other humorous scenes in " Window of Opportunity " were improvised on set during filming . With juggling being one of Richard Dean Anderson 's earlier careers , director Peter DeLuise filmed the juggling sequence in a last effort to fill the episode 's time slot . " Window of Opportunity " has no deleted scenes . 
 As the first episodes of season 4 addressed the attraction between O 'Neill and Carter , its after @-@ effects were chosen to be still noticeable in " Window of Opportunity " . The progressing frustration of Teal 'c , " the man of infinite patience " , is shown by his Kel <unk> <unk> 'ing ( a fictional <unk> state ) during the briefing . The episode 's main guest star was Robin Mossley as Malikai ; Mossley would play a different character in the season 10 episode " Morpheus " . Several crew members make cameo appearances in " Window of Opportunity " . Nicole Forrest , the show 's head of accounting and director Peter Woeste 's wife , appears as Malikai 's wife on a photographic device . One of Anderson 's stand @-@ ins on SG @-@ 1 , Bill Nikolai , plays the technician in O 'Neill 's bicycle scene . Director Peter DeLuise briefly appears as an airman who helps Daniel recover from being repeatedly knocked down by Sgt. Siler in each loop . Siler himself is played by stunt coordinator Dan Shea . The name of writer Joseph Mallozzi appears as the author of the book that O 'Neill and Teal 'c use to study the Ancient language . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his book Approaching the Possible , Jo Storm saw the episode 's title hinting at an " inevitable " story line about the sexual tension between O 'Neill and Carter that has been looming since the beginning of the series . The characters " break [ ing ] the rules of conduct for their jobs " ( fraternization ) made the episode " seem completely unnatural " , while it allowed the writers to explore possibilities in the narrative . Jo Storm also credited the writers for breaking the " boring " convention of getting either only one or all <unk> caught in a time loop . The producers enjoyed having O 'Neill and Teal 'c instead of the usual intellectual combination of Carter and Daniel solve the puzzle . Peter DeLuise regarded the episode as " funnier " and " more lighthearted " than usual episodes . 
 A season 4 DVD review by <unk> gave " Window of Opportunity " 4 out of 5 points , calling it an " enjoyable " , " charming " , and " unique " episode and " one of the series ' most entertaining stories " . Other reviewers found the episode " hilarious " and " a fine example of SG @-@ 1 at its humorous best " . The 2000 <unk> Yearbook ranked " Window of Opportunity " as the second @-@ best episode of science fiction television in the year 2000 . A sampling of fan opinions on <unk> in 2001 showed the episode as a " clear favorite " . In a fan poll conducted in 2007 on the Sci @-@ Fi Channel 's website , " Window of Opportunity " was voted the " best episode ever " out of thirty @-@ two preselected Stargate SG @-@ 1 episodes , and the majority of participants in a 2007 SG @-@ 1 fan poll on MSN Canada named the episode their " favorite of all time . " 
 = Black River National Forest Scenic Byway = 
 The Black River National Forest Scenic Byway is a National Forest Scenic Byway that runs along the Black River in the Ottawa National Forest in the U.S. state of Michigan . The byway follows County Road 513 ( CR 513 ) through Gogebic County in the Upper Peninsula . As a county road , it is maintained jointly by the Gogebic County Road Commission ( <unk> ) with assistance from the U.S. Forest Service ( USFS ) . The byway provides access to several waterfalls and other visitor attractions in the area . The route of the byway first existed as a wagon road in the 1840s and as a county road in the 1920s . The byway designation was instituted on June 20 , 1992 , and the byway was dedicated later that year . 
 = = Route description = = 
 While CR 513 ( Black River Road ) extends further south to connect with US Highway 2 near Bessemer , the National Forest Scenic Byway designation starts at the intersection with CR 204 ( Airport Road ) west of the Gogebic @-@ Iron County Airport and north of the Big <unk> Mountain . From this southern starting point , the roadway runs northward along the Black River through the Ottawa National Forest . CR 513 runs along the western side of the river , staying shy of the banks as it passes through the woods . The woods through which the roadway passes contain pine , hemlock and hardwood trees . The Royal Palm Ranch , a nationally known equestrian school is located along the road on 100 acres ( 40 ha ) of land next to the river . The byway curves away from the river near Copper Peak , the tallest ski flying hill in the world . The 18 @-@ story facility allows visitors on clear enough days to see 85 miles ( 137 km ) in the distance to places like Minnesota , Isle Royale and Canada . 
 North of Copper Peak , the road once again roughly parallels the river , but staying away from the river 's course . The road provides access to five sets of waterfalls . The first is Great Conglomerate Falls , followed by Potawatomi , Gorge , Sandstone and Rainbow falls . The falls are connected to the road by four separate hiking trails . The byway continues past these landmarks before terminating at Black River Harbor . The harbor is the site of a 1920s fishing village , one of only two harbors in the National Forest System . The area was also host to three taverns built by the Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression and a pedestrian suspension bridge used by the North Country Trail to cross the mouth of the river . 
 = = History = = 
 According to the surveys of William A. Burt in 1848 , a wagon road ran south from the modern site of the Black River Harbor to Chippewa Hill , the location of Copper Peak . A wagon road was built by the State of Michigan in 1904 to connect the waterfront with Bessemer . The county had purchased the land around the waterfront in 1924 for a park , and a county road running parallel to the Black River was in place by 1927 . The residents of the fishing village were forced to move and settled at Black River Village . The roadway was improved to a gravel surface by 1930 , and fully paved in late 1949 or early 1950 . In 1967 , the Gogebic County exchanged the park land along the river , including the harbor , with the USFS for other land in the area , and the harbor has been under federal maintenance since . Local officials originally proposed the National Forest Scenic Byway designation for the road in April 1991 . The desire was to " showcase a special part of the National Forest " and boost tourism to the area , according to the park ranger in charge of handling the application . The designation was conferred by the USFS on June 20 , 1992 , with a dedication ceremony on September 19 that year . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire road is in Ironwood Township , Gogebic County . 
 = 2009 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 2009 Giro d 'Italia was the 92nd running of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . It was held from 9 to 31 May 2009 , and marked the 100th year since the first edition of the race . Starting in Venice and finishing in Rome , 22 teams competed over 21 stages . 
 The Giro was raced on a unique path through Italy , taking the peloton to some historic cities and towns in Italian cycling . Though the route lacked any well @-@ known , storied climbs , the many intermediate and mountain stages in the second and third weeks of the race proved deceptively difficult . The 10th and the 16th stages were both called the race 's queen stage , as both contained multiple difficult mountain climbs . 
 Riders protested during the ninth stage , a criterium in Milan . This protest was nominally about the overall safety conditions of the stage , and was sparked by life @-@ threatening injuries sustained by Pedro Horrillo the day before . In the protest , riders declined to contest the stage except for a final sprint finish , a decision that proved controversial with race organizers and fans . 
 Denis Menchov won the race , having taken the lead in a long time trial in stage 12 , and defended vigorously against attacks by his closest challenger , Danilo Di Luca , during the mountain stages of the final week . Di Luca came in second , 41 seconds behind the winner , and won the mauve jersey as points classification winner . Subsequent to the Giro , both he and third @-@ place finisher Franco Pellizotti became embroiled in doping scandals , were given bans , and had their results stripped . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty @-@ two teams were announced for the Giro . These included fifteen ProTour teams , and seven Professional Continental teams . Three ProTour teams did not wish to participate , and were thus not invited : Cofidis , Euskaltel – Euskadi , and Française des Jeux . Conversely , the organizers of the race originally declined to invite Fuji – Servetto , but changed this decision on 23 April , inviting them as the Giro 's 22nd and final team . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , so the Giro began with a peloton of 198 cyclists . 
 The 22 teams that took part in the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 The Astana team did not include 2008 race champion Alberto Contador , who chose not to defend his championship , but did include Lance Armstrong , who had recently returned from retirement . Though his appearance was put in doubt after he crashed out of stage 1 of the Vuelta a Castilla y León and broke his collarbone , Armstrong announced on 16 April that he would start the Giro despite undergoing surgery for his injury . Silence – Lotto star Cadel Evans was originally announced to be taking part in the Giro , but he publicly announced shortly afterward that he would not ride it , and accused RCS Sport ( the organizers of the race ) of using his name to promote the event . Contador and Evans both chose to focus on the Tour de France later in the season . 
 Many riders were named as contenders , including Ivan Basso , Levi Leipheimer , Armstrong , Damiano Cunego , Carlos Sastre , Gilberto Simoni , Danilo Di Luca , Marzio Bruseghin , and Denis Menchov . Before his collarbone injury , Armstrong was considered an overall favorite , and it was also noted that three time trials , including the insertion of an unusually long time trial mid @-@ race , might favor him . Pre @-@ race analysis noted that Armstrong , when on his best form , would be a rider very likely to gain from having such a long race against the clock included in the Giro . 
 Former winner Stefano Garzelli named Leipheimer as the favorite , as did some American media outlets . Armstrong considered Basso to be the favorite when speaking about the Giro in December 2008 . Other news outlets also referred to Basso as the pre @-@ race favorite . 
 Only a small number of stages were expected to end in a sprint , barring a successful breakaway . Sprinters in the event included Mark Cavendish , Alessandro Petacchi , Allan Davis , Filippo Pozzato , Robert Hunter , Robert Förster , Tyler Farrar , Juan José Haedo , and Oscar Gatto . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The first Giro d 'Italia was held in 1909 , and the 2009 route was designed to commemorate the 100th anniversary , though interruptions due to World War I and World War II meant this was only the 92nd race . Milan , which had for years been the city in which the Giro concluded , was the site of a ten @-@ lap criterium on the same circuit that began the first Giro d 'Italia . Every city that hosted a stage start or finish in the first Giro was visited in 2009 with the exception of Genoa , although Arenzano ( in the province of Genoa ) hosted the finish to stage 11 . The 11th stage also went over the Passo del Turchino , a climb used every year in the classic cycling race Milan – San Remo . 
 The tenth stage was planned to mimic stage 17 of the 1949 Giro d 'Italia , which was won by Italian cycling legend Fausto Coppi en route to the overall victory . That route originally included the Col d 'Izoard , a climb in France which has been featured in the Tour de France numerous times . Race organizers were forced to alter this stage to cover only the Italian side of the Alps rather than also visit France , as there were concerns over radio communication in the area , and the roads stood the risk of landslides . It was subsequently made longer than first planned , with an additional , shorter climb added . Stages 10 and 16 , the latter of which went over Monte Petrano and two other first @-@ category climbs , were both called the race 's queen stage . 
 The route received a small amount of criticism for failing to include any well @-@ known and especially difficult climbs such as the Passo del Mortirolo or Monte Zoncolan , instead including stages featuring multiple climbs with lesser ascents . Race director Angelo Zomegnan responded to the criticism by saying , " I won 't follow the philosophy that the selection of climbs has to be determined by their names . " 
 The 21 stages of the 2009 Giro d 'Italia were divided into five categories : one team time trial , seven flat stages , four intermediate stages , seven mountain stages and two individual time trials . The type of stage together with the average speed of the winner decided how much time each cyclist would be allowed to finish that stage before being eliminated from the race . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a team time trial in Lido , a barrier island in the city of Venice . The starting order of the teams was decided by a random draw . Team Columbia – High Road , the first team to take the course , won the stage , giving their star sprinter Mark Cavendish the first pink jersey as leader of the race . Cavendish was defeated in a sprint finish the following day by Italian Alessandro Petacchi , who was riding for the LPR Brakes – Farnese Vini team . Petacchi became the next wearer of the pink jersey , after he won the Stage 3 sprint into Valdobbiadene . Cavendish went on to win three mass @-@ start stages , but Team Columbia – High Road 's success was not limited to Cavendish 's victories nor the team time trial , as Edvald Boasson Hagen and Kanstantsin Sivtsov also took stage wins . 
 The first two high mountain stages of the Giro revealed the men who would battle for the overall race title . Danilo Di Luca of LPR Brakes – Farnese Vini took the win in Stage 4 , and put himself just 2 seconds off the pink jersey . The next day , he claimed the jersey , when he was second to stage winner Denis Menchov at Alpe di Siusi as an elite group of favorites emerged including Menchov , Di Luca , and others who had performed well on the climb and were in high places in the overall standings . 
 Menchov was fifth after Alpe di Siusi , but rose to second before stage 12 , the very long and hilly individual time trial in Cinque Terre . There , he claimed a convincing victory ; only Levi Leipheimer finished within a minute of Menchov 's winning time . Di Luca was nearly two minutes slower than him , finished sixth on the stage , and fell to second overall , with Menchov assuming the race lead . Di Luca tried repeatedly to shed Menchov during the remaining mountain stages to make up the time difference , which was never more than a minute . The two riders were involved in sprints for time bonuses at the finish line in stages 16 and 17 , as well as an intermediate sprint in stage 20 . Menchov was consistently quicker than Di Luca in these sprints . With his superior time @-@ trial skills providing the difference in the final stage , the Russian was able to emerge as Giro champion , despite a dramatic fall in the final kilometre before the finish line . 
 Stefano Garzelli was the winner of the mountains classification , gaining points for consistent high placings on the summit stage finishes , as well as a brief breakaway on the mountainous stage 10 . The points classification was won by Di Luca , after he finished in the top ten in eight of the road stages . The youth classification was won by Kevin Seeldraeyers , who remained consistent after Thomas Lövkvist lost nearly 25 minutes on stage 16 . Lövkvist had , for one day earlier in the race , led not just the youth but also the general classification . 
 Controversy arose during the ten @-@ lap Milan criterium of the ninth stage , when the riders staged a protest over what they viewed as unsafe riding conditions in that stage and those that preceded it . The most visible cause for the protest was Rabobank rider Pedro Horrillo 's accident during the eighth stage ; Horrillo sustained numerous fractures and head injuries after tumbling over a barricade on the roadside while descending the Culmine di San Pietro . Horrillo fell more than 60 m ( 200 ft ) , and nearly died as a result of his injuries . After spending five weeks in hospitals in both Italy and his native Spain , Horrillo eventually recovered , though the day on the Culmine di San Pietro was his last as a professional cyclist , as he retired before the 2010 season began . 
 The protest at first only involved the criterium being neutralized – that is , the race director agreed that each rider would receive the same finishing time as the stage winner regardless of when they actually crossed the line . After the riders rode a lap of the course , they decided instead not to contest the stage at all , riding the first six circuits 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) slower than previous stages . After four laps , they stopped altogether as race leader Di Luca addressed the unhappy crowd to explain their actions . The times for the stage did not count , and there was no aggressive riding until a final sprint finish . Along with Di Luca , Lance Armstrong was considered the principal voice speaking for the peloton on this day . Although the protest was referred to by some as " unanimous , " cyclists such as Filippo Pozzato , who was himself bearing injuries sustained in a crash that would later force him to leave the race , said the riders had been too hasty in their decision , and that it should have been made conclusively before the stage began . Armstrong apologized to the fans for the effect the protest had on what was supposed to be a grand spectacle , but also contended that it was the correct decision for the peloton to make . 
 Success in stages was limited to a few teams . Though there were nearly as many stages ( 21 ) as teams in the event ( 22 ) , only eight teams ultimately came away with stage victories . Six different riders won multiple stages – Cavendish , Petacchi , Menchov , Di Luca , Carlos Sastre , and Michele Scarponi . Teammates of Sastre , Scarponi and Cavendish were also stage winners ; Sastre 's Cervélo TestTeam provided the winners to stages 14 ( Simon Gerrans ) and 21 ( <unk> Konovalovas ) , and Scarponi 's teammate Leonardo Bertagnolli was the winner of stage 15 . The only teams to be single stage winners were Liquigas with Franco Pellizotti in stage 17 , and Silence – Lotto with classics specialist Philippe Gilbert three days later in a stage thought to resemble a classic . Pellizotti was also the third @-@ place overall finisher . With wins for Quick Step 's Seeldraeyers in the youth classification , Garzelli of Acqua & Sapone in the climbers ' competition , and Astana in the Trofeo Fast Team ranking , 11 teams – half of the total entries – won significant prizes during the race . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 About two months after the event concluded , on 22 July , it was announced that second place overall finisher and points classification winner Di Luca had given two positive tests for continuous erythropoietin receptor activator ( CERA , an erythropoietin derivative ) on 20 and 28 May , before the Cinque Terre time trial and the Mount Vesuvius stage in the race 's final week . He was provisionally suspended with immediate effect by the Union Cycliste Internationale ( UCI ) , cycling 's governing body . It was announced on 8 August that the analyses of the B @-@ samples from those controls confirmed the initial results , making it likely that Di Luca will be stripped of some or all of his results from the race . LPR Brakes – Farnese Vini fired him on 13 August . Di Luca at first maintained his innocence and claimed a conspiracy against him by the labs handling the tests . A period of legal maneuvering between Di Luca and the Italian National Olympic Committee ( CONI ) followed . CONI officials asked their anti @-@ doping tribunal ( TNA ) to suspend Di Luca for three years – while two years is a customary ban for a doping positive , CONI prosecutors sought a third year for recidivism , stemming from Di Luca 's previous doping incident two years earlier . He was given a two @-@ year suspension , retroactive to July 2009 , and indicated that he would appeal it to the Court of Arbitration for Sport . In October 2010 , Di Luca was reinstated to active status by CONI , due to his cooperation with several ongoing doping investigations , though his results were indeed stricken from the record . On 10 January 2011 , he signed with Team Katusha and indicated that he would return to the Giro in 2011 to support Katusha team leader Joaquim Rodríguez . 
 Five days before the start of the 2010 Giro d 'Italia , 2009 podium finisher Pellizotti was identified as a rider of interest to the UCI 's biological passport program due to irregular blood values . He was removed from his team 's start list for the Giro and provisionally suspended . The UCI asked that CONI open disciplinary proceedings against him , which had no resolution until after the 2010 season finished . TNA cleared him on 21 October and declared him free to race , at which time the Liquigas team intended to re @-@ sign him . The UCI decided in January 2011 to appeal his case to the CAS . The hearing was held in March , and Pellizotti asked for a quick resolution , with plans to return with Movistar Team in the 2011 Tirreno – Adriatico if he were cleared . The court reached its decision after five days , upholding the UCI 's appeal , handing Pellizotti a two @-@ year ban , and stripping all his results from this Giro and the 2009 Tour de France . Consequently , Pellizotti has said he is quitting the sport . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2009 Giro d 'Italia , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages , the leader received a pink jersey . This classification is considered the most important of the Giro d 'Italia , and the winner is considered the winner of the Giro . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a mauve jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage . The stage win awarded 25 points , second place awarded 20 points , third 16 , fourth 14 , fifth 12 , sixth 10 , and one point fewer per place down the line , to a single point for 15th . In addition , points could be won in intermediate sprints . 
 There was also a mountains classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the mountains classifications , points were won by reaching the top of a mountain before other cyclists . Each climb was categorized as either first , second , or third category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorized climbs . The highest point in the Giro ( called the Cima Coppi ) , which in 2009 was Sestrière in stage 10 , afforded more points than the other first @-@ category climbs . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , which awarded a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1984 were eligible . 
 There were also two classifications for teams . The first was the Trofeo Fast Team . In this classification , the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added ; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time . The Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification , with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points ( 20 for first place , 19 for second place and so on , down to a single point for 20th ) for their team . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Minor classifications = = = 
 Other less well @-@ known classifications , whose leaders did not receive a special jersey , were awarded during the Giro . These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour . Each mass @-@ start stage had one intermediate sprint , the Traguardo Volante , or T.V. The T.V. gave bonus seconds towards the general classification , points towards the regular points classification , and also points towards the T.V. classification . This award was known in previous years as the " Intergiro " and the " Expo Milano 2015 " classification . It was won by Italian Giovanni Visconti , of ISD . 
 Other awards included the Combativity classification , which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints , mountain passes and stage finishes . Mountains classification winner Stefano Garzelli won this award . The Azzurri d 'Italia classification was based on finishing order , but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage . It was won , like the closely associated points classification , by Danilo Di Luca . Additionally , the Trofeo Fuga <unk> rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field , each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear . Quick @-@ Step 's Mauro <unk> was first in this competition . Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements . Silence – Lotto and Quick @-@ Step were most successful in avoiding penalties , and so shared leadership of the Fair Play classification . 
 = = = World Rankings points = = = 
 The Giro was one of 24 events throughout the season that contributed points towards the 2009 UCI World Ranking . Points were awarded to the top 20 finishers overall , and to the top five finishers in each stage . 
 = Nikephoros Melissenos = 
 Nikephoros Melissenos ( Greek : Νικηφόρος <unk> , ca . 1045 – 17 November 1104 ) , Latinized as Nicephorus <unk> , was a Byzantine general and aristocrat . Of distinguished lineage , he served as a governor and general in the Balkans and Asia Minor in the 1060s . In the turbulent period after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 , when several generals tried to seize the throne for themselves , Melissenos remained loyal to Michael VII Doukas and was exiled by his successor Nikephoros III Botaneiates . In 1080 – 1081 , with Turkish aid , he seized control of what remained of Byzantine Asia Minor and proclaimed himself emperor against Botaneiates . After the revolt of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Alexios I Komnenos , however , which succeeded in taking Constantinople , he submitted to him , accepting the rank of Caesar and the governance of Thessalonica . He remained loyal to Alexios thereafter , participating in most Byzantine campaigns of the period 1081 – 1095 in the Balkans at the emperor 's side . He died on 17 November 1104 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origins and early career = = = 
 Nikephoros Melissenos was probably born circa 1045 at Dorylaeum , where his family had extensive estates . Through both his father and his mother , he was of aristocratic descent : his father belonged to the Bourtzes line , while his mother to the illustrious Melissenos family , which dated back to the 8th century and had produced several distinguished generals . Sometime before 1067 , Nikephoros married Eudokia Komnene , the second daughter of the Domestic of the Schools John Komnenos and Anna <unk> and sister of the future Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) . They had at least one known son , who was named John Komnenos . 
 Melissenos held the rank of magistros and the post of governor ( doux ) of <unk> ( modern Sofia ) for some time during the 1060s . In 1070 , he joined the field army commanded by his eldest brother @-@ in @-@ law , the protostrator Manuel Komnenos , in a campaign against the Seljuk Turks . The campaign ended in defeat near Sebasteia ( modern Sivas ) , and Melissenos along with Manuel Komnenos were captured by a Turkish chieftain whom the Byzantines called <unk> . Manuel , however , quickly persuaded the Turk to enter into Byzantine service , and their captivity ended . 
 Melissenos remained loyal to Michael VII Doukas ( r . 1071 – 1078 ) during the rebellion of the strategos of the Anatolic Theme , Nikephoros Botaneiates ( Nikephoros III ) , which began in October 1077 . Michael VII rewarded him by appointing him to Botaneiates 's post , but after Botaneiates 's victory and entry into Constantinople in April 1078 , Melissenos was exiled to the island of Kos . 
 = = = Rebellion = = = 
 In autumn 1080 , Melissenos left Kos and returned to Asia Minor . There , he succeeded in gaining the support of the local population , and in recruiting many Turkish tribesmen as mercenaries to his army . One by one , the cities of western and central Asia Minor opened up their gates to him , and Turkish garrisons were installed in them . Botaneiates tried to send Alexios Komnenos , who had recently suppressed the revolts of Nikephoros Bryennios and Nikephoros Basilakes , against him , but he refused . In February 1081 , Melissenos 's troops took Nicaea , where he was acclaimed as emperor , and defeated a loyalist army under the eunuch John . 
 In March 1081 , Melissenos was encamped with his army at Damalis , on the Asian shore across the Bosporus from Constantinople . There , he received news of the revolt of the Komnenoi against Botaneiates and the proclamation of Alexios Komnenos as emperor . He sent letters to the Komnenoi , suggesting a division of authority over the imperial territory , with the Balkans remaining under Komnenian control and himself keeping Asia Minor , although he also emphasized that the Byzantine Empire should remain united . In reply , the Komnenoi offered to recognize him as Caesar – the second highest dignity after the imperial title itself – and to give him the governance of Thessalonica – the Empire 's second @-@ most important city – if he would submit to them . Melissenos initially refused to accept this offer , but as the Komnenoi were on the verge of taking Constantinople and might refuse to make similar concessions later , he eventually agreed . 
 At the same time , the emperor Nikephoros Botaneiates tried to forestall the capital 's fall to the Komnenoi by sending for Melissenos and asking him to enter the city and assume imperial authority . His envoys , however , were obstructed by George Palaiologos and never reached Melissenos . Constantinople fell to the Komnenian forces , and on 8 April 1081 , Melissenos too entered the imperial capital . True to his word , Alexios I raised him to Caesar and gave him authority over Thessalonica , as well as allotting the city 's revenues to his income . At the same time , however , Alexios raised his brother Isaac Komnenos to the newly created dignity of sebastokrator , which he placed above that of Caesar , bypassing Melissenos . 
 This act of submission , unique among the various rebels of the time , may throw some light on Melissenos 's motivation for his uprising , according to the historian Jean @-@ Claude Cheynet . Cheynet believes that Melissenos was probably more concerned with safeguarding his Asian estates from the depredations of the Turks , and when Alexios granted him Thessalonica and equivalent estates around it – some of which Melissenos later distributed to his clients , like the Bourtzes family – he readily gave up the contest for the Byzantine throne . 
 Despite the end of Melissenos 's revolt , it left a profound legacy : although Melissenos himself submitted to Alexios Komnenos , the towns he had occupied and garrisoned with Turkish soldiers in Ionia , Phrygia , Galatia , and Bithynia remained in their hands . Thus , by becoming involved in the Byzantine civil wars as mercenaries and allies – especially through their use by Botaneiates and Melissenos during their respective revolts to hold down various cities for them – the Turks completed their relatively peaceful take @-@ over of central and western Asia Minor . 
 = = = Service under Alexios Komnenos = = = 
 Melissenos continued to serve Alexios I faithfully throughout the rest of his life . In autumn 1081 , he marched alongside Alexios in his campaign against the Normans of Robert Guiscard . In the Battle of Dyrrhachium , which ended in a crushing Byzantine defeat , he commanded the Byzantine army 's right wing . 
 In the 1083 campaign in Thessaly against the Normans , who , under Guiscard 's son Bohemond were besieging Larissa , Melissenos was used by Alexios as the centerpiece to a ruse . The emperor gave him the imperial insignia and a detachment of the army , which Bohemond proceeded to attack in the belief that this was the main Byzantine force , since the emperor was present with it . While the Normans pursued Melissenos 's men , Alexios with the main army took and looted the Norman camp , forcing Bohemond to lift the siege and withdraw . 
 Melissenos fought alongside Alexios in the Battle of <unk> ( late August 1087 ) against the Pechenegs , commanding the Byzantine left wing . The battle ended in a heavy Byzantine defeat , and Melissenos was taken captive along with many other Byzantines , to be ransomed by the emperor after some time . In spring 1091 , Melissenos was sent to Ainos to recruit soldiers from among the Bulgarians and Vlachs . Occupied with this task , he did not join the imperial army in time for the crushing Byzantine victory over the Pechenegs at the Battle of Levounion on 29 April , arriving the next day . 
 Later in the same year , he participated in the family council of Philippopolis which examined the accusations of conspiracy raised against John Komnenos , the doux of Dyrrhachium by the Archbishop of Ochrid Theophylact . The council degenerated into a heated family quarrel , where John 's father , the sebastokrator Isaac , accused Melissenos and Adrian Komnenos of slandering his son , but in the end Alexios dismissed the charges . 
 In the 1095 campaign against the Cumans , Melissenos , along with George Palaiologos and John Taronites were left in charge of defending the region of <unk> ( modern Stara Zagora ) against Cuman attacks . This is the last mention of Melissenos in Anna Komnene 's Alexiad . He died on 17 November 1104 . 
 = Spider @-@ Man = 
 Spider @-@ Man is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics existing in its shared universe . The character was created by writer @-@ editor Stan Lee and writer @-@ artist Steve Ditko , and first appeared in the anthology comic book Amazing Fantasy # 15 ( Aug. 1962 ) in the Silver Age of Comic Books . Lee and Ditko conceived the character as an orphan being raised by his Aunt May and Uncle Ben , and as a teenager , having to deal with the normal struggles of adolescence in addition to those of a costumed crime @-@ fighter . Spider @-@ Man 's creators gave him super strength and agility , the ability to cling to most surfaces , shoot spider @-@ webs using wrist @-@ mounted devices of his own invention , which he calls " web @-@ shooters " , and react to danger quickly with his " spider @-@ sense " , enabling him to combat his foes . And later in his life founded his own company call Parker Industries . 
 When Spider @-@ Man first appeared in the early 1960s , teenagers in superhero comic books were usually relegated to the role of sidekick to the protagonist . The Spider @-@ Man series broke ground by featuring Peter Parker , the high school student behind Spider @-@ Man 's secret identity and with whose " self @-@ obsessions with rejection , inadequacy , and loneliness " young readers could relate . While Spider @-@ Man had all the makings of a sidekick , unlike previous teen heroes such as Bucky and Robin , Spider @-@ Man had no superhero mentor like Captain America and Batman ; he thus had to learn for himself that " with great power there must also come great responsibility " — a line included in a text box in the final panel of the first Spider @-@ Man story but later retroactively attributed to his guardian , the late Uncle Ben . 
 Marvel has featured Spider @-@ Man in several comic book series , the first and longest @-@ lasting of which is titled The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . Over the years , the Peter Parker character has developed from shy , nerdy high school student to troubled but outgoing college student , to married high school teacher to , in the late 2000s , a single freelance photographer . In the 2010s , he joins the Avengers , Marvel 's flagship superhero team . Spider @-@ Man 's nemesis Doctor Octopus also took on the identity for a story arc spanning 2012 – 2014 , following a body swap plot in which Peter appears to die . Separately , Marvel has also published books featuring alternate versions of Spider @-@ Man , including Spider @-@ Man 2099 , which features the adventures of Miguel O 'Hara , the Spider @-@ Man of the future ; Ultimate Spider @-@ Man , which features the adventures of a teenaged Peter Parker in an alternate universe ; and Ultimate Comics Spider @-@ Man , which depicts the teenager Miles Morales , who takes up the mantle of Spider @-@ Man after Ultimate Peter Parker 's supposed death . 
 Spider @-@ Man is one of the most popular and commercially successful superheroes . As Marvel 's flagship character and company mascot , he has appeared in countless forms of media , including several animated and live @-@ action television series , syndicated newspaper comic strips , and in a series of films . The character was first portrayed in live action by Nicholas Hammond in the 1977 television movie Spider @-@ Man . In films , Spider @-@ Man has been portrayed by actors Tobey Maguire ( 2002 – 2007 ) and Andrew Garfield ( 2012 – 2014 ) , while Tom Holland portrays the character in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , first appearing in Captain America : Civil War in 2016 . Reeve Carney starred as Spider @-@ Man in the 2010 Broadway musical Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark . Spider @-@ Man has been well received as a superhero and comic book character and is usually ranked as one of the greatest comic book characters of all time alongside DC Comics characters such as Superman and Batman . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Creation and development = = = 
 In 1962 , with the success of the Fantastic Four , Marvel Comics editor and head writer Stan Lee was casting about for a new superhero idea . He said the idea for Spider @-@ Man arose from a surge in teenage demand for comic books , and the desire to create a character with whom teens could identify . In his autobiography , Lee cites the non @-@ superhuman pulp magazine crime fighter the Spider ( see also The Spider 's Web and The Spider Returns ) as a great influence , and in a multitude of print and video interviews , Lee stated he was further inspired by seeing a spider climb up a wall — adding in his autobiography that he has told that story so often he has become unsure of whether or not this is true . Though at the time teenage superheroes were usually given names ending with " boy " , Lee says he chose " Spider @-@ Man " because he wanted the character to age as the series progressed , and moreover felt the name " Spider @-@ Boy " would have made the character sound inferior to other superheroes . At that time Lee had to get only the consent of Marvel publisher Martin Goodman for the character 's approval . In a 1986 interview , Lee described in detail his arguments to overcome Goodman 's objections . Goodman eventually agreed to a Spider @-@ Man tryout in what Lee in numerous interviews recalled as what would be the final issue of the science @-@ fiction and supernatural anthology series Amazing Adult Fantasy , which was renamed Amazing Fantasy for that single issue , # 15 ( cover @-@ dated August 1962 , on sale June 5 , 1962 ) . In particular , Lee stated that the fact that it had already been decided that Amazing Fantasy would be cancelled after issue # 15 was the only reason Goodman allowed him to use Spider @-@ Man . While this was indeed the final issue , its editorial page anticipated the comic continuing and that " The Spiderman [ sic ] ... will appear every month in Amazing . " 
 Regardless , Lee received Goodman 's approval for the name Spider @-@ Man and the " ordinary teen " concept , and approached artist Jack Kirby . As comics historian Greg Theakston recounts , Kirby told Lee about an unpublished character on which he had collaborated with Joe Simon in the 1950s , in which an orphaned boy living with an old couple finds a magic ring that granted him superhuman powers . Lee and Kirby " immediately sat down for a story conference " , Theakston writes , and Lee afterward directed Kirby to flesh out the character and draw some pages . Steve Ditko would be the inker . When Kirby showed Lee the first six pages , Lee recalled , " I hated the way he was doing it ! Not that he did it badly — it just wasn 't the character I wanted ; it was too heroic " . Lee turned to Ditko , who developed a visual style Lee found satisfactory . Ditko recalled : 
 One of the first things I did was to work up a costume . A vital , visual part of the character . I had to know how he looked ... before I did any breakdowns . For example : A clinging power so he wouldn 't have hard shoes or boots , a hidden wrist @-@ shooter versus a web gun and holster , etc . ... I wasn 't sure Stan would like the idea of covering the character 's face but I did it because it hid an obviously boyish face . It would also add mystery to the character .... 
 Although the interior artwork was by Ditko alone , Lee rejected Ditko 's cover art and commissioned Kirby to pencil a cover that Ditko inked . As Lee explained in 2010 , " I think I had Jack sketch out a cover for it because I always had a lot of confidence in Jack 's covers . " 
 In an early recollection of the character 's creation , Ditko described his and Lee 's contributions in a mail interview with Gary Martin published in Comic Fan # 2 ( Summer 1965 ) : " Stan Lee thought the name up . I did costume , web gimmick on wrist & spider signal . " At the time , Ditko shared a Manhattan studio with noted fetish artist Eric Stanton , an art @-@ school classmate who , in a 1988 interview with Theakston , recalled that although his contribution to Spider @-@ Man was " almost nil " , he and Ditko had " worked on storyboards together and I added a few ideas . But the whole thing was created by Steve on his own ... I think I added the business about the webs coming out of his hands . " 
 Kirby disputed Lee 's version of the story , and claimed Lee had minimal involvement in the character 's creation . According to Kirby , the idea for Spider @-@ Man had originated with Kirby and Joe Simon , who in the 1950s had developed a character called the Silver Spider for the Crestwood Publications comic Black Magic , who was subsequently not used . Simon , in his 1990 autobiography , disputed Kirby 's account , asserting that Black Magic was not a factor , and that he ( Simon ) devised the name " Spider @-@ Man " ( later changed to " The Silver Spider " ) , while Kirby outlined the character 's story and powers . Simon later elaborated that his and Kirby 's character conception became the basis for Simon 's Archie Comics superhero the Fly . Artist Steve Ditko stated that Lee liked the name Hawkman from DC Comics , and that " Spider @-@ Man " was an outgrowth of that interest . 
 Simon concurred that Kirby had shown the original Spider @-@ Man version to Lee , who liked the idea and assigned Kirby to draw sample pages of the new character but disliked the results — in Simon 's description , " Captain America with cobwebs " . Writer Mark Evanier notes that Lee 's reasoning that Kirby 's character was too heroic seems unlikely — Kirby still drew the covers for Amazing Fantasy # 15 and the first issue of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . Evanier also disputes Kirby 's given reason that he was " too busy " to also draw Spider @-@ Man in addition to his other duties since Kirby was , said Evanier , " always busy " . Neither Lee 's nor Kirby 's explanation explains why key story elements like the magic ring were dropped ; Evanier states that the most plausible explanation for the sudden change was that Goodman , or one of his assistants , decided that Spider @-@ Man as drawn and envisioned by Kirby was too similar to the Fly . 
 Author and Ditko scholar Blake Bell writes that it was Ditko who noted the similarities to the Fly . Ditko recalled that , " Stan called Jack about the Fly " , adding that " [ d ] <unk> later , Stan told me I would be penciling the story panel breakdowns from Stan 's synopsis " . It was at this point that the nature of the strip changed . " Out went the magic ring , adult Spider @-@ Man and whatever legend ideas that Spider @-@ Man story would have contained " . Lee gave Ditko the premise of a teenager bitten by a spider and developing powers , a premise Ditko would expand upon to the point he became what Bell describes as " the first work for hire artist of his generation to create and control the narrative arc of his series " . On the issue of the initial creation , Ditko states , " I still don 't know whose idea was Spider @-@ Man " . Kirby noted in a 1971 interview that it was Ditko who " got Spider @-@ Man to roll , and the thing caught on because of what he did " . Lee , while claiming credit for the initial idea , has acknowledged Ditko 's role , stating , " If Steve wants to be called co @-@ creator , I think he deserves [ it ] " . He has further commented that Ditko 's costume design was key to the character 's success ; since the costume completely covers Spider @-@ Man 's body , people of all races could visualize themselves inside the costume and thus more easily identify with the character . Writer Al Nickerson believes " that Stan Lee and Steve Ditko created the Spider @-@ Man that we are familiar with today [ but that ] ultimately , Spider @-@ Man came into existence , and prospered , through the efforts of not just one or two , but many , comic book creators " . 
 = = = Commercial success = = = 
 A few months after Spider @-@ Man 's introduction , publisher Goodman reviewed the sales figures for that issue and was shocked to find it to have been one of the nascent Marvel 's highest @-@ selling comics . A solo ongoing series followed , beginning with The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 1 ( cover @-@ dated March 1963 ) . The title eventually became Marvel 's top @-@ selling series with the character swiftly becoming a cultural icon ; a 1965 Esquire poll of college campuses found that college students ranked Spider @-@ Man and fellow Marvel hero the Hulk alongside Bob Dylan and Che Guevara as their favorite revolutionary icons . One interviewee selected Spider @-@ Man because he was " beset by woes , money problems , and the question of existence . In short , he is one of us . " Following Ditko 's departure after issue # 38 ( July 1966 ) , John Romita , Sr. replaced him as penciler and would draw the series for the next several years . In 1968 , Romita would also draw the character 's extra @-@ length stories in the comics magazine The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man , a proto @-@ graphic novel designed to appeal to older readers . It only lasted for two issues , but it represented the first Spider @-@ Man spin @-@ off publication , aside from the original series ' summer annuals that began in 1964 . 
 An early 1970s Spider @-@ Man story led to the revision of the Comics Code . Previously , the Code forbade the depiction of the use of illegal drugs , even negatively . However , in 1970 , the Nixon administration 's Department of Health , Education , and Welfare asked Stan Lee to publish an anti @-@ drug message in one of Marvel 's top @-@ selling titles . Lee chose the top @-@ selling The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ; issues # 96 – 98 ( May – July 1971 ) feature a story arc depicting the negative effects of drug use . In the story , Peter Parker 's friend Harry Osborn becomes addicted to pills . When Spider @-@ Man fights the Green Goblin ( Norman Osborn , Harry 's father ) , Spider @-@ Man defeats the Green Goblin , by revealing Harry 's drug addiction . While the story had a clear anti @-@ drug message , the Comics Code Authority refused to issue its seal of approval . Marvel nevertheless published the three issues without the Comics Code Authority 's approval or seal . The issues sold so well that the industry 's self @-@ censorship was undercut and the Code was subsequently revised . 
 In 1972 , a second monthly ongoing series starring Spider @-@ Man began : Marvel Team @-@ Up , in which Spider @-@ Man was paired with other superheroes and villains . From that point on there have generally been at least two ongoing Spider @-@ Man series at any time . In 1976 , his second solo series , Peter Parker , the Spectacular Spider @-@ Man began running parallel to the main series . A third series featuring Spider @-@ Man , Web of Spider @-@ Man , launched in 1985 to replace Marvel Team @-@ Up . The launch of a fourth monthly title in 1990 , the " <unk> " Spider @-@ Man ( with the storyline " Torment " ) , written and drawn by popular artist Todd McFarlane , debuted with several different covers , all with the same interior content . The various versions combined sold over 3 million copies , an industry record at the time . Several limited series , one @-@ shots , and loosely related comics have also been published , and Spider @-@ Man makes frequent cameos and guest appearances in other comic series . In 1996 The Sensational Spider @-@ Man was created to replace Web of Spider @-@ Man . 
 In 1998 writer @-@ artist John Byrne revamped the origin of Spider @-@ Man in the 13 @-@ issue limited series Spider @-@ Man : Chapter One ( Dec. 1998 - Oct. 1999 ) , similar to Byrne 's adding details and some revisions to Superman 's origin in DC Comics ' The Man of Steel . At the same time the original The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was ended with issue # 441 ( Nov. 1998 ) , and The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was restarted with vol . 2 , # 1 ( Jan. 1999 ) . In 2003 Marvel reintroduced the original numbering for The Amazing Spider @-@ Man and what would have been vol . 2 , # 59 became issue # 500 ( Dec. 2003 ) . 
 When primary series The Amazing Spider @-@ Man reached issue # 545 ( Dec. 2007 ) , Marvel dropped its spin @-@ off ongoing series and instead began publishing The Amazing Spider @-@ Man three times monthly , beginning with # 546 @-@ 548 ( all Jan. 2008 ) . The three times monthly scheduling of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man lasted until November 2010 when the comic book was increased from 22 pages to 30 pages each issue and published only twice a month , beginning with # 648 @-@ 649 ( both Nov. 2010 ) . The following year , Marvel launched Avenging Spider @-@ Man as the first spinoff ongoing series in addition to the still twice monthly The Amazing Spider @-@ Man since the previous ones were cancelled at the end of 2007 . The Amazing series temporarily ended with issue # 700 in December 2012 , and was replaced by The Superior Spider @-@ Man , which had Doctor Octopus serve as the new Spider @-@ Man , having taken over Peter Parker 's body . Superior was an enormous commercial success for Marvel , and ran for 31 @-@ issue before the real Peter Parker returned in a newly relaunched The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 1 in April 2014 . 
 = = Fictional character biography = = 
 In Forest Hills , Queens , New York , high school student Peter Parker is a science @-@ whiz orphan living with his Uncle Ben and Aunt May . As depicted in Amazing Fantasy # 15 ( Aug. 1962 ) , he is bitten by a radioactive spider ( erroneously classified as an insect in the panel ) at a science exhibit and " acquires the agility and proportionate strength of an arachnid " . Along with super strength , Parker gains the ability to adhere to walls and ceilings . Through his native knack for science , he develops a gadget that lets him fire adhesive webbing of his own design through small , wrist @-@ mounted barrels . Initially seeking to capitalize on his new abilities , Parker dons a costume and , as " Spider @-@ Man " , becomes a novelty television star . However , " He blithely ignores the chance to stop a fleeing thief , [ and ] his indifference ironically catches up with him when the same criminal later robs and kills his Uncle Ben . " Spider @-@ Man tracks and subdues the killer and learns , in the story 's next @-@ to @-@ last caption , " With great power there must also come — great responsibility ! " 
 Despite his superpowers , Parker struggles to help his widowed aunt pay rent , is taunted by his peers — particularly football star Flash Thompson — and , as Spider @-@ Man , engenders the editorial wrath of newspaper publisher J. Jonah Jameson . As he battles his enemies for the first time , Parker finds juggling his personal life and costumed adventures difficult . In time , Peter graduates from high school , and enrolls at Empire State University ( a fictional institution evoking the real @-@ life Columbia University and New York University ) , where he meets roommate and best friend Harry Osborn , and girlfriend Gwen Stacy , and Aunt May introduces him to Mary Jane Watson . As Peter deals with Harry 's drug problems , and Harry 's father is revealed to be Spider @-@ Man 's nemesis the Green Goblin , Peter even attempts to give up his costumed identity for a while . Gwen Stacy 's father , New York City Police detective captain George Stacy is accidentally killed during a battle between Spider @-@ Man and Doctor Octopus ( # 90 , Nov. 1970 ) . 
 In issue # 121 ( June 1973 ) , the Green Goblin throws Gwen Stacy from a tower of either the Brooklyn Bridge ( as depicted in the art ) or the George Washington Bridge ( as given in the text ) . She dies during Spider @-@ Man 's rescue attempt ; a note on the letters page of issue # 125 states : " It saddens us to say that the whiplash effect she underwent when Spidey 's webbing stopped her so suddenly was , in fact , what killed her . " The following issue , the Goblin appears to kill himself accidentally in the ensuing battle with Spider @-@ Man . 
 Working through his grief , Parker eventually develops tentative feelings toward Watson , and the two " become confidants rather than lovers " . A romantic relationship eventually develops , with Parker proposing to her in issue # 182 ( July 1978 ) , and being turned down an issue later . Parker went on to graduate from college in issue # 185 , and becomes involved with the shy Debra Whitman and the extroverted , flirtatious costumed thief Felicia Hardy , the Black Cat , whom he meets in issue # 194 ( July 1979 ) . 
 From 1984 to 1988 , Spider @-@ Man wore a black costume with a white spider design on his chest . The new costume originated in the Secret Wars limited series , on an alien planet where Spider @-@ Man participates in a battle between Earth 's major superheroes and villains . He continues wearing the costume when he returns , starting in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 252 . The change to a longstanding character 's design met with controversy , " with many hardcore comics fans decrying it as tantamount to sacrilege . Spider @-@ Man 's traditional red and blue costume was iconic , they argued , on par with those of his D.C. rivals Superman and Batman . " The creators then revealed the costume was an alien symbiote which Spider @-@ Man is able to reject after a difficult struggle , though the symbiote returns several times as Venom for revenge . 
 Parker proposes to Watson a second time in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 290 ( July 1987 ) , and she accepts two issues later , with the wedding taking place in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man Annual # 21 ( 1987 ) . It was promoted with a real @-@ life mock wedding using models , including Tara Shannon as Watson , with Stan Lee officiating at the June 5 , 1987 , event at Shea Stadium . However , David Michelinie , who scripted based on a plot by editor @-@ in @-@ chief Jim Shooter , said in 2007 , " I didn 't think they actually should [ have gotten ] married . ... I had actually planned another version , one that wasn 't used . " 
 In a controversial storyline , Peter becomes convinced that Ben Reilly , the Scarlet Spider ( a clone of Peter created by his college professor Miles Warren ) is the real Peter Parker , and that he , Peter , is the clone . Peter gives up the Spider @-@ Man identity to Reilly for a time , until Reilly is killed by the returning Green Goblin and revealed to be the clone after all . In stories published in 2005 and 2006 ( such as " The Other " ) , he develops additional spider @-@ like abilities including biological web @-@ shooters , toxic stingers that extend from his forearms , the ability to stick individuals to his back , enhanced Spider @-@ sense and night vision , and increased strength and speed . Peter later becomes a member of the New Avengers , and reveals his civilian identity to the world , furthering his already numerous problems . His marriage to Mary Jane and public unmasking are later erased in another controversial storyline " One More Day " , in a Faustian bargain with the demon Mephisto , resulting in several adjustments to the timeline , such as the resurrection of Harry Osborn , the erasure of Parker 's marriage , and the return of his traditional tools and powers . 
 That storyline came at the behest of editor @-@ in @-@ chief Joe Quesada , who said , " Peter being single is an intrinsic part of the very foundation of the world of Spider @-@ Man " . It caused unusual public friction between Quesada and writer J. Michael Straczynski , who " told Joe that I was going to take my name off the last two issues of the [ story ] arc " but was talked out of doing so . At issue with Straczynski 's climax to the arc , Quesada said , was 
 ... that we didn 't receive the story and methodology to the resolution that we were all expecting . What made that very problematic is that we had four writers and artists well underway on [ the sequel arc ] " Brand New Day " that were expecting and needed " One More Day " to end in the way that we had all agreed it would . ... The fact that we had to ask for the story to move back to its original intent understandably made Joe upset and caused some major delays and page increases in the series . Also , the science that Joe was going to apply to the retcon of the marriage would have made over 30 years of Spider @-@ Man books worthless , because they never would have had happened . ... [ I ] t would have reset way too many things outside of the Spider @-@ Man titles . We just couldn 't go there .... 
 Following the " reboot " , Parker 's identity was no longer known to the general public ; however , he revealed it to other <unk> and others have deduced it . Parker 's Aunt May marries J. Jonah Jameson 's father , Jay Jameson . Parker became an employee of the think @-@ tank Horizon Labs . In issue # 700 , the dying supervillain Doctor Octopus swaps bodies with Parker , who remains as a presence in Doctor Octopus 's mind , prompting a two @-@ year storyline in the series The Superior Spider @-@ Man in which Peter Parker is absent and Doctor Octopus is Spider @-@ Man . Peter eventually regains control of his body . Following Peter Parker 's return , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man was relaunched in April 2014 . In December 2014 , following the Death of Wolverine comic book , Spider @-@ Man became the new headmaster of the Jean Grey School and began appearing more prominently in X @-@ Men stories , taking Wolverine 's role in the comic Wolverine and the X @-@ Men . 
 = = Personality = = 
 As one contemporaneous journalist observed , " Spider @-@ Man has a terrible identity problem , a marked inferiority complex , and a fear of women . He is anti @-@ social , [ sic ] castration @-@ ridden , racked with Oedipal guilt , and accident @-@ prone ... [ a ] functioning neurotic " . <unk> over his choices , always attempting to do right , he is nonetheless viewed with suspicion by the authorities , who seem unsure as to whether he is a helpful vigilante or a clever criminal . 
 Notes cultural historian Bradford W. Wright , 
 Spider @-@ Man 's plight was to be misunderstood and persecuted by the very public that he swore to protect . In the first issue of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , J. Jonah Jameson , publisher of the Daily Bugle , launches an editorial campaign against the " Spider @-@ Man menace . " The resulting negative publicity exacerbates popular suspicions about the mysterious Spider @-@ Man and makes it impossible for him to earn any more money by performing . Eventually , the bad press leads the authorities to brand him an outlaw . Ironically , Peter finally lands a job as a photographer for Jameson 's Daily Bugle . 
 The mid @-@ 1960s stories reflected the political tensions of the time , as early 1960s Marvel stories had often dealt with the Cold War and Communism . As Wright observes , 
 From his high @-@ school beginnings to his entry into college life , Spider @-@ Man remained the superhero most relevant to the world of young people . Fittingly , then , his comic book also contained some of the earliest references to the politics of young people . In 1968 , in the wake of actual militant student demonstrations at Columbia University , Peter Parker finds himself in the midst of similar unrest at his Empire State University .... Peter has to reconcile his natural sympathy for the students with his assumed obligation to combat lawlessness as Spider @-@ Man . As a law @-@ upholding liberal , he finds himself caught between militant leftism and angry conservatives . 
 = = Powers , skills , and equipment = = 
 A bite from a radioactive spider triggers mutations in Peter Parker 's body , granting him superpowers . In the original Lee @-@ Ditko stories , Spider @-@ Man has the ability to cling to walls , superhuman strength , a sixth sense ( " spider @-@ sense " ) that alerts him to danger , perfect balance and equilibrium , as well as superhuman speed and agility . The character was originally conceived by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko as intellectually gifted , but later writers have depicted his intellect at genius level . Academically brilliant , Parker has expertise in the fields of applied science , chemistry , physics , biology , engineering , mathematics , and mechanics . With his talents , he sews his own costume to conceal his identity , and he constructs many devices that complement his powers , most notably mechanical web @-@ shooters . This mechanism ejects an advanced adhesive , releasing web @-@ fluid in a variety of configurations , including a single rope @-@ like strand to swing from , a net to snare or bind enemies , and a simple glob to foul machinery or blind an opponent . He can also weave the web material into simple forms like a shield , a spherical protection or hemispherical barrier , a club , or a hang @-@ glider wing . Other equipment include spider @-@ tracers ( spider @-@ shaped adhesive homing beacons keyed to his own spider @-@ sense ) , a light beacon which can either be used as a flashlight or project a " Spider @-@ Signal " design , and a specially modified camera that can take pictures automatically . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Due to Spider @-@ Man 's popularity in the mainstream Marvel Universe , publishers have been able to introduce different variations of Spider @-@ Man outside of mainstream comics as well as reimagined stories in many other <unk> spinoffs such as Ultimate Spider @-@ Man , Spider @-@ Man 2099 , and Spider @-@ Man : India . Marvel has also made its own parodies of Spider @-@ Man in comics such as Not Brand <unk> , which was published in the late 1960s and featured such characters as Peter <unk> alias Spidey @-@ Man , and Peter <unk> , the Spectacular Spider @-@ Ham , who appeared in the 1980s . The fictional character has also inspired a number of <unk> such as a manga version of Spider @-@ Man drawn by Japanese artist Ryoichi Ikegami as well as <unk> Hino 's The Bug Boy , which has been cited as inspired by Spider @-@ Man . Also the French comic Télé @-@ Junior , which published strips based on popular TV series , produced original Spider @-@ Man adventures in the late 1970s ; artists included Gérald <unk> , who later moved to America and worked for Marvel . 
 = = Supporting characters = = 
 Spider @-@ Man has had a large range of supporting characters introduced in the comics that are essential in the issues and storylines that star him . After his parents died , Peter Parker was raised by his loving aunt , May Parker , and his uncle and father figure , Ben Parker . After Uncle Ben is murdered by a burglar , Aunt May is virtually Peter 's only family , and she and Peter are very close . 
 J. Jonah Jameson is depicted as the publisher of the Daily Bugle and is Peter Parker 's boss and as a harsh critic of Spider @-@ Man , always saying negative things about the superhero in the newspaper . Despite his role as Jameson 's publishing editor and confidant Robbie Robertson is always depicted as a supporter of both Peter Parker and Spider @-@ Man . 
 Eugene " Flash " Thompson is commonly depicted as Parker 's high school tormentor and bully , but in later comic issues he becomes a friend to Peter . Meanwhile , Harry Osborn , son of Norman Osborn , is most commonly recognized as Peter 's best friend but has also been depicted sometimes as his rival in the comics . 
 Peter Parker 's romantic interests range between his first crush , the fellow high @-@ school student Liz Allan , to having his first date with Betty Brant , the secretary to the Daily Bugle newspaper publisher J. Jonah Jameson . After his breakup with Betty Brant , Parker eventually falls in love with his college girlfriend Gwen Stacy , daughter of New York City Police Department detective captain George Stacy , both of whom are later killed by supervillain enemies of Spider @-@ Man . Mary Jane Watson eventually became Peter 's best friend and then his wife . Felicia Hardy , the Black Cat , is a reformed cat burglar who had been Spider @-@ Man 's girlfriend and partner at one point . 
 = = = Enemies = = = 
 Writers and artists over the years have established a rogues gallery of supervillains to face Spider @-@ Man . In comics and in other media . As with the hero , the majority of the villains ' powers originate with scientific accidents or the misuse of scientific technology , and many have animal @-@ themed costumes or powers . Examples are listed down below in the ordering of their original chronological appearance : Note : Alter ego characters who are the most high profile in the supervillain alias but others have shared that supervillain name are in bold . Indicates a group team . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Unlike a lot of well known rivalries in comics book depictions . Spider @-@ Man is cited to have more than one archenemy and it can be debated or disputed as to which one is worse : 
 ^ Doctor Octopus is regarded as one of Spider @-@ Man 's worst enemies and archenemy . He has been cited as the man Peter might have become if he had not been raised with a sense of responsibility . He is infamous for defeating him the first time in battle and for almost marrying Peter 's Aunt May . He is the core leader of the Sinister Six and has also referred himself as the " Master Planner " . ( " If This Be My Destiny ... ! " ) Later depictions revealed him in Peter Parker 's body where he was the titular character for a while . 
 ^ Norman Osborn using the Green Goblin alias is also commonly described as Spider @-@ Man 's archenemy . Mostly after he is responsible for setting up the death of Spider @-@ Man 's girlfriend in one of the most famous Spider @-@ Man stories of all time which helped end the Silver Age of Comic Books and begin the Bronze Age of Comic Books . He was thought to be dead after that but writers help bring him back from the 1990s and he returned to plague Spider @-@ Man once more in the comic books ( such as being involved of the killing of Aunt May ) and other heroes ( such as the Avengers ) . He is also a enemy of Spider @-@ Man sometimes just as Norman and not just only as the Green Goblin . 
 ^ Another character commonly described as archenemy is Venom . Eddie Brock as Venom is commonly described as the mirror version or the evil version of Spider @-@ Man in many ways . Venom 's goals is usually depicted as trying to ruin Spider @-@ Man 's life and mess with Spider @-@ Man 's head when it comes to targeting enemies . He is one of the few villains depicted as unbeatable to Spider @-@ Man without a few weaknesses . Venom is also one of the most popular Spider @-@ Man villains . This popularity has led him to be an established iconic character of his own with own comic book stories . 
 = = Cultural influence = = 
 In The Creation of Spider @-@ Man , comic book writer @-@ editor and historian Paul <unk> calls the character 's superpowers " nothing too original " ; what was original was that outside his secret identity , he was a " nerdy high school student " . Going against typical superhero fare , Spider @-@ Man included " heavy doses of soap @-@ opera and elements of melodrama " . <unk> feels that Lee and Ditko had created something new in the world of comics : " the flawed superhero with everyday problems " . This idea spawned a " comics revolution " . The insecurity and anxieties in Marvel 's early 1960s comic books such as The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , The Incredible Hulk , and X @-@ Men ushered in a new type of superhero , very different from the certain and all @-@ powerful superheroes before them , and changed the public 's perception of them . Spider @-@ Man has become one of the most recognizable fictional characters in the world , and has been used to sell toys , games , cereal , candy , soap , and many other products . 
 Spider @-@ Man has become Marvel 's flagship character , and has often been used as the company mascot . When Marvel became the first comic book company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1991 , the Wall Street Journal announced " Spider @-@ Man is coming to Wall Street " ; the event was in turn promoted with an actor in a Spider @-@ Man costume accompanying Stan Lee to the Stock Exchange . Since 1962 , hundreds of millions of comics featuring the character have been sold around the world . 
 Spider @-@ Man joined the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade from 1987 to 1998 as one of the balloon floats , designed by John Romita Sr. , one of the character 's signature artists . A new , different Spider @-@ Man balloon float is scheduled to appear from at least 2009 to 2011 . 
 When Marvel wanted to issue a story dealing with the immediate aftermath of the September 11 attacks , the company chose the December 2001 issue of The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . In 2006 , Spider @-@ Man garnered major media coverage with the revelation of the character 's secret identity , an event detailed in a full page story in the New York Post before the issue containing the story was even released . 
 In 2008 , Marvel announced plans to release a series of educational comics the following year in partnership with the United Nations , depicting Spider @-@ Man alongside UN Peacekeeping Forces to highlight UN peacekeeping missions . A BusinessWeek article listed Spider @-@ Man as one of the top ten most intelligent fictional characters in American comics . 
 Rapper Eminem has cited Spider @-@ Man as one of his favorite comic book superheroes . 
 In 2015 , the Supreme Court of the United States decided Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment , LLC , a case concerning royalties on a patent for an imitation web @-@ shooter . The opinion for the Court , by Justice Elena Kagan , included several Spider @-@ Man references , concluding with the statement that " with great power there must also come — great responsibility " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Spider @-@ Man is well received as a comic book character , always appearing as one of the greatest comic book characters or superheroes of all time and almost always being the top Marvel Comics character . Spider @-@ Man was declared the number one superhero on Bravo 's Ultimate Super Heroes , Vixens , and Villains TV series in 2005 . Empire magazine placed him as the fifth @-@ greatest comic book character of all time . Wizard magazine placed Spider @-@ Man as the third greatest comic book character on their website . In 2011 , Spider @-@ Man placed third on IGN 's Top 100 Comic Book Heroes of All Time , behind DC Comics characters Superman and <unk> and sixth in their 2012 list of " The Top 50 Avengers " . In 2014 , IGN identified Spider @-@ Man the greatest Marvel Comics character of all time . A 2015 poll at Comic Book Resources named Spider @-@ Man the greatest Marvel character of all time . IGN described him as the common everyman that represents many normal people but also noting his uniqueness compared to many top @-@ tiered superheroes with his many depicted flaws as a superhero . IGN also noted that despite being one of the most tragic superheroes of all time that he is " one of the most fun and snarky superheroes in existence . " Empire noted and praised that despite the many tragedies that Spider @-@ Man faces that he retains his sense of humour at all times with his witty wisecracks . The magazine website also praised the depiction of his " iconic " superhero poses describing it as " a top artist 's dream " . 
 George Marston of Newsarama placed Spider @-@ Man 's origin story as the greatest origin story of all time opining that " Spider @-@ Man 's origin combines all of the most classic aspects of pathos , tragedy and scientific wonder into the perfect blend for a superhero origin . " 
 = = = Real @-@ life Spider @-@ Men = = = 
 Real @-@ life " Spider @-@ Men " include : 
 In 1981 , skyscraper @-@ safety activist Dan Goodwin , wearing a Spider @-@ Man suit , scaled the Sears Tower in Chicago , Illinois , the Renaissance Tower in Dallas , Texas , and the John Hancock Center in Chicago , Illinois . 
 Alain Robert , nicknamed " Spider @-@ Man " , is a rock and urban climber who has scaled more than 70 tall buildings using his hands and feet , without using additional devices . He sometimes wears a Spider @-@ Man suit during his climbs . In May 2003 , he was paid approximately $ 18 @,@ 000 to climb the 312 @-@ foot ( 95 m ) Lloyd 's building to promote the premiere of the movie Spider @-@ Man on the British television channel Sky Movies . 
 'The Human Spider ' , alias Bill Strother , scaled the Lamar Building in Augusta , Georgia in 1921 . 
 Fathers 4 Justice member David Chick used a Spider @-@ Man outfit to obtain publicity for fathers ' rights in London . 
 <unk> <unk> , a firefighter in Thailand , is considered a real @-@ life Spider @-@ Man . He rescued an 8 @-@ year @-@ old boy with autism from falling off the ledge of a building by scaling it with no ropes and then rescuing the boy . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 From the character 's inception , Spider @-@ Man stories have won numerous awards , including : 
 1962 Alley Award : Best Short Story — " Origin of Spider @-@ Man " by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko , Amazing Fantasy # 15 
 1963 Alley Award : Best Comic : Adventure Hero title — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1963 Alley Award : Top Hero — Spider @-@ Man 
 1964 Alley Award : Best Adventure Hero Comic Book — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1964 Alley Award : Best Giant Comic — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man Annual # 1 
 1964 Alley Award : Best Hero — Spider @-@ Man 
 1965 Alley Award : Best Adventure Hero Comic Book — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1965 Alley Award : Best Hero — Spider @-@ Man 
 1966 Alley Award : Best Comic Magazine : Adventure Book with the Main Character in the Title — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1966 Alley Award : Best Full @-@ Length Story — " How Green was My Goblin " , by Stan Lee & John Romita , Sr. , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 39 
 1967 Alley Award : Best Comic Magazine : Adventure Book with the Main Character in the Title — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1967 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Costumed or Powered Hero — Spider @-@ Man 
 1967 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Male Normal Supporting Character — J. Jonah Jameson , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1967 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Female Normal Supporting Character — Mary Jane Watson , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1968 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Adventure Hero Strip — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1968 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Supporting Character — J. Jonah Jameson , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1969 Alley Award Popularity Poll : Best Adventure Hero Strip — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 
 1997 Eisner Award : Best Artist / Penciller / Inker or Penciller / Inker Team — 1997 Al Williamson , Best Inker : Untold Tales of Spider @-@ Man # 17 @-@ 18 
 2002 Eisner Award : Best <unk> Story — The Amazing Spider @-@ Man vol . 2 , # 30 – 35 : " Coming Home " , by J. Michael Straczynski , John Romita , Jr . , and Scott Hanna 
 = = In other media = = 
 Spider @-@ Man has appeared in comics , cartoons , films , video games , coloring books , novels , records , and children 's books . On television , he first starred in the ABC animated series Spider @-@ Man ( 1967 – 1970 ) and the CBS live @-@ action series The Amazing Spider @-@ Man ( 1978 – 1979 ) , starring Nicholas Hammond . Other animated series featuring the superhero include the syndicated Spider @-@ Man ( 1981 – 1982 ) , Spider @-@ Man and His Amazing Friends ( 1981 – 1983 ) , Fox Kids ' Spider @-@ Man ( 1994 – 1998 ) , Spider @-@ Man Unlimited ( 1999 – 2000 ) , Spider @-@ Man : The New Animated Series ( 2003 ) , and The Spectacular Spider @-@ Man ( 2008 – 2009 ) . A new animated series titled Ultimate Spider @-@ Man , starring Drake Bell , premiered on Disney XD on April 1 , 2012 . 
 A tokusatsu series featuring Spider @-@ Man was produced by Toei and aired in Japan . It is commonly referred to by its Japanese pronunciation " <unk> @-@ Man " . Spider @-@ Man also appeared in other print forms besides the comics , including novels , children 's books , and the daily newspaper comic strip The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , which debuted in January 1977 , with the earliest installments written by Stan Lee and drawn by John Romita , Sr. Spider @-@ Man has been adapted to other media including games , toys , collectibles , and miscellaneous memorabilia , and has appeared as the main character in numerous computer and video games on over 15 gaming platforms . 
 Spider @-@ Man was also featured in a trilogy of live @-@ action films directed by Sam Raimi and starring Tobey Maguire as the titular superhero . The first Spider @-@ Man film of the trilogy was released on May 3 , 2002 ; its sequel , Spider @-@ Man 2 , was released on June 30 , 2004 and the next sequel , Spider @-@ Man 3 , was released on May 4 , 2007 . A third sequel was originally scheduled to be released in 2011 , however Sony later decided to reboot the franchise with a new director and cast . The reboot , titled The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , was released on July 3 , 2012 ; directed by Marc Webb and starring Andrew Garfield as the new Spider @-@ Man . A sequel titled The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 was released on May 2 , 2014 . Most recently , Sony and Disney have made a deal for Spider @-@ Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . Tom Holland made his debut as Spider @-@ Man in the 2016 MCU film Captain America : Civil War , before he is scheduled to star in Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming in 2017 , directed by Jon Watts . 
 A Broadway musical , Spider @-@ Man : Turn Off the Dark , began previews on November 14 , 2010 at the Foxwoods Theatre on Broadway , with the official opening night on June 14 , 2011 . The music and lyrics were written by Bono and The Edge of the rock group U2 , with a book by Julie Taymor , Glen Berger , Roberto Aguirre @-@ Sacasa . Turn Off the Dark is currently the most expensive musical in Broadway history , costing an estimated $ 70 million . In addition , the show 's unusually high running costs are reported to be about $ 1 @.@ 2 million per week . 
 = Bill Cunningham ( rugby union ) = 
 William " Bill " Cunningham ( 8 July 1874 – 3 September 1927 ) was a New Zealand rugby union player who represented New Zealand — known as the All Blacks — between 1901 and 1908 . Most notably he toured with the Original All Blacks on their 1905 – 06 tour of the British Isles , France and North America . They were the first New Zealand representative team to visit the British Isles , and of their 32 matches there Cunningham played in 23 . He played mainly at lock , and was added to the touring party due to his strong scrummaging ability . He played in three Test matches during the trip : against Scotland , Ireland and France , but did not play in the loss to Wales due to injury , the All Blacks ' only defeat on tour . 
 Born near Te <unk> , Cunningham originally played club rugby in Waihi , in the Coromandel region . Lying within the Auckland Rugby Football Union 's boundaries , he was selected to play for Auckland province in 1899 and continued to represent the side until his retirement in 1913 . He was first picked for New Zealand in 1901 , and played against New South Wales that year , but was not selected again until the 1905 Originals ' tour . After the tour he continued to represent New Zealand in both 1907 and 1908 . <unk> to <unk> , he was a member of the first ever New Zealand Māori team in 1910 , and played for them again in 1912 . On retirement in 1913 he had appeared for Auckland 45 times , and for New Zealand 39 — both large numbers for the time . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Born at <unk> , near Te <unk> , on 8 July 1874 , Cunningham was the son of Hera ( Sarah ) <unk> Halbert and her second husband , James Cunningham . Hera was the daughter of Thomas Halbert , a whaler and trader who landed in Poverty Bay in about 1832 , and his fifth wife , Keita <unk> , who belonged to the <unk> iwi . Hera later remarried <unk> <unk> , a cousin of Te <unk> : their daughters included <unk> <unk> , and Keita <unk> <unk> , who married <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 Cunningham married Ethel Minnie Dance of Waihi on 23 September 1907 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Cunningham first played representative rugby union for Auckland province in 1899 . He was selected from his club Waihi West ( a club in Waihi on the Coromandel Peninsula ) , which was affiliated to the Goldfield <unk> . At the time the Goldfields Rugby Union was a <unk> of the Auckland Rugby Football Union , but its constituent clubs are now affiliated to the Thames Valley Rugby Football Union . 
 He was first selected to play for New Zealand in 1901 , and played against Wellington and the New South Wales team that was touring New Zealand at the time . Both matches were comfortably won , with the tourists defeated 20 – 3 . Cunningham played his first of four matches for Auckland against international opposition , against the same New South Wales side a week later , with his Auckland team winning 24 – 3 . 
 Cunningham moved to Auckland in 1902 , and played his club rugby for City , before joining Ponsonby the following season . He had been displaced from the national team by this time , with Cantabrian Bernard Fanning preferred at lock . The New Zealanders used a different scrum formation than seen today , and only one lock was ever required . 
 Despite not being selected for New Zealand in 1904 , Cunningham continued to appear for Auckland , and played in two particularly notable matches that season . In 1904 the first Ranfurly Shield match was played . The shield , a provincial challenge trophy won by defeating the holder , was to become the most prestigious trophy in domestic New Zealand rugby . Due to their unmatched provincial record at the time Auckland were awarded the shield . The first shield challenge was played against Wellington , who were not expected to pose much of a threat . Auckland had not lost at home in six years , but , with Cunningham in the side , Auckland lost 6 – 3 . The second notable match that season was against the touring British Isles who were conducting a tour of Australia and New Zealand . The Aucklanders defeated the British Isles side 13 – 0 , with Cunningham scoring a try and contributing significantly to the dominance of his team 's forwards . 
 = = Original All Blacks = = 
 The first ever tour of a New Zealand representative team to the British Isles was planned for 1905 , and a preliminary tour of Australia and New Zealand was undertaken to help fund the tour . Cunningham was not in the original touring squad , and so played for Auckland against New Zealand . According to Winston McCarthy , New Zealand 's forwards were at " sixes and sevens mainly through want of a good lock . " Following the conclusion of the preliminary tour of Australia and New Zealand it was clear that a specialist lock forward needed to be added to the side . Fanning , who had kept Cunningham out of the New Zealand side in 1903 and 1904 , had retired following the 1904 season and consequently Cunningham did enough to earn selection as the team 's only specialist lock . 
 The team departed aboard the Rimutaka and during the voyage conducted training drills on the ship 's deck ; for this the forwards were coached by the team 's captain , Dave Gallaher , with help from Cunningham . Vice @-@ captain and first five @-@ eighth Billy Stead was in charge of the backs , and consequently the services of the New Zealand Rugby Union @-@ appointed coach Jimmy Duncan were not used . 
 After a six @-@ week voyage , the team arrived in Plymouth , England on 8 September 1905 . After finally arriving in England , the side opened their tour against Devon . Cunningham played in the match which was won easily by the New Zealanders 55 – 4 . Devon were expected to pose a serious challenge , but were overwhelmed and only managed to score a drop @-@ kick . A series of large victories followed against domestic opposition throughout England , and by the time the All Blacks played their first Test match against Scotland , the team had played and won nineteen matches , and scored 612 points while conceding only 15 . 
 When time for the Scotland Test did arrive , it was discovered that as the ground had not been covered for protection from the elements , and had frozen over . The Scotland Football Union wanted to abandon the match , but Gallaher and the tour manager George Dixon contended that the weather would improve enough for the pitch to thaw , and the match was eventually allowed to proceed . The Test was closely contested , with Scotland leading 7 – 6 at half @-@ time , but the All Blacks scored two late tries , including one to Cunningham , to win 12 – 7 ; despite the close score @-@ line , the New Zealanders were clearly the better of the two sides . 
 Cunningham was selected for the Ireland match a week later . The fixture was won 15 – 0 by New Zealand in front of 12 @,@ 000 people at Landsdowne Road . The tourists then returned to England where they defeated England 15 – 0 at Crystal Palace , but Cunningham was not selected due to injury . He was still injured for the Wales Test , and this may have contributed to New Zealand 's defeat . The 3 – 0 loss , the New Zealander 's first of the tour , was narrow and controversial , and according to team manager Dixon , " New Zealand suffered by the absence from the team of G. W. [ George ] Smith , W. Cunningham , and J. W. [ Billy ] Stead . " 
 Cunningham recovered to play the team 's final Test , against France in Paris , where he played as " breakaway " ( flanker ) rather than his usual position of lock . His last two tour matches were against British Columbia during the American leg of the tour , after which the side returned to New Zealand . The " Original All Blacks " — as the team is now known — had played 35 games and lost only once . Over their 32 matches in the British Isles , of which <unk> had played 23 , New Zealand scored 830 points and conceded 39 ; overall they scored 976 points and conceded only 59 . On their arrival back in New Zealand on 6 March 1906 , the All Blacks were welcomed by a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 before being hosted at a civic reception in Auckland . The 1905 – 06 Originals are remembered as perhaps the greatest of All Black sides , and set the standard for all their successors . They introduced a number of innovations to Britain and Ireland , including specialised forward positions and unfamiliar variations in attacking plays . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Cunningham continued to play for Auckland on his return from the Originals ' tour . They had regained the Ranfurly Shield in 1905 , and he played in a number of shield defences over the subsequent seasons . He was selected for the New Zealand team that toured Australia in 1907 where he played seven matches , including all three Tests against Australia . He was again selected for the All Blacks in 1908 , this time to play the touring Anglo @-@ Welsh team , and played in all three Tests . This was his last appearance for New Zealand , which gave him 39 appearances for his national team , including 9 Test matches . He was later selected for the inaugural New Zealand Māori team ( now called the Māori All Blacks ) on their 1910 tour of Australia , and again for another tour in 1912 . 
 He continued to play for Auckland until 1913 . This period included two more matches against international opposition : a victory over the 1908 Anglo @-@ Welsh side 11 – 0 , and a defeat of Australia in 1913 . Auckland had held the Ranfurly Shield throughout this time , and had endured a number of close shield challenges during their reign . They had 23 successful shield defenses before they faced Taranaki on 16 August 1913 . In the match Taranaki scored a converted try ( worth five points at the time ) four minutes from full @-@ time to end Auckland 's shield reign . Cunningham had played in 16 of Auckland 's 24 shield matches during their tenure . He retired from provincial rugby at the end of that season . 
 = = Personal life and playing style = = 
 Cunningham was very physically fit and strong , and was " remarkably agile " according to writer Matt Elliott . He was very popular with his teammates and possessed a good sense of humour . Like the other Māori in the 1905 – 06 All Blacks Billy Stead he was able to speak the language . Outside of rugby he spent his early working @-@ life as an axeman . He also spent some time as a miner , and later worked for the Auckland Harbour Board . At the time of his death he was working at an Auckland freezing works . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Cunningham died suddenly from acute meningitis at Auckland in September 1927 , and his funeral was attended by a number of dignitaries , including representatives of the New Zealand , Auckland , New South Wales and Thames Rugby Unions . His pallbearers were all former All Blacks , and included fellow Original All Blacks George Tyler , George Nicholson and George Gillett . After his casket had been lowered into its grave at Hillsborough Cemetery , an Auckland representative jersey was thrown on top . 
 Under the average height on a line @-@ out , yet no man ever beat him , a genius in scrum , no need to tell him when to keep the ball or let it out . Am I wrong in saying that his death removes the greatest lock the Dominion [ of New Zealand ] ever possessed ? He had three intuitions as far back as November 1904 [ sic ] , that Wales would beat us , that war would occur between England and Germany within ten years , and that he would not live to get the old age pension . How lamentably true . How hard to write the innate qualities of this Nature 's gentleman , a hard but clean player , respected and appreciated by opponents , and adored by his intimates . He goes West leaving us the poorer by his departure . 
 = Only Girl ( In the World ) = 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth album , Loud ( 2010 ) . The album 's lead single , it was released on September 10 . Crystal Johnson wrote the song in collaboration with producers Stargate and Sandy Vee . Rihanna contacted Stargate before Loud 's production and asked them to create lively , uptempo music . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was the first song composed for the album , and the singer decided to include it on the track list before she recorded her vocals . Backed by strong bass and synthesizer , it is a Europop song that incorporates elements of Hi @-@ NRG and rave in its composition . In its lyrics , Rihanna demands physical attention from her lover . 
 Critical response to " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was positive ; a number of critics praised its composition and Rihanna 's decision to move away from the dark themes of her previous album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . The song reached number one on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 chart two weeks after Loud 's second single , " What 's My Name ? " , peaked at number one . It was the first time in the chart 's history that an album 's lead single reached number one after its second single . In the United Kingdom the song spent two weeks at number one and is the nineteenth @-@ bestselling single of all time by a female artist , with over a million copies sold . The song peaked at number one in Australia , New Zealand , Canada and Ireland , and reached the top five in France , Germany and Switzerland . 
 Rihanna performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " on Saturday Night Live in the United States , The X Factor in the United Kingdom and a shortened version at the 31st Brit Awards . Anthony Mandler directed the song 's music video , in which Rihanna is alone in an open natural landscape . The video suggests that she is the only female in the world , echoing the song 's title and lyrics , and critics praised its bright , colorful theme . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 . 
 = = Concept and development = = 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was written by Crystal Johnson with the song 's producers , Stargate and Sandy Vee . Rihanna had previously worked with Stargate on the singles " Hate That I Love You " , " Don 't Stop the Music " and " Rude Boy " . In February 2011 Stargate said that Rihanna approached the Norwegian production duo before she began recording the then @-@ untitled project , saying that she wanted to have fun and produce happy , uptempo songs . According to Tor Erik Hermansen of Stargate , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was the first song created for Loud and Rihanna decided to include it on the album before recording her vocals . In a webchat with fans , Rihanna said that she wanted to take the next step as an artist : " I didn ’ t want to go backward and remake Good Girl Gone Bad . I wanted the next step in the evolution of Rihanna , and it ’ s perfect for us . You guys are always defending me , so now you ’ ve got some great songs to justify it . " The singer described " Only Girl ( In the World ) " as having a " bigger sound " than " Rude Boy " . 
 The song was recorded during Rihanna 's Last Girl on Earth tour . Its instrumental was recorded by Mikkel Storleer Eriksen of Stargate and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , and by Vee at the Bunker in Paris . Kuk Harrell produced Rihanna 's vocals , recording them with Josh Gudwin and Marcos Tovar . Inaam Haq , Dane Liska and Brad Shea recorded additional vocals . The song was mixed by Phil Tan at the Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta and by Vee at The Bunker , with engineering by Damien Lewis . Eriksen , Vee and Hermansen provided the instrumentation , and Johnson sang background vocals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " is a Europop song with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ five seconds . It also incorporates elements of Hi @-@ NRG , rave and R & B styles . It is in the key of F @-@ sharp minor , and written in common time with a moderate tempo of 126 beats per minute . Its instrumentation includes synthesizers , a " heavy whipping bass " and a " strobing " electro beat . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly described the song as a " stronger , sexier " version of her 2007 single , " Don 't Stop the Music " . 
 Rihanna 's voice spans one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half octaves in " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , from F ♯ 3 to C ♯ 5 , and her vocal has a " silky " , " seductive " tone . In the song 's lyrics Rihanna yearns for her lover 's attention , which makes her feel like the only girl in the world . The singer " pours her heart out " in the chorus : " Want you to make me feel like I 'm the only girl in the world / Like I 'm the only one that you 'll ever love / Like I 'm the only one who knows your heart / Only girl in the world . " According to Digital Spy writer Nick Levine , the chorus " thumps like a rabbit having an epileptic fit . " Rihanna sings suggestively , " Baby , I 'll tell you all my secrets that I 'm <unk> ' / You can come inside / And when you enter , you ain 't leavin ' / Be my prisoner for the night . " Fraser McAlpine of the BBC compared the song 's message to that of the German fairy tale " Rapunzel " ; Rihanna is not willing to throw her hair out of the castle for just any man to come and satisfy her , " particularly not someone who isn 't prepared to make the climb up to her scarily high window . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The song received a generally @-@ positive response from music critics . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times called the track a " surefire hit " and something of a " comeback " . MTV News writer James Dinh praised the uptempo song , comparing it to the " stark " lead single " Russian Roulette " from Rihanna 's previous Rated R. Monica Herrera wrote for Billboard that " Only Girl ( In the World ) " " aims squarely for dance @-@ floor domination . " Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song four stars out of five , calling it a " crowd @-@ pleaser " but not overly original . 
 According to Levine and Jim Farber of the New York Daily News , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was Rihanna 's most pop @-@ sounding song since " Don 't Stop the Music " . Analyzing the song , the BBC 's Fraser McAlpine questioned why " Only Girl ( In the World ) " leaves a " positive impression " on the listener despite its arrogant , domineering tone . Critical at first ( " Listen to the pneumatic hiss at the heart of this song . Try and endure the pumping thrust without getting winded . There is simply too much pressure being stuffed into our ears , with too much brutal force " ) , he concluded that Rihanna sings the song with great passion and gave it four stars out of five . James Dolan gave the song two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five in Rolling Stone , writing that " the trance beat won 't keep you in the club unless someone else is paying for the drinks . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 In the United States , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " debuted at number 75 on the Billboard Hot 100 on September 25 , 2010 , jumping to number three the following week , before peaking at number one ( Rihanna 's ninth ) on November 25 . Loud 's second single , " What 's My Name ? " ( featuring Drake ) , topped the Hot 100 two weeks before ; it was the first time in chart history that an album 's first single reached number one after its second . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was Rihanna 's fourth number @-@ one song of 2010 , and she was the first female and the first artist since Usher ( in 2004 ) with four number @-@ one singles in a calendar year . The singer also had the most number @-@ one singles ( nine ) since 2000 . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end chart in 2010 and 2011 at numbers 47 and 40 , respectively . 
 The song debuted on the Digital Songs chart at number one with sales of 249 @,@ 000 , Rihanna 's eighth number @-@ one single and her sixth to debut atop the chart ( the most in both categories by any artist since the chart 's 2005 introduction ) . The singer set a Mainstream Top 40 ( Pop Songs ) radio @-@ airplay chart record when " Only Girl ( In the World ) " rose from number two to number one on November 25 , 2010 , her seventh number @-@ one . The song was number 46 and number 33 , respectively , on the 2011 Billboard Digital Songs and Pop Songs year @-@ end charts . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was Rihanna 's twelfth number @-@ one on the Dance Club Songs songs chart and number 46 on the 2010 Billboard year @-@ end chart . The song has been certified six times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and has sold 3 @.@ 6 million copies in the US as of June 2015 . In Canada , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " debuted at number 65 on September 25 , 2010 and rose to number one for a week the following week . On November 6 the song returned to number one for three consecutive weeks , remaining on the chart for a total of 35 weeks . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 In the United Kingdom " Only Girl ( In the World ) " debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart on October 31 , 2010 , with 126 @,@ 000 copies sold . Cheryl Cole debuted at number one with " Promise This " , selling 157 @,@ 000 copies , and Cole and Rihanna had the highest and second @-@ highest debut sales figures of the year . The song , Rihanna 's sixth number @-@ two song on the UK Singles Chart , rose to number one the next week for two consecutive weeks . It was Rihanna 's fourth UK number @-@ one single , following " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) , " Take a Bow " ( 2008 ) and " Run This Town " ( 2009 ) . By December 2011 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was the 108th song to sell more than a million copies in the United Kingdom , the fifteenth by a female artist , Rihanna 's first as primary artist and second overall ; the 107th million @-@ seller was Eminem 's " Love the Way You Lie " six weeks before , on which Rihanna was featured . 
 Rihanna was the second non @-@ United Kingdom , non @-@ North American million @-@ selling artist ; the first was Danish singer Whigfield with her 1994 song , " Saturday Night " . Although at the time the only other female two @-@ song million @-@ seller was Canadian singer Celine Dion , two of Rihanna 's subsequent singles — " We Found Love " ( 2011 ) and " Diamonds " ( 2012 ) — have also sold more than a million copies each . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " is the nineteenth @-@ bestselling single by a female artist and the 99th overall of all time in the United Kingdom . The song was the fourth- and 68th @-@ bestselling single , respectively , of 2010 and 2011 . Certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments exceeding 600 @,@ 000 copies , it has sold 1 @,@ 080 @,@ 000 copies . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " peaked at number one on the UK Single Downloads Chart and the Scottish Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Director Anthony Mandler filmed the music video for " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at a location two hours from Los Angeles . Rihanna told <unk> that the video was filmed in a " big landscape " so she was the only person in the frame , echoing the song 's title . The singer is also " frolicking in a red field and lying in a bed of flowers . " The video features large balloons in different colours , a swing hanging from the sky and a tree with multi @-@ colored lights . Rihanna 's outfits include a mohair sweater , a floral miniskirt and a white @-@ bra @-@ and @-@ <unk> two @-@ piece . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky praised the video 's simplicity , noting that it seems " as if Rihanna is speaking directly to you , the viewer , and she is your one and only amid swallowing rolling , beautiful , swallowing landscapes . It 's an effect that makes you focus squarely on [ Rihanna ] , who 's <unk> in flirty outfits . " According to Joyce Lee of CBS , Rihanna appeared to have progressed from the " edgy " music videos of the Rated R singles to a more feminine , colourful tone . A Mail Online reviewer and Seth <unk> of Spin echoed Lee 's comments , with the former calling it " beautifully shot " and the latter " whimsical [ and ] beautiful " . The Mail Online reviewer called the video a departure from the " hard @-@ edged , heavier image " music videos of Rated R. Billboard reviewer Jason Lipshutz described the tree with flashing lights as " surreal imagery . " 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Rihanna performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and a solo version of " What 's My Name ? " on Saturday Night Live in New York City on October 30 , 2010 . The next day , she flew to London to perform the song on The X Factor . Rihanna 's dancers had a food fight with cakes and cream while she sang , and the show 's producers had only one minute to clear the stage before the weekly elimination results were announced . On November 7 she performed the song at the MTV Europe Music Awards in Madrid , wearing a " fairy tale " -inspired ensemble and walking through a set of flowers against a sunset . Two days later , Rihanna sang " Only Girl ( In the World ) " on the Italian version of The X Factor in a floral @-@ print bikini , boots and a red pigtail . The next day she flew to France to sing the song on Le Grand Journal , on a set covered with white balloons . 
 The singer returned to London on November 11 to record an interview for The Graham Norton Show , which included a live performance of " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . Rihanna opened the American Music Awards with a medley of songs from Loud . She began with an a cappella version of " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , sitting on a stylized tree of lights above " a field of sable @-@ colored blades of grass . " Rihanna then sang a solo version of " What 's My Name ? " and a short version of " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . According to Mawuse Ziegbe of MTV News , the singer " kicked up the island theme " as drummers in tribal dress circled her . 
 Rihanna performed a short version of " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at the 31st Brit Awards on February 15 , 2011 , as part of a medley with two other singles from Loud : " S & M " and " What 's My Name ? " . She had planned to perform " S & M " only ( to coincide with its United Kingdom release ) , but was asked by the British <unk> Industry to " tone down the sexual references in the song 's lyrics " . Rihanna was reportedly angered at the request and a related one to perform a different song . She made the changes because the BPI wanted to avoid complaints like those received after the seventh @-@ series finale of The X Factor on December 11 , 2010 , when Rihanna was criticized for wearing a provocative outfit and performing a suggestive , " disgusting " dance routine before the 9 pm UK watershed . Rihanna performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , " California King Bed " , " What 's My Name ? " and " S & M " on NBC 's May 27 , 2011 Today as part of its summer concert series . The song , which was included on the Loud , 777 and the Diamonds World Tours , was the opener for her performance at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 . 
 Katy Perry covered " Only Girl ( In the World ) " as part of an acoustic mash @-@ up with Willow Smith 's " Whip My Hair " on her California Dreams Tour ( 2011 ) . Ellie Goulding covered the song during her appearance on Radio 1 's Live Lounge , and the cover was the B @-@ side of her single " Lights " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " – 3 : 55 
 German CD single 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " – 3 : 55 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " ( Extended Club Mix ) – 5 : 39 
 UK CD single 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " – 3 : 55 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 55 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = All @-@ time charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 9 , 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Radio and digital release history = = 
 = Badnjak ( Serbian ) = 
 The badnjak ( Cyrillic : <unk> , Serbian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , also called veseljak ( <unk> , [ <unk> ̌ <unk> ] , literally " jovial one " in Serbian ) , is a log brought into the house and placed on the fire on the evening of Christmas Eve , a central tradition in Serbian Christmas celebrations much like a yule log in other European traditions . The tree from which the badnjak is cut , preferably a young and straight oak , is ceremonially felled early on the morning of Christmas Eve . The felling , preparation , bringing in , and laying on the fire , are surrounded by elaborate rituals , with many regional variations . The burning of the log is accompanied by prayers that the coming year brings food , happiness , love , luck , and riches . The log burns on throughout Christmas Day , when the first visitor strikes it with a poker or a branch to make sparks fly , while wishing that the family 's happiness and prosperity be as abundant as the sparks . As most Serbs today live in towns and cities , the badnjak is often symbolically represented by a cluster of oak twigs with brown leaves attached , with which the home is decorated on Christmas Eve . 
 Since the early 20th century , the Serbian badnjak tradition has also been celebrated more publicly . Before World War I , soldiers of the Kingdom of Serbia developed the custom of laying a badnjak on a fire in their barracks . In the succeeding Kingdom of Yugoslavia , the military badnjak ceremony was further elaborated and standardized in army service regulations , but the tradition ended at the outbreak of World War II . Since the early 1990s , the Serbian Orthodox Church has , together with local communities , organized public celebrations on Christmas Eve in which the badnjak plays a central role . Parishioners festively cut the sapling to be used as the badnjak and take it to their church , where it is consecrated by a priest before it is ceremonially placed on a fire built in the churchyard . 
 The festive kindling of the badnjak commemorates the fire that — according to Serbian folk tradition — the shepherds of Bethlehem built in the cave where Jesus Christ was born , to warm the Baby Jesus and his mother throughout the night . The badnjak may also be seen as a symbol of the cross upon which Christ was crucified , the warmth of its fire symbolizing the salvation which , in the Christian belief , the crucifixion made possible for mankind . Scholars regard the tradition as inherited from the old Slavic religion . They interpret the badnjak as an incarnation of the spirit of vegetation , and as a divinity who dies by burning to be reborn , to whom sacrifices and prayers were offered for the fertility of fields , the health and happiness of the family . The burning symbolized sunshine , securing the <unk> power of the sun in the coming year . Other South Slavic peoples have similar traditions , and the custom that a family brings a log into the house and burns it on Christmas Eve has also been recorded in other parts of Europe . 
 = = Family celebration = = 
 = = = Felling and preparing = = = 
 Traditionally , the badnjak ceremony begins on Christmas Eve , but there are many regional variations surrounding the details . Early in the morning the head of each family , usually accompanied by several male relatives , selects and fells the tree from which a log will be cut for their household . The group announces its departure by firing guns or small celebratory mortars called <unk> . The Turkey oak is the most popular species of tree selected in most regions , but other oaks are also chosen . Beech , pear , quince , hornbeam , and plum trees are used in eastern Serbia , although less frequently than oak trees . In some areas of Montenegrin Littoral where oaks do not grow , olives , bay laurels , elms , or strawberry trees are used instead . Young , straight , and undamaged specimens are preferred . The badnjak may be more valued if it is felled stealthily in someone else 's rather than in one 's own woods . 
 Generally , each household prepares one badnjak , although more are cut in some regions . Depending on the local custom , Montenegrin Serbs may fell two , three , an arbitrary number greater than two , or the number equal to the male members of household plus one . The latter means that each of the males has a log associated with him , with the thickest log representing the head of household and the thinnest linked to the family 's prosperity . If there is only one man in the household , three rather than two logs are prepared . The logs may be cut from different species of tree . In parts of the Bay of Kotor , each household prepares four sets of badnjaks , as they are burned there not only on Christmas Eve , but also on the eves of New Years Day , Epiphany , and the Feast of Saint Sava . 
 In <unk> , south @-@ west of Kotor , the number of the logs is equal to the number of people in the household . A terebinth is cut down for the badnjak associated with the woman of the house , called the badnjačica ( [ <unk> ] ) , meaning she @-@ badnjak . The same term is also used in other areas where only a pair of oak logs is cut , in which case badnjačica refers to the smaller of the two . In <unk> , the badnjačica is prepared from an Italian oak , and the badnjak from a Turkey oak . In Zagarač , central Montenegro , both of the logs may be cut from the same tree if it is tall enough , the badnjačica then coming from the upper , thinner part of the trunk . The pair is in some regions joined by a third log called the <unk> — badnjak the child . Although young and thin trees are usually used for the badnjak , in northern Dalmatia 's region of Bukovica two relatively thick logs with diameters of 30 to 50 centimeters ( 12 to 20 inches ) are prepared , plus one thinner log ( called trinity ) . In other areas dry oak branches are collected from the ground , and used instead of a log . 
 When the head of household finds a suitable tree , he stands in front of it facing east . After throwing grain at the tree , he greets it with the words " Good morning and happy Christmas Eve to you " , makes the Sign of the Cross , says a prayer , and kisses the tree . He may also explain to the badnjak why it will be cut : " I have come to you to take to my home , to be my faithful helper to every progress and improvement , in the house , in the pen , in the field , and in every place . " He then cuts it <unk> on its eastern side , using an axe . Some men put gloves on before they start to cut the tree , and from then on never touch the badnjak with their bare hands . The tree should fall to the east , unhindered by surrounding trees . It must not be left half @-@ cut , as then it will curse the house of the man . In some regions , if the tree is not cut down after the third blow of the axe , then it must be pulled and twisted until its trunk breaks . The resulting badnjak has a so @-@ called " beard " , the part of the trunk at which it broke off from the base of the tree . In Šumadija , half of a circular loaf of bread is left on the stump , the other half being eaten on the way back home . In Zagarač , the stump is covered with moss or dry leaves , and it will be visited again in spring : the stump sprouting through the cover is an omen of good luck and prosperity . 
 The first splinter from the tree is taken home and placed where prosperity is especially desired , such as beside the beehives , in the hen roost , or between milk basins in the dairy room , in the hope that the coming year 's kaymak will clot to form thick layers in the basins . It may also be placed beneath some baker 's yeast , so that the prosperity of the household may grow like yeast . In Semberija , a piece of the splinter is put in the dough for the česnica , a round loaf of bread prepared specially for Christmas dinner . This is done " because of bees " , as the reason is traditionally termed . 
 The top of the felled tree is removed , leaving the badnjak of such a length that allows it to be carried on a man 's shoulder , up to about 2 @.@ 5 meters ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long . Its branches may be lopped off , or not , depending on the local custom . Once in the home , each badnjak is leaned vertically against the house beside the entrance door . In Montenegrin Littoral , each should be adorned with leaved bay laurel , olive , juniper , and rosemary twigs , which are tied to the trunk 's top , middle , and base with ivy or red silken or woolen threads . In parts of eastern Serbia and Kosovo the badnjak is wrapped in a man 's shirt . 
 In west Serbia 's region of <unk> , centered on the town of Krupanj , the badnjak prepared for each household is cut into three logs , the most important of which is the <unk> — the log that comes from the part of the trunk that grew nearest to the ground . In <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Jadar of Serbia , as well as in Ozren and Romanija of Bosnia , the badnjak is cut into three logs associated respectively with the men , the women , and the children . 
 = = = Bringing in and burning = = = 
 In the evening , a man of the family brings their badnjak into the house . If there is more than one badnjak , the thickest of them is regarded as the main one , and is brought in first . Stepping across the threshold , right foot first , the man greets his gathered family with the words " Good evening and happy Christmas Eve to you . " The woman of the house greets him back , saying " May God give you well @-@ being , and may you have good luck " , or " Good luck to you , and together with you for many years to come [ may we be ] " , or similar , before throwing grain from a sieve at the man and the badnjak he carries . In the clan of Kuči , the woman touches the " beard " of the main badnjak with a whole loaf of bread . In Montenegro , two women holding lighted candles stand one on either side of the house door as the badnjaks are carried in . 
 Upon entering the house the man approaches the fireplace , called ognjište ( [ <unk> ] ) — the hearth of an ognjište is similar to a campfire , in that it has no vertical surround . He lays the badnjak down on the fire and moves it a little forward , to summon prosperity for the household . Any other logs are brought in by other males and laid on the fire parallel or perpendicular to the first . In a family with the tradition of burning the badnjak and badnjačica , they are laid one across the other ; the males then kiss the former , and the females the latter . In Bukovica the two thicker logs are placed side by side , and the thinner one ( trinity ) is placed in parallel on top . In 19th @-@ century Herzegovina , families with large houses would load their logs onto three or four pairs of oxen , which were then led into the house . The logs were unloaded and laid on the fire , and the oxen driven out through the back door . 
 Immediately after the badnjak has been brought in , or immediately before in some places , an <unk> of straw is spread over the floor . The straw is usually brought in with the same greetings and throwing of grain as the badnjak . The person spreading it may imitate a hen clucking to call her chicks , " <unk> , <unk> , <unk> " , with the family 's children imitating chicks , " <unk> , <unk> , <unk> " , while they pick at the straw . In <unk> , northern Bosnia , the children then lie down on the straw , before closing their eyes and picking a stalk with their lips : the child that picked the longest stalk will supposedly be the luckiest in the following year . In the Bay of Kotor , the ceremony is accompanied by the words " <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> " — " Whither straw , thither celebration . " A common custom is to scatter a handful of walnuts over the straw . It will be collected and taken out of the house on the morning of the second day after Christmas . Some of the straw may be set aside and used in apotropaic practices in the coming year . 
 The thicker end of the log , the end that was nearest to the tree 's roots , may have a special significance . In Montenegro it is called the head of the badnjak ; the main log is laid on the fire with its head pointing east . In central Serbia the badnjak is laid with its thicker end sticking out from the ognjište . The household 's shepherds would kiss over it to ensure an abundance of lambs in the coming year . In Gruža it is coated with honey which is then licked by children . At the side of ognjište where the thicker end is situated , the family may place a plowshare , a round loaf of bread , a glove filled with wheat , sugar , or a sieve containing grain , honey , cakes , wine , salt , prunes , walnuts , and apples . The cut surface of the thicker end is in <unk> kissed by all the family members after the badnjak is laid on the fire . 
 The head of the household takes a jug of wine and pours some on the badnjak ; in some regions , he may strew wheat grains over the logs . He then proposes a toast : " Grant , O God , that there be health and joy in this home , that our grain and grapevines yield well , that children be born healthy to us , that our property increase in the field , pen , and barn ! " or , " Hail , badnjak , veseljak ! I give you wheat and wine , and you give me every good thing and peace ! " or similar . The name veseljak , literally " jovial one " , is used along with badnjak in some areas . The head drinks a draught of wine from the jug , after which it is passed to other members of household . In the clan of Kuči , wine is poured on the " beard " of the badnjak , and then a little girl sits for a moment on the log — for the well @-@ being of the cattle . Christmas Eve dinner follows , which traditionally includes a round loaf of unleavened bread , beans , fish , walnuts , honey , and red wine . The bread is not cut with a knife , but broken with hands . 
 The badnjak should not be jumped over or trodden upon , and blowing on its fire is avoided . It should not be moved when about to burn through , lest the log break at the place most consumed by the fire , which is usually strongest at the center of the fireplace ; the separation of the log should be a result of the fire only . None of the family members should fall asleep before the log splits , otherwise some of them may die in the coming year , without warning . 
 The moment when the badnjak burns through may be marked with festivities , such as the log being kissed by the head of household , and wine being poured over it accompanied by toasts . A reward may be given to the family member who was the first to notice the event , and in the past the men would go outside and fire their guns in celebration . There is a special verb <unk> used instead of the common <unk> to express " to burn through " when referring to the badnjak , which has the same root as the noun veseljak . Once the log has burnt through , some families let the fire go out , while in others the men keep watch in shifts during the night to keep the badnjak burning . 
 Once the badnjak has burnt through , the thicker end is often taken out of the fire and used according to the local custom . It may be carried around the beehives , extinguished , and placed between the branches of a young plum or apple tree . The men may make crosses from it and put them under the eaves , on the fields , meadows , vineyards , and apiaries , so that the coming year may be happy and fruitful . It may also be set aside for next Christmas Eve , to be placed on the fire immediately before the new badnjak , as a symbol of continuity . In Kosovo , a part of the badnjak is preserved and burned again on New Years Day and Epiphany . 
 The badnjak burns on through Christmas Day , whether rekindled or kept burning from the Eve . The first visit the family receives that day is considered important , comparable to New Years Day first @-@ footing in the British Isles . The family may choose someone , usually a young male , to be their first visitor , known as a polaznik , before the arrival of whom no outsider is allowed to enter the house . Early on the morning of Christmas Day he steps into the house , right foot first , and greets the family with " Christ is Born " , to which they reply " Truly He is Born . " The polaznik then approaches the ognjište and repeatedly strikes the burning log with a poker or a branch to make sparks fly . At the same time he utters a wish that the happiness and prosperity of the household be as abundant as the sparks : 
 The wording of this well @-@ wishing may vary , but its intention is always the same , to invoke happiness and prosperity . The polaznik will then throw a coin into the fire before being presented with a round loaf of bread , the traditional gift for the polaznik , usually accompanied by some other present . The custom to use a domestic animal as a polaznik was kept in some regions until the first half of the 20th century . In <unk> , the head of the household would lead a sheep into the house , place it between the ognjište and himself , and utter the wishes while striking the badnjak with a branch cut from it , before saying : " We passed one fire , we are not afraid of another . " His wife would then kiss him over the sheep after saying " may the ewes kiss the lambs as we kiss each other . " 
 Embers of the badnjak may be used for divination in Jadar . The number of these equal to the sum of grain and livestock sorts grown by the family are taken out from the ognjište and placed on the česnica . Each of the sorts is associated with its own ember on that loaf . The sort whose ember retains its glow longer than the others should be the most productive in the coming year . The log sparking by itself presages a rich harvest of honey . Cooled coals of the badnjak may be placed between the branches of fruit trees ; the young trees may be provided also with twigs from the badnjak . Its ash may be spread over the fields and mixed with fodder . Some of the ash may be set aside to be taken with water as a remedy for headache . There are also numerous other regional practices connected with the badnjak . 
 These ancient traditions have modern , reduced versions . Modern houses usually have no ognjište on which to burn a badnjak , but it may be symbolically represented by several oak twigs , some of which are burnt in a wood @-@ burning kitchen stove and the others placed beside it . Some people chop the badnjak into shorter logs so that they can be put into the hearth and burnt . The most prevalent custom , however , is to place a cluster of oak twigs , with their brown leaves still attached , in whichever location in the home the family feels is appropriate . This cluster is also called the badnjak , and it is usually kept in the home until next Christmas Eve . For the convenience of those living in towns and cities , such little badnjaks can be bought at marketplaces or distributed in churches . In a common arrangement , the cluster of oak twigs is bound together with twigs of European Cornel and several stalks of straw . 
 The laying of a badnjak on the fire was considered the least a Serbian family could do to show their devotion to Serbian tradition . In Petar II Petrović @-@ Njegoš 's poem The Mountain Wreath , the plot of which takes place in 18th @-@ century Montenegro , Voivode <unk> urges converts to Islam to return to Christianity and Serbdom : " [ ... ] Lay the Serbian Christmas @-@ log [ badnjak ] on the fire , paint the Easter eggs various colours , observe with care the Lent and Christmas fasts . As for the rest , do what your heart desires ! " Petrović @-@ Njegoš describes the holiday atmosphere that surrounds the burning badnjak on Christmas Eve through the words of Abbot Stefan , one of the mains characters of The Mountain Wreath : 
 = = Public celebration = = 
 The badnjak ceremony , originally performed only within the family , became a more public celebration . A custom developed before World War I in the Kingdom of Serbia to lay the badnjak on a fire built in military barracks , so that the soldiers stationed there over Christmas could share in the holiday atmosphere . In the succeeding Kingdom of Yugoslavia , the military badnjak ceremony was standardized in army service regulations . On Christmas Eve , under the command of a specially appointed officer , the representatives of military units of a garrison formed a festive procession on horses , accompanied with music . Members of citizens ' associations and other civilians of the garrison town usually joined the procession as it proceeded to the nearest wood to collect the badnjak . They felled a set number of trees , dedicated respectively to the Royal Palace , the military command of the town , the respective commands of units of the garrison , its oldest officer , and its officers ' assembly house . The procession brought the trees to the barracks , in whose yard an open fire was built . The garrison commander then placed the trees ceremonially on the fire , and gave an appropriate address . 
 More and more state institutions , private firms , organizations , and clubs joined the procession each year , and the event began to take on the character of a public holiday . During the 1930s , the laying of badnjak on the fire became a court ritual . It was performed , in the presence of the royal family , by representatives of the army in the Royal Palace 's room with a fireplace . At the end of the 1930s in some parts of Yugoslavia , especially Vojvodina and Montenegro , the military badnjak ceremony was performed not in the barracks yard but in a square in the garrison town . An open fire was built , on which the badnjak was placed by an Orthodox priest in the presence of soldiers and citizens . This tradition , symbolizing the unity of state , church , and people , was ended by the outbreak of World War II . 
 Yugoslavia 's socialist government suppressed or discouraged public religious celebrations until the early 1990s . Since then , the Serbian Orthodox Church has , together with local communities , organized public celebrations on Christmas Eve . There are typically three elements to such celebrations : the preparation , the ritual , and the festivity . The preparation consists of cutting down the oak sapling to be used as the badnjak , taking it to the church yard , and preparing drink and food for the assembled parishioners . The ritual includes Vespers , placing the badnjak on the open fire built in the church yard , blessing or consecrating the badnjak , and an appropriate program with songs and recitals . In some parishes they build the fire on which to burn the badnjak not in the church yard but at some other suitable location in their town or village . The festivity consists of gathering around the fire and socializing . Each particular celebration has its own specific traits however , reflecting the traditions of the local community . 
 The expedition to cut down the badnjak is the basic activity in the preparation part of the celebration . It can be performed by an individual , but it is usually a collective act accompanied by a festive procession that may include carriages and horsemen . After the tree to be used as the badnjak is cut down , it is adorned with straw , ribbons , oranges , apples , and sometimes with the Serbian flag . In some parishes more than one badnjak is used in the celebration , and a different tree is felled for each . Often bunches of leaved oak twigs are prepared to be distributed to the congregation gathered at the church . Each badnjak is festively taken to the church gate , often transported on carriages . The badnjak may be taken into the churchyard without any ceremony , or it may be followed by a procession , as is the case in parts of Republika Srpska and the Bay of Kotor . 
 The ritual is the central part of the celebration . Vespers vary from place to place with respect to the time of the beginning of the service , its length and structure . The laying of badnjak on the fire usually comes after the service , and is done by a priest or by a respected parishioner . Before the burning , the tree may be <unk> carried around the church . In the case of more than one badnjak , the trees are placed in the shape of a cross . The assembled devotees throw then into the fire their twig bunches , each representing a small badnjak . The consecration or blessing is performed by a priest : he <unk> wheat grains over the badnjak , <unk> it while singing the <unk> of the Nativity , and as he intones prayers , he pours wine and spreads honey on it . Instead of applying wine and honey , holy water may be sprinkled on the tree by dipping a bunch of basil into a bowl with the water . This rite is generally performed after the placing on the fire , although it may happen before , in which case the consecration may be performed in the church itself or in its yard . 
 After the ritual the priest delivers a short sermon , followed by the church choir singing Christmas songs ; poems that praise the Nativity of Jesus Christ may be recited . In Montenegro , <unk> Serbian epics are sung to an accompaniment played on the gusle , a traditional Serbian bowed string instrument . The celebration ends with parishioners gathered around the fire , served with cooked <unk> , wine , or tea , and the food allowed during the Nativity Fast . Parishioners may pick a twig from the badnjak and take it home to place in front of their icon , or at another appropriate location . 
 Although Serbian public religious celebrations , as those of other peoples , were discouraged in Socialist Yugoslavia until the early 1990s , they continued among Serbian Americans . The public badnjak ceremony was held in Serbian Orthodox parishes in the United States during that period , as it is today . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 The origin of the badnjak is explained by the events surrounding the Nativity of Jesus Christ . According to the Gospel of Luke 2 : 1 – 20 , Mary Theotokos gave birth to Christ at Bethlehem , wrapped him in cloths and laid him in a manger . By Holy Tradition , the manger was located in a cave near that town . An angel of the Lord appeared to a group of shepherds who were keeping watch over their flock by night in that region , and told them that the Savior was born at Bethlehem . They went there and found the baby lying in the manger , as the angel described to them . By folk tradition , the shepherds brought firewood to the cave and built a fire to warm the newborn Christ and his mother throughout the night . The burning of the badnjak commemorates this event . 
 While blessing the badnjak , some priests chant the following prayer : " O Lord Jesus Christ , our God , who did plant the Tree of Life in paradise so that it might bestow upon us eternal blessedness , bless also now this tree which is a symbol of Thy cross and the Tree of Life in paradise , and which reminds us of Thy holy birth and of the logs which the shepherds of Bethlehem kindled to warm themselves when they came to worship Thee , the divine infant , and thereby prefigured Thy salvation @-@ bearing cross . " 
 Scholars regard the badnjak customs as practises inherited from the old Slavic religion . In the pre @-@ Christian religion of the Serbs , as shown by Serbian scholar Veselin Čajkanović , there were trees seen as dwelling places of spirits or divinities . Čajkanović argues that there were also trees seen as divinities per se . He considers the badnjak as a convincing example of the latter . <unk> , prayers , and sacrifices such as grain , wine , and honey are offered to him ( the name badnjak is of masculine gender in Serbian ) ; he is consistently treated not as a tree but as a person . 
 German scholar and folklorist Wilhelm <unk> holds that the log represented an incarnation of the spirit of vegetation . The sacrifices offered to the badnjak were meant to guarantee the fertility of fields , the health and happiness of the family . Its burning symbolized sunshine , and was intended to secure the <unk> power of the sun in the ensuing year . The lighting of the log could be regarded as a fusion of tree worship and fire worship , attested in Slavic customs ; e.g. , <unk> fed the logs lighted on St. John 's Day by sprinkling wheat upon them . Čajkanović characterizes the pre @-@ Christian badnjak as a divinity who dies by burning to be reborn , comparing it in this respect with Attis , Osiris , Adonis , and <unk> . He also proposes that the crosses made from the thicker end of the log may have originated from idols representing deities comparable with the Roman Lares , the cruciform having developed from an anthropomorphic shape of the idols . The badnjak is preferably cut from an oak , which was the most respected tree in the old Slavic religion , associated with the supreme god Perun . 
 Archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans was a guest in a Serbian highlander family in the region of <unk> , Montenegrin Littoral . Analyzing the practices , he concluded that the badnjak customs were connected with ancestor worship . The lighting of the log on the ognjište could be seen as a solemn annual rekindling of the sacred hearth fire , regarded as the center of the family life and the seat of the ancestors . The belief that ancestral spirits dwell in the domestic hearth was attested among Slavic and other peoples . Fire worship in the old Slavic religion was mostly transformed into the cult of domestic fire , and thus joined with ancestor worship . A trace of sacrifice to the fire is the coin thrown into it by the polaznik after the ritual of making sparks fly from the badnjak . 
 Fire from the domestic hearth was under no circumstances given out of the house on Christmas Eve , not even to a neighbor whose fire had gone out . The reason for this prohibition , according to Čajkanović , was the belief that the Eve is a time when the ancestral spirits , guardians of the family 's happiness and prosperity , are especially active in this world . Christmas Eve dinner is a feast prepared in their honor , and they join the family at it . They gather on the straw spread over the floor , and on the hearth . These spirits could be removed from the family if any piece of their fire were taken away by an outsider . In people 's words , fire should not be given lest the luck be taken away from the house , or for better crops , or because of bees . Referring to the latter explanation , Čajkanović argues that , in the old religion of the Serbs , the bees were regarded as pure and sacred insects , in whom ancestral spirits could dwell . The same explanation , " because of bees " , is also given for the aforementioned custom of putting a piece of the badnjak 's first splinter in the dough for the česnica . 
 Russian philologist Vladimir <unk> has proposed that the felling of the badnjak was originally a reenactment of the mythical fight in which Mladi Božić ( " young god " ) slew his father Stari Badnjak ( " old Badnjak " ) . Božić , the diminutive form of the noun bog , meaning god , is also the Serbian for " Christmas " . The characters of Stari Badnjak and Mladi Božić are found in old Serbian Christmas songs , where they are not explicitly referred to as father and son , and no fight between them is mentioned . By <unk> , the former personified the last day of the Old Year , the climax of the power of Chaos , and the latter personified the first day of the New Year , the beginning of reestablishment of Cosmic Order . He regards Stari Badnjak and Mladi Božić as originating from respectively the dragon and the dragon slayer of the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European mythology . Stari Badnjak would be related to both the Vedic serpent Ahi <unk> ( " the Dragon of the Deep " ) killed by Indra , and the Greek dragon Python killed by Apollo . The words badnjak , <unk> , and python stem from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European root * <unk> , denoting bottom , foundation , depths , and related notions . 
 According to Russian philologist and mythographer Boris Uspensky , Stari Badnjak and Mladi Božić have analogues in East Slavic tradition — Nikola 's Dad and Nikola . The name Nikola is a popular reference to Saint Nicholas of Myra , whose feast falls nineteen days before Christmas , on 6 December , his " dad " being celebrated the day before . Nikola is portrayed in East Slavic folklore as merciful and protective towards the common people , patron of animals and agriculture , connected with riches , abundance , and fertility . Uspensky argues that this saint took on attributes of the serpentine god Volos , whose cult was very strong among East Slavs before Christianization . He was the adversary of the dreadful thunder @-@ god Perun , who is in this case reflected in Nikola 's Dad . 
 The notion of a quarrel between Nikola and his " dad " is present in a number of legends . The connection between the father – son pairs of Stari Badnjak – Mladi Božić and Nikola 's Dad – Nikola is corroborated by the fact that , in many East Slavic regions , practices characteristic for Christmas have been transferred to the Feast of Saint Nicholas . There is , however , an inversion in the comparison between these two pairs . In the former pair , the first stems from the mythical dragon , and the second from the dragon fighter , while in the latter pair it is vice versa . This inversion explains , by Uspensky , the fact that in some areas Nikola 's Dad is celebrated on the day after his son 's feast , rather than on the eve of it . In that way , the " dragon " ( Nikola ) comes before the " dragon fighter " ( Nikola 's Dad ) , as is the case with Stari Badnjak and Mladi Božić . 
 Serbian ethnologist Petar Vlahović has proposed that the noun badnjak and the related adjective <unk> ( attributive " Christmas Eve " ) are derived from the root of the verb <unk> ( " to be awake " ) , referring to a custom of staying awake through the night before Christmas Day . The same etymology of the adjective <unk> has also been proposed by Vuk Stefanović Karadžić , 19th @-@ century Serbian philologist , <unk> of oral literature , and ethnographer . 
 = = Similar European traditions = = 
 The custom that a family solemnly brings a log into the house and lights it on the hearth on Christmas Eve has been recorded in various parts of Europe . In England , a Yule log used to be festively kindled on the domestic hearth so " that sweet luck may come while the log is a @-@ <unk> " , as described by 17th @-@ century poet Robert Herrick . In France , the log had different regional names : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . In Provence , it had to be cut from a fruit tree ; it was brought in by the whole family while they sang a carol praying for blessing on the house , that the women might bear children , the nanny @-@ goats kids , and the ewes lambs , and that their grain and wine might abound . Before the log was placed on the fire , the youngest child in the family poured wine on it . Logs were <unk> laid on the domestic fire on Christmas Eve in various parts of Italy ; in Tuscany , Christmas is called Festa di <unk> , literally " feast of log " . In the Val di Chiana , the children of the family were blindfolded and commanded to beat the burning log with tongs . Traces of Christmas @-@ log customs can also be found in Germany and Scandinavia . In Thuringia the family placed a <unk> ( Christ log ) on the fire before going to bed , so that it might burn all through the night . 
 In Croatian tradition , objects of two different types are referred to as badnjak . The first type includes leaved branches cut from Turkey oaks or hazel trees , up to 2 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long with as many catkins as possible . Such a branch used to be placed on Christmas Eve morning above the house door , under the eaves , or on the roof , and had an aesthetic role . The other type includes logs cut usually from oak trunks . In the evening the family used to ritually bring three such logs into the house and burn them on the hearth . These practices are no longer performed , but in some places a modified form of badnjak is used : a cross is carved into the bark of pieces of firewood which are burned in kitchen stoves on Christmas Eve . In Bulgaria , the youngest man of the family goes on the Eve into a forest to cut down an oak , elm , or pear tree , which will be used as the badnik ( <unk> ) . After the man brings it into the house , a hole is bored in one end of the badnik and filled with wine , cooking oil , and incense . The hole is plugged , and that end of the log is wrapped with a white linen cloth before the badnik is festively burned on the hearth . 
 In Greece , a large log was lit on the hearth on Christmas Eve and kept burning or smoldering through the Twelve Days of Christmas . This was done as a protection against the demons called <unk> , believed to be emerging from their dens at night during that period to attack people and damage their property . The fire and smoke from the log was thought to prevent the <unk> from entering the house down the chimney . The ritual burning of logs on the Eve was also carried out in Albania . When the buzm , as the log was called there , was about to be brought into the house , a member of the family would go out into the yard , shout the name of the household 's head , and proclaim that the buzm was coming and bringing all kinds of delicious things . The head of the household would respond by saying " You are welcome ! " and the buzm would be ceremonially brought in , greeted by the family and treated with great respect . The log would be placed on the hearth , and often a significant part of all food and drink in the house would be put on the log and burned together with it . 
 = Puente ( song ) = 
 " Puente " is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on August 9 2010 as the lead single from his twelfth studio album , Poquita Ropa ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Arjona , who produced it with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos . Two versions of the song were made , one of them being a mixture of salsa , merengue along with Cuban music influences ; and the other an acoustic version made with piano and percussion . 
 Lyrically , " Puente " is a song related to the actual situation of Cuba and the immigration to the United States . The song received critical praise , with a critic stating that it " brings the album to an extraordinary conclusion " , and received comparisons with Fito Páez 's song " Habana " . Commercially , " Puente " did not attain commercial success , managing only to reach number 36 on the US Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . 
 An accompanying music video for " Puente " was released in August 2010 . It was directed by Joaquín Cambré and filmed between Mexico and Argentina . The clip , which showcases the problematic issues of migration in Cuba , was filmed by Arjona while he was on the Quinto Piso Tour with the collaboration of children from 5 to 13 age old . As of 11 July 2012 , the video has reached 1 @.@ 4 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Background = = 
 With Poquita Ropa , Arjona wanted to drastically change his musical style . He tried to use as few instruments as possible , resulting in a production that sounds like a capella performances . Arjona said about the album , " music and women look better with little clothes " , and that " they [ the songs ] are like women ; they get things up and are so concerned about this that they forget that the less clothes , more beauty . The songs are often overwhelmed by ourselves , because we saturate them with arrangements looking to exalt their qualities and we end up hiding them . " 
 Arjona produced the album with the assistance of Dan Warner , who has worked with Shakira , Celine Dion and Christina Aguilera . Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic commented that Poquita Ropa " finds Arjona at his most naked , backed by spare arrangements of acoustic guitar , piano , and Hammond B @-@ 3 along with occasional touches of strings , woodwinds , and chorus vocals . " Poquita Ropa was the first album that Arjona recorded without producer Tommy Torres , whose last production was 5to Piso ( 2008 ) . The album is similar in style to Arjona 's work on Galería Caribe ( 2000 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Puente " is a latin pop song with salsa , merengue and Cuban music influences crafted in eight and a half minutes and divided in three parts . The first one is an a cappella song , sang mainly with a piano . The second part is a ballad with Caribbean and Latin sounds , with some salsa and Cuban influences . The third is a mixture of salsa and merengue , with Cuban influences . The song was written by Arjona , who produced it alongside longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin , under their stagename Los Gringos . Mónica <unk> from newspaper La Nación compared it with a song released by Fito Páez in 1999 , " Habana " . Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic praised the song , stating that it " brings the album to an extraordinary conclusion . " 
 In the song , Arjona sings : " Habana / siempre en las <unk> , tan mitad española , tan mitad africana / <unk> bien las <unk> que en cada <unk> siempre hay un <unk> / Habana . " He also said that " Puente " was the only song that was " not allowed to undress " . When asked about " Puente " ' s main theme , Arjona commented , " Although many believe is a threshed topic , it isn 't for a Cuban , be it on the island or Florida . The status of this dispute hasn 't changed since 1959 and I 've never seen something as disgusting as a rivalry between people occasioned from politics . Chávez can fight with Uribe , Fidel with Obama , but what has this to do with two third @-@ generation cousins that inherit an enmity for a politic matter [ ? ] " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Puente " was released on 17 August 2010 . It was directed by Argentinian director Joaquín Cambre , who also worked with Arjona on the music video for " Sin Ti , Sin Mi " . In the video , to brothers live separately , one of them in La Havana , and the other in Miami , Florida . The video ends with the boys encountering each other in a bridge , along many other people . The video shows the problematic about the migration on Cuba . Arjona shot the video while on his Quinto Piso Tour . It was filmed between Mexico and Argentina , with the collaboration of children from 5 to 13 age old . <unk> commented about the video that " " Puente " for me is an array of images that tell the same story in opposite realities . Two boys exactly alike ; one lives in an abandoned hotel on the beach and the other lives in a big city skyscraper , yet both are equally lonely . Miami and Havana are where those two boys are in their own worlds and see that the only way out of their realms are when they decide to encounter one another . " 
 The video starts showing Arjona inside a room powering on an old video projector and singing while watching a black and white film projected on the wall . This scenes are shown until the music style of the song changes into salsa . Then , after the musical change , scenes of two twin brothers are shown , interpolated , one of them living in Havana , the other living in Miami , Florida . The following scenes show the technological differences to which the brothers are attached , before going into the musical change to merengue and <unk> music , on which two large group of kids , led by the two brothers , are shown sprinting throughout two shores until they meet and start to celebrate . Then , the final musical change is shown , along a collage of different scenes from the United States and Cuba . Finally , Arjona is shown again sit along the video projector , and the clip ends . As of 14 July 2012 , the video has reached 1 @.@ 4 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Trackslisting = = 
 Digital Download 
 " Puente " ( Caribe ) — 8 : 29 
 Digital Download — Acoustic 
 " Puente " ( Acoustic ) — 4 : 46 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are taken from the iTunes exclusive digital booklet . 
 " Puente " ( Acoustic ) 
 " Puente " ( Caribe ) 
 Technical credits 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Eugenia Washington = 
 Eugenia <unk> Washington ( June 27 , 1838 – November 30 , 1900 ) was an American historian , civil servant , and a founder of the lineage societies , Daughters of the American Revolution and Daughters of the Founders and Patriots of America . 
 Washington was born in 1838 near Charles Town , Virginia , in present @-@ day West Virginia . She was the daughter of William Temple Washington , through whom she was a great @-@ grandniece of George Washington , first President of the United States , and a grandniece of Dolley Payne Todd Madison . Following her family 's relocation to Stafford County , she and her family witnessed the Battle of Fredericksburg first hand during the American Civil War . 
 Due to her family 's limited financial resources after the war and her father 's illness , Washington accepted a position as a clerk within the United States Post Office Department in Washington , D.C. , to support her family . There , Washington was one of the four co @-@ founders of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution ( with Mary Desha , Mary Smith Lockwood , and Ellen Hardin Walworth ) . Washington had reportedly been inspired by her experiences during the American Civil War to found an organization for preserving the shared heritage of women from the North and South of the United States . Washington was the DAR 's first Registrar General , and was made " number one " on the " grand roll " of the society 's membership . In 1898 , Washington founded another lineage society , the National Society of Daughters of the Founders and Patriots of America , with the broader goal of preserving the history of the American colonial era . 
 While visiting a relative in Louisiana around 1870 , Washington attended a Roman Catholic mission . She later converted to Roman Catholicism from her Episcopal faith , after which she became a prominent lecturer of the Catholic faith . Washington never married , and she died in 1900 . Washington was interred beside her mother at the Moncure family burial ground of her sister 's estate , " Glencairne , " in Falmouth , Virginia . 
 = = Early life , family , and ancestry = = 
 Eugenia <unk> Washington was born on June 27 , 1838 , at " <unk> " plantation near Charles Town in Jefferson County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) , to William Temple Washington ( 1800 – 1877 ) and his wife , Margaret Calhoun Fletcher ( 1805 – 1865 ) . The name of the plantation on which she was born , " <unk> , " was a portmanteau of both her mother and father 's nicknames . 
 Through her father , Washington was the granddaughter of George Steptoe Washington ( 1771 – 1809 ) and Lucy Payne Washington Todd ( 1772 ? – 1846 ) . She was also the great @-@ granddaughter of Samuel Washington ( 1734 – 1781 , younger brother of George Washington ) , and the great @-@ grandniece of George Washington ( 1732 – 1799 ) . Her grandfather , George Steptoe Washington , was a " favorite nephew " of George Washington and was left an inheritance following Washington 's death . Washington 's grandmother , Lucy Payne Washington Todd , was a sister of First Lady of the United States Dolley Payne Todd Madison ( 1768 – 1849 ) . The widowed Dolley Payne Todd married James Madison at Washington 's grandparents ' residence , Harewood . 
 Through her mother , Washington was great @-@ grandniece of John C. Calhoun ( 1782 – 1850 ) . Also through her mother , Washington was descended from Charles Francois Joseph , Count de <unk> ( born in France in 1755 ) , who served in the American Revolutionary War and was " a friend and kinsman " of Gilbert du Motier , Marquis de Lafayette . <unk> 's grandson and Washington 's grandfather , Thomas Fletcher , served on the staff of General William Henry Harrison in the War of 1812 . 
 Washington 's father , William Temple Washington , was educated at the College of William & Mary and home schooled his children . Around 1859 , William Washington relocated his family to a plantation at Falmouth in Stafford County , Virginia , located on the north side of the Rappahannock River across from Fredericksburg . Washington 's father suffered from paralysis , and she cared for him from a young age . 
 = = American Civil War = = 
 Following her family 's relocation to Falmouth , Washington continued to live a " tranquil life " caring for her father until the American Civil War . Union and Confederate forces fought near the family plantation , so Washington and her family " suffered all the horrors and the hardships " of the war . The family witnessed the Battle of Fredericksburg , December 11 – 15 , 1862 , first hand . A wounded Union Army officer was brought to their home early in the battle and placed in Washington 's care while waiting a surgeon , thus delaying the evacuation of Washington and her disabled father . As the battle drew even nearer , Washington " sheltered her father 's body with her own " in a trench created by a cannon , and they remained in that position for an entire day . 
 By the end of the American Civil War , Washington and her family were " deprived of all worldly goods " . Washington 's mother , Margaret , died shortly after the war 's conclusion in 1865 , and her father , William Temple , died twelve years later in 1877 . 
 = = United States Post Office Department = = 
 After her mother 's death , Washington accepted a position as a clerk within the United States Post Office Department in Washington , D.C. , to support herself and her ailing father . Eva Bryan , former president of the Daughters of Founders and Patriots of America , considered Washington 's position an " honorable " one for a woman , because of the family 's financial straits , although otherwise " the great @-@ great @-@ niece of George Washington would not normally be employed . " Washington and her father relocated from Falmouth to Washington in 1867 , and she lived there until her death in 1900 . During her tenure with the Post Office , Washington was known as " Miss <unk> " and " considered quite attractive and always received a great deal of attention wherever she went " . During her last decade , Washington served as a clerk in the Dead Letter Office . 
 = = Daughters of the American Revolution = = 
 Washington was one of the four co @-@ founders of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution ( with Mary Desha , Mary Smith Lockwood , and Ellen Hardin Walworth ) . The organization 's founders emulated the Sons of the American Revolution , founded in New York City on April 30 , 1889 , which excluded women . According to society tradition , Washington 's experiences during the American Civil War " inspired in her a will to assist women from both the North and the South in the worthy cause of preserving their shared heritage " . 
 Washington and Desha consulted regularly with Sons of the American Revolution members for advice , particularly Registrar General Dr. George Brown Goode , Secretary General A. Howard Clark , William O. McDowell ( SAR member # 1 ) , and Wilson L. Gill ( secretary at the inaugural meeting ) . On October 11 , 1890 , at 2 pm , the 18 founding members and these four men met at the Stratford Arms in Washington , D.C. , thus forming the Daughters of the American Revolution . Washington , Desha , Lockwood , and Walworth are called co @-@ founders since they held two to three meetings in August 1890 . 
 Washington was the DAR 's first Registrar General , and her name appears as member " number one " on the " grand roll " of membership . Washington also served as secretary general , vice president general , and in 1895 she became honorary vice president general , an office which she held until her death . Under Washington 's leadership , the society raised funds for a national monument to Mary Ball Washington , mother of George Washington . Washington ardently carried out the duties of her offices at DAR , despite suffering with a serious eye condition that made it difficult for her to write . Washington stated , " We want a patriotic society founded on service and I will not become a member of an organization which is founded on rank and not on the service of the ancestors . " 
 = = Daughters of Founders and Patriots of America = = 
 Washington founded another lineage society , the National Society of Daughters of the Founders and Patriots of America , in June 1898 . Washington established this organization with the broader goals of preserving the history of the American colonial era ( like The Colonial Dames of America and The National Society of Colonial Dames of America ) , as well as encouraging appreciation of American history and fostering patriotism . Washington disliked the " bickering " within the DAR , and to ensure a more " congenial " society that " remained small and cordial " , she required that the new organization members also be direct descendants of " a colonist who arrived in America between May 13 , 1607 and May 13 , 1687 " as well as qualify for the DAR . Washington chose the deadline date of May 13 , 1687 ( broader than the Mayflower Society ) , so that she would be eligible for membership in the society , but this criterion also limited membership of descendants of slaves since that emigration began a few decades later . While Washington intended for the organization not to grow beyond 300 members , membership in the Daughters of Founders and Patriots of America grew to 2 @,@ 800 by the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = Catholic faith = = 
 While visiting a family member in Louisiana around 1870 , Washington attended a Catholic mission organized by the <unk> at a neighboring parish . After " careful study " , Washington was received into the Roman Catholic Church . Prior to her conversion , Washington consulted with a clergyman at her Episcopal church , and in response to his concern , she replied : " Oh no , I must act up to my convictions and I shall pray hard that you may be given the same grace . " Washington became a prominent lecturer of the Catholic faith and attended the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Washington never married . In 1892 , Washington purchased a second residence at <unk> Berwyn Road in Berwyn Heights , Maryland , from James E. Waugh ; she owned it until her death . While in Washington , D.C. , she resided with her cousin Fanny Washington Finch at 813 13th Street , Northwest . Washington died at the age of 62 on Friday , November 30 , 1900 , at her home on 13th Street . Washington 's housemate and cousin Fanny Washington Finch predeceased her in March of that year . Only " a few acquaintances " among Washington 's colleagues and employees in her Post Office bureau knew she was ill , and she worked until a week before her death . 
 Washington 's sister , Jean Washington Moncure , also a resident of Washington and married to Thomas Gascoigne Moncure , arranged for Washington 's funeral at her own house and interment next to their mother at the Moncure estate " Glencairne " on the Rappahannock River near Falmouth . On December 1 , 1900 , the funeral train left the Pennsylvania Railroad station in Washington , D.C. , for Fredericksburg , Virginia . The Fredericksburg Betty Lewis Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution " escorted " Washington 's remains . A simple graveside service was performed by Reverend Dr. Smith , pastor of St. George 's Episcopal Church in Fredericksburg . A memorial service and requiem mass for Washington were held at St. Patrick 's Catholic Church in Washington , D.C. , on December 31 , 1900 . Following Washington 's death , her sister Jean was the last surviving patrilineal descendant of William Temple Washington . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By Washington 's death in 1900 , membership in the National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution numbered around 35 @,@ 000 . Many chapters of the society expressed their appreciation and respect . She was also mentioned at the groundbreaking of the Memorial Continental Hall on October 11 , 1902 , by Cornelia Cole Fairbanks . In 1908 , a " mourning pin " crafted on the occasion of the death of George Washington that had been given to Washington by her grandmother , Lucy Payne Washington Todd , was donated to the Memorial Continental Hall by Jennie White Hopkins . 
 On April 17 , 1929 , under the leadership of President General Grace L. H. Brosseau , the Daughters of the American Revolution dedicated a memorial to its four founders , including Washington ; it was sculpted by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney and is located at Constitution Hall in Washington , D.C. The Daughters of the American Revolution also maintained Washington 's gravesite at " Glencairne , " and in 1979 they installed a plaque honoring her . In October 1990 , the Daughters of the American Revolution held a ceremony at her gravesite to mark the centennial jubilee of the organization 's founding . On October 13 , 1999 , a year after their own centennial , 21 members of the Daughters of Founders and Patriots of America met at the gravesite to unveil a larger memorial plaque honoring her . 
 = Huolongjing = 
 The Huolongjing ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Lóng <unk> ; Wade @-@ Giles : Huo Lung Ching ; rendered by its translator into English as Fire Drake Manual ; in modern English , Fire Dragon Manual ) is a 14th @-@ century military treatise that was compiled and edited by Jiao Yu and Liu Bowen of the early Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) in China . It outlined the use of various " fire weapons " involving the use of gunpowder . 
 The Huolongjing provides information about various gunpowder compositions , including " magic gunpowder " , " poison gunpowder " , and " blinding and burning gunpowder " . It has descriptions of the Chinese hollow cast iron grenade bomb , shrapnel bombs , and bombs containing poisonous concoctions . The book describes the 10th @-@ century Chinese fire arrow and its evolution into the metal @-@ tube @-@ launched rocket , various rocket launchers , the advent of the two @-@ stage rocket that has a booster rocket , and fin – mounted , winged rockets . The book also describes the use of explosive land mines and naval mines , and the latter 's use of a complex trigger mechanism . The book describes the development of other weapons , including various proto – guns such as the fire lance , handguns with up to ten barrels , handguns with possible serpentine locks used as components in matchlock firearms , early bombard and cannon , cannon barrels filled with metal balls containing poisonous gunpowder solutions , and cannons that were mounted on wheeled carriages . 
 Although Jiao Yu did not provide the book 's preface until the Nanyang publication of 1412 , the book was published in the 14th century and was a compilation of material written since the late 13th century . From his own personal accounts , Jiao Yu also described gunpowder weapons that were in use since 1355 , with his involvement in the Red Turban Rebellion and revolt against Yuan Dynasty Mongol rule . 
 = = Gunpowder warfare and weapons = = 
 = = = Firearms and flamethrowers = = = 
 The military treatise of Jiao Yu and Liu Bowen went into a great amount of detail about the gunpowder weapons of their time . The fire lance and fire tube — a combination of a firearm and flamethrower — came in many different versions and were styled with many different names by the time Jiao Yu edited the Huolongjing . The earliest of these were made of bamboo tubes , although metal versions began to appear in the 12th century . Others , according to description and illustrated pictures of the Huolongjing , emitted arrows called the ' lotus bunch ' accompanied by a fiery blast . Some of these low – nitrate gunpowder flamethrowers used poisonous mixtures , including <unk> oxide , and would blast a spray of porcelain bits as shrapnel . 
 The earliest depiction of a fire lance is dated c . 950 , a Chinese painting on a silk banner found at the Buddhist site of Dunhuang . The oldest existent bronze handgun is the Heilongjiang hand cannon from the Heilongjiang archaeological excavation , dated to 1288 . For that year , the Yuan Shi historical text describes the rebellion of the Christian Mongol prince Nayan and the Jurchen @-@ born military commander Li Ting who , along with a Korean brigade conscripted by Kublai Khan , suppressed Nayan 's rebellion using foot soldiers armed with handguns and portable bombards . 
 The earliest metal barrel guns were not designed for high @-@ nitrate gunpowder and a bore @-@ filling projectile ; rather , they were designed for the low @-@ nitrate flamethrower fire lance that shot small co @-@ <unk> missiles . This was called the " bandit @-@ striking penetrating gun " ( ji <unk> bian chong ) , and was illustrated in a drawing in the Huolongjing . In the Islamic world , the fire lance first appears in a book of 1280 written by Hasan al – <unk> , and again appears in a manuscript of 1320 . In Europe , the first representation of the fire lance is of a horse @-@ mounted knight wielding the weapon in a Latin manuscript illustration dated to 1396 , and also appeared in an illustration of <unk> 's De <unk> ( 1449 ) . 
 The Huolongjing also describes and illustrates metal @-@ barrel handguns , including guns with up to ten barrels . It describes the use of a " match @-@ holding lance gun " ( chi huo – sheng qiang ) , it described its arrangement as a match brought down to the touch hole of three gun barrels , one after the other . During the reign of the Yongle Emperor ( 1402 – 1424 ) , the <unk> Brigade was formed with cavalry horses that were said to have tubes filled with flammable materials holstered to their sides , along with troops with firearms and light artillery on carriages . In addition to firearms and fire lances , the Huolongjing also illustrates the tall , vertical , mobile shield used to hide and protect infantry gunmen , known as the " mysteriously moving phalanx @-@ breaking fierce @-@ flame sword @-@ shield " . This large , rectangular shield would have been mounted on wheels with five rows of six circular holes each where the gun barrels could be placed . The shield itself would have been accompanied by swordsmen on either side to protect the gunmen . 
 = = = Bombards and cannons = = = 
 In China , the first cannon @-@ barrel design portrayed in artwork was a stone sculpture dated to 1128 found in Sichuan province , although the oldest archaeological discovery of a cannon is a bronze cannon of China inscribed with the date , " 2nd year of the Dade era , Yuan Dynasty " ( 1298 ) . The prototype to the metal barrel was of course one made of bamboo , which was recorded in use by a Chinese garrison commander at <unk> , Hubei province , in the year 1132 . One of the earliest references to the destructive force of a cannon in China was made by Zhang Xian in 1341 , with his verse known as The Iron Cannon Affair . Zhang wrote that its cannonball could " pierce the heart or belly when it strikes a man or horse , and can even transfix several persons at once " . Jiao Yu wrote that the cannon , called the " eruptor " , was cast in bronze and had an average length of 53 inches ( 130 cm ) . He wrote that some cannons were simply filled with about 100 lead balls , but others , called the " flying @-@ cloud thunderclap eruptor " ( <unk> ; <unk> pili pao ) had large rounds that produced a bursting charge upon impact . He wrote that the Chinese in his day had discovered how to pack hollow , cast iron shells of cannonballs with gunpowder to create an explosive effect upon contact with enemy targets . In perspective , exploding cannonball rounds were not discovered in Europe until the 16th century . He also mentioned the use of the " poison @-@ fog magic smoke eruptor " , in which " blinding gunpowder " and " poisonous gunpowder " were packed into the hollow cannonball shells and were effective in burning the faces and eyes of enemies , along with choking them with a formidable spray of poisonous smoke . He wrote that cannons were mounted on frames or on wheeled carriages so that they could be rotated in all directions . 
 = = = Land mines and naval mines = = = 
 The first recorded use of a land mine stated that the officer Lou <unk> of the late Song Dynasty created them to kill invading Mongol troops in 1277 . Jiao Yu wrote that land mines were spherical , made of cast iron , and their fuses were ignited by the enemy movement disturbing a trigger mechanism . Although his book did not elaborate on the trigger mechanism , a late Ming Dynasty book of 1606 said that a complex system of a pin release , dropping weights , cords and axles worked to rotate a spinning " steel wheel " that acted as a flint to provide sparks that ignited the mines ' fuses underground . For the use of naval mines , he wrote of slowly burning joss sticks that were disguised and timed to explode against enemy ships nearby : 
 The sea – mine called the ' submarine dragon – king ' is made of wrought iron , and carried on a ( submerged ) wooden board , [ appropriately weighted with stones ] . The ( mine ) is enclosed in an ox @-@ bladder . It subtlety lies in the fact that a thin incense ( – stick ) is arranged ( to float ) above the mine in a container . The ( burning ) of this joss stick determines the time at which the fuse is ignited , but without air its glowing would of course go out , so the container is connected with the mine by a ( long ) piece of goat 's intestine ( through which passes the fuse ) . At the upper end the ( joss stick in the container ) is kept floating by ( an arrangement of ) goose and wild – duck feathers , so that it moves up and down with the ripples of the water . On a dark ( night ) the mine is sent downstream ( towards the enemy 's ships ) , and when the joss stick has burnt down to the fuse , there is a great explosion . 
 In the later " Tiangong <unk> " ( The Exploitation of the Works of Nature ) treatise , written by Song Yingxing in 1637 , the ox bladder described by Jiao Yu is replaced with a lacquer bag and a cord pulled from a hidden <unk> located on the nearby shore , which would release a flint steel – wheel firing mechanism to ignite the fuse of the naval mine . 
 = = = Gunpowder and explosives = = = 
 There were several gunpowder compositions proposed by Jiao Yu , with additions to the standard formula of potassium nitrate ( saltpetre ) , sulphur , and charcoal by adapting gunpowder weapons to early chemical warfare . He described the suitable uses of " magic gunpowder " , " poison gunpowder " , or " blinding and burning gunpowder " in warfare , which displays the various amounts of compositions used in his time . For the making of poisonous gunpowder in hand @-@ thrown or catapult @-@ launched grenade bombs , he advised that a mixture of tung oil , urine , sal <unk> , feces , and scallion juice is heated and coated upon tiny iron pellets and broken porcelain . For this , Jiao Yu wrote , " even birds flying in the air cannot escape the effects of the explosion " . His book also outlined the use of the " flying @-@ sand magic bomb releasing ten thousand fires " , which included the use of a tube of gunpowder placed in an earthenware pot that was previously filled with quicklime , resin , and alcoholic extracts of poisonous plants , which would be released in the explosion . 
 During the 14th century , Chinese gunpowder solutions had reached their maximum explosive potential , with levels of nitrate ranging from 12 % to 91 % . At least six formulae in use by the Chinese that were considered to have maximum explosive force . This came about because of the enrichment of sulphur from pyrite extracts during the earlier Song Dynasty period , while Chinese gunpowder formulae by the late 12th century and at least by 1230 were potential enough for explosive detonations and bursting cast iron shells . The root of all this was the Chinese military handbook written in 1044 , the Wujing Zongyao , which outlined the earliest formulae for gunpowder , which was used in bombs hurled by catapults . Later , Wei Xing ( d . 1164 ) of the Song Dynasty was said to have created a gunpowder formula of saltpetre , sulphur , and willow charcoal for his projectile carriages for launching " fire – stones " up to 400 yards ( 370 m ) . 
 Although its destructive force was widely recognized by the 11th century , the Chinese had earlier termed gunpowder as a " fire @-@ drug " ( huo <unk> ) because of Chinese beliefs in its pharmaceutical properties . Its value in festival entertainment could be seen in firework displays , such as the martial demonstration in 1110 to entertain the court of Emperor Huizong . Leading up to its 10th @-@ century use with Fire Arrows and in fuses for igniting flamethrowers shooting Greek Fire , Daoist alchemists had experimented with various black powder solutions during the Han and Tang Dynasties . After the Wujing Zongyao of 1044 had explicitly stated formulae for gunpowder , the Chinese government became frightened that it could fall into the hands of neighbouring enemies , and in 1076 enacted a strict governmental monopoly over the production and distribution of sulphur . Although saltpetre was a central component of the " fire @-@ drug " and a flavour enhancer for food during the Tang and Song periods , in 1067 the Song government banned the populace of modern Shanxi and Hebei provinces to sell sulphur and saltpetre in any form to foreigners . While engaged in a war with the Mongols in 1259 , the official Li Zengbo wrote in his text " Ko Zhai Za Gao , Xu Gao Hou " that the city of Qingzhou was manufacturing one to two thousand strong iron @-@ cased bomb shells a month , dispatching to Xiangyang and Yingzhou about ten to twenty thousand such bombs at a time . 
 = = = Fire arrows and rockets = = = 
 Jiao Yu termed the earliest fire arrows launched from bows ( not rocket launchers ) " fiery pomegranate shot from a bow " because the lump of gunpowder – filled paper wrapped round the arrow below the metal arrow – head resembled the shape of a pomegranate . Jiao Yu advised that a piece of hemp cloth should be used to strengthen the wad of paper and sealed with molten pine resin . Although he described the fire arrow in great detail , it was mentioned by the much earlier Xia Shaozeng , when 20 @,@ 000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchen conquerors of Kaifeng City in 1126 . An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ( <unk> , " Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques " ) , written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng Gongliang and Yang Weide , described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder . Although written in 1630 ( second edition in 1664 ) , the <unk> of Fang <unk> said that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song in 960 . Even after the rocket was invented in China the fire arrow continued in use ; this could be seen in the Second Opium War , where Chinese used fire arrows against the French in 1860 . 
 By the time of Jiao Yu , the term " fire arrow " had taken on a new meaning and incorporated the earliest rockets found in China . The simple transition of this was to use a hollow tube instead of a bow or ballista firing gunpowder @-@ impregnated fire arrows . The historian Joseph Needham wrote that this discovery came sometime before Jiao Yu during the late Southern Song Dynasty ( 1127 – 1279 ) . From the section of the oldest passages in the Huolongjing , the text reads : 
 One uses a bamboo stick 4 ft 2 in long , with an iron ( or steel ) arrow – head 4 @.@ 5 in long ... behind the feathering there is an iron weight 0 @.@ 4 in long . At the front end there is a carton tube bound on to the stick , where the ' rising gunpowder ' is lit . When you want to fire it off , you use a frame shaped like a dragon , or else conveniently a tube of wood or bamboo to contain it . 
 In the late 14th century , the Chinese had discovered how to combine the rocket launching tube with the fire lance . This involved three tubes attached to the same staff . As the first rocket tube was fired , a charge was ignited in the leading tube which expelled a blinding <unk> powder at the enemy , and finally the second rocket was fired . An illustration of this appears in the Huolongjing , which describes the effectiveness of this weapon to obfuscate the location of the rockets from the enemy . The Huolongjing also describes and illustrates two kinds of mounted rocket launchers that fired multiple rockets . There was a cylindrical , basket @-@ work rocket launcher called the " Mr. Facing @-@ both @-@ ways rocket arrow firing basket " , as well as an oblong @-@ section , rectangular , box rocket launcher known as the " magical rocket @-@ arrow block " . Rockets described in the Huolongjing were not all in the shape of standard fire arrows because there some had artificial wings attached . An illustration shows that fins were used to increase aerodynamic stability for the flight path of the rocket , which according to Jiao Yu could rise hundreds of feet before landing at the designated enemy target . 
 The Huolongjing also describes and illustrates the oldest known multistage rocket ; this was the " fire @-@ dragon issuing from the water " ( huo long chu shui ) , which was used mostly by the Chinese navy . It was a two @-@ stage rocket that had carrier or booster rockets that would automatically ignite a number of smaller rocket arrows that were shot out of the front end of the missile , which was shaped like a dragon 's head with an open mouth , before eventually burning out . This multistage rocket may be considered the ancestor of modern cluster munitions . Needham says that the written material and illustration of this rocket come from the oldest stratum of the Huolongjing , which can be dated to about 1300 @-@ 1350 from the book 's part 1 , chapter 3 , page 23 . 
 = = Historical perspective = = 
 Gunpowder warfare originated in medieval China and underwent technological advancement during the preceding dynasties ; however , its technological and methodical perfection occurred elsewhere . Although the inventions and writings of Jiao Yu and the Chinese " fire @-@ weapons " of his time revolutionised warfare in China , there was little Chinese innovation in gunpowder weapons during and after the 15th century . With no significant enemies , there was no need to advance gunpowder weaponry . In stark contrast , in the competitive European environment , failing to adopt and improve gunpowder technology meant conquest by your neighbours . When the Portuguese arrived in China in the early 16th century , they were mostly unimpressed with Chinese firearms in comparison to their own . With the progression of the earliest European arquebus to the matchlock and the <unk> , and the advent of the flintlock musket of the 17th century , they surpassed the level of earlier Chinese innovation . The Chinese of the late Ming Dynasty adopted the Ottoman Turkish <unk> 's kneeling position and bought European firearms for their infantry musketeers . Illustrations of Ottoman and European riflemen with detailed illustrations of their weapons appeared in Zhao Shizhen 's book <unk> of 1598 . 
 The 16th @-@ century breech @-@ loading model entered China around the time that the Portuguese embassy of Fernão Pires de Andrade came to China in 1517 and was eventually rejected . Portuguese and Chinese ships battled near Tuen Mun in 1521 and the Portuguese were repelled by the Ming Dynasty navy . These hostilities began when the Malacca Sultanate ( a tributary vassal loyal to the Ming ) was defeated and conquered by the Portuguese under Afonso de Albuquerque in 1511 , and in the process slaughtered a large community of Chinese merchants living there . 
 In 1523 , the Chinese navy captured two Western ships with Portuguese breech @-@ loading culverins aboard , which the Chinese called a <unk> ( <unk> ; meaning either a Frank or Frankish culverin ) . According to the Ming Shi , these cannons were presented to the Jiajing Emperor by Wang Hong and their design was copied in 1529 . The Frankish culverin was first illustrated in China in a drawing in a Chinese book published in 1562 . However , according to earlier Ming records , it was the War Ministry official He Ru who first acquired these guns in 1522 , while copies of them were made by Yang San ( Pedro Yang ) and Dai Ming — Westernised Chinese in Beijing , . In an even earlier account of Wang Yangming ( 1472 – 1529 ) , the philosopher and governor of Jiangxi , he intended to use <unk> cannons to suppress the rebellion of Prince Zhu <unk> in 1519 . In any case , the arrival of the breech @-@ loading rifle and cannon into China signified the beginning of continual European influence upon Chinese firearms and artillery . Song Yingxing wrote in his encyclopedia of 1637 that both foreign and unique , native , gunpowder weapons were used : 
 Refined copper is used in the casting of Western @-@ ocean cannon , the Red @-@ hair barbarian cannon , and the French cannon . Equal amounts of refined and raw [ or blister ] copper are used in making such arms as signal guns and muskets . For making guns like Xiangyang , <unk> , First General and Second General , iron is used . 
 = Andy Murray = 
 Andrew Barron " Andy " Murray , OBE ( born 15 May 1987 ) is a Scottish professional tennis player currently ranked world No. 2 in singles . Murray represents Great Britain in his sporting activities and is a three @-@ time Grand Slam tournament winner , Olympic champion and Davis Cup champion . His elder brother is former world No. 1 doubles player Jamie Murray . 
 Murray has reached at least the quarterfinals of all Grand Slam tournaments he has participated in since 2011 , with the exception of the 2015 US Open . He was first ranked as British No. 1 on 27 February 2006 . He achieved a top @-@ 10 ranking by the ATP for the first time on 16 April 2007 , and reached a career peak of world No. 2 on 17 August 2009 . 
 Murray is the 2012 Olympic Gold Medalist , having defeated Roger Federer to become the first British singles champion in over 100 years . He won a silver medal in the 2012 mixed doubles with Laura Robson . 
 At the 2012 US Open , Murray became the first British player since 1977 , and the first British man since 1936 , to win a Grand Slam singles tournament , when he defeated Novak Djokovic in the final in five sets . This title made him the only British male to become a Grand Slam singles champion during the Open Era . On 7 July 2013 , Murray won the 2013 Wimbledon Championships , becoming the first British player to win a Wimbledon senior singles title since Virginia Wade in 1977 , and the first British man to win the Men 's Singles Championship since Fred Perry , 77 years previously . 
 He is the only male player to date to have won Olympic Gold and the US Open in the same calendar year , as well as the third man to hold the Gold Medal and two majors on different surfaces ( after Andre Agassi and Rafael Nadal ) . Subsequent to his success at the Olympics and Wimbledon , Murray was voted the 2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year . In the 2016 Gentlemen 's Singles , Murray won his second Wimbledon title , beating Canadian Milos Raonic to become the first British man to win multiple Wimbledon singles titles since Fred Perry in 1935 . 
 Murray has been the runner @-@ up in eight other singles Grand Slam finals : the 2008 US Open , the 2010 , 2011 , 2013 , 2015 and 2016 Australian Opens , the 2012 Wimbledon Championships , and the 2016 French Open losing three to Roger Federer and five to Novak Djokovic . He is the first man in the Open Era to achieve five runner @-@ up finishes at the Australian Open , after losing to Djokovic in the final of the 2016 Australian Open . In 2011 , Murray became only the seventh player in the Open Era to reach the semifinals of all four Grand Slam tournaments in one year . 
 After reaching the final of the 2016 French Open , Murray became the tenth player in the Open Era to reach the final of all four Grand Slam events and is joint ninth on the list for finals reached . He is only the second British player ( after Fred Perry ) of either sex to have reached the final of all four majors . 
 He featured in Great Britain 's Davis Cup winning team in 2015 , winning 11 matches ( 8 singles and 3 doubles ) as they secured their first Davis Cup title since 1936 . Murray was voted the 2015 BBC Sports Personality of the Year , while the Davis Cup team won the 2015 BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year Award . He has scored a total 34 wins and 7 losses with the British Davis Cup team . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Murray was born in Glasgow , Scotland , the son of Judith " Judy " Murray ( née Erskine ) and William Murray . His maternal grandfather , Roy Erskine , was a professional footballer in the late 1950s . Murray is an avid supporter of Hibernian Football Club , the team his grandfather represented . Murray 's elder brother , Jamie , is also a professional tennis player , playing on the doubles circuit . Murray was born with a bipartite patella , where the kneecap remains as two separate bones instead of fusing together in early childhood , but was not diagnosed until the age of 16 . He is seen to hold his knee due to the pain caused by the condition and has pulled out of events because of it . Murray began playing tennis at the age of three when his mother Judy took him to play on the local courts . He played in his first competitive tournament at age five and by the time he was eight he was competing with adults in the Central District Tennis League . 
 Murray grew up in Dunblane and attended Dunblane Primary School . He and his brother were present during the 1996 Dunblane school massacre , when Thomas Hamilton killed 16 children and a teacher before shooting himself ; Murray took cover in a classroom . Murray says he was too young to understand what was happening and is reluctant to talk about it in interviews , but in his autobiography Hitting Back he states that he attended a youth group run by Hamilton , and that his mother gave Hamilton lifts in her car . Murray later attended Dunblane High School . 
 Murray 's parents split up when he was only 10 . He believes the impact this had on him could be the reason behind his competitive spirit . At 15 , he was asked to train with Rangers Football Club at their School of Excellence , but declined , opting to focus on his tennis career instead . He then decided to move to Barcelona , Spain . There he studied at the Schiller International School and trained on the clay courts of the Sánchez @-@ Casal Academy , coached by Pato Alvarez . Murray described this time as " a big sacrifice " . His parents had to find £ 40 @,@ 000 to pay for his 18 @-@ month stay there . While in Spain , he trained with Emilio Sánchez , formerly the world No. 1 doubles player . 
 In February 2013 , Murray bought <unk> House for £ 1 @.@ 8 million which opened as a 15 @-@ room five @-@ star hotel in April 2014 . Later that month Murray was awarded Freedom of Stirling and received an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Stirling in recognition of his services to tennis . 
 Murray began dating Kim Sears , daughter of player @-@ turned @-@ coach Nigel Sears , in 2005 . Their engagement was announced in November 2014 , and they married on 11 April 2015 at Dunblane Cathedral in his home town . The couple have a daughter , Sophia Olivia , born on 7 February 2016 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Junior tennis = = = 
 Leon Smith , Murray 's tennis coach from 11 to 17 , described Murray as " unbelievably competitive " , while Murray attributes his abilities to the motivation gained from losing to his older brother Jamie . In 1999 , at the age of 12 , Murray won his age group at the Orange Bowl , a prestigious event for junior players . 
 In July 2003 , Murray started out on the Challenger and Futures circuit . In his first tournament , he reached the quarterfinals of the Manchester Challenger . In September , Murray won his first senior title by taking the Glasgow Futures event . He also reached the semifinals of the Edinburgh Futures event . 
 For the first six months of 2004 , Murray had a knee injury and couldn 't play . 
 In July 2004 , Murray played a Challenger event in Nottingham , where he lost to future Grand Slam finalist Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga in the second round . Murray then went on to win Futures events in <unk> and Rome . 
 In September 2004 , he won the Junior US Open and was selected for the Davis Cup World Group play @-@ off match against Austria later that month ; however , he was not selected to play . Later that year , he won BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year . 
 As a junior , Murray reached as high as No. 6 in the world in 2003 ( and No. 8 in doubles ) . In the 2004 @-@ instated combined rankings , Murray reached No. 2 in the world . 
 Junior Slam results : Australian Open : - 
 French Open : SF ( 2005 ) 
 Wimbledon : 3R ( 2004 ) 
 US Open : W ( 2004 ) 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 Murray began 2005 ranked world No. 407 , but when he was in South America in January , he hurt his back and had to take 3 months off . 
 In March , he became the youngest Briton to play in the Davis Cup . Murray turned professional in April and was given a wild card entry to a clay @-@ court tournament in Barcelona , the Open SEAT , where he lost in three sets to Jan <unk> . In April , Murray parted acrimoniously from his coach Pato Alvarez , complaining about his negative attitude . Murray then reached the semifinals of the boys ' French Open where he lost in straight sets to Marin Čilić . 
 Mark Petchey agreed to coach Murray for 4 weeks till the end of Wimbledon , but it metamorphosed into a full @-@ time position . Given a wild card to Queen 's , Murray progressed past Santiago Ventura in straight sets for his first ATP match win . Following a second round win against Taylor Dent , he played former Australian Open champion Thomas Johansson in the third round , losing in three sets after cramping and twisting his ankle . Following his performance at Queen 's , Murray received a wild card for Wimbledon . Ranked 312 , Murray became the first Scot in the Open Era to reach the third round of the men 's singles tournament at Wimbledon . In the third round , Murray lost to 2002 Wimbledon finalist David Nalbandian due to cramping and fatigue , having led by two sets to love . 
 Following Wimbledon , Murray won Challengers events on the hard courts of <unk> and Binghamton , New York . He then experienced his first Masters event at Cincinnati , where he beat Taylor Dent , before losing in three sets to world No. 4 , Marat Safin . With a wild card entry , Murray played Andrei Pavel in the opening round of the US Open , where he recovered from being down two sets to one to win his first five @-@ set match . However , he lost in the second round to Arnaud Clément in another five set contest . Murray was again selected for the Davis Cup match against Switzerland . He was picked for the opening singles rubbers , losing in straight sets to Stanislas Wawrinka . Murray made his first ATP final at the Thailand Open where he faced world No. 1 Roger Federer . Murray lost in straight sets . 
 Murray beat Tim Henman in their first meeting , at the Basel Swiss Indoors in the first round , and eventually reached the quarterfinals . 
 In November , Murray captained Scotland at the inaugural Aberdeen Cup against England led by Greg Rusedski . This was an exhibition tournament , and the only event where Murray played Rusedski , they never met on the Tour . Rusedski beat Murray in the first match , but Murray won the second . This was also the first time that Andy and his brother Jamie Murray played doubles as seniors . Scotland defeated England 4 ½ – 2 ½ . He completed the year ranked 64 and was named the 2005 BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year . 
 = = = 2006 : British No. 1 = = = 
 The 2006 season saw Murray compete on the full circuit for the first time and split with his coach Mark Petchey and team up with Brad Gilbert . 
 On 27 February , Murray became the British Number 1 , ending Tim Henman 's seven @-@ year run . Murray was now world No 42 , Greg Rusedski No 43 , and Tim Henman No 49 . Rusedski regained his British no 1 status on 15 May for eight weeks , after which Murray became no 1 again on 10 July . 
 Murray suffered a straight sets defeat at the Australian Open , to Argentine Juan Ignacio Chela in the first round and to Gaël Monfils at the French Open , in five sets . Murray did reach the fourth round for the first time at both Wimbledon and the US Open . 
 Murray played in Davis Cup ties against Serbia , Israel and Ukraine . Murray missed the opening singles matches before losing the doubles as Britain lost their tie against Serbia . During the tie with Israel , Murray won his rubber and lost the doubles before pulling out with a neck injury before the reverse singles , as Britain lost the tie . Against Ukraine , Murray won both his singles rubbers , but lost the doubles , as Britain won the tie . 
 At the Masters , Murray lost in the first round in Miami , Monte Carlo and Rome . Murray went out of the tournaments in Indian Wells and Hamburg in the second round . Murray reached his first Masters semifinal in Toronto at the Rogers Cup , losing to Richard Gasquet . 
 At Cincinnati , Murray became only one of two players , alongside Rafael Nadal , to defeat Roger Federer in 2006 , breaking the Swiss star 's 55 match winning streak on hard courts . He lost two rounds later to Andy Roddick , but broke into the top 20 for the first time . In the final two Masters events in Madrid and Paris , Murray exited both tournaments at the last @-@ 16 stage ending his season , with losses to Novak Djokovic and Dominik <unk> . When the tour reached San Jose , California ; Murray defeated a top ten player for the first time , Andy Roddick . Murray went on to claim the SAP Open title defeating world No. 11 Lleyton Hewitt . Murray was a finalist at the Legg Mason Tennis Classic . Playing doubles with his brother in Bangkok the pair reached the final . After the French Open , where Murray was injured again , he revealed that his bones hadn 't fully grown , causing him to suffer from cramps and back problems . 
 In November , the Aberdeen Cup was held for the second time , with Murray leading the Scotland team and Greg Rusedski captaining England . Scotland won 6 ½ – 1 . 
