 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 The first major groups of amphibians developed in the Devonian period , around 370 million years ago , from lobe @-@ finned fish which were similar to the modern coelacanth and lungfish . These ancient lobe @-@ finned fish had evolved multi @-@ jointed leg @-@ like fins with digits that enabled them to crawl along the sea bottom . Some fish had developed primitive lungs to help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the Devonian swamps were low in oxygen . They could also use their strong fins to hoist themselves out of the water and onto dry land if circumstances so required . Eventually , their bony fins would evolve into limbs and they would become the ancestors to all tetrapods , including modern amphibians , reptiles , birds , and mammals . Despite being able to crawl on land , many of these prehistoric <unk> fish still spent most of their time in the water . They had started to develop lungs , but still breathed predominantly with gills . 
 Many examples of species showing transitional features have been discovered . Ichthyostega was one of the first primitive amphibians , with nostrils and more efficient lungs . It had four sturdy limbs , a neck , a tail with fins and a skull very similar to that of the lobe @-@ finned fish , <unk> . Amphibians evolved adaptations that allowed them to stay out of the water for longer periods . Their lungs improved and their skeletons became heavier and stronger , better able to support the weight of their bodies on land . They developed " hands " and " feet " with five or more digits ; the skin became more capable of retaining body fluids and resisting desiccation . The fish 's <unk> bone in the hyoid region behind the gills diminished in size and became the stapes of the amphibian ear , an adaptation necessary for hearing on dry land . An affinity between the amphibians and the teleost fish is the multi @-@ folded structure of the teeth and the paired supra @-@ occipital bones at the back of the head , neither of these features being found elsewhere in the animal kingdom . 
 At the end of the Devonian period ( 360 million years ago ) , the seas , rivers and lakes were teeming with life while the land was the realm of early plants and devoid of vertebrates , though some , such as Ichthyostega , may have sometimes hauled themselves out of the water . It is thought they may have propelled themselves with their forelimbs , dragging their hindquarters in a similar manner to that used by the elephant seal . In the early Carboniferous ( 360 to 345 million years ago ) , the climate became wet and warm . Extensive swamps developed with mosses , ferns , horsetails and <unk> . Air @-@ breathing arthropods evolved and invaded the land where they provided food for the carnivorous amphibians that began to adapt to the terrestrial environment . There were no other tetrapods on the land and the amphibians were at the top of the food chain , occupying the ecological position currently held by the crocodile . Though equipped with limbs and the ability to breathe air , most still had a long tapering body and strong tail . They were the top land predators , sometimes reaching several metres in length , preying on the large insects of the period and the many types of fish in the water . They still needed to return to water to lay their shell @-@ less eggs , and even most modern amphibians have a fully aquatic larval stage with gills like their fish ancestors . It was the development of the amniotic egg , which prevents the developing embryo from drying out , that enabled the reptiles to reproduce on land and which led to their dominance in the period that followed . 
 After the Carboniferous rainforest collapse amphibian dominance gave way to reptiles , and amphibians were further devastated by the Permian – Triassic extinction event . During the Triassic Period ( 250 to 200 million years ago ) , the reptiles continued to out @-@ compete the amphibians , leading to a reduction in both the amphibians ' size and their importance in the biosphere . According to the fossil record , Lissamphibia , which includes all modern amphibians and is the only surviving lineage , may have branched off from the extinct groups Temnospondyli and Lepospondyli at some period between the Late Carboniferous and the Early Triassic . The relative scarcity of fossil evidence precludes precise dating , but the most recent molecular study , based on multilocus sequence typing , suggests a Late Carboniferous / Early Permian origin for extant amphibians . 
 The origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians is a matter of debate . A 2005 molecular phylogeny , based on rDNA analysis , suggests that salamanders and caecilians are more closely related to each other than they are to frogs . It also appears that the divergence of the three groups took place in the Paleozoic or early Mesozoic ( around 250 million years ago ) , before the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea and soon after their divergence from the lobe @-@ finned fish . The briefness of this period , and the swiftness with which radiation took place , would help account for the relative scarcity of primitive amphibian fossils . There are large gaps in the fossil record , but the discovery of a proto @-@ frog from the Early Permian in Texas in 2008 provided a missing link with many of the characteristics of modern frogs . Molecular analysis suggests that the frog – salamander divergence took place considerably earlier than the palaeontological evidence indicates . 
 As they evolved from lunged fish , amphibians had to make certain adaptations for living on land , including the need to develop new means of locomotion . In the water , the sideways thrusts of their tails had propelled them forward , but on land , quite different mechanisms were required . Their vertebral columns , limbs , limb girdles and musculature needed to be strong enough to raise them off the ground for locomotion and feeding . Terrestrial adults discarded their lateral line systems and adapted their sensory systems to receive stimuli via the medium of the air . They needed to develop new methods to regulate their body heat to cope with fluctuations in ambient temperature . They developed behaviours suitable for reproduction in a terrestrial environment . Their skins were exposed to harmful ultraviolet rays that had previously been absorbed by the water . The skin changed to become more protective and prevent excessive water loss . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The superclass <unk> is divided into four classes of vertebrate animals with four limbs . Reptiles , birds and mammals are amniotes , the eggs of which are either laid or carried by the female and are surrounded by several membranes , some of which are impervious . Lacking these membranes , amphibians require water bodies for reproduction , although some species have developed various strategies for protecting or bypassing the vulnerable aquatic larval stage . They are not found in the sea with the exception of one or two frogs that live in brackish water in mangrove swamps . On land , amphibians are restricted to moist habitats because of the need to keep their skin damp . 
 The smallest amphibian ( and vertebrate ) in the world is a <unk> frog from New Guinea ( Paedophryne amauensis ) first discovered in 2012 . It has an average length of 7 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 in ) and is part of a genus that contains four of the world 's ten smallest frog species . The largest living amphibian is the 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 ft 11 in ) Chinese giant salamander ( Andrias davidianus ) but this is a great deal smaller than the largest amphibian that ever existed — the extinct 9 m ( 30 ft ) <unk> , a crocodile @-@ like temnospondyl dating to 270 million years ago from the middle Permian of Brazil . The largest frog is the African Goliath frog ( Conraua goliath ) , which can reach 32 cm ( 13 in ) and weigh 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . 
 Amphibians are ectothermic ( cold @-@ blooded ) vertebrates that do not maintain their body temperature through internal physiological processes . Their metabolic rate is low and as a result , their food and energy requirements are limited . In the adult state , they have tear ducts and movable eyelids , and most species have ears that can detect airborne or ground vibrations . They have muscular tongues , which in many species can be protruded . Modern amphibians have fully ossified vertebrae with articular processes . Their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae . Their skulls are mostly broad and short , and are often incompletely ossified . Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales , apart from a few fish @-@ like scales in certain caecilians . The skin contains many mucous glands and in some species , poison glands . The hearts of amphibians have three chambers , two atria and one ventricle . They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea . Most amphibians lay their eggs in water and have aquatic larvae that undergo metamorphosis to become terrestrial adults . Amphibians breathe by means of a pump action in which air is first drawn into the <unk> region through the nostrils . These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat . They supplement this with gas exchange through the skin . 
 = = = Anura = = = 
 The order Anura ( from the Ancient Greek a ( n ) - meaning " without " and oura meaning " tail " ) comprises the frogs and toads . They usually have long hind limbs that fold underneath them , shorter forelimbs , webbed toes with no claws , no tails , large eyes and glandular moist skin . Members of this order with smooth skins are commonly referred to as frogs , while those with warty skins are known as toads . The difference is not a formal one taxonomically and there are numerous exceptions to this rule . Members of the family Bufonidae are known as the " true toads " . Frogs range in size from the 30 @-@ centimetre ( 12 in ) Goliath frog ( Conraua goliath ) of West Africa to the 7 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 30 in ) Paedophryne amauensis , first described in Papua New Guinea in 2012 , which is also the smallest known vertebrate . Although most species are associated with water and damp habitats , some are specialised to live in trees or in deserts . They are found worldwide except for polar areas . 
 Anura is divided into three suborders that are broadly accepted by the scientific community , but the relationships between some families remain unclear . Future molecular studies should provide further insights into their evolutionary relationships . The suborder <unk> contains four families of primitive frogs . These are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> which have few derived features and are probably paraphyletic with regard to other frog lineages . The six families in the more evolutionarily advanced suborder <unk> are the fossorial <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and the obligatorily aquatic Pipidae . These have certain characteristics that are intermediate between the two other suborders . Neobatrachia is by far the largest suborder and includes the remaining families of modern frogs , including most common species . 96 % of the over 5 @,@ 000 extant species of frog are <unk> . 
 = = = Caudata = = = 
 The order Caudata ( from the Latin cauda meaning " tail " ) consists of the salamanders — elongated , low @-@ slung animals that mostly resemble lizards in form . This is a symplesiomorphic trait and they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals . Salamanders lack claws , have scale @-@ free skins , either smooth or covered with tubercles , and tails that are usually flattened from side to side and often finned . They range in size from the Chinese giant salamander ( Andrias davidianus ) , which has been reported to grow to a length of 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) , to the diminutive <unk> <unk> from Mexico which seldom exceeds 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in length . Salamanders have a mostly Laurasian distribution , being present in much of the Holarctic region of the northern hemisphere . The family Plethodontidae is also found in Central America and South America north of the Amazon basin ; South America was apparently invaded from Central America by about the start of the Miocene , 23 million years ago . Urodela is a name sometimes used for all the extant species of salamanders . Members of several salamander families have become paedomorphic and either fail to complete their metamorphosis or retain some larval characteristics as adults . Most salamanders are under 15 cm ( 6 in ) long . They may be terrestrial or aquatic and many spend part of the year in each habitat . When on land , they mostly spend the day hidden under stones or logs or in dense vegetation , emerging in the evening and night to forage for worms , insects and other invertebrates . 
 The suborder Cryptobranchoidea contains the primitive salamanders . A number of fossil <unk> have been found , but there are only three living species , the Chinese giant salamander ( Andrias davidianus ) , the Japanese giant salamander ( Andrias japonicus ) and the hellbender ( <unk> <unk> ) from North America . These large amphibians retain several larval characteristics in their adult state ; gills slits are present and the eyes are <unk> . A unique feature is their ability to feed by suction , depressing either the left side of their lower jaw or the right . The males excavate nests , persuade females to lay their egg strings inside them , and guard them . As well as breathing with lungs , they respire through the many folds in their thin skin , which has capillaries close to the surface . 
 The suborder Salamandroidea contains the advanced salamanders . They differ from the <unk> by having fused <unk> bones in the lower jaw , and by using internal fertilisation . In <unk> , the male deposits a bundle of sperm , the spermatophore , and the female picks it up and inserts it into her cloaca where the sperm is stored until the eggs are laid . The largest family in this group is Plethodontidae , the lungless salamanders , which includes 60 % of all salamander species . The family Salamandridae includes the true salamanders and the name " newt " is given to members of its subfamily <unk> . 
 The third suborder , <unk> , contains the four species of sirens , which are in a single family , Sirenidae . Members of this order are eel @-@ like aquatic salamanders with much reduced forelimbs and no hind limbs . Some of their features are primitive while others are derived . Fertilisation is likely to be external as <unk> lack the cloacal glands used by male <unk> to produce spermatophores and the females lack spermathecae for sperm storage . Despite this , the eggs are laid singly , a behaviour not conducive for external fertilisation . 
 = = = Gymnophiona = = = 
 The order Gymnophiona ( from the Greek gymnos meaning " naked " and <unk> meaning " serpent " ) or Apoda ( from the Latin an- meaning " without " and the Greek <unk> meaning " legs " ) comprises the caecilians . These are long , cylindrical , limbless animals with a <unk> or worm @-@ like form . The adults vary in length from 8 to 75 centimetres ( 3 to 30 inches ) with the exception of Thomson 's caecilian ( Caecilia thompsoni ) , which can reach 150 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 feet ) . A caecilian 's skin has a large number of transverse folds and in some species contains tiny embedded dermal scales . It has rudimentary eyes covered in skin , which are probably limited to discerning differences in light intensity . It also has a pair of short tentacles near the eye that can be extended and which have tactile and olfactory functions . Most caecilians live underground in burrows in damp soil , in rotten wood and under plant debris , but some are aquatic . Most species lay their eggs underground and when the larvae hatch , they make their way to adjacent bodies of water . Others brood their eggs and the larvae undergo metamorphosis before the eggs hatch . A few species give birth to live young , nourishing them with glandular secretions while they are in the oviduct . Caecilians have a mostly Gondwanan distribution , being found in tropical regions of Africa , Asia and Central and South America . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 The integumentary structure contains some typical characteristics common to terrestrial vertebrates , such as the presence of highly cornified outer layers , renewed periodically through a moulting process controlled by the pituitary and thyroid glands . Local thickenings ( often called warts ) are common , such as those found on toads . The outside of the skin is shed periodically more or less in one piece , in contrast to mammals and birds where it is shed in flakes . Amphibians often eat the sloughed skin . Caecilians are unique among amphibians in having mineralized dermal scales embedded in the dermis between the furrows in the skin . The similarity of these to the scales of bony fish is largely superficial . Lizards and some frogs have somewhat similar osteoderms forming bony deposits in the dermis , but this is an example of convergent evolution with similar structures having arisen independently in diverse vertebrate lineages . 
 Amphibian skin is permeable to water . Gas exchange can take place through the skin ( cutaneous respiration ) and this allows adult amphibians to respire without rising to the surface of water and to hibernate at the bottom of ponds . To compensate for their thin and delicate skin , amphibians have evolved mucous glands , principally on their heads , backs and tails . The secretions produced by these help keep the skin moist . In addition , most species of amphibian have granular glands that secrete distasteful or poisonous substances . Some amphibian toxins can be lethal to humans while others have little effect . The main poison @-@ producing glands , the <unk> , produce the neurotoxin bufotoxin and are located behind the ears of toads , along the backs of frogs , behind the eyes of salamanders and on the upper surface of caecilians . 
 The skin colour of amphibians is produced by three layers of pigment cells called chromatophores . These three cell layers consist of the melanophores ( occupying the deepest layer ) , the <unk> ( forming an intermediate layer and containing many granules , producing a blue @-@ green colour ) and the <unk> ( yellow , the most superficial layer ) . The colour change displayed by many species is initiated by hormones secreted by the pituitary gland . Unlike bony fish , there is no direct control of the pigment cells by the nervous system , and this results in the colour change taking place more slowly than happens in fish . A vividly coloured skin usually indicates that the species is toxic and is a warning sign to predators . 
 = = = Skeletal system and locomotion = = = 
 Amphibians have a skeletal system that is structurally homologous to other tetrapods , though with a number of variations . They all have four limbs except for the legless caecilians and a few species of salamander with reduced or no limbs . The bones are hollow and lightweight . The musculoskeletal system is strong to enable it to support the head and body . The bones are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other by means of overlapping processes . The pectoral girdle is supported by muscle , and the well @-@ developed pelvic girdle is attached to the backbone by a pair of sacral ribs . The ilium slopes forward and the body is held closer to the ground than is the case in mammals . 
 In most amphibians , there are four digits on the fore foot and five on the hind foot , but no claws on either . Some salamanders have fewer digits and the <unk> are eel @-@ like in appearance with tiny , stubby legs . The sirens are aquatic salamanders with stumpy forelimbs and no hind limbs . The caecilians are limbless . They burrow in the manner of earthworms with zones of muscle contractions moving along the body . On the surface of the ground or in water they move by undulating their body from side to side . 
 In frogs , the hind legs are larger than the fore legs , especially so in those species that principally move by jumping or swimming . In the walkers and runners the hind limbs are not so large , and the burrowers mostly have short limbs and broad bodies . The feet have adaptations for the way of life , with webbing between the toes for swimming , broad adhesive toe pads for climbing , and keratinised tubercles on the hind feet for digging ( frogs usually dig backwards into the soil ) . In most salamanders , the limbs are short and more or less the same length and project at right angles from the body . Locomotion on land is by walking and the tail often swings from side to side or is used as a prop , particularly when climbing . In their normal gait , only one leg is advanced at a time in the manner adopted by their ancestors , the lobe @-@ finned fish . Some salamanders in the genus <unk> and certain <unk> climb trees and have long limbs , large toepads and prehensile tails . In aquatic salamanders and in frog tadpoles , the tail has dorsal and ventral fins and is moved from side to side as a means of propulsion . Adult frogs do not have tails and caecilians have only very short ones . 
 Salamanders use their tails in defence and some are prepared to jettison them to save their lives in a process known as autotomy . Certain species in the Plethodontidae have a weak zone at the base of the tail and use this strategy readily . The tail often continues to twitch after separation which may distract the attacker and allow the salamander to escape . Both tails and limbs can be regenerated . Adult frogs are unable to regrow limbs but tadpoles can do so . 
 = = = Circulatory system = = = 
 Amphibians have a juvenile stage and an adult stage , and the circulatory systems of the two are distinct . In the juvenile ( or tadpole ) stage , the circulation is similar to that of a fish ; the two @-@ chambered heart pumps the blood through the gills where it is oxygenated , and is spread around the body and back to the heart in a single loop . In the adult stage , amphibians ( especially frogs ) lose their gills and develop lungs . They have a heart that consists of a single ventricle and two atria . When the ventricle starts contracting , deoxygenated blood is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs . Continued contraction then pumps oxygenated blood around the rest of the body . Mixing of the two bloodstreams is minimized by the anatomy of the chambers . 
 = = = Nervous and sensory systems = = = 
 The nervous system is basically the same as in other vertebrates , with a central brain , a spinal cord , and nerves throughout the body . The amphibian brain is less well developed than that of reptiles , birds and mammals but is similar in morphology and function to that of a fish . It is believed amphibians are capable of perceiving pain . The brain consists of equal parts , cerebrum , midbrain and cerebellum . Various parts of the cerebrum process sensory input , such as smell in the olfactory lobe and sight in the optic lobe , and it is additionally the centre of behaviour and learning . The cerebellum is the center of muscular coordination and the medulla oblongata controls some organ functions including heartbeat and respiration . The brain sends signals through the spinal cord and nerves to regulate activity in the rest of the body . The pineal body , known to regulate sleep patterns in humans , is thought to produce the hormones involved in hibernation and aestivation in amphibians . 
 Tadpoles retain the lateral line system of their ancestral fishes , but this is lost in terrestrial adult amphibians . Some caecilians possess electroreceptors that allow them to locate objects around them when submerged in water . The ears are well developed in frogs . There is no external ear , but the large circular eardrum lies on the surface of the head just behind the eye . This vibrates and sound is transmitted through a single bone , the stapes , to the inner ear . Only high @-@ frequency sounds like mating calls are heard in this way , but low @-@ frequency noises can be detected through another mechanism . There is a patch of specialized <unk> , called papilla amphibiorum , in the inner ear capable of detecting deeper sounds . Another feature , unique to frogs and salamanders , is the columella @-@ operculum complex adjoining the auditory capsule which is involved in the transmission of both airborne and seismic signals . The ears of salamanders and caecilians are less highly developed than those of frogs as they do not normally communicate with each other through the medium of sound . 
 The eyes of tadpoles lack lids , but at metamorphosis , the cornea becomes more dome @-@ shaped , the lens becomes flatter , and eyelids and associated glands and ducts develop . The adult eyes are an improvement on invertebrate eyes and were a first step in the development of more advanced vertebrate eyes . They allow colour vision and depth of focus . In the retinas are green rods , which are receptive to a wide range of wavelengths . 
 = = = Digestive and excretory systems = = = 
 Many amphibians catch their prey by flicking out an elongated tongue with a sticky tip and drawing it back into the mouth before seizing the item with their jaws . Some use inertial feeding to help them swallow the prey , repeatedly thrusting their head forward sharply causing the food to move backwards in their mouth by inertia . Most amphibians swallow their prey whole without much chewing so they possess voluminous stomachs . The short oesophagus is lined with cilia that help to move the food to the stomach and mucus produced by glands in the mouth and pharynx eases its passage . The enzyme <unk> produced in the stomach helps digest the chitinous cuticle of arthropod prey . 
 Amphibians possess a pancreas , liver and gall bladder . The liver is usually large with two lobes . Its size is determined by its function as a glycogen and fat storage unit , and may change with the seasons as these reserves are built or used up . Adipose tissue is another important means of storing energy and this occurs in the abdomen , under the skin and , in some salamanders , in the tail . 
 There are two kidneys located dorsally , near the roof of the body cavity . Their job is to filter the blood of metabolic waste and transport the urine via ureters to the urinary bladder where it is stored before being passed out periodically through the cloacal vent . Larvae and most aquatic adult amphibians excrete the nitrogen as ammonia in large quantities of dilute urine , while terrestrial species , with a greater need to conserve water , excrete the less toxic product urea . Some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid . 
 = = = Respiratory system = = = 
 The lungs in amphibians are primitive compared to those of amniotes , possessing few internal septa and large alveoli , and consequently having a comparatively slow diffusion rate for oxygen entering the blood . Ventilation is accomplished by buccal pumping . Most amphibians , however , are able to exchange gases with the water or air via their skin . To enable sufficient cutaneous respiration , the surface of their highly vascularised skin must remain moist to allow the oxygen to diffuse at a sufficiently high rate . Because oxygen concentration in the water increases at both low temperatures and high flow rates , aquatic amphibians in these situations can rely primarily on cutaneous respiration , as in the Titicaca water frog and the hellbender salamander . In air , where oxygen is more concentrated , some small species can rely solely on cutaneous gas exchange , most famously the plethodontid salamanders , which have neither lungs nor gills . Many aquatic salamanders and all tadpoles have gills in their larval stage , with some ( such as the axolotl ) retaining gills as aquatic adults . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 For the purpose of reproduction most amphibians require fresh water although some lay their eggs on land and have developed various means of keeping them moist . A few ( e.g. <unk> raja ) can inhabit brackish water , but there are no true marine amphibians . There are reports , however , of particular amphibian populations unexpectedly invading marine waters . Such was the case with the Black Sea invasion of the natural hybrid Pelophylax esculentus reported in 2010 . 
 Several hundred frog species in adaptive radiations ( e.g. , Eleutherodactylus , the Pacific <unk> , the <unk> @-@ Papuan <unk> , and many other tropical frogs ) , however , do not need any water for breeding in the wild . They reproduce via direct development , an ecological and evolutionary adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free @-@ standing water . Almost all of these frogs live in wet tropical rainforests and their eggs hatch directly into miniature versions of the adult , passing through the tadpole stage within the egg . Reproductive success of many amphibians is dependent not only on the quantity of rainfall , but the seasonal timing . 
 In the tropics , many amphibians breed continuously or at any time of year . In temperate regions , breeding is mostly seasonal , usually in the spring , and is triggered by increasing day length , rising temperatures or rainfall . Experiments have shown the importance of temperature , but the trigger event , especially in arid regions , is often a storm . In anurans , males usually arrive at the breeding sites before females and the vocal chorus they produce may stimulate ovulation in females and the endocrine activity of males that are not yet reproductively active . 
 In caecilians , fertilisation is internal , the male extruding an intromittent organ , the <unk> , and inserting it into the female cloaca . The paired Müllerian glands inside the male cloaca secrete a fluid which resembles that produced by mammalian prostate glands and which may transport and nourish the sperm . Fertilisation probably takes place in the oviduct . 
 The majority of salamanders also engage in internal fertilisation . In most of these , the male deposits a spermatophore , a small packet of sperm on top of a gelatinous cone , on the substrate either on land or in the water . The female takes up the sperm packet by grasping it with the lips of the cloaca and pushing it into the vent . The spermatozoa move to the spermatheca in the roof of the cloaca where they remain until ovulation which may be many months later . Courtship rituals and methods of transfer of the spermatophore vary between species . In some , the spermatophore may be placed directly into the female cloaca while in others , the female may be guided to the spermatophore or restrained with an embrace called amplexus . Certain primitive salamanders in the families Sirenidae , <unk> and <unk> practice external fertilisation in a similar manner to frogs , with the female laying the eggs in water and the male releasing sperm onto the egg mass . 
 With a few exceptions , frogs use external fertilisation . The male grasps the female tightly with his forelimbs either behind the arms or in front of the back legs , or in the case of <unk> tricolor , around the neck . They remain in amplexus with their cloacae positioned close together while the female lays the eggs and the male covers them with sperm . <unk> nuptial pads on the male 's hands aid in retaining grip . Often the male collects and retains the egg mass , forming a sort of basket with the hind feet . An exception is the granular poison frog ( Oophaga granulifera ) where the male and female place their cloacae in close proximity while facing in opposite directions and then release eggs and sperm simultaneously . The tailed frog ( <unk> <unk> ) exhibits internal fertilisation . The " tail " is only possessed by the male and is an extension of the cloaca and used to inseminate the female . This frog lives in fast @-@ flowing streams and internal fertilisation prevents the sperm from being washed away before fertilisation occurs . The sperm may be retained in storage tubes attached to the oviduct until the following spring . 
 Most frogs can be classified as either prolonged or explosive breeders . Typically , prolonged breeders congregate at a breeding site , the males usually arriving first , calling and setting up territories . Other satellite males remain quietly nearby , waiting for their opportunity to take over a territory . The females arrive sporadically , mate selection takes place and eggs are laid . The females depart and territories may change hands . More females appear and in due course , the breeding season comes to an end . Explosive breeders on the other hand are found where temporary pools appear in dry regions after rainfall . These frogs are typically fossorial species that emerge after heavy rains and congregate at a breeding site . They are attracted there by the calling of the first male to find a suitable place , perhaps a pool that forms in the same place each rainy season . The assembled frogs may call in unison and frenzied activity ensues , the males scrambling to mate with the usually smaller number of females . 
 There is a direct competition between males to win the attention of the females in salamanders and newts , with elaborate courtship displays to keep the female 's attention long enough to get her interested in choosing him to mate with . Some species store sperm through long breeding seasons , as the extra time may allow for interactions with rival sperm . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Most amphibians go through metamorphosis , a process of significant morphological change after birth . In typical amphibian development , eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle . Frogs , toads and salamanders all hatch from the egg as larvae with external gills . Metamorphosis in amphibians is regulated by thyroxine concentration in the blood , which stimulates metamorphosis , and prolactin , which counteracts thyroxine 's effect . Specific events are dependent on threshold values for different tissues . Because most embryonic development is outside the parental body , it is subject to many adaptations due to specific environmental circumstances . For this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges instead of teeth , whisker @-@ like skin extensions or fins . They also make use of a sensory lateral line organ similar to that of fish . After metamorphosis , these organs become redundant and will be reabsorbed by controlled cell death , called apoptosis . The variety of adaptations to specific environmental circumstances among amphibians is wide , with many discoveries still being made . 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 The egg of an amphibian is typically surrounded by a transparent gelatinous covering secreted by the oviducts and containing <unk> and mucopolysaccharides . This capsule is permeable to water and gases , and swells considerably as it absorbs water . The ovum is at first rigidly held , but in fertilised eggs the innermost layer liquefies and allows the embryo to move freely . This also happens in salamander eggs , even when they are unfertilised . Eggs of some salamanders and frogs contain unicellular green algae . These penetrate the jelly envelope after the eggs are laid and may increase the supply of oxygen to the embryo through photosynthesis . They seem to both speed up the development of the larvae and reduce mortality . Most eggs contain the pigment melanin which raises their temperature through the absorption of light and also protects them against ultraviolet radiation . Caecilians , some plethodontid salamanders and certain frogs lay eggs underground that are unpigmented . In the wood frog ( Rana sylvatica ) , the interior of the globular egg cluster has been found to be up to 6 ° C ( 11 ° F ) warmer than its surroundings , which is an advantage in its cool northern habitat . 
 The eggs may be deposited singly or in small groups , or may take the form of spherical egg masses , rafts or long strings . In terrestrial caecilians , the eggs are laid in grape @-@ like clusters in burrows near streams . The amphibious salamander Ensatina attaches its similar clusters by stalks to underwater stems and roots . The greenhouse frog ( Eleutherodactylus planirostris ) lays eggs in small groups in the soil where they develop in about two weeks directly into juvenile frogs without an intervening larval stage . The <unk> frog ( Physalaemus <unk> ) builds a floating nest from foam to protect its eggs . First a raft is built , then eggs are laid in the centre , and finally a foam cap is overlaid . The foam has anti @-@ microbial properties . It contains no detergents but is created by whipping up proteins and lectins secreted by the female . 
 = = = Larvae = = = 
 The eggs of amphibians are typically laid in water and hatch into free @-@ living larvae that complete their development in water and later transform into either aquatic or terrestrial adults . In many species of frog and in most lungless salamanders ( Plethodontidae ) , direct development takes place , the larvae growing within the eggs and emerging as miniature adults . Many caecilians and some other amphibians lay their eggs on land , and the newly hatched larvae wriggle or are transported to water bodies . Some caecilians , the alpine salamander ( Salamandra atra ) and some of the African live @-@ bearing toads ( Nectophrynoides spp . ) are viviparous . Their larvae feed on glandular secretions and develop within the female 's oviduct , often for long periods . Other amphibians , but not caecilians , are ovoviviparous . The eggs are retained in or on the parent 's body , but the larvae subsist on the yolks of their eggs and receive no nourishment from the adult . The larvae emerge at varying stages of their growth , either before or after metamorphosis , according to their species . The toad genus Nectophrynoides exhibits all of these developmental patterns among its dozen or so members . 
 = = = = Frogs = = = = 
 Frog larvae are known as tadpoles and typically have oval bodies and long , vertically flattened tails with fins . The free @-@ living larvae are normally fully aquatic , but the tadpoles of some species ( such as <unk> <unk> ) are semi @-@ terrestrial and live among wet rocks . Tadpoles have cartilaginous skeletons , gills for respiration ( external gills at first , internal gills later ) , lateral line systems and large tails that they use for swimming . Newly hatched tadpoles soon develop gill pouches that cover the gills . The lungs develop early and are used as accessory breathing organs , the tadpoles rising to the water surface to gulp air . Some species complete their development inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs . These larvae do not have gills but instead have specialised areas of skin through which respiration takes place . While tadpoles do not have true teeth , in most species , the jaws have long , parallel rows of small keratinized structures called keradonts surrounded by a horny beak . Front legs are formed under the gill sac and hind legs become visible a few days later . 
 Iodine and T4 ( over stimulate the spectacular apoptosis [ programmed cell death ] of the cells of the larval gills , tail and fins ) also stimulate the evolution of nervous systems transforming the aquatic , vegetarian tadpole into the terrestrial , carnivorous frog with better neurological , visuospatial , olfactory and cognitive abilities for hunting . 
 In fact , tadpoles developing in ponds and streams are typically herbivorous . Pond tadpoles tend to have deep bodies , large caudal fins and small mouths ; they swim in the quiet waters feeding on growing or loose fragments of vegetation . Stream dwellers mostly have larger mouths , shallow bodies and caudal fins ; they attach themselves to plants and stones and feed on the surface films of algae and bacteria . They also feed on diatoms , filtered from the water through the gills , and stir up the sediment at bottom of the pond , ingesting edible fragments . They have a relatively long , spiral @-@ shaped gut to enable them to digest this diet . Some species are carnivorous at the tadpole stage , eating insects , smaller tadpoles and fish . Young of the Cuban tree frog ( Osteopilus septentrionalis ) can occasionally be cannibalistic , the younger tadpoles attacking a larger , more developed tadpole when it is undergoing metamorphosis . 
 At metamorphosis , rapid changes in the body take place as the lifestyle of the frog changes completely . The spiral ‐ shaped mouth with horny tooth ridges is reabsorbed together with the spiral gut . The animal develops a large jaw , and its gills disappear along with its gill sac . Eyes and legs grow quickly , and a tongue is formed . There are associated changes in the neural networks such as development of stereoscopic vision and loss of the lateral line system . All this can happen in about a day . A few days later , the tail is reabsorbed , due to the higher thyroxine concentration required for this to take place . 
 = = = = Salamanders = = = = 
 At hatching , a typical salamander larva has eyes without lids , teeth in both upper and lower jaws , three pairs of feathery external gills , a somewhat laterally flattened body and a long tail with dorsal and ventral fins . The forelimbs may be partially developed and the hind limbs are rudimentary in pond @-@ living species but may be rather more developed in species that reproduce in moving water . Pond @-@ type larvae often have a pair of balancers , rod @-@ like structures on either side of the head that may prevent the gills from becoming clogged up with sediment . Some members of the genera Ambystoma and Dicamptodon have larvae that never fully develop into the adult form , but this varies with species and with populations . The northwestern salamander ( Ambystoma gracile ) is one of these and , depending on environmental factors , either remains permanently in the larval state , a condition known as neoteny , or transforms into an adult . Both of these are able to breed . Neoteny occurs when the animal 's growth rate is very low and is usually linked to adverse conditions such as low water temperatures that may change the response of the tissues to the hormone thyroxine . Other factors that may inhibit metamorphosis include lack of food , lack of trace elements and competition from conspecifics . The tiger salamander ( Ambystoma tigrinum ) also sometimes behaves in this way and may grow particularly large in the process . The adult tiger salamander is terrestrial , but the larva is aquatic and able to breed while still in the larval state . When conditions are particularly inhospitable on land , larval breeding may allow continuation of a population that would otherwise die out . There are fifteen species of obligate neotenic salamanders , including species of Necturus , Proteus and <unk> , and many examples of facultative ones that adopt this strategy under appropriate environmental circumstances . 
 <unk> salamanders in the family Plethodontidae are terrestrial and lay a small number of unpigmented eggs in a cluster among damp leaf litter . Each egg has a large yolk sac and the larva feeds on this while it develops inside the egg , emerging fully formed as a juvenile salamander . The female salamander often broods the eggs . In the genus <unk> , the female has been observed to coil around them and press her throat area against them , effectively massaging them with a mucous secretion . 
 In newts and salamanders , metamorphosis is less dramatic than in frogs . This is because the larvae are already carnivorous and continue to feed as predators when they are adults so few changes are needed to their digestive systems . Their lungs are functional early , but the larvae do not make as much use of them as do tadpoles . Their gills are never covered by gill sacs and are reabsorbed just before the animals leave the water . Other changes include the reduction in size or loss of tail fins , the closure of gill slits , thickening of the skin , the development of eyelids , and certain changes in dentition and tongue structure . Salamanders are at their most vulnerable at metamorphosis as swimming speeds are reduced and transforming tails are encumbrances on land . Adult salamanders often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer , and a land phase in winter . For adaptation to a water phase , prolactin is the required hormone , and for adaptation to the land phase , thyroxine . External gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases because these are completely absorbed upon leaving the water for the first time . 
 = = = = Caecilians = = = = 
 Most terrestrial caecilians that lay eggs do so in burrows or moist places on land near bodies of water . The development of the young of <unk> glutinosus , a species from Sri Lanka , has been much studied . The eel @-@ like larvae hatch out of the eggs and make their way to water . They have three pairs of external red feathery gills , a blunt head with two rudimentary eyes , a lateral line system and a short tail with fins . They swim by undulating their body from side to side . They are mostly active at night , soon lose their gills and make sorties onto land . Metamorphosis is gradual . By the age of about ten months they have developed a pointed head with sensory tentacles near the mouth and lost their eyes , lateral line systems and tails . The skin thickens , embedded scales develop and the body divides into segments . By this time , the caecilian has constructed a burrow and is living on land . 
 In the majority of species of caecilians , the young are produced by vivipary . <unk> <unk> , a species from South America , is typical of these . Up to nine larvae can develop in the oviduct at any one time . They are elongated and have paired sac @-@ like gills , small eyes and specialised scraping teeth . At first , they feed on the yolks of the eggs , but as this source of nourishment declines they begin to rasp at the ciliated epithelial cells that line the oviduct . This stimulates the secretion of fluids rich in lipids and <unk> on which they feed along with scrapings from the oviduct wall . They may increase their length sixfold and be two @-@ fifths as long as their mother before being born . By this time they have undergone metamorphosis , lost their eyes and gills , developed a thicker skin and mouth tentacles , and reabsorbed their teeth . A permanent set of teeth grow through soon after birth . 
 The ringed caecilian ( <unk> annulatus ) has developed a unique adaptation for the purposes of reproduction . The progeny feed on a skin layer that is specially developed by the adult in a phenomenon known as maternal <unk> . The brood feed as a batch for about seven minutes at intervals of approximately three days which gives the skin an opportunity to regenerate . Meanwhile , they have been observed to ingest fluid exuded from the maternal cloaca . 
 = = = Parental care = = = 
 The care of offspring among amphibians has been little studied but , in general , the larger the number of eggs in a batch , the less likely it is that any degree of parental care takes place . Nevertheless , it is estimated that in up to 20 % of amphibian species , one or both adults play some role in the care of the young . Those species that breed in smaller water bodies or other specialised habitats tend to have complex patterns of behaviour in the care of their young . 
 Many woodland salamanders lay clutches of eggs under dead logs or stones on land . The black mountain salamander ( Desmognathus <unk> ) does this , the mother brooding the eggs and guarding them from predation as the embryos feed on the yolks of their eggs . When fully developed , they break their way out of the egg capsules and disperse as juvenile salamanders . The male hellbender , a primitive salamander , excavates an underwater nest and encourages females to lay there . The male then guards the site for the two or three months before the eggs hatch , using body undulations to fan the eggs and increase their supply of oxygen . 
 The male Colostethus <unk> , a tiny frog , protects the egg cluster which is hidden under a stone or log . When the eggs hatch , the male transports the tadpoles on his back , stuck there by a mucous secretion , to a temporary pool where he dips himself into the water and the tadpoles drop off . The male midwife toad ( <unk> <unk> ) winds egg strings round his thighs and carries the eggs around for up to eight weeks . He keeps them moist and when they are ready to hatch , he visits a pond or ditch and releases the tadpoles . The female gastric @-@ brooding frog ( <unk> spp . ) reared larvae in her stomach after swallowing either the eggs or hatchlings ; however , this stage was never observed before the species became extinct . The tadpoles secrete a hormone that inhibits digestion in the mother whilst they develop by consuming their very large yolk supply . The pouched frog ( Assa <unk> ) lays eggs on the ground . When they hatch , the male carries the tadpoles around in brood pouches on his hind legs . The aquatic Surinam toad ( Pipa pipa ) raises its young in pores on its back where they remain until metamorphosis . The granular poison frog ( Oophaga granulifera ) is typical of a number of tree frogs in the poison dart frog family Dendrobatidae . Its eggs are laid on the forest floor and when they hatch , the tadpoles are carried one by one on the back of an adult to a suitable water @-@ filled crevice such as the axil of a leaf or the rosette of a bromeliad . The female visits the nursery sites regularly and deposits unfertilised eggs in the water and these are consumed by the tadpoles . 
 = = Feeding and diet = = 
 With a few exceptions , adult amphibians are predators , feeding on virtually anything that moves that they can swallow . The diet mostly consists of small prey that do not move too fast such as beetles , caterpillars , earthworms and spiders . The sirens ( Siren spp . ) often ingest aquatic plant material with the invertebrates on which they feed and a Brazilian tree frog ( <unk> truncata ) includes a large quantity of fruit in its diet . The Mexican burrowing toad ( <unk> dorsalis ) has a specially adapted tongue for picking up ants and termites . It projects it with the tip foremost whereas other frogs flick out the rear part first , their tongues being hinged at the front . 
 Food is mostly selected by sight , even in conditions of dim light . Movement of the prey triggers a feeding response . Frogs have been caught on fish hooks baited with red flannel and green frogs ( Rana clamitans ) have been found with stomachs full of elm seeds that they had seen floating past . Toads , salamanders and caecilians also use smell to detect prey . This response is mostly secondary because salamanders have been observed to remain stationary near odoriferous prey but only feed if it moves . Cave @-@ dwelling amphibians normally hunt by smell . Some salamanders seem to have learned to recognize immobile prey when it has no smell , even in complete darkness . 
 Amphibians usually swallow food whole but may chew it lightly first to subdue it . They typically have small hinged pedicellate teeth , a feature unique to amphibians . The base and crown of these are composed of dentine separated by an <unk> layer and they are replaced at intervals . Salamanders , caecilians and some frogs have one or two rows of teeth in both jaws , but some frogs ( Rana spp . ) lack teeth in the lower jaw , and toads ( Bufo spp . ) have no teeth . In many amphibians there are also vomerine teeth attached to a facial bone in the roof of the mouth . 
 The tiger salamander ( Ambystoma tigrinum ) is typical of the frogs and salamanders that hide under cover ready to ambush unwary invertebrates . Others amphibians , such as the Bufo spp. toads , actively search for prey , while the Argentine horned frog ( <unk> ornata ) lures inquisitive prey closer by raising its hind feet over its back and vibrating its yellow toes . Among leaf litter frogs in Panama , frogs that actively hunt prey have narrow mouths and are slim , often brightly coloured and toxic , while ambushers have wide mouths and are broad and well @-@ camouflaged . Caecilians do not flick their tongues , but catch their prey by grabbing it with their slightly backward @-@ pointing teeth . The struggles of the prey and further jaw movements work it inwards and the caecilian usually retreats into its burrow . The subdued prey is <unk> down whole . 
 When they are newly hatched , frog larvae feed on the yolk of the egg . When this is exhausted some move on to feed on bacteria , algal crusts , detritus and <unk> from submerged plants . Water is drawn in through their mouths , which are usually at the bottom of their heads , and passes through branchial food traps between their mouths and their gills where fine particles are trapped in mucus and filtered out . Others have specialised mouthparts consisting of a horny beak edged by several rows of labial teeth . They scrape and bite food of many kinds as well as stirring up the bottom sediment , filtering out larger particles with the papillae around their mouths . Some , such as the spadefoot toads , have strong biting jaws and are carnivorous or even cannibalistic . 
 = = Vocalization = = 
 The calls made by caecilians and salamanders are limited to occasional soft squeaks , grunts or hisses and have not been much studied . A clicking sound sometimes produced by caecilians may be a means of orientation , as in bats , or a form of communication . Most salamanders are considered voiceless , but the California giant salamander ( Dicamptodon <unk> ) has vocal cords and can produce a rattling or barking sound . Some species of salamander emit a quiet squeak or yelp if attacked . 
 Frogs are much more vocal , especially during the breeding season when they use their voices to attract mates . The presence of a particular species in an area may be more easily discerned by its characteristic call than by a fleeting glimpse of the animal itself . In most species , the sound is produced by expelling air from the lungs over the vocal cords into an air sac or sacs in the throat or at the corner of the mouth . This may distend like a balloon and acts as a resonator , helping to transfer the sound to the atmosphere , or the water at times when the animal is submerged . The main vocalisation is the male 's loud advertisement call which seeks to both encourage a female to approach and discourage other males from intruding on its territory . This call is modified to a quieter courtship call on the approach of a female or to a more aggressive version if a male intruder draws near . Calling carries the risk of attracting predators and involves the expenditure of much energy . Other calls include those given by a female in response to the advertisement call and a release call given by a male or female during unwanted attempts at amplexus . When a frog is attacked , a distress or fright call is emitted , often resembling a scream . The usually nocturnal Cuban tree frog ( Osteopilus septentrionalis ) produces a rain call when there is rainfall during daylight hours . 
 = = Territorial behaviour = = 
 Little is known of the territorial behaviour of caecilians , but some frogs and salamanders defend home ranges . These are usually feeding , breeding or sheltering sites . Males normally exhibit such behaviour though in some species , females and even juveniles are also involved . Although in many frog species , females are larger than males , this is not the case in most species where males are actively involved in territorial defence . Some of these have specific adaptations such as enlarged teeth for biting or spines on the chest , arms or thumbs . 
 In salamanders , defence of a territory involves adopting an aggressive posture and if necessary attacking the intruder . This may involve snapping , chasing and sometimes biting , occasionally causing the loss of a tail . The behaviour of red back salamanders ( Plethodon cinereus ) has been much studied . 91 % of marked individuals that were later recaptured were within a metre ( yard ) of their original daytime retreat under a log or rock . A similar proportion , when moved experimentally a distance of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) , found their way back to their home base . The salamanders left odour marks around their territories which averaged 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 33 square metres ( 1 @.@ 7 to 3 @.@ 6 sq ft ) in size and were sometimes inhabited by a male and female pair . These deterred the intrusion of others and delineated the boundaries between neighbouring areas . Much of their behaviour seemed stereotyped and did not involve any actual contact between individuals . An aggressive posture involved raising the body off the ground and glaring at the opponent who often turned away submissively . If the intruder persisted , a biting lunge was usually launched at either the tail region or the naso @-@ labial grooves . Damage to either of these areas can reduce the fitness of the rival , either because of the need to regenerate tissue or because it impairs its ability to detect food . 
 In frogs , male territorial behaviour is often observed at breeding locations ; calling is both an announcement of ownership of part of this resource and an advertisement call to potential mates . In general , a deeper voice represents a heavier and more powerful individual , and this may be sufficient to prevent intrusion by smaller males . Much energy is used in the vocalization and it takes a toll on the territory holder who may be displaced by a fitter rival if he tires . There is a tendency for males to tolerate the holders of neighbouring territories while vigorously attacking unknown intruders . Holders of territories have a " home advantage " and usually come off better in an encounter between two similar @-@ sized frogs . If threats are insufficient , chest to chest tussles may take place . Fighting methods include pushing and shoving , deflating the opponent 's vocal sac , seizing him by the head , jumping on his back , biting , chasing , splashing , and ducking him under the water . 
 = = Defence mechanisms = = 
 Amphibians have soft bodies with thin skins , and lack claws , defensive armour , or spines . Nevertheless , they have evolved various defence mechanisms to keep themselves alive . The first line of defence in salamanders and frogs is the mucous secretion that they produce . This keeps their skin moist and makes them slippery and difficult to grip . The secretion is often sticky and distasteful or toxic . Snakes have been observed yawning and gaping when trying to swallow African clawed frogs ( Xenopus laevis ) , which gives the frogs an opportunity to escape . Caecilians have been little studied in this respect , but the Cayenne caecilian ( <unk> <unk> ) produces toxic mucus that has killed predatory fish in a feeding experiment in Brazil . In some salamanders , the skin is poisonous . The rough @-@ skinned newt ( Taricha granulosa ) from North America and other members of its genus contain the neurotoxin tetrodotoxin ( <unk> ) , the most toxic non @-@ protein substance known and almost identical to that produced by pufferfish . Handling the newts does not cause harm , but ingestion of even the most minute amounts of the skin is deadly . In feeding trials , fish , frogs , reptiles , birds and mammals were all found to be susceptible . The only predators with some tolerance to the poison are certain populations of common garter snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ) . In locations where both snake and salamander co @-@ exist , the snakes have developed immunity through genetic changes and they feed on the amphibians with impunity . Coevolution occurs with the newt increasing its toxic capabilities at the same rate as the snake further develops its immunity . Some frogs and toads are toxic , the main poison glands being at the side of the neck and under the warts on the back . These regions are presented to the attacking animal and their secretions may be foul @-@ tasting or cause various physical or neurological symptoms . Altogether , over 200 toxins have been isolated from the limited number of amphibian species that have been investigated . 
 Poisonous species often use bright colouring to warn potential predators of their toxicity . These warning colours tend to be red or yellow combined with black , with the fire salamander ( Salamandra <unk> ) being an example . Once a predator has sampled one of these , it is likely to remember the colouration next time it encounters a similar animal . In some species , such as the fire @-@ bellied toad ( Bombina spp . ) , the warning colouration is on the belly and these animals adopt a defensive pose when attacked , exhibiting their bright colours to the predator . The frog <unk> <unk> is not poisonous , but mimics the appearance of other toxic species in its locality , a strategy that may deceive predators . 
 Many amphibians are nocturnal and hide during the day , thereby avoiding diurnal predators that hunt by sight . Other amphibians use camouflage to avoid being detected . They have various colourings such as mottled browns , greys and olives to blend into the background . Some salamanders adopt defensive poses when faced by a potential predator such as the North American northern short @-@ tailed shrew ( Blarina brevicauda ) . Their bodies writhe and they raise and lash their tails which makes it difficult for the predator to avoid contact with their poison @-@ producing granular glands . A few salamanders will <unk> their tails when attacked , sacrificing this part of their anatomy to enable them to escape . The tail may have a constriction at its base to allow it to be easily detached . The tail is regenerated later , but the energy cost to the animal of replacing it is significant . 
 Some frogs and toads inflate themselves to make themselves look large and fierce , and some spadefoot toads ( <unk> spp ) scream and leap towards the attacker . Giant salamanders of the genus Andrias , as well as <unk> and <unk> frogs possess sharp teeth and are capable of drawing blood with a defensive bite . The blackbelly salamander ( Desmognathus <unk> ) can bite an attacking common garter snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis ) two or three times its size on the head and often manages to escape . 
 = = Cognition = = 
 In amphibians , there is evidence of habituation , associative learning through both classical and instrumental learning , and discrimination abilities . 
 In one experiment , when offered live fruit flies ( Drosophila virilis ) , salamanders choose the larger of 1 vs 2 and 2 vs 3 . Frogs can distinguish between low numbers ( 1 vs 2 , 2 vs 3 , but not 3 vs 4 ) and large numbers ( 3 vs 6 , 4 vs 8 , but not 4 vs 6 ) of prey . This is irrespective of other characteristics , i.e. surface area , volume , weight and movement , although discrimination among large numbers may be based on surface area . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Dramatic declines in amphibian populations , including population crashes and mass localized extinction , have been noted since the late 1980s from locations all over the world , and amphibian declines are thus perceived to be one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity . In 2004 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) reported stating that currently birds , mammals , and amphibians extinction rates were at minimum 48 times greater than natural extinction rates — possibly 1 @,@ 024 times higher . In 2006 there were believed to be 4 @,@ 035 species of amphibians that depended on water at some stage during their life cycle . Of these , 1 @,@ 356 ( 33 @.@ 6 % ) were considered to be threatened and this figure is likely to be an underestimate because it excludes 1 @,@ 427 species for which there was insufficient data to assess their status . A number of causes are believed to be involved , including habitat destruction and modification , over @-@ exploitation , pollution , introduced species , climate change , endocrine @-@ disrupting pollutants , destruction of the ozone layer ( ultraviolet radiation has shown to be especially damaging to the skin , eyes , and eggs of amphibians ) , and diseases like chytridiomycosis . However , many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly understood , and are a topic of ongoing discussion . 
 With their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins , amphibians are often considered to be ecological indicators . In many terrestrial ecosystems , they constitute one of the largest parts of the vertebrate biomass . Any decline in amphibian numbers will affect the patterns of predation . The loss of carnivorous species near the top of the food chain will upset the delicate ecosystem balance and may cause dramatic increases in opportunistic species . In the Middle East , a growing appetite for eating frog legs and the consequent gathering of them for food was linked to an increase in mosquitoes . Predators that feed on amphibians are affected by their decline . The western terrestrial garter snake ( Thamnophis elegans ) in California is largely aquatic and depends heavily on two species of frog that are diminishing in numbers , the Yosemite toad ( Bufo canorus ) and the mountain yellow @-@ legged frog ( Rana <unk> ) , putting the snake 's future at risk . If the snake were to become scarce , this would affect birds of prey and other predators that feed on it . Meanwhile , in the ponds and lakes , fewer frogs means fewer tadpoles . These normally play an important role in controlling the growth of algae and also forage on detritus that accumulates as sediment on the bottom . A reduction in the number of tadpoles may lead to an overgrowth of algae , resulting in depletion of oxygen in the water when the algae later die and decompose . Aquatic invertebrates and fish might then die and there would be unpredictable ecological consequences . 
 A global strategy to stem the crisis was released in 2005 in the form of the Amphibian Conservation Action Plan . Developed by over eighty leading experts in the field , this call to action details what would be required to curtail amphibian declines and extinctions over the following five years and how much this would cost . The Amphibian Specialist Group of the IUCN is spearheading efforts to implement a comprehensive global strategy for amphibian conservation . Amphibian Ark is an organization that was formed to implement the ex @-@ situ conservation recommendations of this plan , and they have been working with zoos and aquaria around the world , encouraging them to create assurance colonies of threatened amphibians . One such project is the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation Project that built on existing conservation efforts in Panama to create a country @-@ wide response to the threat of chytridiomycosis . 
 = Here Comes Treble = 
 " Here Comes Treble " is the fifth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office . The episode originally aired on NBC on October 25 , 2012 . It guest stars Stephen Colbert as Andy 's college friend Broccoli Rob and Ben Silverman as an investor . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) invites his old college a cappella group , Here Comes Treble , to perform for the office during Halloween . Andy , however , gets angry when he hears that his college friend Broccoli Rob ( Colbert ) is telling a different story about the group . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , with the help of Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) tries to track down a person who is using prescription anxiety pills . Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) fight over his new job . 
 The title is a reference to Andy 's college a cappella group , which had previously been alluded to in the series , but never actually shown . The episode also marked the final Halloween installment for the series . " Here Comes Treble " received mixed reviews from television critics , with many mainly criticizing Andy 's characterization . Others were more complimentary of the episode 's subplots . " Here Comes Treble " was viewed by 4 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 9 / 5 percent rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , ranking third in its timeslot . The episode , however , ranked as the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) invites the latest roster of his Cornell University a cappella group , Here Comes Treble ( portrayed by the University of Virginia <unk> ) , to perform for the office during the Halloween party . He secretly hopes the group will ask him to lead them in a performance of George Michael 's " Faith " . He becomes increasingly frustrated when the group is not interested in talking about his glory days as part of the group , and upon learning that old band mate Broccoli Rob ( Stephen Colbert ) claimed Andy 's nickname of " Boner Champ " , Andy complains to both Rob , via video chat , and to Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) . Though Erin sees the situation as trivial , she nonetheless demands that the group sing " Faith " for Andy . 
 Meanwhile , for his new job , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) meets with investors . Although the investing window had closed , Jim insists on taking part and offers $ 10 @,@ 000 under pressure — much more than he and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) had agreed to . After Jim returns , he tells Pam during the Here Comes Treble 's performance , and they start arguing during the singing . When the group begins performing " Faith " , Andy is surprised that Rob appears via video to sing the lead . The group mistakenly thought the song was to be dedicated to Andy , and they contacted Rob to sing it with them . The " concert " ends and Andy continues to argue with Rob as Rob <unk> apologizes for stealing Andy 's song until Erin finally puts an end to the video chat . Andy entertains the idea of moving to Cornell to keep his legacy alive . Alarmed , Erin redirects him towards using his family 's money to create a scholarship for young a cappella singers . When he calls his mother to set it up , she informs him the family has lost all their money . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight finds an anti @-@ anxiety pill on the floor and begins a search for the office " madman " . Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) partners with him in the investigation in order to escape his suspicions , but ultimately confesses that the pill belongs to her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Here Comes Treble " was written by supervising producer Owen Ellickson , marking his third writing credit for the series , after the eighth season episodes " Pool Party " and " Fundraiser " . The episode was directed by Claire Scanlon , who has served as an editor on the series for several seasons , this was her second directing credit after the eight season episode , " Angry Andy " . 
 The title is a reference to Andy 's a cappella group Here Comes Treble , which had previously been alluded to in the series , but never actually shown . " Here Comes Treble " guest stars Stephen Colbert as Andy 's college friend Broccoli Rob . Former NBC Entertainment co @-@ chairman Ben Silverman also guest stars as one of the investors at Jim 's meeting . With the filming of " Here Comes Treble " , the cast began realizing that the show was truly approaching its end . Wilson said , " it 's getting real . It 's like there 's a clock ticking " . Helms said that the fact that the episode was the last Halloween installment for the series is " a sad thing " . 
 The official website of The Office included three cut scenes from " Here Comes Treble " within a week of the episode 's release . In the 146 @-@ second clip , Andy tells the office that the a cappella group is staying with Andy and Erin — Andy gets the basses and B @-@ tones and Erin gets the tenors . In another scene , Andy throws a tantrum about his solo and his nickname . In the final shot , Andy gives the group nihilistic advice about the future before he sings " Faith " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Due to the nature of the episode , many of the characters are dressed as cultural icons and characters from fiction . Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) is dressed as Scarlett Johansson 's version of the superhero Black Widow from the 2012 superhero film The Avengers . Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) is dressed as Charlie Brown , the protagonist in the comic strip Peanuts by Charles M. Schulz . Angela is dressed as former First Lady Nancy Reagan , with her husband State Senator Robert Lipton wearing a Ronald Reagan mask . Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) is dressed as a dinosaur , but states that he is " the Electoral College " . Andy is dressed as George Michael . For the episode , Wilson 's character is dressed up as a pig . Wilson noted that the " writers really just wanted to torture me by having me in a pig 's nose for an entire week of shooting " . 
 Due to the presence of the a cappella group , the episode features several songs . The group sings the Rose Royce 1976 single " Car Wash " , the 1983 Culture Club song " Karma Chameleon " , and Edwin McCain 's 1998 hit " I 'll Be " . The group also sings Cornell 's alma mater . Pam and Jim later get in an argument about the 1962 novelty song " The Monster Mash " . During their Skype @-@ argument Broccoli Rob mentions that he collaborated with Trey Anastasio , the frontman for the jam band Phish . During the seventh season episode " The Sting " , Andy mentioned that Broccoli Rob and Anastasio had collaborated on a song together . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Here Comes Treble " originally aired on NBC on October 25 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by 4 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 5 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This made " Here Comes Treble " , at the time of its airing , the lowest @-@ rated episode of The Office , beating the eighth season entry " Fundraiser " , which was viewed by 4 @.@ 17 million viewers . The Office finished third in its time slot , being beaten by an episode of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 percent rating and an entry of the CBS drama Person of Interest , which received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 percent rating Despite this , The Office was the highest @-@ rated NBC television program of the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He criticized the characterization of Andy and said that the character had " hit a plateau when his fist went through that wall in season three " and represented " a grinning puppet who can be imbued with some of Michael Scott 's leftover tics and remind people he went to Cornell " . However , Adams enjoyed the episode 's subplots and wrote that the episode really " gave me a better picture of what makes Andy 's girlfriend tick . " Furthermore , he praised many of her lines and her acting ability . Damon Houx of ScreenCrush said that the episode was a " surprisingly strong Erin episode " and that " Dwight acting crazy was also well used " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and called it " a nice enough holiday episode " . He was critical of the episode 's Jim and Pam <unk> , saying that it could have " been left on the cutting room floor . " IGN reviewer Cindy White awarded the episode a 7 @.@ 9 rating , denoting a " good " episode . She wrote that while the story had its limitations , " Little lines and bits [ ... ] helped elevate ' Here Comes Treble ' " . 
 Michael Tedder of New York felt that the main story was weak and that the " plot line might have made more sense last year , with Andy trying to take his mind off troubles with Erin or Robert California by trying to regress to his college days without it working , but these days Andy is the boss and has the girl . " He did , however , compliment the appearance of Colbert , writing that " it was still nice to see the two Daily Show alums sparring again . " He was also complimentary towards the " little tidbits " , such as Dwight 's subplot . Bonnie <unk> of Paste felt that the episode was too rushed and that the storylines did not have a chance to naturally play out . She wrote that , " Each thread provided some interesting character development or set up future storylines , but , crammed together in the same 21 minutes , they made for a slightly disjointed @-@ feeling episode . " WhatCulture ! reviewer Joseph Kratzer gave the episode two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and called it the " first dud of the ninth season " . He criticized the story , saying that " the plot 's failure [ is due to the fact that ] the goal of the story was not met by the means the writers chose to employ ; there was no sense of grand scope or deep @-@ rooted history , just Andy being petty and refusing to let go of the past as he 's challenged by his old friend . " Kratzer called Dwight and Nellie 's subplot the " most successful story " in the episode . 
 The manner in which Stephen Colbert appeared received mixed reviews . Adams compared Colbert 's cameo to former lead actor Steve Carell 's appearance in the first series of the BBC Two sitcom Life 's Too Short , calling it " an unfortunate echo " . White wrote that his cameo was not " quite the sublime experience I was hoping for " largely due to the amount of anticipation that was put into his appearance . Kratzer called the underuse of Colbert " borderline criminal " . 
 = One More Chance ( Madonna song ) = 
 " One More Chance " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna from the ballads compilation Something to Remember ( 1995 ) . Written and produced by Madonna and David Foster , it was released on March 7 , 1996 by Maverick Records as the album 's second single in Australia and Japan , and the third single in several European countries . An acoustic pop ballad , the song lyrically talks about attempting to win a lost lover back . The song was inspired by Madonna 's real life experience , but she wrote it from the opposite point of view . 
 The song received positive response from music critics , who praised its musical simplicity and Madonna 's vocal delivery . " One More Chance " peaked at number two in Italy and charted within the top forty in Australia , Finland , Sweden , and the United Kingdom . Since Madonna was busy filming the musical Evita , the song received little promotion and no accompanying music video . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 In November 1995 , Madonna released a compilation album , Something to Remember , featuring a selection of her ballads over a decade of her career and three new songs . " One More Chance " was one of the new songs she composed alongside Canadian musician David Foster . It was released as the album 's second single in Australia and Japan , and the third single in the European countries on March 7 , 1996 . The Spanish version of " You 'll See " , titled " Verás " , appeared as the B @-@ side of the single release . Foster initially did not expect Madonna would collaborate with him , as he believed that his music was not " really [ be ] hip enough for her . " Madonna and Foster worked on the song during the writing and recording session for Something to Remember , in the third weekend of September 1995 . 
 According to biographer Barbara Victor in the book Goddess : Inside Madonna , Madonna wrote the song during her six @-@ month vocal training with vocal coach Joan Leder in preparation of her role in the musical Evita . In a January 1996 interview with Spin magazine , Madonna said that the song was inspired by a happy moment in her life , when she gave a chance to a man she knew , and he was able to fulfill it to her needs . She reversed the situation and wrote the song . Madonna explained , " Often in my songwriting , I take things people say to me and turn them around , and put it in the first person . So it 's actually something that was said to me . " Madonna did not reveal the name of the person who became the main subject of the song . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " One More Chance " was produced and arranged by Madonna and David Foster . Recording process of the song was done in Brooklyn Studios and assisted by Ronnie Rivera . It was engineered and mixed by David Reitzas , who also produced the remix of " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " for the same album . Simon Franglen provided synclavier programming for the song . Only three instruments were used for the song — acoustic guitar played Dean Parks , cello played by Suzie Katayama and keyboard played by David Foster . 
 " One More Chance " is an acoustic pop ballad . It is set in the time signature of common time , having a tempo of 92 beats per minute . The song is played in the key of F major , with a basic sequence of Cmaj7 – Bm7 – Am7 – Bm7 as its chord progression , while piano and guitar are used to play the background music . Madonna 's voice spans from G3 to B ♭ 4 . The verses start off with F major and then the chorus leans towards D minor , the bridge and the ending sections changes to D major . Louis Virtel from Idolator said on the song " [ Madonna ] begs for forgiveness , and her only accompaniment is stark acoustic strumming . " Madonna utilized her vocal lessons for Evita during the recording of " You 'll See " and " One More Chance " . She said " If you listen to those songs , you can hear how I was trying to absorb and utilize what I was learning for the recording of Evita . " 
 The song begins with the sound of a finger @-@ picked acoustic guitar , reminiscent of " More Than Words " ( 1991 ) by American rock band Extreme . The composition has an organic arrangement , devoid of any synths and sequencing , and only based on guitars and subdued strings . A number of chord changes happen throughout the song as Madonna sings the lyrics , accompanied by an interval gap after the end of each chorus with the line " if you care for me " . The bridge section portrays a combination between the harmonies and the guitars , as the key changes . " One More Chance " ends with a brief pause of Madonna 's solo vocals , couple of guitar chords and then it dissipates with a final strung of a major chord on the instrument . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " One More Chance " is just one of the " consumer enticements that just add to the allure . " Billboard critic Timothy White called it " bittersweet serenade . " J. D. Considine from The Baltimore Sun called the song " the album 's greatest surprise " . He explained , " this David Foster song is quite demanding vocally , requiring a wider range and more power than anything else on the album . Yet Madonna more than lives up to the challenge , showing enough power and polish to make even Madonna @-@ <unk> admit she can sing . Louis Virtel from music website Idolator wrote , " No other Madonna song sounds quite like it , and it holds up as a melancholic statement against grander compositions like ' You 'll See ' and ' I 'll Remember ' . " 
 J. Randy Taraborrelli , the author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , called the song , along with " You 'll See " , as one of " the most sombre songs [ Madonna ] has ever recorded . " Tirzah Agassi from The Jerusalem Post felt the song is " much more shallow " than " You 'll See " . Adam Graham from The Detroit News called the song " a sparse acoustic ballad " on which Madonna warmed up her pre @-@ Evita pipes . Writing for the website TheBacklot.com in 2012 , Louis Virtel ranked the song at number 84 on " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " , saying that the song is " nothing more than a guitar and Madonna 's torch @-@ song trilling , and it 's more effective than anything you 've heard out of Taylor Swift 's mouth in the past five years " . Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna was critical of the song . He panned the lyrics , saying they were " bland " and felt that Madonna 's singing " lacked confidence and improvisation needed to make this kind of [ song ] really come alive " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " One More Chance " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 11 on March 23 , 1996 . It dropped to number 29 in its second week and stayed on the top 100 for four weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , the single had sold 56 @,@ 851 copies in the United Kingdom as of August 2008 . In Australia , the song debuted at number 43 on the ARIA Singles Chart on March 24 , 1996 . It peaked at number 35 on the chart and stayed within the top 50 for five weeks . In Italy , " One More Chance " debuted at number ten on the FIMI Singles Chart on April 6 , 1996 . The next week , the single reached a peak of number two on the chart , staying there for one week before descending down the chart . " One More Chance " was the 77th best @-@ selling single of the year in Italy . In Finland , " One More Chance " entered the singles chart at number 14 in the 13th week of 1996 . It appeared on the chart for four weeks with peak position at number 12 . In Sweden , the song debuted and peaked at number 39 on March 29 , 1996 , staying on the chart for three weeks . Due to its weak performance in European countries , " One More Chance " only managed to peak at number 50 on the European Hot 100 Singles chart on April 13 , 1996 . 
 = = Promotion and cover version = = 
 Released while Madonna was busy filming the musical Evita , the song had barely any promotion and no official music video was shot . A video was shown on MTV combining the music videos for " Rain " , " You 'll See " , I Want You " , " Take a Bow " and " La Isla Bonita " . Madonna has also never performed the song live since its release . In 2000 , the song was covered in Spanish by Mexican pop duo <unk> <unk> with the title " Hoy que no <unk> " ( English : " Today That You 're Not Here " ) . The Spanish lyrics were written by Donato <unk> . It was included in their fifth studio album , Movimiento perpetuo , released October 10 , 2000 , by EMI Latin . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 UK CD single / Japanese CD maxi @-@ single 
 " One More Chance " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 25 
 " You 'll See " ( Spanish Version ) – 4 : 20 
 " You 'll See " ( Spanglish Version ) – 4 : 20 
 UK 7 " single / UK cassette single 
 " One More Chance " ( Album Version ) – 4 : 25 
 " You 'll See " ( Spanish Version ) – 4 : 20 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , arranger , vocals 
 David Foster – songwriter , producer , arranger , keyboards 
 Simon Franglen – synclavier programming 
 Suzie Katayama – cello 
 Dean Parks – acoustic guitar 
 David Reitzas – engineer , mixing 
 Ronnie Rivera – assistant 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1899 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1899 Atlantic hurricane season featured the longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone in the Atlantic basin on record . There were nine tropical storms , of which five became hurricanes . Two of those strengthened into major hurricanes , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The first system was initially observed in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico on June 26 . The tenth and final system dissipated near Bermuda on November 10 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . In post @-@ season analysis , two tropical cyclones that existed in October were added to HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database . At one point during the season , September 3 through the following day , a set of three tropical cyclones existed simultaneously . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Three , nicknamed the San Ciriaco hurricane . A post @-@ season analysis of this storm indicated that it was the longest @-@ lasting Atlantic tropical cyclone on record . The path impacted the Lesser Antilles , Puerto Rico , Dominican Republic , the Bahamas , Florida , South Carolina , North Carolina , Virginia , and the Azores . The San Ciriaco hurricane alone caused about $ 20 million ( 1899 USD ) in damage and at least 3 @,@ 656 deaths . Another notable tropical cyclone , the Carrabelle hurricane , brought extensive damage to Dominican Republic and Florida Panhandle . Losses in Florida reached about $ 1 million . At least 9 deaths were associated with the storm . Hurricane Nine in October brought flooding to Cuba and Jamaica , as well as minor damage to South Carolina , North Carolina , and Virginia . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 150 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 Weather maps first indicated a tropical storm in the extreme northwestern Gulf of Mexico on June 26 . With initial sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , the storm did not differentiate in intensity as it headed northwestward . At 0900 UTC on June 27 , the system made landfall near the southwestern end of Galveston Island , Texas at the same intensity . Three hours later , it weakened to a tropical depression and later dissipated over Southeast Texas at 1800 UTC . Heavy rainfall produced by the storm from <unk> to Waco and toward the coast contributed to an ongoing flood event in the state . According to Texas State Senator Asbury Bascom Davidson , the Brazos , Colorado , Guadalupe , Navasota , and San Saba Rivers overflowed . An estimated 12 @,@ 000 square miles ( 31 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land were inundated . In Hearne , water rose above every rain gauge . Thousands of people were left homeless . The flood caused $ 9 million in damage and 284 deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A hurricane was first observed south of Dominican Republic on July 28 . Shortly thereafter , it made landfall in Azua Province with an intensity equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane . Early on July 29 , the system weakened to a tropical storm , shortly before emerging into the southwestern Atlantic Ocean . It then moved west @-@ northwestward and remained at relatively the same intensity over the next 24 hours . The storm made landfall near Islamorada , Florida on July 30 . Crossing the Florida Keys , it soon emerged into the Gulf of Mexico . The storm began to re @-@ intensify on July 31 and became a hurricane later that day . Early on August 1 , it peaked with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , several hours before making landfall near Apalachicola , Florida at the same intensity . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated over southern Alabama on August 2 . 
 In Dominican Republic , three large schooners were wrecked at Santo Domingo ; only one crew member on the three vessels survived . " Great " damage was reported along coastal sections of the country , while a loss of telegraph service impacted most of interior areas . In Florida , damage in the city of Carrabelle was extensive , with no more than a score of " unimportant " houses remained . Losses in the city reached approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 . At least 57 shipping vessels were destroyed ; damage from these ships collectively totaled about $ 375 @,@ 000 . Additionally , 13 lumber vessels were beached . Many boats at the harbor and the wharfs in Lanark were wrecked . Large portions of stores and pavilions in the city were damaged . The towns of Curtis Mill and McIntyre were completely destroyed , while the resort city of St. Teresa suffered significant damage . Seven deaths were confirmed in Florida . Overall , losses reached at least $ 1 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The next storm , known as the San Ciriaco Hurricane , was first observed as a tropical storm to the southwest of Cape Verde on August 3 . It slowly strengthened while heading steadily west @-@ northwestward across the Atlantic Ocean . By late on August 5 , the storm strengthened into a hurricane . During the following 48 hours , it deepened further , reaching Category 4 hurricane status before crossing the Leeward Islands on August 7 . Later that day , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . The storm weakened slightly before making landfall in Guayama , Puerto Rico with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) on August 8 . Several hours later , it emerged into the southwestern Atlantic as a Category 3 hurricane ; it would remain at that intensity for over 9 days . The system paralleled the north coast of Dominican Republic and then crossed the Bahamas , striking several islands , including Andros and Grand Bahama . After clearing the Bahamas , it began heading northward on August 14 , while centered east of Florida . Early on the following day , the storm re @-@ curved northeastward and appeared to be heading out to sea . However , by August 17 , it turned back to the northwest . At 0100 UTC on August 18 , the storm made landfall near Hatteras , North Carolina with 120 mph winds . 
 The storm weakened after moving inland and fell to Category 1 intensity by 1200 UTC on August 18 . Later that day , the storm re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic Ocean . Now heading northeastward , it continued weakening , but maintained Category 1 intensity . By late on August 20 , the storm curved eastward over the northwestern Atlantic . It also began losing tropical characteristics and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on August 22 , while located about 325 miles ( 525 km ) south of Sable Island . However , after four days , the system regenerated into a tropical storm while located about 695 miles ( 1 @,@ 120 km ) west @-@ southwest of Flores Island in the Azores on August 26 . It moved slowly north @-@ northwestward , until curving to the east on August 29 . Between August 26 and September 1 , the storm did not differentiate in intensity , but began re @-@ strengthening while turning southeastward on September 2 . Early on the following day , the storm again reached hurricane intensity . It curved northeastward and passed through the Azores on September 3 , shortly before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . The storm had the longest duration of an Atlantic hurricane on record , lasting for 31 days , 28 of which it was tropical . 
 In Guadeloupe , the storm unroofed and flooded many houses . Communications were significantly disrupted in the interior portions of the island . Impact was severe in Montserrat , with nearly every building destroyed and 100 deaths reported . About 200 small houses were destroyed on Saint Kitts , with estates suffering considerable damage , while nearly all estates were destroyed on Saint Croix . Eleven deaths were reported on the island . In Puerto Rico , the system brought strong winds and heavy rainfall , which caused extensive flooding . Approximately 250 @,@ 000 people were left without food and shelter . Additionally , telephone , telegraph , and electrical services were completely lost . Overall , damage totaled approximately $ 20 million , with over half were losses inflicted on crops , particularly coffee . At the time , it was the costliest and worst tropical cyclone in Puerto Rico . It was officially estimated that the storm caused 3 @,@ 369 fatalities . In the Bahamas , strong winds and waves sank 50 small crafts , most of them at Andros . Severe damage was reported in the capital city of Nassau , with over 100 buildings destroyed and many damaged , including the Government House . A few houses were also destroyed in Bimini . The death toll in the Bahamas was at least 125 . In North Carolina , storm surge and rough sea destroyed fishing piers and bridges , as well as sink about 10 vessels . Because Hatteras Island was almost entirely inundated with 4 to 10 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) of water , a great proportion of homes on the island were damaged , with much destruction at Diamond City . There were at least 20 deaths in the state of North Carolina . In the Azores , the storm also caused one fatality and significant damage on some islands . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 Weather maps indicated a tropical storm just east of the Lesser Antilles beginning on August 29 . The storm moved westward and strengthened into a hurricane early on August 30 . Several hours later , it entered the Caribbean Sea after passing near Antigua and Montserrat . Impact was generally light in the Lesser Antilles . At San Juan , Puerto Rico , sustained winds reached 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) . The storm maintained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) as it continued westward across the Caribbean Sea . Vessels sailing from ports in Cuba and Hispaniola were advised to " take every precaution " . After the storm curved northward late on September 1 , vessels from Hispaniola only were advised to take caution . 
 Late on September 1 , the hurricane made landfall east of Jacmel , Haiti with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . By 1800 UTC , it weakened to a tropical storm . The storm emerged into the Atlantic Ocean early on September 2 , after weakening further . While passing just east of the Turks and Caicos Islands early on September 3 , the storm re @-@ strengthened and attained hurricane status again . Several hours later , it strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane and peaked with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . After weakening to a Category 1 hurricane late on September 4 , the storm passed northwest of Bermuda . Hurricane force winds caused considerable damage on the island . At 1200 UTC on September 5 , the hurricane became extratropical . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 HURDAT initially indicates a tropical storm about 920 miles ( 1 @,@ 480 km ) west @-@ southwest of Brava , Cape Verde on September 3 . The storm moved west @-@ northwestward and slowly intensified , <unk> hurricane status late on September 5 . It continued to slowly strengthen , becoming a Category 2 hurricane on September 6 . About 24 hours later , the cyclone deepened into a Category 3 hurricane while located near the Lesser Antilles . On Saint Kitts , sustained winds reached 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) , while up to 3 @.@ 13 inches ( 80 mm ) of rainfall was reported . Many houses were destroyed on Anguilla and Barbuda . In the former , an estimated 200 homes were demolished , leaving 800 people homeless . Early on September 9 , the storm reached maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . The storm maintained intensity as a Category 3 hurricane and re @-@ curved northward by September 11 . 
 The hurricane turned northeastward on September 12 and began to accelerate . Early on September 13 , it passed very close to Bermuda , with a minimum barometric pressure of 939 mbar ( 27 @.@ 7 inHg ) observed on the island . Cedar trees were uprooted , while fruit and ornamental trees were swept out to sea . Some houses were destroyed , while others were deroofed . Severe damage was also reported at the naval yard and colonial government buildings . At the Her Majesty 's Dockyard alone , damage was " at least five figures " . Early on September 14 , the storm weakened to a Category 2 hurricane , then to a Category 1 several hours later . Shortly after 0000 UTC on September 15 , the hurricane struck the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . It soon became extratropical . In Newfoundland , severe damage was reported at fishing premises . The schooners Angler , Daisy , and Lily May either capsized or were driven ashore , resulting in 16 deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 A ship in the western Caribbean Sea reported a tropical storm on October 2 . The storm moved north @-@ northwestward and entered the Gulf of Mexico early on the following day . Late on October 3 , it peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm re @-@ curved eastward while situated over the northeastern Gulf of Mexico . At 0000 UTC on October 5 , this system made landfall in modern @-@ day Largo , Florida at the same intensity . Thereafter , the storm headed northeastward , until becoming extratropical early on October 6 , while located offshore Georgia . 
 Impact from this system was generally minor . Prior to landfall in Florida , the storm produced winds up to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in Port Eads , Louisiana . The highest wind speed in Florida was 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) in Jupiter . There , the storm also dropped 4 @.@ 94 inches ( 125 mm ) of rain . The Jupiter area also reported rough seas , with the highest tides in 7 years . The storm wrecked two schooners – the John R. <unk> at Fernandina Beach and the John H. <unk> at Cumberland Island , Georgia . After becoming extratropical , the remnants of the storm brought wind gusts up to 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) to Cape Henry , Virginia and Block Island , Rhode Island . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 Reports from a ship on October 10 indicated a tropical storm with sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 008 mbar ( 29 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Located well southwest of Cape Verde , the storm moved northwestward without differentiating in intensity . It was lasted noted on October 14 , while situated at 21 @.@ 5 ° N , 43 @.@ 5 ° W. 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eight = = = 
 A tropical depression developed in the central Bahamas on October 15 . The depression moved east @-@ northeastward strengthened into a tropical storm by the following day . Later on October 16 , the storm peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . It re @-@ curved northwestward and slowly began to weaken . Early on October 18 , the system fell to tropical depression intensity . Several hours later , the cyclone dissipated while located about 195 miles ( 315 km ) east @-@ southeast of Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 = = = Hurricane Nine = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather developed into a tropical storm while located south @-@ southwest of Jamaica on October 26 . The system moved slowly north @-@ northwestward and gradually strengthened , reaching hurricane status on October 28 . By early on the following day , it made landfall on the southern coast of Sancti Spíritus Province , Cuba . Briefly weakening to a tropical storm , the system re @-@ intensified into a hurricane after reaching the Atlantic Ocean late on October 29 . Moving toward the Bahamas , the storm became a Category 2 hurricane on October 30 . Around that time , it struck Grand Bahama island . After peaking with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) , the system accelerated north @-@ northwestward and made landfall near Myrtle Beach , South Carolina on October 31 . It quickly weakened and became extratropical over Virginia later that day . 
 In the city of Black River , Jamaica , rough seas caused significant damage to the marine industry and washed out crops . There were " many dead " in Jamaica , though the actual number of fatalities is unknown . Damage from the storm in Cuba was reported in the Sancti Spíritus and Santa Clara Provinces . Due to the threat of the Zaza River overflowing , residents were forced to evacuate . Strong winds and flooding destroyed several houses and severely damaged a number of others . At Wrightsville Beach , North Carolina , tides were reported as 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal . Water came over the wharves in Wilmington and inundated some streets ; there was also flooding in New Bern , Morehead City , and Beaufort . One steamer was wrecked on the coast and 10 smaller vessels were driven ashore . One fatality was reported and damage was estimated at roughly $ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ten = = = 
 A ship observed a tropical storm north of Panama on November 7 . The storm strengthened and headed northeastward across the central Caribbean Sea . It curved northward on November 8 , around the time of peaking with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Later that day , the storm made landfall in Saint Thomas Parish , Jamaica at the same intensity . Thereafter , the system weakened and struck extreme western Santiago de Cuba Province , Cuba with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on November 9 . It continued to weaken while crossing the island and emerged into the southwestern Atlantic Ocean later that day . The storm curved northeastward and passed through the Bahamas on November 10 . It then weakened to a tropical depression , several hours before dissipating about 385 miles ( 620 km ) southeast of Bermuda . 
 The storm brought strong winds and heavy rainfall to Jamaica and Cuba . Significant damage was reported at Port Antonio , Jamaica , especially the property and agriculture of the United Fruit Company . Several districts of Saint Thomas Parish became isolated and the town of Morant Bay was " shattered " . In Cuba , rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 7 inches ( 140 mm ) in the city of Santiago de Cuba . Damage to buildings and crops were reported in the region . Four fatalities occurred when a tree fell on their farmhouse in Manzanillo , Granma Province . 
 = SMS Niobe = 
 SMS Niobe ( " His Majesty 's Ship Niobe " ) was the second member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class of light cruisers built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , laid down in 1898 , launched in July 1899 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in June 1900 . She was named after Niobe , a figure from Greek mythology . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Niobe was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The ship had a long career , serving in all three German navies , along with the Yugoslav and Italian fleets over the span of over 40 years in service . 
 Niobe served in both home and overseas waters in the Imperial Navy , before being reduced to a coastal defense ship after the outbreak of World War I. She survived the conflict and was one of six cruisers permitted to the Reichsmarine by the Treaty of Versailles . In 1925 , the German Navy sold the ship to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . There , she was renamed Dalmacija and served until April 1941 , when she was captured by the Italians during the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia . Renamed Cattaro , she served in the Italian Regia Marina until the Italian surrender in September 1943 . She was then seized by the German occupiers of Italy , who restored her original name . She was used in the Adriatic briefly until December 1943 , when she ran aground on the island of Silba , and was subsequently destroyed by British Motor Torpedo Boats . The wreck was ultimately salvaged and broken up for scrap in 1947 – 49 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Niobe was 105 meters ( 344 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 03 m ( 16 @.@ 5 ft ) forward . She displaced 2 @,@ 963 t ( 2 @,@ 916 long tons ; 3 @,@ 266 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines manufactured by AG @-@ Germania . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by eight coal @-@ fired Thornycroft water @-@ tube boilers . Niobe carried 500 tonnes ( 490 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 570 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 610 km ; 4 @,@ 110 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , for 100 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Construction and early career = = = 
 Niobe was ordered under the contract name " B " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen on 30 August 1898 and launched on 18 July 1899 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned on 25 June 1900 to begin sea trials , which lasted until 22 August . She was thereafter placed in reserve . On 11 April 1901 , the ship returned to service and was assigned as the flagship of the I Torpedo @-@ boat Flotilla on the 18th , replacing the elderly aviso Blitz , which was by then worn out . Niobe served in this position until 26 June , and during this period , took part in training exercises in the Baltic Sea and the Kattegat . On 28 June , she left the I Flotilla and escorted the imperial yacht Hohenzollern on a trip to Norway . The visit was cut short following the death of Kaiser Wilhelm II 's mother , Victoria . Niobe then joined the I Squadron for the annual fleet exercises in late August and early September . Following the conclusion of the maneuvers , Niobe was again tasked with escorting Wilhelm II in Hohenzollern , this time to meet with Russian Tsar Nicholas II from 11 to 13 September . Niobe then returned to Wilhelmshaven , where she went into drydock for alterations that lasted from 1 October to 1 April 1902 . 
 After Niobe returned to active service in April 1902 , she returned to duty with the I Torpedo @-@ boat Flotilla , and was stationed in the Baltic . On 2 July , she was transferred back to the I Squadron for the annual training exercises and a winter cruise toward the end of the year . During this period , Korvettenkapitän ( Corvette Captain ) Franz von Hipper served as the ship 's commander . In early 1903 , she again returned to the I Torpedo @-@ boat Flotilla , her last stint as the flotilla flagship . The Navy initially planned on sending Niobe to reinforce the squadron participating in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902 – 03 , but the incident concluded before she could be sent . Instead , on 1 March , she joined the cruisers of the I Scouting Group for a trip to Norway . She remained in the I Scouting Group for the annual maneuvers that followed later in the year , and through 1904 as well . Following the fleet maneuvers in August and September 1904 , Niobe was decommissioned on 29 September . She spent the following two years out of service , during which time she underwent a major overhaul . 
 On 19 June 1906 , Niobe was recommissioned for service in the East Asia Squadron . She left Wilhelmshaven on 9 July and rendezvoused with the squadron , the flagship of which was the armored cruiser Fürst Bismarck , on 8 September . The ship cruised Chinese and Japanese waters for the next three years ; her time in the East Asia Squadron was uneventful . On 31 January 1909 , Niobe steamed out of the main German port in the region , Tsingtao , and made the return voyage to Germany . She reached Kiel on 21 March , and having become badly worn out during her three years abroad , she was decommissioned on the 31st . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Niobe was recommissioned for coastal defense , stationed in the German Bight . Between 28 August to 2 September , and from 23 December , Niobe 's commander also served as the commander of the torpedo @-@ boat flotillas defending the Jade Bight and the mouth of the Weser . She was removed from front @-@ line service on 5 September 1915 , and her crew was reduced four days later . The commander of the torpedo @-@ boat flotillas returned to Niobe on 14 January 1916 , as his previous flagship , the old coastal defense ship Siegfried , was decommissioned . Niobe nevertheless remained in service with a reduced crew . Kommodore ( Commodore ) Ludwig von Reuter , the commander of the IV Scouting Group , and his staff briefly used Niobe as a headquarters ship , from 6 June to 3 July . Starting on 20 August , she became the headquarters ship for now @-@ Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) von Hipper , the commander of the I Scouting Group . 
 During this period , Hipper organized the office of <unk> der <unk> der <unk> ( BSN — Commander of the Defense of the North Sea ) , which was also stationed on Niobe . In 1917 , she was disarmed so her guns could be used to reinforce the defenses of Wilhelmshaven . In October that year , Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker , then the commander of the I Squadron , came aboard Niobe ; the bulk of the High Seas Fleet had gone into the Baltic to launch Operation Albion , and Boedicker temporarily took control of the BSN . Hipper and his staff left Niobe on 11 August 1918 , having been promoted to command of the High Seas Fleet . The BSN remained aboard Niobe until January 1919 , two months after the war ended with the Armistice ; it was then transferred to the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Kaiser Wilhelm II , also in use as a headquarters ship . Niobe was then decommissioned on 3 February . 
 Niobe was among the ships permitted by the Treaty of Versailles after the end of the war , and so she continued on in service with the newly reorganized Reichsmarine . During this period , she was significantly modernized ; her old ram bow was replaced with a clipper bow . Her old 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns were replaced with newer SK L / 45 guns in U @-@ boat mountings and two 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes in deck @-@ mounted launchers were installed . On 24 June 1925 , Niobe was stricken from the naval register and sold to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . 
 = = = Yugoslav service and World War II = = = 
 Yugoslavia had initially been given the ships of the old Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy after the dissolution of the Empire in the closing days of World War I , but the Allied powers quickly seized the majority of the ships and allocated them to the various Allied countries . Left with only twelve modern torpedo boats , Yugoslavia sought more powerful vessels . The Royal Yugoslav Navy therefore purchased Niobe when Germany placed her for sale in 1925 . Renamed Dalmacija ( Dalmatia ) , she was completely rearmed in 1926 before she entered Yugoslavian service . She was equipped with six Škoda 8 @.@ 5 cm / 55 quick @-@ firing guns , and initially four and later six 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were added . After entering service , Dalmacija was employed as a gunnery training ship . In May and June 1929 , Dalmacija , the submarines Hrabri and Nebojša , the submarine tender Hvar and six torpedo boats went on a cruise to Malta , the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . According to the British naval attaché , the ships and crews made a very good impression while visiting Malta . 
 In April 1941 , during the Axis Invasion of Yugoslavia , Dalmacija remained in harbor and did not see action . Following the Yugoslav surrender , the ship was captured by the Italians in Kotor on 25 April . Renamed Cattaro , the ship was placed in service with the Regia Marina . On 31 July 1942 , the cruiser was attacked by the British submarine HMS Traveller south of <unk> but all of the torpedoes missed . The ship 's fate is somewhat unclear ; according to Hildebrand et. al . , Cattaro was later transferred to the Navy of the Independent State of Croatia , where she was commissioned as a training ship under the name Znaim . She returned to German service in September 1943 after Italy surrendered to the Allies , significantly reducing the warships available to Germany in the Adriatic . A German and Croatian crew operated the ship , once again named Niobe , under the German flag . According to Gardiner and Chesneau , however , the ship remained in Italian hands until Germany seized it in September 1943 , thereafter turning her over to the Independent State of Croatia as Znaim before retaking the ship and restoring her original name at some point thereafter . 
 Nevertheless , the ship 's armament was again revised after leaving Italian service , this time consisting of six 8 @.@ 4 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , four 4 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns , four 20 mm Oerlikon anti @-@ aircraft guns , and twenty @-@ six 20 mm Breda anti @-@ aircraft guns , and she was commissioned on 8 November . On the night of 21 – 22 September , while she was still refitting , two British Motor Torpedo Boats — MTB 226 and MTB 228 — attacked the ship to the northwest of Zara without success . Niobe began escorting convoys in the Adriatic , the first taking place of 13 November . This convoy consisted of several transports carrying units from the 7th Infantry Division to the islands of Cres , Krk , and <unk> . 
 On 19 December , Niobe ran aground on the island of Silba . Three days later , the British Motor Torpedo Boats MTB 276 and MTB 298 attacked the ship and hit her with two torpedoes ; nineteen men were killed in the attack . The Germans then abandoned the wreck , which was later cannibalized for spare parts by the Yugoslav Partisans . The wreck remained on Silba until 1947 , when salvage operations began . She was raised and broken up for scrap by 1949 . 
 = Go to the Top ( song ) = 
 " Go to the Top " is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Kumi Koda for her eleventh studio album , Bon Voyage ( 2012 ) . It premiered on October 24 , 2012 as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Kumi , while production was handled by Clarabell . It was used as the opening theme song for the Âge – developed anime series Muv @-@ Luv Alternative : Total Eclipse . Musically , the track was described as an electronic dance song with elements of 8 @-@ bit music , dance @-@ pop , and dubstep . 
 Upon its release , " Go to the Top " garnered positive reviews from music critics . Many critics commended the song 's dance @-@ influenced composition , lyrical content , and Kumi 's vocal delivery . Minor criticism was towards the songs inclusion of 8 @-@ bit music elements . The song was successful in Japan , peaking at # 1 on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart and becoming Kumi 's eighth number one single . It also reached 10 on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 The accompanying music video for " Go to the Top " was shot in Tokyo by Tomoe Nakano ; it features an animated Kumi flying a large robot in a racing circuit with another racer . Koda performed the single during several of her concerts , including Premium Night : Love & Songs and the Hall Tour 2014 : Bon Voyage . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Go to the Top " was Kumi 's first single since her promotional recording " <unk> Waitin ' On ? " from her sixth remix album Beach Mix , and giving birth to her and Kenji 's son in July 2012 . On June 30 , Koda Kumi 's record label Rhythm Zone confirmed that she was to perform the theme song for the Âge – developed anime series Muv @-@ Luv Alternative : Total Eclipse . The song was Kumi 's seventh collaboration effort with anime series ; the previous six songs being " Real Emotion " and " 1000 Words " for the 2003 video game Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , " Go Way " for the 2006 film Crayon Shin @-@ chan : Densetsu o <unk> <unk> ! Amigo ! . Koda also performed the theme songs the live @-@ action film of the anime series ; the title track for Cutie Honey , " Crazy 4 U " for Gilgamesh , " No Regret " for The Law of <unk> , and the title track for Re : Cutie Honey . 
 It was selected as the lead single from Bon Voyage and was released in Japan on October 24 , 2012 by Rhythm Zone . The Maxi CD version of the single contains the B @-@ side " Darling " , and the DJ <unk> and Takeo Yatabe remix for " Go to the Top " . The DVD version of the single contains the accompanying music video , and a limited " Total Eclipse Edition " with <unk> includes all tracks and the video except " Darling " . There are four cover sleeves to " Go to the Top " . The CD , DVD , and Fan Club formats feature close @-@ up shots of Kumi wearing a bejewelled masquerade mask . Red construction tape superimposes her , with Kumi 's and the song 's title inserted in it . The Total Eclipse Edition features a shot of Total Eclipse character Takamura Yui . The digital single uses the original DVD cover . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Go to the Top " was written by Kumi , while production was handled by Clarabell . Clarabell was in charge of the song 's arrangement and production , including the synthesizers , keyboards , and drum machine . <unk> Konda played the electric guitar during the chorus and song breaks . The song was described as an electronic dance song that , according to Patrick St. Michel from The Japan Times , " featured elements of contemporary stateside electronic dance music ( EDM ) . " The song was noted for its numerous musical elements including 8 @-@ bit music , dance @-@ pop , and dubstep . Koda said that she had become " languish [ ed ] " after having " life @-@ changing events such as marriage and having a baby , " . She felt the effects left her " not knowing what direction I was going to take , " in terms of her musical sound and lyrical delivery . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Go to the Top " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Vixen <unk> from Comic Buzz stated that the song was the reason she loved the episodes , particularly the first two . <unk> said that the song was " worth listening to " . Julie from the website <unk> listed Koda as their Music Spotlight <unk> of the Week , and listed " Go to the Top " as her third most essential career track . The other five were , in order : " Juicy " , " Taboo " , " Freaky " and " You " . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Shot Discs praised the composition and production of " Go to the Top " . He commended how Kumi " played " with the lyrical content , and complimented the " futuristic " and " robotic " sounds . He went on to compliment her vocal abilities and the " attitude " portrayed in the track . A reviewer from CD Journal labelled the 8 @-@ bit elements were " cheap " , he commended Kumi 's " strong " delivery . The NHK ( Japan Broadcasting Corporation ) listed the song in the Red Team for their annual New Years Eve countdown show , Kōhaku Uta Gassen . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Go to the Top " debuted at two on the Daily Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , moving to number one the following day ; it later reached the top spot in its first week on the top 100 . Its first week sales in Japan were an estimated 54 @,@ 559 units . It became her eighth number one single and her first inside the 2010 decade . Despite this , this became Kumi 's second number one single with the lowest first week sales ; her lowest to date is her 2009 double a @-@ side single " Alive / Physical Thing " with an estimated 32 @,@ 468 units . Regarding the number one position , Kumi stated , " I decided to come back to the stage and I am thrilled beyond words to be back in the No. 1 spot . " The song stayed in the top 100 for three weeks , and an additional three weeks inside the top 200 . 
 It has sold over 69 @,@ 390 units in Japan , her second lowest selling number single after " Alive / Physical Thing " with 44 @,@ 725 units . As of October 2012 , the single is her last single to reach number one on the Oricon Singles Chart and her last single to sell over 50 @,@ 000 units . As of January 2016 , Oricon 's database has ranked " Go to the Top " as her 21 best selling single . It also reached number 10 on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart . " Go to the Top " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units , her last single to be certified for physical shipments . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Go to the Top " was directed by Tomoe Nakano . This is Kumi 's first animated music video , and her only collaboration with Nakano . The video opens with people inside a late @-@ night cafe . In the distance , a television screen reads " The next single is a winter ballad single in December " ; this is a reference to Kumi 's December single Koishikute . The music video features an animated Kumi inside a giant robot , ready to race an opponent . The two robots get ready to race around a city circuit , with the crowd cheering them on . As they race , several obstacles are in the way . The opponent attacks Kumi , but crashes into the stadium . Due to some damage of her robot , she jumps out of the robot with a cyber – <unk> and races to the end . Winning , the opponent 's robot is completely damage as the opponent emerges from it . The opponent , a woman , throws a pendant of Kumi and her . The video finishes with the pendant changing to the song 's title . The music video premiered on October 24 on Japanese music television . 
 = = Promotion and other appearances = = 
 Koda performed the song for the first time on her Premium Night : Love & Songs concert tour in Japan . It was later included on the live album , released on March 20 , 2013 . The song was included on Koda 's Hall Tour 2014 : Bon Voyage concert tour in Japan . It was included on the special medley segment , which also included the tracks : " Real Emotion " , " Last Angel " , " Crazy 4 U " , " Gentle Words " , " Anata Dake Ga " , " Take Back " , " Taboo " , and " Lady Go ! " . It was later included on the live album and DVD release , released on October 3 and October 10 , 2014 @.@ respectively . The DJ Aki and <unk> remix was included on her Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 5 remix compilation ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Kumi Koda – vocals , background vocals , song writing 
 Clarabell – composer , producer , arranger , programmer , engineer 
 <unk> Nomura – composer , producer , arranger , programmer , engineer 
 <unk> Konda – guitar 
 DJ Aki – composer , remixer 
 Takeo Yatabe – composer , remixer 
 Tomoe Nakano – director 
 Rhythm Zone - management , label 
 Avex Trax - parent label , management 
 Credits adapted from the CD and DVD version of the single : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Gravity ( Fred Frith album ) = 
 Gravity is a 1980 solo album by English guitarist , composer and improviser Fred Frith from Henry Cow and Art Bears . It was Frith 's second solo album and his first since the demise of Henry Cow in 1978 . It was originally released in the United States on LP record on The Residents 's Ralph record label and was the first of three solo albums Frith made for the label . 
 Gravity was recorded in Sweden , the United States and Switzerland and featured Frith with Swedish Rock in Opposition group Samla Mammas Manna on one side of the LP , and Frith with United States progressive rock group The Muffins on the other side . Additional musicians included Marc Hollander from Aksak Maboul and Chris Cutler from Henry Cow . 
 Gravity has been described as an avant @-@ garde " dance " record that draws on rhythm and dance from folk music across the world . AllMusic called it one of the most important experimental guitar titles from Fred Frith . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fred Frith was a classically @-@ trained violinist who turned to playing blues guitar while at school . In 1967 he went to Cambridge University where he and fellow student , Tim Hodgkinson formed the English avant @-@ rock group Henry Cow . Frith and Hodgkinson remained with the band until its demise in 1978 . After the release of Henry Cow 's second album in May 1974 , Frith recorded his debut solo album , Guitar Solos ( 1974 ) , which featured unaccompanied and improvised experimental rock music played on prepared guitars by Frith without any overdubbing . Guitar Solos was well received by music critics , and was voted one of the best albums of 1974 by NME . 
 During the recording of Henry Cow 's sixth album in January 1978 , musical differences arose within the group over the prevalence of song @-@ oriented material on the album . Some wanted purely instrumental compositions , while others , including Frith , favoured songs . As a compromise Frith and the band 's drummer , Chris Cutler released the songs on an album Hopes and Fears ( 1978 ) under the name Art Bears , while the instrumental tracks , plus others recorded later were released on Henry Cow 's last album , Western Culture ( 1979 ) . Art Bears went on to make two more albums of songs . 
 After Henry Cow broke up , Frith moved to New York City in 1979 where he became involved with a number of musical projects , including a new solo album . To make a more " immediate " record after the intensities of Henry Cow and Art Bears , Frith turned his attention to world folk and dance music . In Hopes and Fears he had " rediscovered the joys of song @-@ form " , and it was the song " The Dance " that Frith and Cutler wrote for that album that inspired the making of Gravity . Frith said in a BBC interview : 
 Frith had been listening to music from other cultures , particularly Eastern Europe since the mid @-@ 1970s . He made no attempt to notate what he heard , but absorbed it and let it find its way later into his own music . On Gravity Frith mixed up all these different musical styles to make new songs out of them . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Gravity was the first of a series of projects Frith did for The Residents 's record label Ralph Records . He had recorded with The Residents in the late 1970s and early 1980s , and appeared on several of their albums . 
 Frith used two backing bands for Gravity , Swedish Rock in Opposition group Samla Mammas Manna and United States progressive rock group The Muffins . He recorded side one of the LP record with Samla Mammas Manna at Norrgården Nyvla in Uppsala , Sweden , with additional recording at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in August 1979 . Side two of the LP was recorded with The Muffins at Catch @-@ a @-@ Buzz Studio in Rockville , Maryland , United States in November 1979 , with additional recording at Sunrise Studios in Switzerland in January 1980 . Frith recorded two additional tracks with The Muffins , " Vanity , Vanity " and " Dancing in Sunrise , Switzerland " , but they were omitted from the album due to space constraints . They appeared later on The Muffins 's 1985 album , Open City . 
 Many of the tracks on Gravity consist of melodic lines woven into complex rhythmic structures taken from different folk music cultures . The time signatures are not the standard 3 / 4 or 4 / 4 , but more complex signatures like 15 / 8 . Frith described in an interview how he arrived in Uppsala with his carefully written music sheets , only to find that Samla Mammas Manna could not read music . But when he played the music to them , he was " stunned by their ability to hear the details , especially the rhythmic details , that I had written . " 
 The title of the album came from a 1937 quote by Curt Sachs ( printed on the back of the album sleeve ) in which he described dance as " the victory over gravity " . In 1980 Ralph Records also released a single from the album , " Dancing in the Street " b / w " What a Dilemma " . It did not chart on any of the major music charts . 
 = = Music = = 
 Frith called Gravity a " dance album " , not in the disco / funk sense of its day , but a collection of " dance music " drawn from cultures around the world . The album features an array of rock , folk and jazz instruments , plus field recordings , clapping and " whirling " , and has been described as a " musical hybridization " of " Latin percussion , calypso festivity , eastern @-@ tinged percussion [ and ] Klezmer @-@ like celebration " . 
 " The Boy Beats the Rams " opens Gravity with a burst of laughter followed by some tap dancing , " random " percussion and Frith 's " distinctive keening " violin . On " Spring Any Day Now " Frith mixes a bossa nova rhythm with a North African melody . " Don 't Cry For Me " features Greek mandolin with heavy metal guitar . " Hands of the <unk> " draws on Middle Eastern folk dance , " Slap Dance " is a Serbian " folk romp " , and " Career in Real Estate " is in the tradition of a Scottish fiddle tune . 
 " Dancing in the Street " is a " de / reconstruction " of Martha and the Vandellas 's 1964 hit that includes a " bizarrely harmonised guitar " playing the song 's melody over a " boiling mass of feedback " and tape manipulation . According to the album 's sleeve notes , this track also includes a recording of " Iranian demonstrators celebrating the capture of American hostages " . 
 " Crack in the Concrete " features an e @-@ bowed guitar over " edgy , dissonant chords " and a " massed kazoo choir of horns " that presages Frith 's experimental rock band Massacre he formed in New York City in February 1980 . " Norrgården Nyvla " flows into " Year of the Monkey " which ends with a brief sample of the 13th Puerto Rico Summertime Band , " ten seconds of the real thing " according to the LP liner notes . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 In the January 1983 edition of Down Beat magazine , Bill Milkowski wrote that in contrast to Art Bears 's " bleak attitude " , Frith 's Gravity is a " truly joyous solo LP , [ ... ] an extremely warm , almost whimsical album " . Thomas Schulte at AllMusic described it as an " entertaining and multicultural pocket folk festival " and said it was " one of the most important guitar @-@ based , experimental guitar titles from the avant @-@ guitarist " . In a BBC Online review of Gravity , Peter Marsh called it " Absolutely essential " , adding that it " manages to be wildly eclectic yet avoids incoherence " . Brandon Wu of Ground and Sky said that despite his " relative indifference " to the album , one of Gravity 's great strengths is that it is both accessible and avant @-@ garde . 
 Gravity inspired a 2003 album Spring Any Day Now by David Greenberg and David McGuinness with the Concerto Caledonia . Subtitled " Music of 18th century Scotland and elsewhere " , the album includes covers of two tracks from Gravity , " Spring Any Day Now " and " Norrgården Nyvla " , and a track from Frank Zappa 's Roxy & Elsewhere ( 1974 ) , " Echidna 's Arf ( Of You ) " . 
 Frith continued his exploration of folk and dance music on his next album for Ralph Records , Speechless ( 1981 ) . As with Gravity , he recorded Speechless with two bands , French Rock in Opposition group Etron Fou Leloublan on one side of the LP , and Frith 's New York City group Massacre on the other . The album included extensive tape manipulation , which was an ongoing passion of Frith 's at the time . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In August 2012 Frith led a performance of Gravity in San Francisco , California entitled " Fred Frith and Friends play Gravity " . The performers were Frith , Dominique Leone , Jon Leidecker ( Wobbly ) , Aaron Novik , Ava Mendoza , Jordan Glenn , Kasey Knudsen , Lisa Mezzacappa and <unk> Abe . Frith led two more performances of Gravity at Roulette in Brooklyn , New York City on 19 and 20 September 2013 , featuring Frith ( guitar / electric bass ) , Leone ( keyboards ) , Leidecker ( sampling ) , Novik ( clarinet / bass clarinet ) , Mendoza ( guitar ) , Abe ( accordion ) , Glenn ( drums ) , Knudsen ( alto saxophone ) , Mezzacappa ( bass ) , <unk> <unk> ( violin ) , and William Winant ( percussion ) . 
 Frith formed the Gravity Band in 2014 , comprising Frith ( conductor / guitar / bass ) , <unk> ( violin ) , Knudsen ( saxophone ) , Novik ( clarinet ) , Abe ( accordion ) , Leidecker ( samples ) , Leone ( keyboards ) , Mendoza ( guitar ) , Mezzacappa ( bass ) , Glenn ( drums ) , Winant ( percussion ) , and Myles <unk> ( sound ) . They performed the album live at the 30th Festival International de Musique <unk> de Victoriaville in Canada in May 2014 , at the Music Meeting in Nijmegen , Netherlands in June 2014 , and at the Moers Festival in Germany , also in June 2014 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks composed by Fred Frith except where noted . 
 = = = Original 1980 release = = = 
 = = = 1990 CD re @-@ issue bonus tracks = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 Fred Frith – guitar , bass guitar , violin , extra percussion 
 Samla Mammas Manna : 
 Lars <unk> – piano , organ , accordion 
 Hans Bruniusson – drums 
 Eino <unk> – guitar , mandolin 
 Marc Hollander – alto saxophone , clarinet 
 = = = = Guests = = = = 
 Olivia <unk> – tap dancing , clapping 
 Chris Cutler – snare drum and maracas ( track 3 ) , clapping 
 Tina Curran – whirling , clapping 
 Catherine <unk> – whirling , clapping 
 Frank Wuyts – recorders ( track 6 ) , whirling , clapping 
 Michel <unk> – clapping 
 Etienne Conod – clapping 
 Denis van Hecke – clapping 
 Veronique Vincent – clapping 
 = = = = Recording and production = = = = 
 Recorded at Norrgården Nyvla in Uppsala , Sweden and at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in August 1979 . 
 Gabriel Rosen – engineer ( Sweden ) 
 Etienne Conod – engineer ( Switzerland ) 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 Fred Frith – guitar , bass guitar , violin , keyboards , drums ( tracks 1 @,@ 5 @,@ 7 ) 
 The Muffins : 
 Dave Newhouse – alto saxophone , organ ( track 4 ) 
 Thomas Scott – soprano saxophone ( track 6 ) 
 Paul Sears – drums ( tracks 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @,@ 8 ) 
 Billy Swann – bass guitar ( tracks 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @,@ 8 ) 
 Marc Hollander – alto saxophone , bass clarinet 
 = = = = Guests = = = = 
 Hans Bruniusson – drums ( track 4 ) 
 Tina Curran – subliminal bass guitar ( track 1 ) 
 Frank Wuyts – drums ( track 3 ) 
 = = = = Recording and production = = = = 
 Recorded at Catch @-@ a @-@ Buzz Studio , Rockville , Maryland , United States in November 1979 and at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in January 1980 . 
 Thomas Scott and Colleen Scott – engineers ( USA ) 
 Etienne Conod – engineer ( Switzerland ) 
 = = = Bonus tracks on 1990 CD re @-@ issue = = = 
 Fred Frith – bass guitar , guitar , violin , keyboards , drums , percussion 
 Marc Hollander – soprano saxophone ( track 18 ) 
 Chris Cutler – drums ( tracks 15 – 18 ) 
 Frank Wuyts – synthesiser ( track 18 ) 
 Michel <unk> – oboe , bassoon ( track 18 ) 
 Denis van Hecke – cello ( track 18 ) 
 Lindsay Cooper – bassoon , oboe ( tracks 15 @,@ 16 ) 
 Tim Hodgkinson – alto saxophone ( track 15 ) 
 Annemarie Roelofs – trombone ( track 15 ) 
 Dagmar Krause – voice ( track 17 ) 
 Tom Cora – bass guitar , percussion ( track 19 ) 
 = = = = Recording = = = = 
 Track 15 recorded at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in July – August 1978 , previously unreleased ( an outtake from the Henry Cow Western Culture recording sessions ) 
 Track 16 recorded at Kaleidophon , London in March 1978 , originally released on Hopes and Fears ( 1978 ) by Art Bears 
 Track 17 recorded at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in January 1978 , originally released on Hopes and Fears ( 1978 ) by Art Bears 
 Track 18 recorded at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in January 1979 , originally released on Un <unk> de l <unk> des Bandits ( 1980 ) by Aksak Maboul 
 Track 19 recorded at Sunrise Studios , Kirchberg , Switzerland in January 1984 , originally released on Learn to Talk ( 1984 ) by Skeleton Crew 
 Track 20 recorded at Noise , New York City in September 1988 , previously unreleased 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 <unk> <unk> ( Robert Wyatt 's wife ) – album cover artwork on the original LP record 
 = = CD reissues = = 
 In 1990 East Side Digital and RecRec Music re @-@ issued Gravity on CD with six bonus tracks . In 2002 Fred Records issued a remastered version of the original Gravity with no bonus tracks . 
 = Cedric Wright = 
 George Cedric Wright ( April 13 , 1889 – 1959 ) was an American violinist and wilderness photographer of the High Sierra . He was Ansel Adams 's mentor and best friend for decades , and accompanied Adams when three of his most famous photographs were taken . He was a long <unk> participant in the annual wilderness High Trips sponsored by the Sierra Club . 
 = = Family = = 
 Cedric Wright was born and raised in Alameda , California . His father was a successful attorney , and one of his father 's clients was astronomer Charles Hitchcock Adams , Ansel Adams 's father . Cedric 's uncle , William Hammond Wright , was an astronomer who became head of Lick Observatory . As a result of his father 's success , Wright was financially comfortable throughout his life . 
 His first wife was Mildred <unk> , and they had a daughter , Alberta . After they divorced , he married pianist and piano teacher Rhea Ufford in 1929 . They had a daughter , Joanne , and a son , David . 
 = = Violinist = = 
 Wright was motivated to become a violinist when he heard a performance by Fritz Kreisler . After study in the United States , he spent seven years studying with Otakar <unk> in Prague and Vienna . 
 Wright was known as a " distinguished violinist " , and was a violin teacher at the University of California Extension and Mills College for many years . Renowned violin teacher and conductor Louis Persinger called him " one of the foremost performers and instructors in the West " . In 1934 , arthritis brought an early end to his professional career as a violinist , and he then decided to pursue his hobby of photography as a career . 
 = = Friendship and collaboration with Ansel Adams = = 
 Wright first met Ansel Adams at a family gathering at the Wright family vacation home in the Santa Cruz Mountains when Cedric was about 21 and Ansel was about 8 years old . They encountered each other again on a four @-@ week wilderness High Trip in Yosemite National Park , organized by the Sierra Club in 1923 . Nancy Newhall wrote , " On that first High Trip , Ansel found himself drawn to one Cedric Wright , a violinist , who could fiddle by the fire deep into the night and still be among the first up , making a little fire of twigs . . . " 
 Their friendship , which continued until Wright 's death in 1959 , was described by Mary Street Alinder as an " intense comradeship " . The men shared a deep interest in both classical music and photography , since Adams was an accomplished classical pianist . Wright introduced Adams to the writings of the British philosopher Edward Carpenter , whose thoughts helped shape both men 's world views . Together , they discussed the works of other writers , including Elbert Hubbard and Walt Whitman . 
 Back in the Bay Area after their initial 1923 wilderness journey together had ended , Adams became a part of Wright 's social circle of musicians and Sierra Club activists who gathered at his Berkeley home . Adams " idolized " Wright , and he followed in Wright 's footsteps by taking long trips into the wilderness of the Sierra Nevada each summer , photographing the remote mountain peaks . 
 In his autobiography , Ansel Adams called Cedric Wright " my best friend for many years " . He described Wright as " almost an occupant of another world and a creator and messenger of beauty and mysteries . Perhaps his greatest gift was that of imparting confidence to those who were wavering on the edge of fear and indecision ; often it was me . " 
 In 1926 , Wright introduced Adams to Albert Bender , a patron of the arts who was to play an instrumental role in Adams 's enormous success as a photographer . Wright was also a close friend of Virginia Best , who was Adams ' girlfriend for years . Wright visited with her when Adams was away on photography trips , and she confided in him about the problems in her relationship with Adams . Wright was their best man when they were married on January 2 , 1928 . 
 Wright accompanied and assisted Adams when he took three of the most famous photographs of his career : 
 On April 10 , 1927 , Wright hiked with Adams , Virginia Best , Charles Michael and another photographer , Arnold Williams , to a rocky perch high above Yosemite Valley called the " Diving Board " . There , Adams took Monolith , the Face of Half Dome , which Mary Street Alinder called Adams 's " most significant photograph " because it was a triumph of visualization showing " extreme manipulation of tonal values " . This photo set Adams on the path of becoming America 's most well @-@ known photographer . Adams called the excursion a " personally historic moment in my photographic career . " 
 During the 1932 Sierra Club High Trip to Sequoia National Park , Wright and Adams both photographed Precipice Lake near Eagle Scout Peak , while Virginia swam in the lake , still arrayed with icy patches . Wright was shocked when he saw Adams 's Frozen Lake and Cliffs , The Sierra Nevada , Sequoia National Park , so much more beautiful than the photos Wright himself had produced . Mary Street Alinder described the image : " Mirrored ghostly upon the inky waters , a shattered black cliff descends into a partially frozen lake . " 
 In 1941 , Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes hired Adams for six months to create photographs of lands under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior . Wright accompanied Adams and his young son Michael Adams on a long road trip around the west . While traveling through the Chama River valley near nightfall on November 1 , 1941 , they encountered a " fantastic scene " , a church and cemetery near Hernandez , New Mexico , and pulled to the side of the road . Adams recalled that he yelled at his son Michael and at Wright to " Get this ! Get that , for God 's sake ! We don 't have much time ! " Desperate to capture the image in the fading light , they scrambled to set up the tripod and camera , knowing that only moments remained before the light was gone . The result was Moonrise , Hernandez , New Mexico , a photograph that became so popular and collectible that Adams personally made over 1 @,@ 300 photographic prints of it during his long career . On October 17 , 2006 , Sotheby 's auctioned a print of this photograph for $ 609 @,@ 600 . Art historian H. W. Janson called this photo " a perfect marriage of straight and pure photography " . 
 = = Wright 's Berkeley home = = 
 In 1921 , Wright purchased an old dairy barn at <unk> Etna Street in Berkeley , California , and hired architect Bernard Maybeck to remodel it into a home . Nicknamed " the barn " , Wright 's home featured " a soaring ceiling with room for a rope swing hung from the rafters and space enough for two grand pianos . Maybeck 's daughter @-@ in @-@ law <unk> Maybeck " remembered evenings at Cedric Wright 's studio , when the women wore evening dresses and the men wore tuxedos , and there was much music around the big stone fireplace . " 
 The home was known as " party central " among Sierra Club members of the era . Among that social circle were Richard M. Leonard and his wife Doris , Francis P. Farquhar and his wife Marjorie , David Brower and his wife Anne , Edgar <unk> and his wife Peggy , and Wright 's best friends , Ansel Adams and his wife Virginia . Nancy Newhall described the atmosphere : " Meanwhile in Cedric Wright 's house among the redwoods in Berkeley , Ansel was finding a warm welcome ... In his house there was music for violin and piano ; there was poetry , especially Whitman . " 
 = = Sierra Club High Trips = = 
 The High Trips were large wilderness excursions organized and led by the Sierra Club , beginning in 1901 . While most of these excursions were to the High Sierra , some were to other destinations , such as the Canadian Rockies in 1928 . Wright 's photos of that trip , along with those of Adams and other photographers , were included in a portfolio produced to commemorate it . No other member participated in as many High Trips as Wright , and David Brower recounted that Wright told him in 1953 that he had participated in 33 High Trips . Tom Turner wrote that " Wright was a tireless and talented photographer of the mountain scene , who entertained campers with his fiddle and loved to greet weary hikers at day 's end with an unexpected cup of tea or soup . " During the High Trips , Wright and his student Dorothy Minty would often entertain groups of 200 participants with performances of Bach 's Double Violin Concerto . 
 = = Photographer , inventor and writer = = 
 Arthritis forced Wright to give up his career as a violinist in 1934 , and he resolved to pursue his hobby of photography as a new career . In 1939 the Museum of Modern Art accepted six of Wright 's photographs , donated by Albert Bender , into its photography collection . These were followed by another ten prints the following year . Several of his photos were displayed at the Golden Gate International Exposition in San Francisco in 1939 and 1940 . Wright 's work was also featured in a 1943 exhibition at The Museum of Modern Art called " Action Photography " , along with work by Erich Salomon , Peter Stackpole , Alfred Stieglitz , Paul Strand and Weegee . 
 He was issued a United States patent for a portable photo @-@ printing device in 1935 . He also made various devices , including " collapsible and portable latrines " for the High Trips , and " astonishingly solid camera and violin cases of varnished plywood with leather thongs , which would tolerate the rigors of being packed for a month on <unk> . " 
 In an article published in 1957 , which included eight full @-@ page photographs , Wright described his thoughts about how high mountain beauty resembles great music : " Beauty haunts the high country like a majestic hymn , sings in cold sunny air , the brilliant mountain air — makes of sunlight a living thing — floats in cloud forms — filters changing floods of light ever clothing the mountains anew . Beauty arrives in deep voice of river and wind through forest , swelling the chorus , giving sonority universal proportions . " He dedicated these words to Sierra Club leader William Edward Colby , and they became part of the introduction to Wright 's posthumous book , Words of the Earth . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Ansel Adams described Wright 's final years as " complex and difficult " . He suffered a stroke , which caused a personality change , and he became " rigid and dictatorial " , which was a " painful experience for all his friends . " Wright died in 1959 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After his death , Nancy Newhall edited and completed his book , Words of the Earth , which was among the first titles published by Sierra Club Books in 1960 . Ansel Adams wrote the foreword . 
 In 1961 , a 12 @,@ 362 @-@ foot ( <unk> meter ) High Sierra peak was officially named Mount Cedric Wright ( 36 ° 54 ′ 13 @.@ 9 ″ N 118 ° 23 ′ 15 @.@ 2 ″ W ) , in memory of Wright , who was described as an " internationally known photographer whose photography has made a significant contribution to the appreciation of the natural scene . " The mountain is located in Kings Canyon National Park , 1 @.@ 9 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) southwest of Colosseum Mountain and 5 @.@ 3 km ( 3 @.@ 3 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Mount Pinchot . Virginia Best Adams later arranged for park ranger Randy <unk> to scatter Wright 's ashes on the slopes of Mount Cedric Wright . In 1976 , Ansel Adams and the Sierra Club arranged for Wright 's personal papers to be donated to the Bancroft Library at the University of California , Berkeley . 
 A 2011 exhibit at the Chadwick School featured photos of the school by both Wright and Adams . Two of Wright 's children had attended the school . A critic writing for the Los Angeles Times praised Wright 's work : " In the Chadwick exhibition , it 's Wright who trumps Adams with the show 's most jaw @-@ dropping image : a 1947 shot of five boys playing basketball on the school 's outdoor court , against a backdrop of rolling hills and the Los Angeles Basin far below . It captures a moment of sheer ballet , the composition so gracefully perfect that one would think it had been choreographed by Balanchine — except that you can 't choreograph players leaping for a rebound . " 
 = Hurricane Danielle ( 1998 ) = 
 Hurricane Danielle resulted in minor damage throughout its duration as a tropical cyclone in late August and early September 1998 . The fourth named storm and second hurricane of the annual hurricane season , Danielle originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa on August 21 . Tracking generally west @-@ northwestward , the disturbance was initially disorganized ; under favorable atmospheric conditions , shower and thunderstorm activity began to consolidate around a low @-@ pressure center . Following a series of satellite intensity estimates , the system was upgraded to Tropical Depression Four during the pre @-@ dawn hours of August 24 , and further to Tropical Storm Danielle that afternoon . Moving around the southern periphery of the Azores High located in the northeastern Atlantic , quick intensification to hurricane status occurred early on August 25 . By 0600 UTC the following day , Danielle reached an initial peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , a Category 2 hurricane . Increased wind shear from a nearby trough encroached on further development later that day , and subsequently led to slight weakening . By 1200 UTC on August 27 , despite continued unfavorable conditions , Danielle reached a second peak intensity equal to the first . Weakening once ensued late on August 27 in addition to the days following , and Danielle was a low @-@ end Category 1 hurricane by August 31 as its forward speed slowed . 
 As the cyclone reached the western periphery of the ridge that steered it across the Atlantic for much of its existence , it began yet another period of intensification , and once again attained a peak intensity as a Category 2 hurricane . Passing northwest of Bermuda , Danielle weakened to Category 1 hurricane strength , but for a final time intensified into a 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) tropical cyclone thereafter . As the cyclone passed over increasingly cool sea surface temperatures and became intertwined in a baroclinic zone , it began to undergo an extratropical transition . At 0000 UTC on September 4 , Danielle was no longer considered a tropical cyclone , despite retaining hurricane @-@ force winds . Several days later , the remnants of Danielle merged with a larger extratropical low and became indistinguishable . As a tropical cyclone , it produced heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico and the Lesser Antilles , leading to flooding . Tropical storm @-@ force winds were observed in Bermuda even though the cyclone passed well northwest of the island . During Danielle 's transition to an extratropical cyclone , it produced light rain and led to minor beach erosion in Newfoundland . The larger extratropical low that merged with the system resulted in large waves off the coast of the United Kingdom , leading to major beach erosion and coastal flooding . Overall , no fatalities were reported with the system and it caused an estimated $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 1998 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Danielle trace back to a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa and into the eastern Atlantic Ocean early on August 21 . Tracking west @-@ northwestward , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began Dvorak satellite intensity estimates later that morning following the consolidation of convection – shower and thunderstorm activity – near the system 's center . Favorable atmospheric conditions led to further organization , and it is estimated that the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression by 0600 UTC on August 24 , while located roughly 690 miles ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . Operationally , the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories at 1530 UTC and noted that the depression was already on the verge of tropical storm intensity . The depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Danielle later on August 24 following an increase in organization on satellite imagery . 
 As the cyclone moved northwestward along the southern periphery of the Azores High , it began a period of rapid deepening in which a " pinhole " eye became distinguishable on satellite imagery ; on this basis , Danielle was upgraded to a hurricane at 1200 UTC on August 25 . At the time , Danielle was a compact system , with tropical storm force winds spanning only 115 miles ( 185 km ) from the center . Although the NHC was fairly certain that the storm would continue west @-@ northwestward , a veer north or south of the forecast track seemed plausible due to the influence of an upper @-@ level low to the west @-@ northwest of Danielle . Nonetheless , the storm continued its west @-@ northwest track . At 0600 UTC on August 26 , Danielle attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , one of four peak intensities . Although the eye became obscured and southeasterly vertical wind shear increased late on August 26 , the National Hurricane Center did not indicate weakening and instead predicted that Danielle would reach winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) by late on August 27 . Early on August 27 , a United States Air Force reconnaissance aircraft flight reported surface winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , though post @-@ analysis indicates that the intensity of the storm was underestimated . 
 The storm briefly re @-@ strengthened slightly on August 27 , reaching its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) for the second time at 1200 UTC . Vertical wind shear persisted and Danielle soon began to weaken again . Later on August 27 , the National Hurricane Center predicted that the storm would travel along the periphery of an anticyclone centered just east of Bermuda , which would keep the storm away from the East Coast of the United States . Despite being in an apparently favorable environment , Danielle continued to slowly weaken , as the forecast for decreasing wind shear did not initially materialize . Additionally , upwelling from Hurricane Bonnie roughly a week earlier contributed to a decrease in strength . Although the storm weakened further , reconnaissance aircraft observations on August 29 concluded that the structure of Danielle had improved compared to the previous day . By early on August 30 , Danielle had weakened to the extent that it was only a minimal hurricane , with maximum winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) at the time . On August 30 , the National Hurricane Center noted that Danielle would soon leave the upwelling track left by Bonnie , and likely lead to intensification . Thus , the possibility of re @-@ strengthening increased , though predictions only showed gradual intensification . 
 By early on August 31 , an increase in sustained winds , a decrease in barometric pressure , and a 23 miles ( 37 km ) wide eye observed by reconnaissance aircraft all suggested that Danielle was beginning to intensify . On August 31 , the anticyclone near Bermuda caused Danielle to curve northeastward , away from the East Coast of the United States . Later that day , a significant increase in intensity led the storm to again reach its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . On September 1 , there was significant uncertainty in the future intensity of Danielle , as a shortwave trough located northeast of the storm would either enhance outflow , causing strengthening , or increase wind shear , resulting in weakening . At 1500 UTC on September 1 , it was predicted that Danielle would strengthen slightly before weakening and becoming extratropical by September 3 . Three hours later , Danielle reached its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) for the fourth and final time . 
 Early on September 2 , the storm weakened again and was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane . At 0600 UTC on September 3 , Danielle reached its minimum barometric pressure of 960 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 35 inHg ) , although sustained winds were only 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at the time . As late as 1500 UTC on September 3 , satellite imagery indicated that Danielle was retaining tropical characteristics . The National Hurricane Center did not forecast any further weakening before the extratropical transition , but instead mentioned the possibility of baroclinic strengthening . Late on September 3 , the final advisory was issued on the transitioning storm . Danielle officially transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on September 4 according to a post @-@ season report from the NHC , while located east @-@ southeast of Newfoundland . The remnants of Danielle traversed east and eventually northeastward across the Atlantic Ocean . It produced rough seas in the British Isles on September 6 before merging with an extratropical low pressure area north of Ireland on September 8 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Shortly after formation , Danielle was considered a potential threat to the Lesser Antilles , with the National Hurricane Center noting that " any deviation to the left of the track would bring Danielle closer [ to ] the Leeward Islands . " However , Danielle bypassed far enough north of the Lesser Antilles to prevent any tropical storm or hurricane watches or warnings . Several days later , the storm was considered a possible threat to Florida by local newspapers , though the National Hurricane Center accurately predicted a re @-@ curvature from the United States mainland well in advance . At 1500 UTC on September 1 , at which time Danielle was situated northeast of the Bahamas , a tropical storm warning was issued for Bermuda ; this was later cancelled after Danielle passed northwest of the island . 
 The outer bands of Danielle produced heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico , causing street flooding and landslides in Bayamón , Guaynabo , Toa Alta , and Vega Alta ; several streams overflowed their banks , causing additional flooding . In a neighborhood of Bayamón , one house was damaged after a wall collapsed . Losses in Puerto Rico totaled to approximately $ 50 @,@ 000 ( 1998 USD ) . Hurricane Bonnie ripped an artificial reef composed of tires offshore Atlantic Beach , North Carolina in late August . Danielle washed numerous of these loose tires ashore , especially on Emerald Isle . As a result , the Governor of North Carolina , Jim Hunt , requested prison labor and the National Guard to clean up beaches from Brunswick County to Carteret County . Instead of resulting in further erosion in the aftermath of Bonnie farther up along the coast , Danielle led to a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) increase in sand along the New Jersey coastline . In Bermuda , sustained winds of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) and a gust of 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) were reported on September 2 . Offshore Atlantic Canada , wave heights reached as high as 82 feet ( 25 m ) . However , other than light rainfall in Newfoundland , the storm caused no impact in Canada . Tori Murden , an American attempting to become the first woman to solo row across the Atlantic Ocean , encountered rough seas from the storm and its remnants . By September 7 , Murden sent out a distress signal and was rescued by the Independent Spirit later that day . 
 While passing near the British Isles on September 6 as an extratropical storm , Danielle produced severe sea conditions on the western part of the isles . Major beach erosion was observed , and many people required rescuing . Coastal portions of Cornwall were evacuated as high waves inundated many homes , and an all @-@ terrain police vehicle was shoved into the sea by a rogue wave in the Isles of Scilly . An 11 ‑ year @-@ old boy and his father were trapped in a sea cave on the north coast of Cornwall due to rough surf . Two other men from Port Isaac also became isolated in the same location after their boat capsized . All four were eventually rescued by a helicopter that hovered near the entrance of the sea cave . At the West Sands Caravan Park near Selsey , West Sussex , twelve families were evacuated to higher ground . A yacht filled with eight people ran aground near Calshot ; they required rescuing by the Solent Coastguards . Flash flooding was reported throughout Wiltshire , especially in the city of Melksham . Numerous motorists were left stranded in inundated streets , while water entered several homes , store basements , a fire station , and the Cooper Avon Tyre Factory . 
 = Attack on Titan = 
 Attack on Titan ( Japanese : 進撃の巨人 , Hepburn : Shingeki no Kyojin , lit . " Advancing Giants " ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Hajime Isayama . The series began in Kodansha 's Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine on September 9 , 2009 , and has been collected into 19 tankōbon volumes as of April 2016 . It is set in a world where humanity lives in cities surrounded by enormous walls ; a defense against the Titans , gigantic humanoids that eat humans seemingly without reason . The story initially centers on Eren Yeager , his adopted sister Mikasa Ackerman and childhood friend Armin <unk> , who join the military to fight the Titans after their home town is invaded and Eren 's mother is eaten . However , as the story progresses and the truths about the Titans are slowly revealed to the reader , the narrative shifts to encompass Historia Reiss , squad leader Levi , and other supporting characters . 
 The spin @-@ off light novel series Before the Fall began in December 2011 and has received a manga adaptation . Two additional light novel series and four additional spin @-@ off manga series have also been created . A television anime adaptation produced by Wit Studio and Production I.G aired in Japan on MBS between April and September 2013 and a second season is confirmed to be released in April 2017 . Four video game adaptations developed by Nitroplus staffers in collaboration with Production I.G were announced to be released as bonus content for the third and sixth volumes of the Blu @-@ ray Disc release of the anime , with another game developed by Spike Chunsoft for the Nintendo 3DS . A two @-@ part live @-@ action film adaptation , Attack on Titan and Attack on Titan : End of the World , and a live @-@ action web @-@ series were released in 2015 . An anime adaptation of the Junior High spin @-@ off manga , produced by Production I.G , began airing in October 2015 . Attack on Titan and all five spin @-@ off manga are published in North America by Kodansha Comics USA , while the three novel series are published by Vertical . The anime has been licensed by Funimation Entertainment for North America , by Manga Entertainment for the UK , and by Madman Entertainment for Australasia . 
 Attack on Titan has become a commercial success . As of July 2015 , the manga had 52 @.@ 5 million copies in print , with 50 million copies in Japan and 2 @.@ 5 million copies overseas . The release of the anime also saw a boost in the series ' popularity , with it having received critical acclaim for its atmosphere and story . Although it also gained fame in neighboring Asian countries , the series ' themes have been a subject of controversy . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Over 100 years before the beginning of the story , giant humanoid creatures called Titans ( <unk> , Kyojin ) suddenly appeared and nearly wiped out humanity , devouring them without remorse or reason . What remains of humanity now resides within three enormous concentric walls : the outermost is Wall Maria ( ウォール ・ <unk> , Wōru Maria ) ; the middle wall is Wall Rose ( ウォール ・ <unk> , Wōru <unk> , sometimes pronounced like rosé ) and the innermost is Wall Sheena ( ウォール ・ <unk> , Wōru <unk> , alt . " Wall Sina " ) . Inside these walls , humanity has lived in uneasy peace for one hundred years ; many people growing up without ever having seen a Titan . This all changes when one day , a giant 60 @-@ meter ( 200 ft ) -tall Colossus Titan mysteriously appears after a strike of lightning and breaches the outer wall of the <unk> district , a town at Wall Maria , allowing the smaller Titans to invade the district . An Armored Titan smashes clean through Wall Maria , forcing mankind to abandon the land between Wall Maria and Wall Rose , evacuating the remaining population into the inner districts . The sudden influx of population causes turmoil and famine . 
 The Titans are giant humanoid figures about 3 – 15 meters ( 10 – 50 ft ) tall and are usually masculine in body structure but lack reproductive organs . Although they do not appear to need food , they instinctively attack and eat humans on sight ; it is mentioned that they derive their energy from sunlight . In addition the Titans also do not have a proper digestive tract ; once they have eaten their fill of human prey , titans will vomit their meal into large , slimy balls , derisively referred to as " hairballs " . Finally , their skin is tough and difficult to penetrate , and they regenerate quickly from injuries , save for a weak spot at the nape of their neck . 
 Combating the Titans is the military , which is divided into three branches . Foremost in the story is the Survey Corps ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , which goes out into Titan territory to try to reclaim the land . The Survey Corps are heavily derided in society because of their high casualty rate and little sense of progress . The second and largest branch is the Garrison Regiment ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , which guards the walls and the civilian populace . The third branch is the Military Police Brigade ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who guards the royal family and live relatively relaxed lives , although this eventually results in fraud , corruption , and political subterfuge . The soldiers use a tethering system called Vertical Maneuvering Equipment ( <unk> , <unk> Kidō <unk> ) acting as a grappling system , allowing them to jump onto ( and swing from ) walls , trees , or nearby buildings to attack Titans . However , despite it being the soldiers ' primary line of defense against the Titans , it is useless in open and flat terrain like fields . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story of Attack on Titan revolves around the adventures of Eren Yeager , his foster sister , Mikasa Ackerman , and their childhood friend Armin <unk> . After the wall which protects their hometown of Shinganshina is breached by the Colossal Titan leading the other Titans to enter , Eren watches in horror as one of them eats his mother . Vowing to kill all the Titans , Eren enlists in the military , along with his friends . 
 Five years later , the three cadet graduates are positioned in Trost District , one of the border towns jutting out of Wall Rose when the Titans attack again . In the ensuing battle , Eren is eaten by one of the Titans before Armin 's eyes . A Titan later appears and begins fighting the other Titans while ignoring humans ; the Titan is revealed to be Eren , who has developed the ability to transform into one . Though he is seen as a threat by some , he helps the military take back Trost District . After being placed on trial for being a danger to the humans , he is taken in by the Survey Corps ' Special Operations Squad , led by Captain Levi . 
 In an expedition to Shinganshina , the Scouts are attacked by a Female Titan who attempts to capture Eren . Although the Scouts are able to briefly capture the Female Titan , she breaks free and devastates Levi 's squad , forcing the expedition to retreat . Armin determines that the Female Titan is Annie , one of the cadets who taught Eren to fight , and devises a plan to capture her at <unk> . During this operation , collateral damage reveals that Titans reside in and make up the walls surrounding the human settlements . 
 Some of Eren 's friends are also revealed to be able to transform into Titans and had been sent as spies by an unknown party to find something called " The Coordinate " . It is later confirmed that the Coordinate is the power to control other Titans at will , and that Eren holds that power . The royal family and the Military Police track Eren and his friend Krista Lenz , who is actually Historia Reiss , the successor to the real king , Rod Reiss , as the current king is but a figurehead . 
 The Survey Corps , losing all will to follow the current government , stage a successful rebellion to overthrow the monarchy , culminating with the death of Rod by the hands of his own daughter , who becomes the new queen . It is then revealed that the Reiss Family was responsible for the creation of the walls 100 years ago using the Coordinate , which was stolen by Eren 's father Grisha , who then transferred it to Eren 's body by turning him into a Titan before allowing his son to devour him . Eren also obtains a new power that allows him to create massive and permanent structures that the Survey Corps intend to use in order to seal the breach in Shinganshina and reclaim Wall Maria . 
 = = Production = = 
 Hajime Isayama created a 65 @-@ page one @-@ shot version of Attack on Titan in 2006 . Originally , he also offered his work to the Weekly Shōnen Jump department at Shueisha , where he was advised to modify his style and story to be more suitable for Jump . He declined and instead decided to take it to the Weekly Shōnen Magazine department at Kodansha . Before serialization began in 2009 , he had already thought of ideas for twists , although they are fleshed out as the series progresses . The author initially based the scenery in the manga on that of his hometown , which is surrounded by mountains . While working at an internet cafe , Isayama encountered a customer who grabbed him by the collar . It was this incident that showed him " the fear of meeting a person I can 't communicate with , " which is the feeling that he conveys through the Titans . When designing the appearances of the Titans , he uses several models such as martial artist Yushin Okami for Eren Yeager 's Titan form as well as Brock Lesnar for the Armored Titan . George Wada , the anime 's producer , stated that the " Wall of Fear " was influenced by the isolated and enclosed nature of Japanese culture . He also said that the inner feelings of every individual is one of the series ' main influences . Isayama later would confirm that Attack on Titan was inspired in part by Muv @-@ Luv Alternative , the second visual novel in the Muv @-@ Luv visual novel series . 
 Isayama estimated his basic monthly timeline as one week to storyboard and three weeks to actually draw the chapter . The story is planned out in advance , even marking down in which collected volumes a specific " truth " will be revealed . In September 2013 , he stated that he is aiming to end the series in 20 collected volumes . Originally , Isayama planned to give the series a tragic conclusion similar to that of the film adaptation of Stephen King 's The Mist , where every character dies . However , positive response to the manga and anime has caused the author to contemplate changing the ending due to the impact it could have on fans . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Hajime Isayama 's original manga serial , Attack on Titan commenced publication in Kodansha 's monthly publication Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine starting with the September 2009 issue . The first tankōbon collected volume was released on March 17 , 2010 . The most recent , volume 16 , was released on April 9 , 2015 . As of November 2014 , the manga had 45 million copies in print The series ' twelfth collected volume was given a first printing of 2 @.@ 2 million copies , making Attack on Titan one of only two manga series ever to get an initial print surpassing 2 million , the other being One Piece . Volume 13 has the highest initial first print of the series so far , with 2 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 copies . It is also the first print run record for its publisher , Kodansha . 
 A comedic spin @-@ off of the series , titled Attack on Titan : Junior High ( <unk> ！ <unk> , Shingeki ! Kyojin <unk> ) and written by Saki Nakagawa , began serialization in Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine 's May 2012 issue . It follows the main characters as they battle the Titans while in junior high school . Another manga series based on the prequel light novels Attack on Titan : Before the Fall started running in Kodansha 's Monthly Shōnen Sirius from August 2013 , drawn by Satoshi Shiki . An additional spin @-@ off based on the No Regrets visual novel was serialized in the shōjo manga magazine Aria , titled Attack on Titan : No Regrets ( 進撃の巨人 <unk> , Shingeki no Kyojin : <unk> <unk> ) . It is written by Gun Snark and illustrated by Hikaru Suruga . It focuses on the origins of Captain Levi , one of the most prominent characters in the main series . A yonkoma spin @-@ off , called Spoof on Titan ( <unk> , <unk> no Kyojin , " Titan Short Skits " ) and drawn by <unk> , was released on Kodansha 's Manga Box smartphone and tablet application from December 2013 to December 30 , 2014 in both Japanese and English . A manga adaptation of Hiroshi Seko 's Attack on Titan : Lost Girls novel , written and illustrated by <unk> Fuji , began publication in Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine on August 9 , 2015 . 
 In North America , the series is published in English by Kodansha Comics USA . They published the first volume on June 19 , 2012 , . The fifteenth was released on April 7 , 2015 . By July 2015 , the manga had 2 @.@ 5 million copies in circulation in North America . The first three spin @-@ off manga have also been licensed by Kodansha Comics USA , who published the first volume of each between March and June 2014 . It announced its license to Spoof on Titan at the New York Comic Con in October 2015 , and its acquisition of Lost Girls in March 2016 . 
 = = = Novel = = = 
 A light novel series titled Attack on Titan : Before the Fall ( 進撃の巨人 Before the fall ) , written by Ryō Suzukaze and illustrated by <unk> <unk> , began on April 1 , 2011 . Its story is set before the events of the manga and it was published by Kodansha in three volumes . While the first tells the story of Angel , the blacksmith who develops the first prototypes of the Vertical Maneuvering Equipment , the following two follow a young man who was found as a baby in the stomach of a Titan . A second light novel series called Attack on Titan : Harsh Mistress of the City ( 進撃の巨人 <unk> , Shingeki no Kyojin <unk> Toshi no <unk> ) , written by Ryō Kawakami and illustrated by Range Murata , began on August 1 , 2014 . Vertical began releasing the novels in North America in the summer of 2014 . A novel titled Attack on Titan : Lost Girls ( 進撃の巨人 Lost Girls ) , written by Hiroshi Seko , was published on December 9 , 2014 . It comprises three short stories featuring Mikasa and Annie Leonhart , titled " Lost in the cruel world " , " Wall Sina , Goodbye " , and " Lost Girls " . It was also released in English by Vertical . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 An anime television series adaptation produced by Wit Studio ( a subsidiary of IG Port ) aired on MBS between April 7 , 2013 and September 29 , 2013 , directed by Tetsurō Araki with Yūki Kaji starring as Eren , Yui Ishikawa voicing Mikasa and Marina Inoue as Armin . Both Funimation and Crunchyroll simulcast the series on their respective websites , and Funimation began releasing the series on North American home video in 2014 . The anime has been licensed in the UK by Manga Entertainment . Madman Entertainment acquired the show for distribution in Australia and New Zealand . The final episode was also aired in Japanese theaters . The anime had some production issues with needing more animators with Wit Studios ' character designer , Kyoji Asano tweeting and looking for active animators to work on the anime . An OVA version of the " Ilse 's Notebook " special chapter from tankōbon volume 5 was originally scheduled to be released on August 9 , 2013 , bundled with the volume 11 limited edition , but was postponed and included with a limited edition of volume 12 , released on December 9 , 2013 , instead . The OVA was bundled on subtitled DVD with the English limited edition release of the 17th manga volume , released on December 1 , 2015 . A second OVA was released on April 9 , 2014 , bundled with the 13th volume of the series , this one focused on the members of the 104th Training Corps . Two additional OVA episodes , based on the Attack on Titan : No Regrets prequel manga , were bundled with the 15th and 16th volumes of the main series , released on December 9 , 2014 and April 9 , 2015 , respectively . The anime previously aired on Adult Swim 's Toonami block . In Australia , the anime currently airs on SBS 2 on Tuesdays , in Japanese with English subtitles , with the first episode having aired on September 30 . 
 For the first thirteen episodes , the opening theme is " Guren no Yumiya " ( <unk> , lit . " Crimson Bow and Arrow " , styled in German as " <unk> Pfeil und Bogen " ) by Linked Horizon , and the ending theme is " <unk> <unk> na Sekai " ( <unk> , lit . " This Beautiful Cruel World " ) by Yōko Hikasa . For episodes 14 – 25 , the opening theme is " Jiyū no Tsubasa " ( <unk> , lit . " Wings of Freedom " , styled in German as " Die <unk> der Freiheit " ) by Linked Horizon , and the ending theme is " great escape " by Cinema Staff . Both " Guren no Yumiya " and " Jiyū no Tsubasa " were released as part of the single " Jiyū e no Shingeki " on July 10 , 2013 . 
 The anime was compiled into two animated theatrical films with new voice acting from the same cast . The first film Attack on Titan – Part 1 : Crimson Bow and Arrow ( 「 進撃の巨人 」 前編 ～ <unk> ～ , Shingeki no Kyojin Zenpen ~ Guren no Yumiya ~ ) covers the first 13 episodes and was released on November 22 , 2014 , while the second film Attack on Titan – Part 2 : Wings of Freedom ( 「 進撃の巨人 」 後編 ～ <unk> ～ , Shingeki no Kyojin Kōhen ~ Jiyū no Tsubasa ~ ) adapts the remaining episodes and adds new ending footage . It was released on June 27 , 2015 . A rebroadcast of the first season will be aired during January 9 on NHK 's BS Premium channel . A second season of the anime series was announced on the opening day of the first theatrical film , set to be released in 2016 , though the premiere date was pushed back to April 2017 . 
 A television anime adaptation of the Attack on Titan : Junior High manga spin @-@ off began airing in October 2015 . The series is being directed by <unk> Ibata at Production I.G , with series composition by Midori Gotou , character design by <unk> <unk> , and music by Asami Tachibana . Linked Horizon will be back to do the opening theme " Youth Like Fireworks " . The ending theme , " Ground 's Counterattack " ( " Hangeki no Daichi " ) , is performed by the voice actors for Eren , Mikasa , and Jean . A rebroadcast of the series will be aired during January . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 There have been four video game adaptations of Attack on Titan developed by Nitroplus staffers in collaboration with Production I.G. Nitroplus clarified that the studio as a company is not involved in the Attack on Titan Blu @-@ ray Disc games , while individual staffers are . The games are visual novels and were included in the first copies of the third and sixth Blu @-@ ray Disc volumes of the anime . The games cover spin @-@ off stories about the characters of Attack on Titan . Isayama supervised the development of the games . 
 The third Blu @-@ ray volume was released on September 18 with Seko 's Lost in the Cruel World visual novel about Mikasa , and a preview of Gun Snark 's No Regrets ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> , lit . " A Choice with No Regrets " ) . The sixth Blu @-@ ray volume was released on December 18 with the full version of No Regrets about Levi and Erwin 's past , Jin <unk> 's visual novel In the Forest of the Night , Burning Bright about Eren and Levi , and Seko 's Wall Sina , Goodbye visual novel about Annie . 
 An action game , titled Attack on Titan : Humanity in Chains ( 進撃の巨人 ～ <unk> ～ , Shingeki no Kyojin ~ Hangeki no Tsubasa ~ , subtitle lit . " Wings of Counterattack " ) , was developed by Spike Chunsoft for the Nintendo 3DS and released in Japan on December 5 , 2013 , North America on May 12 , 2015 and Europe on July 2 , 2015 . 
 A smartphone social game , titled Attack on Titan : Howl Toward Freedom ( Shingeki no Kyojin ~ Jiyū e no Hōkō ~ ) is in development by Mobage for iOS and Android platforms . In the game , players play as a character who has been exiled from Wall Rose . Players must build and fortify a town outside the wall and expand it by manufacturing items as well as using Titans and exploiting resources from other players . 
 Additionally , Attack on Titan gameplay and merchandise has been featured in a crossover event with Nexon MMORPG MapleStory in its Japanese and GMS versions . 
 Another game , Attack on Titan , for PlayStation 4 , PlayStation 3 , and PlayStation Vita , published by Koei Tecmo and developed by Omega Force , was announced at Gamescom 2015 . It was released on February 18 , 2016 in Japan . Later was confirmed to be released worldwide along with PC and Xbox One versions . 
 Capcom are developing an Attack on Titan arcade game named Shingeki no Kyojin : Team Battle . 
 = = = Live @-@ action = = = 
 A live @-@ action film was announced to be in production in October 2011 . In December 2012 , it was reported that Tetsuya Nakashima left his position as director . According to film distributor Toho , Nakashima had considerable creative differences on the scriptwriting and other matters . In December 2013 , Shinji Higuchi was revealed to be directing , and would also be responsible with the special effects . Writer Yūsuke Watanabe and critic / subculture expert Tomohiro <unk> was announced to be scripting the movie with series creator Isayama . In July 2014 , it was revealed that two films will be released in the summer of 2015 . A teaser trailer for the first live @-@ action film was released in March 2015 . The following month , Toho released the second trailer for the first film , and announced the second installment will be called Attack on Titan : End of the World . In June 2015 , a third trailer for the first film was released , revealing the Three @-@ Dimensional Maneuvering Gear , as well as confirming the film will be released in IMAX theaters in Japan . 
 A live @-@ action miniseries , titled Shingeki no Kyojin : Hangeki no <unk> ( 進撃の巨人 <unk> , " Attack on Titan : Beacon for Counterattack " ) and utilizing the same actors as the films , started streaming on NTT DoCoMo 's online @-@ video service <unk> on August 15 , 2015 . The three episode series focuses on Zoë <unk> and her research of the Titans , as well as how the Vertical Maneuvering Equipment was created . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Two guidebooks to the manga titled Inside and Outside were released on April 9 and September 9 , 2013 , featuring concept art , character profiles and interviews . They were combined into one and released in North America on September 16 , 2014 , by Kodansha USA . 
 A 16 @-@ minute drama CD was created with the anime 's staff and included in the January 2014 issue of Bessatsu Shōnen Magazine . 
 On November 3 , 2014 , American writer C. B. <unk> revealed that a crossover between Attack on Titan and Marvel Comics was in the works . <unk> scripts the scenario written by the original author Hajime Isayama . The one @-@ shot crossover featured Spider @-@ Man , the Avengers and the Guardians of the Galaxy facing off against several Titans , including the Colossal Titan , the Armored Titan , and the Female Titan on the streets of New York City . During Free Comic Book Day 2015 , Marvel 's Secret Wars preview included an 8 @-@ page presentation " Attack on Avengers " by creator Hajime Isayama with art by Gerardo <unk> . It was announced at the 2015 New York Comic @-@ Con that an American comic book titled Attack on Titan Anthology will be published . 
 From January 23 to May 10 , 2015 , Universal Studios Japan hosted attractions based on Attack on Titan . “ The Real ” Attack on Titan Experience features a life @-@ size 15 meter tall Eren titan engaging a 14 meter tall female titan in combat . Other attractions include a ground level titan , which visitors can pose with . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Attack on Titan won the Kodansha Manga Award in the shōnen category in 2011 , was nominated for the 4th Manga Taishō Award and both the 16th and 18th annual Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize . The 2012 edition of Kono Manga ga Sugoi ! , which surveys people in the manga and publishing industry , named Attack on Titan the eighth best manga series for male readers , while the 2014 edition named it the sixth best . Attack on Titan was the top favorite manga for Yomiuri Shimbun 's Sugoi Japan Awards in 2015 . Attack on Titan was the second highest selling manga series of 2013 , with 15 @,@ 933 @,@ 801 copies sold in a single year . In April 2014 , Oricon reported that 30 million volumes of the series have been sold . In the first half of 2014 it topped the chart , ending One Piece 's five @-@ year reign as the highest selling series in that period , with Isayama surprised about it and thanking the readers . By the end of the year , it was the second best selling manga with 11 @,@ 728 @,@ 368 copies sold . In 2015 , the series sold 8 @,@ 778 @,@ 048 copies ranking third for the year . The manga 's publisher , Kodansha , credits Attack on Titan for the company 's first revenue increase in eighteen years . The anime is noted to have helped in boosting the series ' sales while Mainichi Shimbun called it a " once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ decade hit . " 
 Six of the seven English volumes published in North America at the time charted on The New York Times Manga Best Seller list for the week of October 13 , 2013 , and volume one was on the list for 81 weeks straight . In June 2015 , the first volume clocked in at its 100th week on the top 10 chart . Volume one was also number one on Nielsen BookScan 's list of top 20 graphic novels in American bookstores for October 2013 , and for the month of September , the series had more volumes on the list than any other series . The Young Adult Library Services Association in the United States named the series one of its " Great Graphic Novels for Teens " in 2013 . Kodansha USA 's English release won the 2014 Harvey Award for Best American Edition of Foreign Material . Attack on Titan was the only manga to be nominated for the 2015 Goodreads Choice Award for Best Graphic Novel / Comic . 
 Many have analyzed Attack on Titan as representing " the hopelessness felt by young people in today 's society . " while writer Mao <unk> called it a " coming @-@ of @-@ age story of the boys and girls at its core , " with a new mystery every episode . It is these mysteries that critic <unk> Kure says amplifies readers ' expectations . The artwork of the manga has been criticized as crude by some reviewers , with Isayama himself admitting his drawings are " amateurish . " However , those same critics stated that after years of serialization , the art has been improving , and Kure believes that had the illustrations been " refined " , it would not have conveyed the " eeriness " that is a key characteristic of the work . In a short review , Jason Thompson noted how the characters conveniently receive " power @-@ ups " to create plot twists , but concluded that these said plot twists and the manga 's post @-@ apocalyptic world are " too good to miss . " 
 The anime has been very successful in Japan , with average sales of 52 @,@ 052 across 9 volumes , with a total of 468 @,@ 468 as of August 2015 . It was the number one selling TV anime of 2013 in Japan . It was also the number one streaming anime from Funimation in 2014 and the number one fan favorite Funimation home video released of 2014 . The anime adaptation won multiple prizes during the 3rd Newtype Anime Awards , including Best Director , Best Script , Best Soundtrack , Best Theme Song , Top Female Character and Title of the Year . It received the award for Best TV Animation at the 2013 Animation Kobe Awards . It received the award for Animation of the Year at the 2014 Tokyo Anime Award , along with , Best Director , Best Screenplay and Best Music . It won the 2013 Digital Contents of the Year Award at Japan 's 19th annual Association of Media in Digital ( AMD ) Awards . Carl Kimlinger from Anime News Network was sharply critical of the first two episodes of the anime adaptation . He did praise the show for " [ bringing ] back the terror of the fee @-@ fi @-@ fo @-@ fum set " , but then said that it " does not a good show make " . Kimlinger criticized Araki 's direction , saying he " clearly intends it to be powerful and unsettling , but it 's just crude and unpleasant . " On the other hand , other critics from Anime News Network praised much of the series . Rebecca Silverman said it " is both gorgeous and appalling in its visuals " , and " an excellent mix of what 18th century Gothic novelist Ann Radcliffe defined as horror versus terror : the one is physical , making you want to look away , and the other is intellectual , making you want to know what 's going to happen next . " Though there are several apocalyptic action shows , Carlo Santos noted that " few get as close to perfection as Attack on Titan does " . Santos described it as " a masterpiece of death and destruction " even if he only watched the first episode . Theron Martin of Anime News Network praised the musical score and the " intense , impactful first episode " despite his feeling that it has " limited animation " . Martin also compared Attack on Titan 's vibe and visual aesthetic to Claymore . 
 = = Political interpretations = = 
 The series has gained a strong popularity in not only Japan but also throughout the world . For instance , coverage of the anime appeared on the front page of the Hong Kong free newspaper <unk> on May 27 , 2013 , concerning its popularity within Hong Kong as well as in China and Taiwan . However , the series also attracted criticism : the South Korean Electronic Times magazine accused Attack on Titan of having a militaristic message that serves Japanese Prime Minister Shinzō Abe 's political leanings ; while the series also resonated with Hong Kong youths who saw the invading Titans as a metaphor for Mainland China . Hong Kong media commentator Wong Yeung @-@ tat praised Isayama 's style and the versatility of Attack on Titan 's setting , which opens itself to readers ' various interpretations . In 2013 , after media linked to a 2010 blog post by Isayama indicating that the design of the character Dot Pixis was based on the Imperial Japanese General Akiyama <unk> , an Internet flame war about the general 's war record ( e.g. allowing the Port Arthur massacre to occur ) ensued on his blog and included death threats to the author . Because many of the threats written in Japanese had grammatical errors , it is believed that they were written by people outside of Japan . 
 = Two Dozen and One Greyhounds = 
 " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " is the 20th episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 9 , 1995 . The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Bob Anderson . Frank Welker guest stars as Santa 's Little Helper and various other dogs . In the episode , Santa 's Little Helper has puppies with a dog that he met at the greyhound racetrack . When the Simpsons cannot take care of the puppies any longer , they decide to sell them ; however , the puppies do not want to be separated . Montgomery Burns steals the puppies from the Simpsons , and decides to make a tuxedo out of them . Before he can do so , however , Bart and Lisa Simpson save the puppies from Mr. Burns , and ultimately convince him never to wear fur again . 
 The episode is inspired by Dodie Smith 's 1956 novel The Hundred and One Dalmatians and Walt Disney Pictures ' 1961 animated film adaptation One Hundred and One Dalmatians . The producers decided to have Mr. Burns communicate his horrific plan of making a tuxedo from the puppies through a song after determining that it would be a " fun and light " way to convey his plan of killing the greyhounds . " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " received a generally positive reception from television critics . During the week of its original American broadcast , the episode finished 55th in ratings , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 3 . Several reviews considered the episode to be one of their favorites of the series , and especially praised Mr. Burns ' appearances . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons ' dog , Santa 's Little Helper becomes very excited and runs away from home to the dog racing track , where he falls in love with a female greyhound named She 's the Fastest . She is given to the Simpsons after her owner notes that she will no longer race after falling in love . One day , She 's the Fastest gives birth to 25 puppies . Eventually , the puppies become difficult to manage , and Homer and Marge Simpson attempt to sell them to people more capable of giving them adequate care . After seeing the puppies unwilling to separate , however , people begin to leave . Suddenly , Montgomery Burns arrives and offers to let them live in his mansion . After the Simpsons choose not to sell the puppies to him , he steals them when they are not looking . 
 Bart and Lisa Simpson track the puppies to Mr. Burns ' mansion , where they spy on him through a window . They see him treating the puppies well by giving them a bath . When one of the puppies stands on his hind legs , Mr. Burns picks him as his favorite of the bunch . Burns inexplicably claims that the puppy reminds him of actor Rory Calhoun , and names him " Little Monty " . After the bath , Mr. Burns walks into the next room , loads a gun , and sings a musical number called " See My Vest " ( a parody of " Be Our Guest " from the 1991 film Beauty and the Beast ) while demonstrating his wardrobe of fur clothing to his personal assistant , Waylon Smithers . After his performance , Burns prepares to kill all of the puppies , except for Little Monty , to make a new tuxedo for his wardrobe . 
 After learning about Mr. Burns ' plan , Bart and Lisa sneak through the window and attempt to escape with the puppies down a laundry chute using Bart 's socks . However , Mr. Burns is waiting for them at the bottom . As Mr. Burns is about to kill the dogs , Bart grabs Little Monty from Mr. Burns ' hands and places him with the other puppies , hoping that Mr. Burns will not kill the dogs if he can not determine which is Little Monty . When Mr. Burns tells Little Monty to stand up , though , he does . As Mr. Burns bends down to pick up Little Monty , Bart reels a clothesline with some socks hanging from it , causing all of the puppies to stand up . Mr. Burns can not tell which is Little Monty , so he prepares to shoot them all . However , the standing dogs are too cute for him to kill and , emotionally touched , he promises to never wear fur or kill any animals that can do an amusing trick . Mr. Burns buys all of the puppies from the Simpsons and successfully raises all of them into world @-@ class championship racing dogs , winning him millions , to Homer 's dismay over the Simpson 's missed fortune @-@ making opportunity . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Inspiration , writing , and music = = = 
 " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " was written by Mike Scully and directed by Bob Anderson . The Simpsons writers Al Jean and Mike Reiss came up with the original idea for the episode . The idea came to them after watching the 1961 Disney film One Hundred and One Dalmatians . David Mirkin , the episode 's show runner , later jokingly said that Jean and Reiss liked to steal ideas from Disney , and pointed to an episode in season eight that they wrote as proof , titled " Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala ( Annoyed Grunt ) cious " , which was based on the 1964 Disney film Mary Poppins . Mirkin thought that it was great that they could take stuff from Disney and do darker versions on The Simpsons " in a completely legal way " . 
 Groening was happy with the episode because it felt like a callback to the first episode of The Simpsons , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , and because it features references to One Hundred and One Dalmatians . The Disney film thrilled Groening as a kid , and was one of the reasons for why he was first interested in animation and cartooning . In One Hundred and One Dalmatians , the puppies watch cartoons on television several times ; the idea of a cartoon within a cartoon thrilled Groening , and said that this idea inspired him to create The Itchy & Scratchy Show , a fictional television show within the Simpsons universe . 
 Mr. Burns says in the episode that the puppy that stands up only on its hind legs reminds him of Rory Calhoun , an American actor who lived from 1922 to 1999 . The Simpsons writer George Meyer came up with the joke , but Groening argued against it because he did not think the audience would know who Calhoun was . The writers decided to keep it in anyway , because it was later expanded into a key part of the episode 's ending . Several years later , Groening stated that he was proven correct after pointing to discussions on the Internet about the episode asking who Calhoun was . 
 As Bart and Lisa sneak away to Mr. Burns ' mansion , they see him loading a gun and singing a musical number called " See My Vest " , in which he proclaims his intention to kill the puppies to make a tuxedo out of them . When the staff discussed how they could gloss over the horrifying things Mr. Burns would do to the dogs , one of the writers suggested that if they communicated his plan through a song , it would stay " fun and light " . Scully , who agreed that the idea was good , came in the following day with complete lyrics that he wrote for " See My Vest " , which was a parody of the song " Be Our Guest " , sung by Jerry Orbach in the 1991 film Beauty and the Beast . Mirkin loved Scully 's work on the parody song , commenting , " The rhymes are really clever . It 's one of our very best songs [ on The Simpsons ] . " He also liked the fact that songs could be used in episodes of The Simpsons without the episodes turning into musicals , saying , " We 'll just do one song and that 's plenty . We have fun with that and then we 're out . " 
 = = = Animation and voice acting = = = 
 Even though animals in cartoons often behave with " semi @-@ human awareness " , Groening said he preferred animals in cartoons to behave exactly the way they do in real life , claiming that this was how animals were depicted in " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " . Mirkin said there were some exceptions for gags , but most of the time they tried to keep the animals acting realistically . The animal noises for the episode were performed by Frank Welker , who was praised by Mirkin on the DVD audio commentary for the episode , saying , " He can do anything , and it fits perfectly . You forget you 're listening to a guy , and he 's a pleasure to work with . " Welker was also praised by Groening , who said Welker was unbelievably good at doing animal noises . 
 The staff had a " big fight " with the Fox network censors over the scene in which Santa 's Little Helper mates with a female greyhound named She 's The Fastest . The writers were originally worried about the idea , but Mirkin knew that they could shoot it in a certain way to show the dogs having sex without being explicit . In the scene 's final version , the dogs are only seen from the shoulders up ; the crew 's animatic showing the scene in full was later released on DVD . Anderson noted that during the episode 's censor screening , there was a giant laugh at the depiction . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The overarching plot of the episode , as well as its title , was inspired by the Disney film One Hundred and One Dalmatians , which deals with a large number of puppies similar to " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " . Besides the film , less obvious references to Disney @-@ animated films are made throughout the episode . The song " See My Vest " sung by Mr. Burns is a parody of " Be Our Guest " , which is sung by Lumiere ( voiced by Jerry Orbach ) in the film Beauty and the Beast . The scene in which Santa 's Little Helper and She 's the Fastest are presented with a plate of spaghetti at Luigi 's Italian restaurant parodies Lady and the Tramp . 
 The scene in which the greyhounds watch television is similar to the <unk> of One Hundred and One Dalmatians . Instead of watching What 's my Crime ? like the <unk> do in the film , the greyhounds watch the television series Models , Inc . The clerk that performs a mind @-@ meld on Santa 's Little Helper is a reference to the Vulcan mind @-@ meld ability in Star Trek ; the same music from the mind @-@ meld scenes in Star Trek are played during the scene . At one point , Santa 's Little Helper looks wistfully out the window of the Simpson family 's car , and then morphs out of the car window in reference to a similar scene in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ; music from that film plays in the background . Four of the puppies are named Jay , David , Paul and Branford , a reference to late @-@ night talkshow hosts David Letterman and Jay Leno and their respective bandleaders Paul Shaffer and , at the time , Branford Marsalis . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " finished 55th in ratings for the week of April 3 – 9 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 3 . The song " See My Vest " from the episode , sung by Mr. Burns , was later released on the album Songs in the Key of Springfield in 1997 . The Daily Bruin complimented the song 's lyrics as witty , and claimed that by listening to the song , memories of the episode came to mind . They noted how the musical piece revealed Mr. Burns ' essence of character , and that it also commented on some disturbing elements of humankind . MSNBC compiled a list of " TV ’ s top 10 scariest characters " , placing Mr. Burns at number one . In the list , they noted , " Burns is terrifying because he will do absolutely anything , and since it 's a cartoon , he just might , " pointing to " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " and his plans to make the puppies into a tuxedo as proof . 
 The episode was generally well received by television critics . In a review by the Toronto Star , Ben Rayner commented that " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " was one of his favorite episodes of the series , and concluded that Mr. Burns ' " tour de force " performance was particularly captivating . The Toronto Star later produced a list of the best and worst The Simpsons episodes , in which they considered " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " one of the best episodes of the series and concluded that the musical number was one of the best scenes involving Mr. Burns . In a review for the sixth season DVD of The Simpsons , IGN 's Todd Gilchrist found Burns ' performance to be memorable , commenting that he " flirts with copyright infringement with his rendition of ' See My Vest ' " . Michael Price of IGN also considered Burns ' performance to have reached a level of excellence comparable to " The Monorail Song " in " Marge vs. the Monorail " . 
 In a review for The Simpsons season six DVD , review website DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of B − . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson appreciated the spoofs of Disney films , and also complimented " the most bizarre references to Rory Calhoun imaginable " , concluding that the combination of these elements formed a " fine show " . In a review for the Toronto Star , Ben Rayner enjoyed " Two Dozen and One Greyhounds " , calling it one of the classic episodes of the series . 
 = Clwyd = 
 Clwyd ( Welsh pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a preserved county of Wales , situated in the north @-@ east corner of the country ; it is named after the River Clwyd , which runs through the county . To the north lies the Irish Sea , Cheshire is to the east and Shropshire to the south @-@ east , both in England . The Welsh counties of Powys and Gwynedd lie to the south and west respectively . Clwyd additionally shares a maritime border with the metropolitan county of Merseyside along the River Dee . Between 1974 and 1996 , it was a county with a county council , one of the eight counties into which Wales was divided , and was subdivided into six districts . In 1996 , the county of Clwyd was abolished , and the new unitary authorities of Conwy County Borough , Denbighshire , and Flintshire were created ; under this reorganisation , " Clwyd " became a preserved county , with the name being retained for certain ceremonial functions . 
 This area of northeastern Wales has been settled since prehistoric times , the Romans built a fort beside a ford on the River Conwy , and the Normans and Welsh disputed the territory . They built their castles at strategic locations as they advanced and retreated , but in the end , England prevailed , and Edward I conquered the country in 1282 . In the following centuries , the Welsh people were repressed and there were numerous uprisings and rebellions against English rule . The Act of Union in 1535 incorporated Wales under the English Crown and made it subject to English law . 
 Traditionally , agriculture was the mainstay of the economy of this part of Wales , but with the Industrial Revolution , the North Wales Coalfield was developed and parts of eastern Clwyd around the Dee estuary and Wrexham became industrialised . The advent of the railway running from Chester along the North Wales coast in the mid @-@ nineteenth century made it easy for urban dwellers from Lancashire and Cheshire to visit the seaside towns of North Wales , and nowadays , tourism is the main source of income in Clwyd . 
 = = History = = 
 North Wales has had human settlements since prehistoric times . By the time the Romans reached Britain , the area that is now Clwyd was occupied by the Celtic Deceangli tribe . They lived in a chain of hill forts running through the Clwydian Range and their tribal capital was <unk> at an important river crossing on the River Conwy . This fell to the Romans , who built their own fort here , in about 75 AD and the whole of Wales was soon under their control . After the Roman departure from Britain in 410 AD , the successor states of Gwynedd and Powys controlled what is now Clwyd . From about 800 onwards , a series of dynastic marriages led to Rhodri Mawr inheriting the kingdoms of Gwynedd and Powys . After his death , this kingdom was divided among his three sons and further strife followed , with not only Welsh battles being fought , but also many raids by Danes and Saxons . 
 The Normans conquest of England at first had little effect on North Wales . This was to change as the city of Chester on the River Dee became the base for successive campaigns against the country in the thirteenth century . The coastal plain of Clwyd was the main invasion route used and a number of castles were built there to facilitate these advances . The castles at Flint and Rhuddlan date from this period , and were the first to be built by Edward I of England in North Wales during his successful conquest in 1282 . After this , the rule of the Welsh Princes was at an end and Wales became annexed to England . The country was known as the Principality of Wales during the period 1216 to 1536 . From 1301 , the crown 's lands in north and west Wales , including Clwyd , formed part of the appanage of England 's heir apparent , who was given the title " Prince of Wales " . This was a time of repression for the Welsh people and there were numerous uprisings and rebellions against English rule . Under the Act of Union of 1535 , Wales became permanently incorporated under the English Crown and subject to English law . 
 Although the Industrial Revolution did not much affect the rural parts of Clwyd , there was considerable industrial activity in the North Wales Coalfield in the north @-@ east of the county , particularly around Wrexham . The Bersham Ironworks at Bersham , in the same area , was at the forefront of technological advances and was most famous for being the original working site of the industrialist John Wilkinson who invented new processes for boring cannons . The Williams @-@ Wynn family of <unk> had become rich after the dissolution of the monasteries and owned vast estates in Clwyd with resources including lead , tin and copper as well as corn and timber . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The county of Clwyd is in the northeastern corner of Wales . It is bounded by the Irish Sea to the north , the Welsh counties of <unk> to the west and Powys to the south , and the English counties of Shropshire and Cheshire to the southeast and east respectively ; much of the eastern boundary follows the course of the River Dee and its estuary . Other large rivers in the county include the River Alyn , a tributary of the Dee , the River Clwyd and the River Conwy in the west . The northern coastal strip of the county is heavily developed for tourism and has many resorts , including Llandudno , Colwyn Bay , Colwyn , Abergele , Rhyl and Prestatyn . In the northeast lies Deeside , the coastal plain beside the Dee estuary , and this part of Clwyd is heavily developed for industry . The area around Wrexham and the commuter settlements close to Chester are also heavily built up . 
 To the west of this is a ridge of mountains with a steep scarp slope to the west , the Clwydian Range . The highest point of these hills is Moel <unk> at 1 @,@ 820 ft ( 555 m ) . The north @-@ central part of the county is the broad Vale of Clwyd , and the best agricultural land lies here . To the south of this , the land is much higher and more rugged , the Denbigh Moors and the Berwyn range are here . The central and western parts of the county are much more rural than the coastal area and the east , with part of the Snowdonia National Park lying in the western part of the county . The population as of 2007 is estimated at 491 @,@ 100 , based on figures for the four component unitary authority areas . 
 Clwyd is bordered by the preserved counties of Gwynedd to the west , Powys to the south , Shropshire to the south @-@ east , Cheshire to the east and Merseyside over the River Dee . Since the 2003 boundary changes , its coastline has extended from the Dee Estuary in Flintshire through to <unk> in Conwy . Clwyd consists of the whole of the historic county of Flintshire , and most of Denbighshire . Since 2003 it has also included the former district of Aberconwy , which lies in the historic county of Caernarfonshire , and also <unk> Rural District which was previously part of the historic county of Merionethshire . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of Clwyd depends on a mixture of industrial , agricultural and tourism activities , with tourism predominating . The land uses of any region depend on the underlying geology which influences the soil types . In the Clwydian Range , lead and spar minerals have been mined in the past , and limestone quarried from <unk> Mountain , Ruabon Mountain and Minera Mountain near Wrexham . The Minera <unk> were once the largest lime workings in North Wales . Later , road building stone was extracted but the quarries closed in 1992 . Coal mining in the North Wales Coalfield ceased in the second half of the twentieth century but used to be a large source of employment in the area . The main products being manufactured in industrial east Clwyd include aircraft components ( Airbus ) , engines ( Toyota ) , paper ( Shotton Paper ) and steel processing , and the port of Mostyn builds and supports offshore <unk> . 
 Agriculture , largely based on livestock , has traditionally been the main occupation in the central and western parts of the county . There are a mix of large and small farm businesses , and a thriving dairy sector in the Vale of Clwyd . Many of the towns have livestock markets and the farming industry supports farm machinery merchants , vets , feed merchants , contractors and all the ancillary trades connected with agriculture . With their incomes on the decline , farmers have found opportunities in tourism , rural crafts , specialist food shops , farmers ' markets and value @-@ added food products . 
 Tourism is nowadays the main source of income in Clwyd . The upland areas with their sheep farms and small , stone @-@ walled fields are attractive to visitors , and redundant farm buildings are often converted to self @-@ catering accommodation while the farmhouses themselves supply bed @-@ and @-@ breakfast opportunities . The arrival of the railway on the coast in the mid @-@ nineteenth century opened up travel from Merseyside and caused a boom in tourism , with guesthouses in seaside towns offering board and lodging for the urban visitors . More recently caravan sites and holiday villages have blossomed and there has been an increase in the ownership of " second homes " . 
 Various initiatives designed to boost the economy of North Wales are being attempted in 2016 . These include the Northern Gateway project on the former Sealand RAF site on Deeside , and a redevelopment project for the former Rhyl seafront and funfair . 
 = = Administrative history = = 
 From the late 1950s , the radical reform of local government in Wales was considered more pressing than that in England , due to the small size of many of the existing authorities , especially the upper tier county councils . The Local Government Commission for Wales set up in 1958 was the first to recommend wholesale amalgamation of the administrative counties outside Glamorgan and Monmouthshire , with extensive boundary changes ; however the then Minister of Housing and Local Government Sir Keith Joseph decided not to accept the report , noting that county amalgamations in England had been highly unpopular when proposed . 
 In 1967 , after a change of government , the Secretary of State for Wales Cledwyn Hughes published a white paper which revived the idea of amalgamation , but instead of the boundary changes proposed in the previous report , treated each county as a whole . The report recommended a single new county of Gwynedd incorporating Denbighshire , Flintshire , Caernarfonshire , Merionethshire and Anglesey . The white paper stated that " the need for early action is particularly urgent in Wales " , and so the issue was not referred to a Royal Commission as in England . Opponents criticised the proposed new county for being too large , and in November 1968 a new Secretary of State announced that Gwynedd would be divided into two . 
 This revised proposal was continued in a further white paper in March 1970 , although this proposed that the counties be unitary authorities which would have no district councils below them . The incoming Conservative government resurrected two @-@ tier local government in a consultative document published in February 1971 , again with the same upper @-@ tier boundaries . Some minor changes having been made to the existing county boundaries due to special local factors , the Local Government Act 1972 duly created Clwyd as a merger of Flintshire with most of Denbighshire , along with the <unk> Rural District from Merionethshire . The 1970 white paper had introduced the name of Clwyd by reference to the River Clwyd and the Clwydian range of hills ; Clwyd was the only new Welsh county which did not take its name from an ancient kingdom . 
 For second @-@ tier local government purposes , Clwyd was divided into six districts : Alyn and Deeside , Colwyn , <unk> , Glyndŵr , Rhuddlan and Wrexham <unk> , each being operated by a district or borough council . These were abolished , along with the county itself , on 1 April 1996 . Clwyd County Council 's coat of arms was granted in December 1974 . The design of the shield , crest and motto includes elements taken from the arms of the councils of the former Flintshire and Denbighshire . The green and white wave represents the Vale of Clwyd and the Clwydian Range lying between the two parts of the county . The cross and choughs come from Flintshire 's shield , which itself incorporated the traditional arms of Edwin of <unk> , while the black lion of the Princes of Powys <unk> is taken from Denbighshire 's shield . The motto , <unk> <unk> <unk> can be translated as " The shield of Justice is God " . 
 Clwyd County Council and its districts were abolished by the Local Government ( Wales ) Act 1994 , and local government would be replaced by the four unitary authorities of Flintshire , Wrexham County Borough , Denbighshire , and parts of Conwy ( along with some smaller communities moving to Powys ) . The Act also abolished the County , and states the term " county " would be synonymous with the " principal areas " created by the 1994 Act . However the Act then created a further set of " preserved counties " , which were based on the eight created by the 1972 Act . These Preserved Counties , similar in respect to English Ceremonial counties , would be retained for a variety of purposes , including Lieutenancy and <unk> . 
 Clwyd County Council and its six districts ceased operations at midnight on 1 April 1996 , and local government was immediately transferred to the new principal areas of Conwy , Denbighshire , Flintshire and Wrexham . However , although bearing the same names , the boundaries of Flintshire and Denbighshire were substantially different from those of the earlier counties . As it happened , the county records for historic Flintshire had been retained at the Hawarden branch of the Clwyd Records Office while those for historic Denbighshire had continued to be held at the Ruthin branch , so there was no problem in segregating the records . 
 The Preserved County of Clwyd came into effect on the same day that Clwyd County Council was abolished . The preserved county was almost identical to the 1974 – 96 county , but had a few minor changes in line with changes to local government boundaries , the communities of <unk> @-@ ym @-@ <unk> , <unk> and <unk> being transferred from Clwyd to Powys . 
 = = 2003 boundary review = = 
 In 2003 , the borders of Clwyd were changed to cover the remainder of Conwy ( which had previously been part of Gwynedd ) , which was part of a Wales @-@ wide re @-@ organisation of the preserved counties , so that boundaries of the preserved counties would contain whole current principal areas only . 
 These moves were met with some criticism , as the preserved counties were created to sustain a stable and continuing layout , irrespective of interim local government reviews affecting principal areas . This led to some areas , such as the Aberconwy district , moving to a preserved county it had never been administered by in the past , and therefore these moves went generally unreported due to the preserved county 's limited status . The Boundary Commission proceeded to retain the eight preserved counties , and modified their borders in 2003 to match with the incumbent principal area boundaries . The 2003 arrangement brings towns such as Llandudno , Conwy and Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed into the preserved county of Clwyd . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Many local organisations still make use of the word " Clwyd " in their name , often because their membership covers a wider area than their present unitary authority . These organisations include the Clwyd Theatr Cymru , which is based in Mold and is the largest producing arts centre in Wales . It provides young people the opportunity to get involved in drama . The Clwyd Family History Society can help its members to access many historical documents concerning northeastern Wales , and the Clwyd @-@ Powys Archaeological Trust is one of four archaeological trusts covering the whole of Wales . The Clwyd County Darts Association organises tournaments and takes part in inter @-@ county matches . The Clwyd East Football League was created in 2011 to represent the North East Wales area at the fifth tier of Welsh Football . It has subsequently changed its name to the North East Wales Football League . The Clwyd Pension Fund is the Local Government pension scheme inherited from Clwyd County Council , now providing pension schemes for Wrexham , Flintshire and Denbighshire unitary authorities and former districts . 
 The position of Lord Lieutenant of Clwyd also continues as the Monarch 's personal representative , as with the other seven preserved counties of Wales . The current Lord Lieutenant is Henry George <unk> , who was appointed in 2013 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The Pontcysyllte Aqueduct was built by Thomas Telford in 1805 and is the largest aqueduct in the United Kingdom ; it carries the Llangollen Canal over the River Dee and is a World Heritage Site , being considered a masterpiece of civil engineering . The Clwydian Range and Dee Valley constitute an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , one of just five in the whole of Wales . Denbigh , Colwyn and Ruthin are historic towns and Llangollen hosts the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod in July each year . 
 The <unk> is a Neolithic mound , the second largest such structure in Britain being only superseded by Silbury Hill . Caer <unk> is one of many Iron Age hill forts in the county that attest to human occupation of this area for millennia . Maen <unk> Cross is a carved 10th century wheel cross depicting Celtic and Viking symbols . The castles of Rhuddlan and Flint were built by the Normans during their invasion of North Wales and Castell Dinas <unk> was a Welsh fortress of the same period . St Asaph Cathedral also dates from the thirteenth century as does the medieval Cistercian abbey of Valle Crucis . 
 <unk> Garden is a formal garden in a landscaped setting , and <unk> Hall is a stately home , both owned by the National Trust . Other fine country houses in Clwyd include Trevor Hall and <unk> Fawr , <unk> , while Plas Mawr and Aberconwy House are historic town houses in Conwy . Also in Conwy is the Conwy Suspension Bridge , one of the first such bridges in the world . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The North Wales Coast Line is the railway line from Crewe to Holyhead , operated by Virgin Trains . Trains leaving Crewe pass through Chester , cross the River Dee into Wales , and continue through Flint , Shotton , Holywell junction , Prestatyn , Rhyl , Colwyn Bay , Llandudno Junction , Conwy and Bangor , to Holyhead , from where there is a ferry service to Ireland . Passengers can change at Shotton for the Borderlands Line , which links Wrexham with Bidston on the Wirral Peninsula in England . The Conwy Valley Line links Llandudno Junction to Blaenau Ffestiniog via Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed and was constructed mainly for use as a freight line for the transport of slate to the quay at Deganwy for export by sea . It is a scenic route with a number of request stops . 
 There are no motorways in Clwyd . The A55 dual carriageway road passes from Chester through St Asaph to the North Wales coast at Abergele , after which it runs parallel to the railway line through Conway and Bangor to terminate at Holyhead . The <unk> passes from Chester to Abergele through Deeside and along the coast , before leaving the coast and terminating at Llanrwst . The main road from London is the A5 which enters Clwyd at Chirk and passes northwestwards through Llangollen , <unk> and Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed to join the A55 and terminate at Bangor . The <unk> crosses the Denbigh Moors from southeast to northwest , and the <unk> links Ruthin with St Asaph . There are local bus services between the main centres of population . Several services by Arriva Wales run along the main coast road between Chester and Holyhead , linking the coastal resorts . Other routes include ; Llandudno to Llanrwst and Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed via Conwy and <unk> ; Rhyl to Denbigh ; Wrexham to Chester ; and Wrexham to Mold . 
 = Bahá 'í Faith = 
 The Bahá 'í Faith ( Persian : <unk> Bahá <unk> , Arabic : <unk> Bahá 'iyya / <unk> / ) is a monotheistic religion which emphasizes the spiritual unity of all humankind . Three core principles establish a basis for Bahá 'í teachings and doctrine : the unity of God , that there is only one God who is the source of all creation ; the unity of religion , that all major religions have the same spiritual source and come from the same God ; and the unity of humanity , that all humans have been created equal , coupled with the unity in diversity , that diversity of race and culture are seen as worthy of appreciation and acceptance . According to the Bahá 'í Faith 's teachings , the human purpose is to learn to know and to love God through such methods as prayer , reflection and being of service to humanity . 
 The Bahá 'í Faith was founded by Bahá 'u'lláh in 19th @-@ century Persia . Bahá 'u'lláh was exiled for his teachings from Persia to the Ottoman Empire and died while officially still a prisoner . After Bahá 'u'lláh 's death , under the leadership of his son , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá , the religion spread from its Persian and Ottoman roots , and gained a footing in Europe and America , and was consolidated in Iran , where it suffers intense persecution . After the death of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá , the leadership of the Bahá 'í community entered a new phase , evolving from a single individual to an administrative order with both elected bodies and appointed individuals . There are probably more than 5 million Bahá 'ís around the world in more than 200 countries and territories . 
 In the Bahá 'í Faith , religious history is seen to have unfolded through a series of divine messengers , each of whom established a religion that was suited to the needs of the time and to the capacity of the people . These messengers have included Abrahamic figures — Moses , Jesus , Muhammad , as well as figures from Indian religions like Krishna , Buddha , and others . For Bahá 'ís , the most recent messengers are the Báb and Bahá 'u'lláh . In Bahá 'í belief , each consecutive messenger prophesied of messengers to follow , and Bahá 'u'lláh 's life and teachings fulfilled the end @-@ time promises of previous scriptures . Humanity is understood to be in a process of collective evolution , and the need of the present time is for the gradual establishment of peace , justice and unity on a global scale . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word Bahá 'í is used either as an adjective to refer to the Bahá 'í Faith or as a term for a follower of Bahá 'u'lláh . The word is not a noun meaning the religion as a whole . It is derived from the Arabic Bahá ' ( بهاء ) , meaning " glory " or " splendor " . The term " <unk> " ( or " Baha 'ism " ) is still used , mainly in a pejorative sense . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 Three core principles establish a basis for Bahá 'í teachings and doctrine : the unity of God , the unity of religion , and the unity of humanity . From these postulates stems the belief that God periodically reveals his will through divine messengers , whose purpose is to transform the character of humankind and to develop , within those who respond , moral and spiritual qualities . Religion is thus seen as orderly , unified , and progressive from age to age . 
 = = = God = = = 
 The Bahá 'í writings describe a single , personal , inaccessible , omniscient , omnipresent , imperishable , and almighty God who is the creator of all things in the universe . The existence of God and the universe is thought to be eternal , without a beginning or end . Though inaccessible directly , God is nevertheless seen as conscious of creation , with a will and purpose that is expressed through messengers termed Manifestations of God . 
 Bahá 'í teachings state that God is too great for humans to fully comprehend , or to create a complete and accurate image of , by themselves . Therefore , human understanding of God is achieved through his revelations via his Manifestations . In the Bahá 'í religion , God is often referred to by titles and attributes ( for example , the All @-@ Powerful , or the All @-@ Loving ) , and there is a substantial emphasis on monotheism ; such doctrines as the Trinity are seen as compromising , if not contradicting , the Bahá 'í view that God is single and has no equal . The Bahá 'í teachings state that the attributes which are applied to God are used to translate Godliness into human terms and also to help individuals concentrate on their own attributes in worshipping God to develop their potentialities on their spiritual path . According to the Bahá 'í teachings the human purpose is to learn to know and love God through such methods as prayer , reflection , and being of service to others . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Bahá 'í notions of progressive religious revelation result in their accepting the validity of the well known religions of the world , whose founders and central figures are seen as Manifestations of God . Religious history is interpreted as a series of dispensations , where each manifestation brings a somewhat broader and more advanced revelation that is rendered as a text of scripture and passed on through history with greater or lesser reliability but at least true in substance , suited for the time and place in which it was expressed . Specific religious social teachings ( for example , the direction of prayer , or dietary restrictions ) may be revoked by a subsequent manifestation so that a more appropriate requirement for the time and place may be established . Conversely , certain general principles ( for example , neighbourliness , or charity ) are seen to be universal and consistent . In Bahá 'í belief , this process of progressive revelation will not end ; however , it is believed to be cyclical . Bahá 'ís do not expect a new manifestation of God to appear within 1000 years of Bahá 'u'lláh 's revelation . 
 Bahá 'í beliefs are sometimes described as syncretic combinations of earlier religious beliefs . Bahá 'ís , however , assert that their religion is a distinct tradition with its own scriptures , teachings , laws , and history . While the religion was initially seen as a sect of Islam , most religious specialists now see it as an independent religion , with its religious background in Shi 'a Islam being seen as analogous to the Jewish context in which Christianity was established . Muslim institutions and clergy , both Sunni and Shia , consider Bahá 'ís to be deserters or apostates from Islam , which has led to Bahá 'ís being persecuted . Bahá 'ís describe their faith as an independent world religion , differing from the other traditions in its relative age and in the appropriateness of Bahá 'u'lláh 's teachings to the modern context . Bahá 'u'lláh is believed to have fulfilled the messianic expectations of these precursor faiths . 
 = = = Human beings = = = 
 The Bahá 'í writings state that human beings have a " rational soul " , and that this provides the species with a unique capacity to recognize God 's station and humanity 's relationship with its creator . Every human is seen to have a duty to recognize God through His messengers , and to conform to their teachings . Through recognition and obedience , service to humanity and regular prayer and spiritual practice , the Bahá 'í writings state that the soul becomes closer to God , the spiritual ideal in Bahá 'í belief . When a human dies , the soul passes into the next world , where its spiritual development in the physical world becomes a basis for judgment and advancement in the spiritual world . Heaven and Hell are taught to be spiritual states of nearness or distance from God that describe relationships in this world and the next , and not physical places of reward and punishment achieved after death . 
 The Bahá 'í writings emphasize the essential equality of human beings , and the abolition of prejudice . Humanity is seen as essentially one , though highly varied ; its diversity of race and culture are seen as worthy of appreciation and acceptance . Doctrines of racism , nationalism , caste , social class , and gender @-@ based hierarchy are seen as artificial impediments to unity . The Bahá 'í teachings state that the unification of humanity is the paramount issue in the religious and political conditions of the present world . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Shoghi Effendi , the appointed head of the religion from 1921 to 1957 , wrote the following summary of what he considered to be the distinguishing principles of Bahá 'u'lláh 's teachings , which , he said , together with the laws and ordinances of the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas constitute the bedrock of the Bahá 'í Faith : 
 The independent search after truth , unfettered by superstition or tradition ; the oneness of the entire human race , the pivotal principle and fundamental doctrine of the Faith ; the basic unity of all religions ; the condemnation of all forms of prejudice , whether religious , racial , class or national ; the harmony which must exist between religion and science ; the equality of men and women , the two wings on which the bird of human kind is able to soar ; the introduction of compulsory education ; the adoption of a universal auxiliary language ; the abolition of the extremes of wealth and poverty ; the institution of a world tribunal for the adjudication of disputes between nations ; the exaltation of work , performed in the spirit of service , to the rank of worship ; the glorification of justice as the ruling principle in human society , and of religion as a bulwark for the protection of all peoples and nations ; and the establishment of a permanent and universal peace as the supreme goal of all mankind — these stand out as the essential elements [ which Bahá 'u'lláh proclaimed ] . 
 = = = Social principles = = = 
 The following principles are frequently listed as a quick summary of the Bahá 'í teachings . They are derived from transcripts of speeches given by `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá during his tour of Europe and North America in 1912 . The list is not authoritative and a variety of such lists circulate . 
 Unity of God 
 Unity of religion 
 Unity of humanity 
 Unity in diversity 
 Equality between men and women 
 Elimination of all forms of prejudice 
 World peace and a New world order 
 Harmony of religion and science 
 Independent investigation of truth 
 Principle of Ever @-@ Advancing Civilization 
 Universal compulsory education 
 Universal auxiliary language 
 Obedience to government and non @-@ involvement in partisan politics unless submission to law amounts to a denial of Faith . 
 Elimination of extremes of wealth and poverty 
 Spiritual solutions to economic problems 
 With specific regard to the pursuit of world peace , Bahá 'u'lláh prescribed a world @-@ embracing collective security arrangement as necessary for the establishment of a lasting peace . 
 = = = Mystical teachings = = = 
 Although the Bahá 'í teachings have a strong emphasis on social and ethical issues , there exist a number of foundational texts that have been described as mystical . The Seven Valleys is considered Bahá 'u'lláh 's " greatest mystical composition . " It was written to a follower of Sufism , in the style of <unk> , The Persian Muslim poet , and sets forth the stages of the soul 's journey towards God . It was first translated into English in 1906 , becoming one of the earliest available books of Bahá 'u'lláh to the West . The Hidden Words is another book written by Bahá 'u'lláh during the same period , containing 153 short passages in which Bahá 'u'lláh claims to have taken the basic essence of certain spiritual truths and written them in brief form . 
 = = = Covenant = = = 
 The Bahá 'í teachings speak of both a " Greater Covenant " , being universal and endless , and a " Lesser Covenant " , being unique to each religious dispensation . The Lesser Covenant is viewed as an agreement between a Messenger of God and his followers and includes social practices and the continuation of authority in the religion . At this time Bahá 'ís view Bahá 'u'lláh 's revelation as a binding lesser covenant for his followers ; in the Bahá 'í writings being firm in the covenant is considered a virtue to work toward . The Greater Covenant is viewed as a more enduring agreement between God and humanity , where a Manifestation of God is expected to come to humanity about every thousand years , at times of turmoil and uncertainty . With unity as an essential teaching of the religion , Bahá 'ís follow an administration they believe is divinely ordained , and therefore see attempts to create schisms and divisions as efforts that are contrary to the teachings of Bahá 'u'lláh . <unk> have occurred over the succession of authority , but any Bahá 'í divisions have had relatively little success and have failed to attract a sizeable following . The followers of such divisions are regarded as Covenant @-@ breakers and shunned , essentially excommunicated . 
 = = Canonical texts = = 
 The canonical texts are the writings of the Báb , Bahá 'u'lláh , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá , Shoghi Effendi and the Universal House of Justice , and the authenticated talks of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá . The writings of the Báb and Bahá 'u'lláh are considered as divine revelation , the writings and talks of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá and the writings of Shoghi Effendi as authoritative interpretation , and those of the Universal House of Justice as authoritative legislation and elucidation . Some measure of divine guidance is assumed for all of these texts . Some of Bahá 'u'lláh 's most important writings include the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas , literally the Most Holy Book , which is his book of laws , the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Íqán , literally the Book of Certitude , which became the foundation of much of Bahá 'í belief , the Gems of Divine Mysteries , which includes further doctrinal foundations , and the Seven Valleys and the Four Valleys which are mystical treatises . 
 = = History = = 
 Bahá 'í history follows a sequence of leaders , beginning with the Báb 's declaration in Shiraz , Iran on the evening of 22 May 1844 , and ultimately resting on an administrative order established by the central figures of the religion . The Bahá 'í community was mostly confined to the Persian and Ottoman empires until after the death of Bahá 'u'lláh in 1892 , at which time he had followers in 13 countries of Asia and Africa . Under the leadership of his son , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá , the religion gained a footing in Europe and America , and was consolidated in Iran , where it still suffers intense persecution . After the death of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá in 1921 , the leadership of the Bahá 'í community entered a new phase , evolving from a single individual to an administrative order with both elected bodies and appointed individuals . 
 = = = The Báb = = = 
 On the evening of 22 May 1844 , <unk> `Alí @-@ Muhammad of Shiraz , Iran proclaimed that he was " the Báb " ( <unk> " the Gate " ) , referring to his later claim to the station of Mahdi , the Twelfth Imam of <unk> Islam . His followers were therefore known as Bábís . As the Báb 's teachings spread , which the Islamic clergy saw as a threat , his followers came under increased persecution and torture . The conflicts escalated in several places to military sieges by the Shah 's army . The Báb himself was imprisoned and eventually executed in 1850 . 
 Bahá 'ís see the Báb as the forerunner of the Bahá 'í Faith , because the Báb 's writings introduced the concept of " He whom God shall make manifest " , a Messianic figure whose coming , according to Bahá 'ís , was announced in the scriptures of all of the world 's great religions , and whom Bahá 'u'lláh , the founder of the Bahá 'í Faith , claimed to be in 1863 . The Báb 's tomb , located in Haifa , Israel , is an important place of pilgrimage for Bahá 'ís . The remains of the Báb were brought secretly from Iran to the Holy Land and eventually interred in the tomb built for them in a spot specifically designated by Bahá 'u'lláh . The main written works translated into English of the Báb 's are collected in Selections from the Writings of the Báb out of the estimated 135 works . 
 = = = Bahá 'u'lláh = = = 
 Mírzá Husayn `Alí <unk> was one of the early followers of the Báb , and later took the title of Bahá 'u'lláh . He was arrested and imprisoned for this involvement in 1852 . Bahá 'u'lláh relates that in 1853 , while incarcerated in the dungeon of the Síyáh @-@ Chál in Tehran , he received the first intimations that he was the one anticipated by the Báb . 
 Shortly thereafter he was expelled from Tehran to Baghdad , in the Ottoman Empire ; then to Constantinople ( now Istanbul ) ; and then to Adrianople ( now Edirne ) . In 1863 , at the time of his banishment from Baghdad to Constantinople , Bahá 'u'lláh declared his claim to a divine mission to his family and followers . Tensions then grew between him and Subh @-@ i @-@ <unk> , the appointed leader of the Bábís who did not recognize Bahá 'u'lláh 's claim . Throughout the rest of his life Bahá 'u'lláh gained the allegiance of most of the Bábís , who came to be known as Bahá 'ís . Beginning in 1866 , he began declaring his mission as a Messenger of God in letters to the world 's religious and secular rulers , including Pope Pius IX , Napoleon III , and Queen Victoria . 
 In 1868 Bahá 'u'lláh was banished by Sultan <unk> a final time to the Ottoman penal colony of `Akká , in present @-@ day Israel . Towards the end of his life , the strict and harsh confinement was gradually relaxed , and he was allowed to live in a home near `Akká , while still officially a prisoner of that city . He died there in 1892 . Bahá 'ís regard his resting place at Bahjí as the <unk> to which they turn in prayer each day . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh wrote many written works taken as scripture in the religion of which only a fraction have been translated into English . There have been 15 @,@ 000 works both small and large noted – the most significant of which are the Most Holy Book , the Book of Certitude , the Hidden Words , and the Seven Valleys . There is also a series of compilation volumes of smaller works the most significant of which is the Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá 'u'lláh . 
 = = = `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá = = = 
 <unk> Effendi was Bahá 'u'lláh 's eldest son , known by the title of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá ( Servant of Bahá ) . His father left a Will that appointed `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá as the leader of the Bahá 'í community , and designated him as the " Centre of the Covenant " , " Head of the Faith " , and the sole authoritative interpreter of Bahá 'u'lláh 's writings . `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá had shared his father 's long exile and imprisonment , which continued until `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá 's own release as a result of the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 . Following his release he led a life of travelling , speaking , teaching , and maintaining correspondence with communities of believers and individuals , expounding the principles of the Bahá 'í Faith . 
 It is estimated that `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá wrote over 27 @,@ 000 works mostly in the form of letters of which only a fraction have been translated into English . Among the more well known are The Secret of Divine Civilization , the Tablet to Auguste @-@ Henri Forel , and Some Answered Questions . Additionally notes taken of a number of his talks were published in various volumes like Paris Talks during his journeys to the West . 
 = = = Bahá 'í administration = = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh 's Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas and The Will and Testament of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá are foundational documents of the Bahá 'í administrative order . Bahá 'u'lláh established the elected Universal House of Justice , and `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá established the appointed hereditary Guardianship and clarified the relationship between the two institutions . In his Will , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá appointed his eldest grandson , Shoghi Effendi , as the first Guardian of the Bahá 'í Faith , serving as head of the religion until his death , for 36 years . 
 Shoghi Effendi throughout his lifetime translated Bahá 'í texts ; developed global plans for the expansion of the Bahá 'í community ; developed the Bahá 'í World Centre ; carried on a voluminous correspondence with communities and individuals around the world ; and built the administrative structure of the religion , preparing the community for the election of the Universal House of Justice . He died in 1957 under conditions that did not allow for a successor to be appointed . 
 At local , regional , and national levels , Bahá 'ís elect members to nine @-@ person Spiritual Assemblies , which run the affairs of the religion . There are also appointed individuals working at various levels , including locally and internationally , which perform the function of propagating the teachings and protecting the community . The latter do not serve as clergy , which the Bahá 'í Faith does not have . The Universal House of Justice , first elected in 1963 , remains the successor and supreme governing body of the Bahá 'í Faith , and its 9 members are elected every five years by the members of all National Spiritual Assemblies . Any male Bahá 'í , 21 years or older , is eligible to be elected to the Universal House of Justice ; all other positions are open to male and female Bahá 'ís . 
 = = = International plans = = = 
 In 1937 , Shoghi Effendi launched a seven @-@ year plan for the Bahá 'ís of North America , followed by another in 1946 . In 1953 , he launched the first international plan , the Ten Year World Crusade . This plan included extremely ambitious goals for the expansion of Bahá 'í communities and institutions , the translation of Bahá 'í texts into several new languages , and the sending of Bahá 'í pioneers into previously unreached nations . He announced in letters during the Ten Year Crusade that it would be followed by other plans under the direction of the Universal House of Justice , which was elected in 1963 at the culmination of the Crusade . The House of Justice then launched a nine @-@ year plan in 1964 , and a series of subsequent multi @-@ year plans of varying length and goals followed , guiding the direction of the international Bahá 'í community . 
 Annually , on 21 April , the Universal House of Justice sends a ‘ Ridván ’ message to the worldwide Bahá ’ í community , which generally gives an update on the progress made concerning the current plan , and provides further guidance for the year to come . The Bahá 'ís around the world are currently being encouraged to focus on capacity building through children 's classes , youth groups , devotional gatherings , and a systematic study of the religion known as study circles . Further focuses are involvement in social action and participation in the prevalent discourses of society . The years from 2001 until 2021 represent four successive five @-@ year plans , culminating in the centennial anniversary of the passing of `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 A Bahá 'í published document reported 4 @.@ 74 million Bahá 'ís in 1986 growing at a rate of 4 @.@ 4 % . Bahá 'í sources since 1991 usually estimate the worldwide Bahá 'í population to be above 5 million . The World Christian Encyclopedia estimated 7 @.@ 1 million Bahá 'ís in the world in 2000 , representing 218 countries , and 7 @.@ 3 million in 2010 with the same source . They further state : " The Baha 'i Faith is the only religion to have grown faster in every United Nations region over the past 100 years than the general population ; Baha ’ i was thus the fastest @-@ growing religion between 1910 and 2010 , growing at least twice as fast as the population of almost every UN region . " This source 's only systematic flaw was to consistently have a higher estimate of Christians than other cross @-@ national data sets . 
 From its origins in the Persian and Ottoman Empires , by the early 20th century there were a number of converts in South and South East Asia , Europe , and North America . During the 1950s and 1960s , vast travel teaching efforts brought the religion to almost every country and territory of the world . By the 1990s , Bahá 'ís were developing programs for systematic consolidation on a large scale , and the early 21st century saw large influxes of new adherents around the world . The Bahá 'í Faith is currently the largest religious minority in Iran , Panama , and Belize ; the second largest international religion in Bolivia , Zambia , and Papua New Guinea ; and the third largest international religion in Chad and Kenya . 
 According to The World Almanac and Book of Facts 2004 : 
 The majority of Bahá 'ís live in Asia ( 3 @.@ 6 million ) , Africa ( 1 @.@ 8 million ) , and Latin America ( 900 @,@ 000 ) . According to some estimates , the largest Bahá 'í community in the world is in India , with 2 @.@ 2 million Bahá 'ís , next is Iran , with 350 @,@ 000 , the US , with 150 @,@ 000 , and Brazil , with 60 @,@ 000 . Aside from these countries , numbers vary greatly . Currently , no country has a Bahá 'í majority . 
 The Bahá 'í Faith is a medium @-@ sized religion and was listed in The Britannica Book of the Year ( 1992 – present ) as the second most widespread of the world 's independent religions in terms of the number of countries represented . According to Britannica , the Bahá 'í Faith ( as of 2002 ) is established in 247 countries and territories ; represents over 2 @,@ 100 ethnic , racial , and tribal groups ; has scriptures translated into over 800 languages ; and has an estimated seven million adherents worldwide . Additionally , Bahá 'ís have self @-@ organized in most of the nations of the world . 
 The Bahá 'í religion was ranked by the Foreign Policy magazine as the world 's second fastest growing religion by percentage ( 1 @.@ 7 % ) in 2007 . 
 = = Social practices = = 
 = = = Laws = = = 
 The laws of the Bahá 'í Faith primarily come from the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas , written by Bahá 'u'lláh . The following are a few examples of basic laws and religious observances . 
 Prayer in the Bahá 'í Faith consists of obligatory prayer and devotional ( general ) prayer . Bahá 'ís over the age of 15 must individually recite an obligatory prayer each day , using fixed words and form . In addition to the daily obligatory prayer , believers are directed to daily offer devotional prayer and to meditate and study sacred scripture . There is no set form for devotions and meditations , though the devotional prayers written by the central figures of the Bahá 'í Faith and collected in prayer books are held in high esteem . Reading aloud of prayers from prayer books is a typical feature of Bahá 'í gatherings . 
 <unk> and gossip are prohibited and denounced . 
 Adult Bahá 'ís in good health should observe a nineteen @-@ day sunrise @-@ to @-@ sunset fast each year from 2 March through 20 March . 
 Bahá 'ís are forbidden to drink alcohol or to take drugs , unless prescribed by doctors . 
 Sexual intercourse is only permitted between a husband and wife , and thus premarital , extramarital , and homosexual intercourse are forbidden . ( See also Homosexuality and the Bahá 'í Faith ) 
 Gambling is forbidden . 
 Fanaticism is forbidden . 
 Adherence to ritual is discouraged , with the notable exception of the obligatory prayers . 
 <unk> from partisan politics is required . 
 While some of the laws from the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas are applicable at the present time and may be enforced to a degree by the administrative institutions , Bahá 'u'lláh has provided for the progressive application of other laws that are dependent upon the existence of a predominantly Bahá 'í society . The laws , when not in direct conflict with the civil laws of the country of residence , are binding on every Bahá 'í , and the observance of personal laws , such as prayer or fasting , is the sole responsibility of the individual . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 The purpose of marriage in the Bahá 'i faith is mainly to foster spiritual harmony , fellowship and unity between a man and a woman and to provide a stable and loving environment for the rearing of children . The Bahá 'í teachings on marriage call it a fortress for well @-@ being and salvation and place marriage and the family as the foundation of the structure of human society . Bahá 'u'lláh highly praised marriage , discouraged divorce and homosexuality , and required chastity outside of marriage ; Bahá 'u'lláh taught that a husband and wife should strive to improve the spiritual life of each other . Interracial marriage is also highly praised throughout Bahá 'í scripture . 
 Bahá 'ís intending to marry are asked to obtain a thorough understanding of the other 's character before deciding to marry . Although parents should not choose partners for their children , once two individuals decide to marry , they must receive the consent of all living biological parents , whether they are Bahá 'í or not . The Bahá 'í marriage ceremony is simple ; the only compulsory part of the wedding is the reading of the wedding vows prescribed by Bahá 'u'lláh which both the groom and the bride read , in the presence of two witnesses . The vows are " We will all , verily , abide by the Will of God . " 
 = = = Work = = = 
 Monasticism is forbidden , and Bahá 'ís attempt to ground their spirituality in ordinary daily life . Performing useful work , for example , is not only required but considered a form of worship . Bahá 'u'lláh prohibited a mendicant and ascetic lifestyle . The importance of self @-@ exertion and service to humanity in one 's spiritual life is emphasised further in Bahá 'u'lláh 's writings , where he states that work done in the spirit of service to humanity enjoys a rank equal to that of prayer and worship in the sight of God . 
 = = = Places of worship = = = 
 Most Bahá 'í meetings occur in individuals ' homes , local Bahá 'í centers , or rented facilities . Worldwide , there are currently seven Bahá 'í Houses of Worship , with an eighth near completion in Chile , and a further seven planned as of April 2012 . Bahá 'í writings refer to an institution called a " <unk> 'l @-@ <unk> " ( Dawning @-@ place of the Mention of God ) , which is to form the center of a complex of institutions including a hospital , university , and so on . The first ever <unk> 'l @-@ <unk> in <unk> , Turkmenistan , has been the most complete House of Worship . 
 = = = Calendar = = = 
 The Bahá 'í calendar is based upon the calendar established by the Báb . The year consists of 19 months , each having 19 days , with four or five intercalary days , to make a full solar year . The Bahá 'í New Year corresponds to the traditional Persian New Year , called <unk> <unk> , and occurs on the vernal equinox , near 21 March , at the end of the month of fasting . Bahá 'í communities gather at the beginning of each month at a meeting called a Feast for worship , consultation and socializing . 
 Each of the 19 months is given a name which is an attribute of God ; some examples include Bahá ’ ( Splendour ) , ‘ Ilm ( Knowledge ) , and <unk> ( Beauty ) . The Bahá 'í week is familiar in that it consists of seven days , with each day of the week also named after an attribute of God . Bahá 'ís observe 11 Holy Days throughout the year , with work suspended on 9 of these . These days commemorate important anniversaries in the history of the religion . 
 = = = Symbols = = = 
 The symbols of the religion are derived from the Arabic word Bahá ’ ( بهاء " splendor " or " glory " ) , with a numerical value of 9 , which is why the most common symbol is the nine @-@ pointed star . The <unk> symbol and calligraphy of the Greatest Name are also often encountered . The former consists of two five @-@ pointed stars interspersed with a stylized Bahá ’ whose shape is meant to recall the three <unk> , while the latter is a calligraphic rendering of the phrase <unk> Bahá <unk> @-@ <unk> ( يا بهاء <unk> " O Glory of the Most Glorious ! " ) . 
 The five @-@ pointed star is the symbol of the Bahá 'í Faith . In the Bahá 'í Faith , the star is known as the <unk> ( Arabic : " temple " ) , and it was initiated and established by the Báb . The Báb and Bahá 'u'lláh wrote various works in the form of a pentagram . 
 = = = Socio @-@ economic development = = = 
 Since its inception the Bahá 'í Faith has had involvement in socio @-@ economic development beginning by giving greater freedom to women , promulgating the promotion of female education as a priority concern , and that involvement was given practical expression by creating schools , agricultural coops , and clinics . 
 The religion entered a new phase of activity when a message of the Universal House of Justice dated 20 October 1983 was released . Bahá 'ís were urged to seek out ways , compatible with the Bahá 'í teachings , in which they could become involved in the social and economic development of the communities in which they lived . Worldwide in 1979 there were 129 officially recognized Bahá 'í socio @-@ economic development projects . By 1987 , the number of officially recognized development projects had increased to 1482 . 
 = = = United Nations = = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh wrote of the need for world government in this age of humanity 's collective life . Because of this emphasis the international Bahá 'í community has chosen to support efforts of improving international relations through organizations such as the League of Nations and the United Nations , with some reservations about the present structure and constitution of the UN . The Bahá 'í International Community is an agency under the direction of the Universal House of Justice in Haifa , and has consultative status with the following organizations : 
 United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) 
 United Nations Development Fund for Women ( <unk> ) 
 United Nations Economic and Social Council ( ECOSOC ) 
 United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) 
 World Health Organization ( WHO ) 
 The Bahá 'í International Community has offices at the United Nations in New York and Geneva and representations to United Nations regional commissions and other offices in Addis Ababa , Bangkok , Nairobi , Rome , Santiago , and Vienna . In recent years an Office of the Environment and an Office for the Advancement of Women were established as part of its United Nations Office . The Bahá 'í Faith has also undertaken joint development programs with various other United Nations agencies . In the 2000 Millennium Forum of the United Nations a Bahá 'í was invited as the only non @-@ governmental speaker during the summit . 
 = = Persecution = = 
 Bahá 'ís continue to be persecuted in Islamic countries , as Islamic leaders do not recognize the Bahá 'í Faith as an independent religion , but rather as apostasy from Islam . The most severe persecutions have occurred in Iran , where over 200 Bahá 'ís were executed between 1978 and 1998 , and in Egypt . The rights of Bahá 'ís have been restricted to greater or lesser extents in numerous other countries , including Afghanistan , Indonesia , Iraq , Morocco , and several countries in sub @-@ Saharan Africa . 
 = = = Iran = = = 
 The marginalization of the Iranian Bahá 'ís by current governments is rooted in historical efforts by Muslim clergy to persecute the religious minority . When the Báb started attracting a large following , the clergy hoped to stop the movement from spreading by stating that its followers were enemies of God . These clerical directives led to mob attacks and public executions . Starting in the twentieth century , in addition to repression that impacted individual Bahá 'ís , centrally directed campaigns that targeted the entire Bahá 'í community and its institutions were initiated . In one case in Yazd in 1903 more than 100 Bahá 'ís were killed . Bahá 'í schools , such as the <unk> boys ' and girls ' schools in Tehran , were closed in the 1930s and 1940s , Bahá 'í marriages were not recognized and Bahá 'í texts were censored . 
 During the reign of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi , to divert attention from economic difficulties in Iran and from a growing nationalist movement , a campaign of persecution against the Bahá 'ís was instituted . An approved and coordinated anti @-@ Bahá 'í campaign ( to incite public passion against the Bahá 'ís ) started in 1955 and it included the spreading of anti @-@ Bahá 'í propaganda on national radio stations and in official newspapers . In the late 1970s the Shah 's regime consistently lost legitimacy due to criticism that it was pro @-@ Western . As the anti @-@ Shah movement gained ground and support , revolutionary propaganda was spread which alleged that some of the Shah 's advisors were Bahá 'ís . Bahá 'ís were portrayed as economic threats , and as supporters of Israel and the West , and societal hostility against the Bahá 'ís increased . 
 Since the Islamic Revolution of 1979 Iranian Bahá 'ís have regularly had their homes ransacked or have been banned from attending university or from holding government jobs , and several hundred have received prison sentences for their religious beliefs , most recently for participating in study circles . Bahá 'í cemeteries have been desecrated and property has been seized and occasionally demolished , including the House of Mírzá Buzurg , Bahá 'u'lláh 's father . The House of the Báb in Shiraz , one of three sites to which Bahá 'ís perform pilgrimage , has been destroyed twice . 
 According to a US panel , attacks on Bahá 'ís in Iran increased under Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 's presidency . The United Nations Commission on Human Rights revealed an October 2005 confidential letter from Command Headquarters of the Armed Forces of Iran ordering its members to identify Bahá 'ís and to monitor their activities . Due to these actions , the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights stated on 20 March 2006 , that she " also expresses concern that the information gained as a result of such monitoring will be used as a basis for the increased persecution of , and discrimination against , members of the Bahá 'í faith , in violation of international standards . The Special Rapporteur is concerned that this latest development indicates that the situation with regard to religious minorities in Iran is , in fact , deteriorating . 
 On 14 May 2008 , members of an informal body known as the " Friends " that oversaw the needs of the Bahá 'í community in Iran were arrested and taken to <unk> prison . The Friends court case has been postponed several times , but was finally underway on 12 January 2010 . Other observers were not allowed in the court . Even the defence lawyers , who for two years have had minimal access to the defendants , had difficulty entering the courtroom . The chairman of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom said that it seems that the government has already predetermined the outcome of the case and is violating international human rights law . Further sessions were held on 7 February 2010 , 12 April 2010 and 12 June 2010 . On 11 August 2010 it became known that the court sentence was 20 years imprisonment for each of the seven prisoners which was later reduced to ten years . After the sentence , they were transferred to <unk> prison . In March 2011 the sentences were reinstated to the original 20 years . On 3 January 2010 , Iranian authorities detained ten more members of the Baha 'i minority , reportedly including Leva Khanjani , granddaughter of <unk> Khanjani , one of seven Baha 'i leaders jailed since 2008 and in February , they arrested his son , Niki Khanjani . 
 The Iranian government claims that the Bahá 'í Faith is not a religion , but is instead a political organization , and hence refuses to recognize it as a minority religion . However , the government has never produced convincing evidence supporting its characterization of the Bahá 'í community . Also , the government 's statements that Bahá 'ís who recanted their religion would have their rights restored , attest to the fact that Bahá 'ís are persecuted solely for their religious affiliation . The Iranian government also accuses the Bahá 'í Faith of being associated with Zionism because the Bahá 'í World Centre is located in Haifa , Israel . These accusations against the Bahá 'ís have no basis in historical fact , and the accusations are used by the Iranian government to use the Bahá 'ís as " scapegoats " . In fact it was the Iranian leader Naser al @-@ Din Shah Qajar who banished Bahá 'u'lláh from Persia to the Ottoman Empire and Bahá 'u'lláh was later exiled by the Ottoman Sultan , at the behest of the Persian Shah , to territories further away from Iran and finally to Acre in Syria , which only a century later was incorporated into the state of Israel . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 Bahá 'í institutions and community activities have been illegal under Egyptian law since 1960 . All Bahá 'í community properties , including Bahá 'í centers , libraries , and cemeteries , have been confiscated by the government and fatwas have been issued charging Bahá 'ís with apostasy . 
 The Egyptian identification card controversy began in the 1990s when the government modernized the electronic processing of identity documents , which introduced a de facto requirement that documents must list the person 's religion as Muslim , Christian , or Jewish ( the only three religions officially recognized by the government ) . Consequently , Bahá 'ís were unable to obtain government identification documents ( such as national identification cards , birth certificates , death certificates , marriage or divorce certificates , or passports ) necessary to exercise their rights in their country unless they lied about their religion , which conflicts with Bahá 'í religious principle . Without documents , they could not be employed , educated , treated in hospitals , travel outside of the country , or vote , among other hardships . Following a protracted legal process culminating in a court ruling favorable to the Bahá 'ís , the interior minister of Egypt released a decree on 14 April 2009 , amending the law to allow Egyptians who are not Muslim , Christian , or Jewish to obtain identification documents that list a dash in place of one of the three recognized religions . The first identification cards were issued to two Bahá 'ís under the new decree on 8 August 2009 . 
 = New wave of British heavy metal = 
 The new wave of British heavy metal ( commonly abbreviated as NWOBHM ) was a nationwide musical movement that started in the United Kingdom in the late 1970s and achieved international attention by the early 1980s . Journalist Geoff Barton coined the term in a May 1979 issue of the British music newspaper Sounds to describe the emergence of new heavy metal bands in the late 1970s , during the period of punk rock 's decline and the dominance of new wave music . 
 Although encompassing diverse mainstream and underground styles , the music of the NWOBHM is best remembered for drawing on the heavy metal of the 1970s and infusing it with the intensity of punk rock to produce fast and aggressive songs . The DIY attitude of the new metal bands led to the spread of raw @-@ sounding , self @-@ produced recordings and a proliferation of independent record labels . Song lyrics were usually about escapist themes such as mythology , fantasy , horror and the rock lifestyle . 
 The NWOBHM began as an underground phenomenon growing in parallel to punk and largely ignored by the media . It was only through the promotion of rock DJ Neal Kay and Sounds ' campaigning that it reached the public consciousness and gained radio airplay , recognition and success in the UK . The movement involved mostly young , white , male and working – class musicians and fans , who suffered the hardships brought on by rising unemployment for years after the 1973 – 75 recession . As a reaction to their bleak reality , they created a community separate from mainstream society to enjoy each other 's company and their favourite loud music . The NWOBHM was heavily criticised for the excessive hype generated by local media in favour of mostly talentless musicians . Nonetheless , it generated a renewal in the genre of heavy metal music and furthered the progress of the heavy metal subculture , whose updated behavioural and visual codes were quickly adopted by metal fans worldwide after the spread of the music to Europe , North America and Japan . 
 The movement spawned perhaps a thousand metal bands , but only a few survived the advent of MTV and the rise of the more commercial glam metal in the second half of the 1980s . Among them , Iron Maiden and Def Leppard became international stars , and Motörhead and Saxon had considerable success . Other groups , such as Diamond Head , Venom and Raven , remained underground but were a major influence on the successful extreme metal subgenres of the late 1980s and 1990s . Many bands from the NWOBHM reunited in the 2000s and remained active through live performances and new studio albums . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Social unrest = = = 
 In the second half of the 1970s , the United Kingdom was in a state of social unrest and widespread poverty as a result of the ineffective social politics of both Conservative and Labour Party governments during a three @-@ year period of economic recession . As a consequence of deindustrialisation , the unemployment rate was exceptionally high , especially among working class youth . It continued to rise in the early 1980s , peaking in February 1983 . The discontent of so many people caused social unrest with frequent strikes , and culminated in a series of riots ( see 1981 Brixton riot , 1981 Toxteth riots ) . During this period , the mass of young people , deprived of the prospect of even relatively low @-@ skill jobs that were available to the previous generations , searched for different ways to earn money in the music and entertainment businesses . The explosion of new bands and new musical styles coming from the UK in the late 1970s was a result of their efforts to make a living in the economic depression that hit the country before the governments of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher . 
 The desperation and the violent reaction of a generation robbed of a safe future are well @-@ represented by the British punk movement of 1977 – 78 , whose rebellion against the establishment continued diluted in the new wave and post @-@ punk music of the 1980s . These self @-@ proclaimed punks were politically militant , relishing their anarchic attitude and stage practices like pogo dancing . They wore short and spiked hairstyles or shaved heads , often with safety pins and ripped clothes and considered musical prowess unimportant as long as the music was simple and loud . However , not all working @-@ class male youths embraced the punk movement ; some preferred to escape from their grim reality in heavy metal , which was equally effective in providing fun , stress relief , and peer companionship – otherwise denied because of their unemployment . 
 = = = Heavy rock in the UK = = = 
 The UK was a cradle of the first wave of heavy metal , which was born at the end of the 1960s and flowered in the early 1970s . Of the many British bands that came to prominence during that period , Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath and Deep Purple achieved worldwide success and critical acclaim . The success of the music genre , usually called heavy rock at the time , generated a community of UK fans with strong ties to psychedelia , hippie doctrines and biker subculture . Each of these bands was in crisis in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1970s : Led Zeppelin were plagued by discord and personal tragedies and had drastically reduced their activities , Black Sabbath finally fired their charismatic but unreliable frontman Ozzy Osbourne , and Deep Purple disbanded . As a consequence , the whole movement lost much of its momentum and media interest , which were refocused on what British writer Malc Macmillan calls " the more fashionable or lucrative markets of the day " such as disco , glam , mod revival , new wave and electronic music . Just like progressive rock acts and other mainstream music groups of the 1970s , heavy rock bands were viewed as – in the words of journalist Garry Bushell – " lumbering dinosaurs " by a music press infatuated with punk rock and new wave . Some writers even declared the premature demise of heavy metal altogether . 
 The crisis of British heavy rock giants left space for the rise of other rock bands in the mid @-@ 1970s , like : Queen , Hawkwind , Budgie , Bad Company , Status Quo and Nazareth , all of which had multiple chart entries in the UK and had conducted successful international tours . The British chart results of the period show that there was still a vast audience for heavy metal in the country and upcoming bands Thin Lizzy , UFO and Judas Priest , also had tangible success and media coverage in the late 1970s . Foreign hard rock acts , such as Blue Öyster Cult and Kiss from the US , Rush from Canada , Scorpions from Germany , and especially AC / DC from Australia , climbed the British charts in the same period . 
 = = = Motörhead = = = 
 The band Motörhead was founded in 1975 by already experienced musicians . Their leader Ian " Lemmy " Kilmister was a former member of the space rock band Hawkwind , Larry Wallis had played with Pink Fairies , and Eddie Clarke had been a member of Curtis Knight 's Zeus . Their previous experience is one element which divides critics and fans over whether the band belongs to the new wave of British heavy metal . Some believe that the band should be considered an inspiration for the movement but not part of it , because they had signed recording contracts , toured the country , and had chart success before any NWOBHM band had stepped out of their local club scene . Motörhead were also the only metal band of the period recording songs with veteran BBC radio DJ John Peel for his Peel Sessions program and the first to reach No. 1 in the UK Albums Chart with the live album No Sleep ' til Hammersmith in June 1981 . Lemmy himself said , " the NWOBHM ... didn 't do us much good " , because Motörhead " came along a bit too early for it " . 
 Other critics view Motörhead as the first significant exponent of the movement and the first band to fully implement a crossover between punk rock and heavy metal . Their fast music , the renunciation of technical virtuosity in favour of sheer loudness , and their uncompromising attitude were welcomed equally by punks and heavy metal fans . Motörhead were supported by many NWOBHM bands on tour , and they also shared the stage with Lemmy 's friends punk band The Damned . Motörhead 's musical style became very popular during the NWOBHM , making them a fundamental reference for the nascent movement and for musicians of various metal subgenres in the following decades . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Identity and style = = = 
 The NWOBHM involved both musicians and fans who were largely young , male and white and shared class origin , ethic and aesthetic values . American sociologist Deena Weinstein , in her book Heavy Metal : The Music and Its Culture , describes the rise and growth of the movement as the achievement of maturity for heavy metal , after its birth in the early 1970s and before branching out into various subgenres in the following years . British heavy metal fans , commonly known as <unk> , metalheads or headbangers for the violent , rhythmic shaking of their heads in time to the music , dismissed the simplistic image of rebellious youth inherited from the counterculture of the 1960s and the psychedelic attachments characteristic of heavy rock in the 1970s , updating the shared principles and codes of the heavy metal subculture and definitely separating it from mainstream society . 
 Towards the end of the 1970s , British metalheads coalesced into a closed community of peers that exalted power and celebrated masculinity . According to Deena Weinstein 's analysis , their male camaraderie and the general absence of women in their ranks did not turn into machismo and misogyny . In the same article , she wrote that British heavy metal : " is not racist , despite its uniformly white performers , and its lyrics are devoid of racial references . " Another characteristic of the subculture was its latent homophobia , less violent but not dissimilar to British skinheads ' disposition ; in his book Running with the Devil : Power , Gender and Madness in Heavy Metal Music , Robert Walser calls it a " collective affirmation of heterosexuality " , and in a journal British sociologist John Clarke regards it as " a reaction against the erosion of traditionally available stereotypes of masculinity " . Headbangers showed little interest in political and social problems , finding in each other 's company , in the consumption of beer and in the music , the means to escape their bleak reality ; for this reason they were often accused of nihilism or escapism . In contrast with punks , they loved musicianship and made idols of virtuoso guitarists and vocalists , viewing the live show as the full realisation of their status . The fans were very loyal to the music , to each other and to the bands with whom they shared origins and from whom they required coherence with their values , authenticity and continuous accessibility . To depart from this strict code meant being marked as a " sell out " or " poseur " and being somewhat excluded from the community . The lyrics of the song " Denim and Leather " by Saxon reflect precisely the condition of British metalheads in those years of great enthusiasm . Access to this male @-@ dominated world for female musicians and fans was not easy and only women who adapted to their male counterparts ' standards and codes were accepted , as attested by Girlschool and Rock Goddess , the only notable all @-@ female metal bands of that era . 
 The music , philosophy and lifestyle of heavy metal bands and fans were often panned by both left @-@ wing critics and conservative public opinion , described as senseless , ridiculous to the limit of self @-@ parody , and even dangerous for the young generation . The 1984 mockumentary This Is Spinal Tap addressed many idiosyncrasies of British metal bands , showing comic sides of that world which external observers would judge absurd . Instead metal musicians regarded the movie 's content as much too real . 
 = = = Visual aspects = = = 
 The dress code of the British headbangers reflected the newly found cohesion of the movement and recalled the look of 1960s rockers and American bikers . The common elements were long hair and jeans , black or white T @-@ shirts with band logos and cover art and leather jackets or denim vests adorned with patches . Following the example of Judas Priest , elements of S & M fashion entered the metal wardrobe of the 1980s and it became typical to show off metallic studs and ornaments , or for metal musicians to wear spandex or leather trousers . Elements of militaria , such as bullet belts and insignia , were also introduced at this time . This style of dress quickly became the uniform of metalheads worldwide . 
 Most bands of the NWOBHM had the same look as their fans and produced rock shows without special visual effects . A notable exception was Iron Maiden , which created the grisly character Eddie the Head as a stage prop to enrich their performances very early in their career . Other exceptions were Demon , Cloven Hoof and Samson , which used various props , costumes and tricks in their shows , while Pagan Altar and Venom became well known for their elaborate scenography inspired by shock rock and Satanism . 
 = = = Musical and lyrical elements = = = 
 The NWOBHM – comprising bands with very different influences and styles – was promoted as both a movement and a distinct music genre only in its formative years during the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1970s . Especially in those early years , what characterised the flood of new music was its raw sound , due in large part to low @-@ budget productions , but also to the amateurish talents of many young bands . Those young musicians were also linked by a shared inspiration from the works of the aforementioned successful heavy rock bands of the late 1960s and 1970s , and kept a sort of continuity with the earlier acts , whose music had temporarily gone out of fashion but was still thriving underground . However , the media of the 1980s and the promotional literature of record labels typically placed rock music that employed loud guitars but was not classifiable as " punk " under the blanket term " heavy metal " , subsuming the entire spectrum of NWOBHM bands within a single music genre . 
 Following a largely organic and uncalculated impulse , many of these new bands infused classic heavy metal with the immediacy of pub rock and the intensity of punk rock , implementing to various degrees the crossover of genres started by Motörhead ; in general they shunned ballads , de @-@ emphasised harmonies and produced shorter songs with fast tempos and a very aggressive sound based on riffs and power chords , featuring vocals ranging from high pitched wails to gruff and low growls . Iron Maiden , Angel Witch , Saxon , Holocaust , Tygers of Pan Tang , Girlschool , Tank and More are notable performers of this style , which bands such as <unk> , Jaguar , Raven and Venom stretched to produce even more extreme results . Critics consider this new approach to heavy metal the greatest musical accomplishment of the NWOBHM and an important evolutionary step for the genre . 
 A style more melodic and more akin to the hard rock of bands like Rainbow , Magnum , UFO , Thin Lizzy and Whitesnake was equally represented during the NWOBHM . The music of Def Leppard , Praying Mantis , White Spirit , Demon , Shy , Gaskin , <unk> and many others , contained hooks as much as riffs , often retained a closer link with blues rock , included power ballads and featured keyboards , acoustic instruments and melodic and soaring vocals . After the peak of the movement in 1981 , this style was favoured by the media and gained greater acceptance among the British audience ; it became prevalent when bands usually playing the more aggressive style of metal adapted to the more popular sound , which resembled that of mainstream American acts . These changes in musical direction disoriented some fans and led them to reject those bands which were perceived as having compromised key elements of their musical identity in the pursuit of success . 
