 These two styles do not exhaust all of the musical influences found in the British metal music of the early 1980s , because many bands were also inspired by progressive rock ( Iron Maiden , Diamond Head , Blitzkrieg , Demon , Saracen , Shiva , Witchfynde ) , boogie rock ( Saxon , Vardis , Spider , Le Griffe ) and glam rock ( Girl , Wrathchild ) . Doom metal bands Pagan Altar and Witchfinder General were also part of the NWOBHM and their albums are considered among the best examples of that already established subgenre . 
 British writer John Tucker writes that NWOBHM bands were in general fuelled by their first experiences with adult life and " their lyrics rolled everything into one big youthful fantasy " . They usually avoided social and political themes in their lyrics , or treated them in a shallow " street @-@ level " way , preferring topics from mythology , the occult , fantasy , science fiction and horror films . Songs about romance and lust were rare , but the frequent lyrics about male bonding and the rock lifestyle contain many sexist allusions . Christian symbolism is often present in the lyrics and cover art , as is the figure of Satan , used more as a shocking and macabre subject than as the antireligious device of 1990s ' black metal subculture . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = An underground movement ( 1975 – 78 ) = = = 
 Thin Lizzy , UFO and Judas Priest were already playing international arenas , when new heavy metal bands , composed of very young people , debuted in small venues in many cities in the UK . The country 's larger venues were usually reserved for chart @-@ topping disco music , because their use as rock music clubs was considered much less profitable . Like most British bands in the past , the new groups spent their formative years playing live in clubs , pubs , dance halls and social circles for low wages ; this training honed their skills , created a local fan base and enabled them to come in contact with managers and record label agents . 
 Angel Witch , Iron Maiden , Praying Mantis and Samson from London , Son of a Bitch ( later Saxon ) from Barnsley , Diamond Head from Stourbridge , Marseille from Liverpool , White Spirit from Hartlepool , Witchfynde from Derbyshire , Vardis from Wakefield , Def Leppard from Sheffield , Raven and Tygers of Pan Tang from around Newcastle , and Holocaust from Edinburgh were the most important metal bands founded between 1975 and 1977 that animated the club scene in their respective cities and towns . The first bands of the newborn musical movement competed for space in venues with punk outfits , often causing clubs to specialise , presenting only punk or only rock and hard rock . Differences in ideology , attitude and looks also caused heated rivalries between the two audiences . What punk and NWOBHM musicians had in common was their " do @-@ it @-@ yourself " attitude toward the music business and the consequent practice of self @-@ production and self @-@ distribution of recorded material in the form of audio cassette demos , or privately pressed singles , aimed initially at local supporters . It also led to the birth and diffusion of small independent record labels , often an extension of record shops and independent recording studios , which sometimes produced both punk and metal releases . Indie labels are considered important to the movement 's evolution , because they removed the intrusion of corporate business which had hindered rock music in the late 1970s , giving local bands the chance to experiment with more extreme forms of music . 
 While British and international media covered punk intensively , the new grassroots metal movement remained underground until 1978 , largely ignored by popular music magazines such as New Musical Express , The Face and Melody Maker and by radio stations . News about the bands and music circulated by word @-@ of @-@ mouth and fanzines , or through interested DJs , who travelled the country from club to club . Neal Kay was one of those DJs ; he started to work in 1975 at a disco club called The Bandwagon in Kingsbury , North West London , housed in the back @-@ room of the Prince of Wales pub and equipped with a massive sound system . He transformed his nights at The Bandwagon into The Heavy Metal Soundhouse , a spot specialising in hard rock and heavy metal music and a place to listen to albums of established acts and to demos of new bands , which circulated among fans through cassette trading . Besides participating in air guitar competitions and watching live shows , the audience could also vote for Kay 's selections . The DJ made a weekly Heavy Metal Top 100 list of the most requested songs at The Soundhouse , by both newcomers and established bands and sent it to record shops and to the music journal Sounds , the only paper that showed interest in the developing scene . Many young musicians realised that they were not alone in playing metal only through that weekly list , which included bands from all over the country . At the time , Geoff Barton was a staffer at Sounds who wrote features on the new up @-@ and @-@ coming metal bands and was pivotal in directing the developing subculture of metalheads with his articles . At the suggestion of his editor Alan Lewis and in an attempt to find a common stylistic element in the bands ' music , he used the term " New Wave of British Heavy Metal " for the first time in his review of a gig on the Metal Crusade tour featuring Angel Witch , Iron Maiden and Samson at The Music Machine in London on 8 May 1979 . The term soon became the identifier for the whole movement . 
 = = = First wave ( 1979 – 81 ) = = = 
 Compilation albums featuring bands from the nascent movement started to circulate , issued by Neat Records , Heavy Metal Records and Ebony Records , companies that became leaders in the independent metal label market during the 1980s . The fresh outlet of Neal Kay 's chart , the attention of Sounds and the many compilations issued by independent labels , focused the efforts of the new bands on producing demos and singles . Iron Maiden 's The Soundhouse Tapes is one of the best known collections of such demos . As Barton recalled : " There were hundreds of these bands . Maybe even thousands . Barely a day would go by without a clutch of new NWOBHM singles arriving in the Sounds office . " 
 Tommy Vance , a BBC radio host , took notice of the phenomenon and played singles by the new metal bands on his late night Friday Rock Show on BBC Radio 1 . Along with John Peel 's broadcast , Vance 's was the only corporate radio show to feature songs from underground metal acts , many of whom were invited to play live at BBC studios under the supervision of long @-@ time collaborator and producer , Tony Wilson . Alice 's Restaurant Rock Radio , a pirate FM radio station in London , also championed the new bands on air and with their own " roadshow " in rock pubs and clubs . 
 Despite the transition of the young bands from being local attractions to touring extensively in the UK , major record labels ' A & R agents still did not recognise the rising new trend . Thus , most new bands signed contracts with small independent labels , which could afford only limited printings of singles and albums and usually offered only national distribution . Many other bands , including Iron Maiden , Def Leppard and Diamond Head , self @-@ produced their first releases and sold them through mail order or at concerts . Saxon were the first to sign with an internationally distributed label , the French Carrere Records , followed by Def Leppard with Phonogram in August 1979 , and Iron Maiden with EMI in December 1979 . In early 1980 , EMI tested the market with the Neal Kay @-@ compiled album Metal for Muthas and a UK tour of the bands that had contributed to the compilation , eventually signing Angel Witch ( who were dropped after the release of their first single ) and Ethel the Frog . 
 Sounds gave Metal for Muthas a poor review , but the album was nevertheless a commercial success and may have been instrumental in encouraging major labels to sign a few more bands . A II Z , Fist , White Spirit and Praying Mantis were dropped after the release of their debut albums , while Tygers of Pan Tang , Samson , More , Demon and Girlschool had more success and lasted longer on major labels ' line @-@ ups . The new releases by these bands were better produced and some of them , with the support of intensive tours in the UK and Europe , obtained good chart results . The best chart performances of that period were for Iron Maiden 's debut album Iron Maiden and for Wheels of Steel by Saxon , which reached No. 4 and No. 5 on the UK Albums Chart respectively , while their singles " Running Free " , " Wheels of Steel " and " 747 ( Strangers in the Night ) " entered the UK Singles Chart Top 50 . The immediate consequence of that success was increased media coverage for metal bands , which included appearances on the British music TV shows Top of the Pops and The Old Grey Whistle Test . The emergence of many new bands in the period between 1978 and 1980 was another remarkable effect of the promotion of the movement to a relevant national phenomenon . 
 The momentum behind the NWOBHM also benefited already established bands , which reclaimed the spotlight with new and acclaimed releases . Ex @-@ Deep Purple singer Ian Gillan returned to sing heavy metal with the album Mr. Universe in 1979 and was on the forefront of the British metal scene with his band Gillan in the following years . His former Deep Purple band mate Ritchie Blackmore also climbed the UK charts with his hard rock group Rainbow 's releases Down to Earth ( 1979 ) and Difficult to Cure ( 1981 ) . Black Sabbath recovered and returned to success with the albums Heaven and Hell ( 1980 ) and Mob Rules ( 1981 ) , featuring the ex @-@ Rainbow singer Ronnie James Dio . 1980 saw several other entries by hard rock and heavy metal bands in the top 10 of the British charts : MSG 's first album peaked at No. 8 , Whitesnake 's Ready an ' Willing at No. 6 , Judas Priest 's best @-@ seller British Steel and Motörhead ' s Ace of Spades at No. 4 , while Back in Black by AC / DC reached number one . 
 As proof of the successful revival of the British hard rock and metal scene , tours and gigs of old and new acts were sold out , both at home and in other European countries , where the movement had spread . Groups arising from the NWOBHM were no longer precluded from world tours and were often chosen as opening acts for major bands in arenas and stadiums . Iron Maiden supported Kiss in Europe in 1980 , embarking on their first world tour as headliners in 1981 , as well as opening for Judas Priest and UFO in the US . Def Leppard visited the US for the first time in 1980 for a three @-@ month trek supporting Pat Travers , Judas Priest , Ted Nugent , AC / DC and Sammy Hagar . Saxon opened for Judas Priest in Europe and for Rush and AC / DC in the US in 1981 . NWOBHM bands were already present on the roster of the famous Reading Festival in 1980 , and were quickly promoted to headliners for the 1981 and 1982 events . The 1980 edition was also remarkable for the violent protests against Def Leppard , whose declared interest in the American market was received badly by British fans . In addition to Reading , a new festival called Monsters of Rock was created in 1980 at Castle Donington , England , to showcase only hard rock and heavy metal acts . 
 = = = Into the mainstream ( 1982 – 83 ) = = = 
 The NWOBHM eventually found space in newspapers and music magazines other than Sounds , as journalists caught up with the " next big thing " happening in the UK . Melody Maker even published a weekly heavy metal chart based on record shop sales . Sounds ' publisher exploited his support of the movement to launch the first issue of Kerrang ! , a colour magazine directed by Geoff Barton devoted exclusively to hard rock and heavy metal , in June 1981 . Kerrang ! was an unexpected success and soon became the reference magazine for metalheads worldwide , followed shortly by the American Circus and Hit Parader , the German Metal Hammer and the British Metal Forces . The attention of international media meant more record sales and more world tours for NWOBHM bands , whose albums entered many foreign charts . Their attempts to climb the British charts culminated in Iron Maiden 's The Number of the Beast topping the UK Albums Chart on 10 April 1982 and staying at number 1 for two weeks . The album charted at number 33 in the US , where the band acquired a reputation as Devil @-@ worshippers due to the album cover 's depiction of a hellish scene . 
 The success of the music produced by the movement and its passage from underground phenomenon to mainstream genre , prompted its main promoter Geoff Barton to declare the NWOBHM finished in 1981 . He felt disappointed by the low quality of the new bands and frustrated by the ease with which record labels exploited enthusiasm for heavy metal . Coincidentally , in the same year , the Bandwagon was closed and the Prince of Wales pub was subsequently demolished to build a restaurant . Although the movement had lost some of its appeal for diehard fans , as evidenced by the increased popularity of American @-@ influenced AOR releases on sales @-@ based national polls , it retained enough vitality to launch a second wave of bands , which rose from the underground and released their first albums in 1982 and 1983 . 
 NWOBHM bands had been touring steadily in the United States , but had not yet received enough FM radio airplay there to make a significant impression on American charts . Def Leppard remedied that , releasing Pyromania at the beginning of 1983 , an album with a more melodic and FM @-@ friendly approach in comparison with the more aggressive sound of their earlier music . The band 's goal of reaching a wider international audience , which included many female fans , was attained completely in the US , where Pyromania peaked at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 chart behind Michael Jackson 's Thriller . Thanks to a string of hit singles and the heavy rotation of their music videos on the recently launched MTV , the album had sold more than six millions copies in the US by 1984 and made Def Leppard superstars . The overwhelming international success of Pyromania induced both American and British bands to follow Def Leppard 's example , giving a decisive boost to the more commercial and melodic glam metal and heralding the end of the NWOBHM . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The UK had been a home for music video pioneers . When MTV started broadcasting in 1982 , the importance of videos abruptly grew , changing from an occasional promotional fancy to an indispensable means of reaching an audience . MTV filled its programs with many hard rock and heavy metal videos , but these were too expensive for bands who either had no recording contract or had signed to small , independent labels . Moreover , music videos exalted the visual appeal of a band , an area where some British metal groups were deficient . So the NWOBHM suffered the same decline as other musical phenomena that were based on low @-@ budget productions and an underground following . Many of its leaders , such as Diamond Head , Tygers of Pan Tang , Angel Witch and Samson , were unable to follow up on their initial success ; their attempts to update their look and sound to match new expectations of the wider audience not only failed , but also alienated their original fans . By the mid @-@ 1980s , image @-@ driven , sex @-@ celebrating glam metal emanating from Hollywood 's Sunset Strip , spearheaded by Van Halen and followed by bands such as Mötley Crüe , Quiet Riot , Dokken , Great White , Ratt and W.A.S.P. , quickly replaced other styles of metal in the tastes of many British rock fans . New Jersey act Bon Jovi and the Swedish Europe , thanks to their successful fusion of hard rock and romantic pop , also became very popular in the UK , with the former even headlining the 1987 Monsters of Rock Festival . Record companies latched on to the more polished glam metal subgenre over the NWOBHM bands , which maintained a fan base elsewhere in Europe , but found themselves crowded out of the UK and US markets by the success of these American groups . 
 While the attention devoted to the NWOBHM bands waned , a new succession of far less mainstream metal subgenres began to emerge and attract many British metalheads . Power metal and thrash metal , both stemming from the NWOBHM and maintaining much of its ethos , were gaining critical acclaim and commercial success in the second half of the 1980s with their even faster and heavier sound . Bands such as Helloween , Savatage , Metallica , Slayer , Megadeth , and Anthrax captured much of the market share of those metalheads who were not content with the sound or style of more mainstream , pop @-@ oriented metal bands . 
 The N.W.O.B.H.M. Encyclopedia by Malc Macmillan lists more than 500 recording bands established in the decade between 1975 and 1985 and related to the movement . Probably as many bands were born in the same time interval , but never emerged from their local club scene , or recorded nothing more than demos or limited pressings of self @-@ produced singles . The disinterest of record labels , bad management , internal struggles and wrong musical choices that turned off much of their original fan base , resulted in most groups disbanding and disappearing by the end of the decade . A few of the best known groups , such as Praying Mantis in Japan and Saxon , Demon and Tokyo Blade in mainland Europe , survived in foreign markets . Some others , namely Raven , Girlschool and Grim Reaper , tried to break through in the US market signing with American labels , but their attempts were unsuccessful . 
 Two of the more popular bands of the movement , however , went on to considerable , lasting success . Iron Maiden has since become one of the most commercially successful and influential heavy metal bands of all time , even after adopting a more progressive style . Def Leppard became even more successful , targeting the American mainstream rock market with their more refined hard rock sound . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 The widespread popularity of the Internet in the late 1990s / early 2000s helped NWOBHM fans and musicians to reconnect and rekindle their shared enthusiasm . The NWOBHM experienced a minor revival , highlighted by the good sales of old vinyl and collectibles and by the demand for new performances . Statements of appreciation by metal bands of the 1990s , the success of tribute bands , the re @-@ issues of old albums and the production of new thoroughly edited compilations , attracted the media 's attention and encouraged many of the original groups to reunite for festival appearances and tours . According to Macmillan and AllMusic reviewer Eduardo Rivadavia , probably the most important of those compilation albums was New Wave of British Heavy Metal ' 79 Revisited , compiled by Metallica 's drummer Lars Ulrich and former Sounds and Kerrang ! journalist Geoff Barton . It was released in 1990 as a double CD , featuring bands as obscure as Hollow Ground right through to the major acts of the era . 
 A new publication called Classic Rock , featuring Barton and many of the writers from Kerrang ! ' s first run , championed the NWOBHM revival and continues to focus much of its attention on rock acts from the 1980s . Starting in the 2000s , many reunited bands recorded new albums and revisited their original styles , abandoned in the second half of the 1980s . Their presence , at metal festivals and on the international rock club circuit , has been constant ever since . 
 = = Influences and legacy = = 
 The NWOBHM triggered a renaissance in a stagnant rock genre , but took on heavy criticism for the excessive local media hype surrounding a legion of typically mediocre musicians . Detractors think that , unlike heavy metal of the preceding decades , their music was unoriginal and included no classic rock recordings . Nevertheless , these bands and their diverse output offered a blueprint that counterparts across the Western world would later emulate and expand . The collision of styles that characterized the NWOBHM is now seen as key to the diversification of heavy metal in the second half of the 1980s into various subgenres that came to the fore in the 1990s . The stardom of Def Leppard in the US provided a catalyst for the growth of glam metal , just as bands like Angel Witch , Witchfynde , Cloven Hoof and especially Venom generated the music , lyrics , cover art and attitude that sparked black metal in its various forms in Europe and America . Motörhead , Iron Maiden , Raven , Tank , Venom and other minor groups are viewed as precursors of speed metal and thrash metal , two subgenres which carried forward the crossover with punk , incorporating elements of hardcore while amplifying volume , velocity and aggressive tone . Starting around 1982 , distant points such as North America , West Germany , and Brazil each became the locus of its own distinctive thrash metal scenes – East Coast and Bay Area , Teutonic , and Brazilian thrash metal . Their debt to the NWOBHM was acknowledged for example by Metallica 's Lars Ulrich , an active fan and avid collector of NWOBHM recordings and memorabilia . Under his influence , the set lists of Metallica 's early shows were filled with covers of British metal groups . The sound of the NWOBHM even " cross @-@ pollinated " a subgenre of punk , as UK 82 street punk bands like Discharge blended punk music with elements of metal . 
 The birth of speed metal in the early 1980s was also pivotal for the evolution of power metal in the latter half of the decade , as exemplified by Helloween from Germany , and Manowar , Savatage , and Virgin Steele from the US . 
 Since the beginning of the NWOBHM , North American bands like Anvil , Riot , Twisted Sister , Manowar , Virgin Steele , The Rods , Hellion , Cirith Ungol , and Exciter had a continuous exchange with the other side of the Atlantic , where their music was appreciated by British metalheads . In this climate of reciprocity , Manowar and Virgin Steele initially signed with the British indie label Music for Nations , while Twisted Sister recorded their first two albums in London . 
 The sound of Japanese bands Earthshaker , Loudness , Anthem and other minor groups was also influenced by the NWOBHM , whose British sound engineers were used for their early albums . The Japanese band Bow Wow even transferred to England to be part of the British metal scene . 
 Germany , Sweden , Denmark , Belgium , Netherlands , France and Spain promptly welcomed the new British bands and spawned imitators almost immediately . Acts like Accept , Grave Digger , Sinner and Warlock from Germany , E. F. Band from Sweden , Mercyful Fate from Denmark , Killer and Ostrogoth from Belgium , Picture and Bodine from the Netherlands , Trust and Nightmare from France , and <unk> Rojo and Ángeles del Infierno from Spain , formed between 1978 and 1982 and were heavily influenced by the sound of the NWOBHM . Many of these bands signed with the Dutch Roadrunner Records or with the Belgian Mausoleum Records , independent labels that also published recordings of British NWOBHM acts . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Philip Seymour Hoffman = 
 Philip Seymour Hoffman ( July 23 , 1967 – February 2 , 2014 ) was an American actor , director , and producer of film and theater . Best known for his distinctive supporting and character roles Hoffman was a regular presence in films from the early 1990s until his death at age 46 . 
 Drawn to theater as a teenager , Hoffman studied acting at New York University 's Tisch School of the Arts . He began his screen career in a 1991 episode of Law & Order and started to appear in films in 1992 . He gained recognition for his supporting work throughout the decade , notably in Boogie Nights ( 1997 ) , Happiness ( 1998 ) , The Big Lebowski ( 1998 ) , Magnolia ( 1999 ) , and The Talented Mr. Ripley ( 1999 ) . He began to occasionally play leading roles , and for his portrayal of the author Truman Capote in Capote ( 2005 ) , won multiple accolades including the Academy Award for Best Actor . Hoffman 's profile continued to grow , and he received three more Oscar nominations for his supporting work as a brutally frank CIA officer in Charlie Wilson 's War ( 2007 ) , a priest accused of pedophilia in Doubt ( 2008 ) , and the charismatic leader of a Scientology @-@ type movement in The Master ( 2012 ) . 
 While he mainly worked in independent films , including The Savages ( 2007 ) and Synecdoche , New York ( 2008 ) , Hoffman also appeared in Hollywood blockbusters , such as Twister ( 1996 ) and Mission : Impossible III ( 2006 ) , and , in one of his final roles , as Plutarch Heavensbee in the Hunger Games series ( 2013 – 15 ) . The feature Jack Goes Boating ( 2010 ) marked his debut as a filmmaker . Hoffman was also an accomplished theater actor and director . He joined the off @-@ Broadway LAByrinth Theater Company in 1995 , where he directed , produced , and appeared in numerous stage productions . His performances in three Broadway plays – True West ( 2000 ) , Long Day 's Journey into Night ( 2003 ) , and Death of a Salesman ( 2012 ) – all led to Tony Award nominations . 
 Hoffman struggled with drug addiction as a young adult , and relapsed in 2013 after many years of sobriety . In February 2014 , he was found dead with a syringe of heroin still in his arm , but official cause of death was combined drug intoxication – an unexpected event that was widely lamented in the film and theater industries . Remembered for his fearlessness in playing reprehensible characters , and for bringing depth and humanity to such roles , Hoffman was described in his New York Times obituary as " perhaps the most ambitious and widely admired American actor of his generation " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hoffman was born on July 23 , 1967 , in the Rochester suburb of Fairport , New York . His mother , Marilyn O 'Connor ( née Loucks ) , came from nearby Waterloo and worked as an elementary school teacher before becoming a lawyer and eventually a family court judge . His father , Gordon Stowell Hoffman , was a native of Geneva , New York , and worked for the Xerox Corporation . Along with one brother , Gordy , Hoffman had two sisters , Jill and Emily . 
 Hoffman was baptized a Roman Catholic and attended mass as a child , but did not have a heavily religious upbringing . His parents divorced when he was nine , leaving the children to be raised primarily by their mother . Hoffman 's childhood passion was sports , particularly wrestling and baseball , but at age 12 he saw a stage production of Arthur Miller 's All My Sons and was transfixed . He recalled in 2008 , " I was changed – permanently changed – by that experience . It was like a miracle to me " . Hoffman developed a love for the theater , and proceeded to attend regularly with his mother , who was a lifelong enthusiast . He remembered that productions of <unk> and Alms for the Middle Class , the latter starring a teenage Robert Downey , Jr . , were also particularly inspirational . At the age of 14 , Hoffman suffered a neck injury that ended his sporting activity , and he began to consider acting . Encouraged by his mother , he joined a drama club , and initially committed to it because he was attracted to a female member . 
 Acting gradually became a passion for Hoffman : " I loved the camaraderie of it , the people , and that 's when I decided it was what I wanted to do . " At the age of 17 , he was selected to attend the 1984 New York State Summer School of the Arts in Saratoga Springs , where he met his future collaborators Bennett Miller and Dan Futterman . Miller later commented on Hoffman 's popularity at the time : " We were attracted to the fact that he was genuinely serious about what he was doing . Even then , he was passionate . " Hoffman applied for several drama degree programs and was accepted to New York University 's ( NYU ) Tisch School of the Arts . Between starting on the program and graduating from Fairport High School , he continued his training at the Circle in the Square Theatre 's summer program . Hoffman had positive memories of his time at NYU , where he supported himself by working as an usher . With friends , he co @-@ founded the <unk> Ensemble acting troupe . He received a drama degree in 1989 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1991 – 95 ) = = = 
 After graduating , Hoffman worked in off @-@ Broadway theater and made additional money with customer service jobs . He made his screen debut in 1991 , in a Law & Order episode called " The Violence of Summer " , playing a man accused of rape . His first cinema role came the following year , when he was credited as " Phil Hoffman " in the independent film Triple Bogey on a Par Five Hole . After this , he adopted his grandfather 's name , Seymour , to avoid confusion with another actor . More film roles promptly followed , with appearances in the studio production My New Gun , and a small role in the comedy Leap of Faith , starring Steve Martin . Following these roles , he gained attention playing a spoiled student in the Oscar @-@ winning Al Pacino film Scent of a Woman ( 1992 ) . Hoffman auditioned five times for his role , which The Guardian journalist Ryan Gilbey says gave him an early opportunity " to indulge his skill for making unctuousness compelling " . The film earned US $ 134 million worldwide and was the first to get Hoffman noticed . Reflecting on Scent of a Woman , Hoffman later said " If I hadn 't gotten into that film , I wouldn 't be where I am today . " It was only at this time that he abandoned his job in a delicatessen to become a professional actor . 
 Hoffman continued playing small roles throughout the early 1990s . After appearing in Joey Breaker and the critically panned teen zombie picture My Boyfriend 's Back , he had a more notable role playing John Cusack 's wealthy friend in the crime comedy Money for Nothing . In 1994 , he portrayed an inexperienced mobster in the crime thriller The Getaway , starring Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger , and appeared with Andy García and Meg Ryan in the romantic drama When a Man Loves a Woman . He then played a police deputy who gets punched by Paul Newman – one of Hoffman 's acting idols – in the drama Nobody 's Fool . 
 Still considering stage work to be fundamental to his career , Hoffman joined the LAByrinth Theater Company of New York City in 1995 . It was an association that lasted the remainder of his life ; along with appearing in multiple productions , he later became co @-@ artistic director of the theater company with John Ortiz and directed various plays over the years . Hoffman 's only film appearance of 1995 was in the 22 @-@ minute short comedy The Fifteen Minute Hamlet , which satirized the film industry in an Elizabethan setting . He played the characters of Bernardo , Horatio , and Laertes alongside Austin Pendleton 's Hamlet . 
 = = = A rising actor ( 1996 – 99 ) = = = 
 Between April and May 1996 , Hoffman appeared at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in a Mark Wing @-@ Davey production of Caryl Churchill 's The <unk> . Following this , based on his work in Scent of a Woman , he was cast by writer – director Paul Thomas Anderson to appear in his debut feature Hard Eight ( 1996 ) . Hoffman had only a brief role in the crime thriller , playing a cocksure young craps player , but it began the most important collaboration of his career . Before cementing his creative partnership with Anderson , Hoffman appeared in one of the year 's biggest blockbusters , Twister , playing a grubby , hyperactive storm chaser alongside Helen Hunt and Bill Paxton . According to a People magazine survey of Twitter and Facebook users , Twister is the film that Hoffman is most popularly associated with . He then reunited with Anderson for the director 's second feature , Boogie Nights , about the Golden Age of Pornography . The ensemble @-@ piece starred Mark Wahlberg , Julianne Moore and Burt Reynolds ; Hoffman played a boom operator , described by David Fear of Rolling Stone as a " complete , unabashed loser " , who attempts to seduce Wahlberg 's character . <unk> received by critics , the film grew into a cult classic and it has been cited as the role in which Hoffman first showed his full ability . Fear commended the " naked emotional neediness " of the performance , adding that it made for compulsive viewing . Hoffman later expressed his appreciation for Anderson when he called the director " incomparable " . 
 Continuing with this momentum , Hoffman appeared in five films in 1998 . He had supporting roles in the crime thriller Montana and the romantic comedy Next Stop Wonderland , both of which were commercial failures , before working with the Coen brothers in their dark comedy The Big Lebowski . Hoffman had long been a fan of the directors and relished the experience of working with them . Appearing alongside Jeff Bridges and John Goodman , Hoffman played Brandt , the smug personal assistant of the titular character . Although it was only a small role , he claimed it was one that he was most recognized for , in a film that has achieved cult status and a large fan @-@ base . Between March and April 1998 , Hoffman made 30 appearances on stage at the New York Theatre Workshop in a production of Mark Ravenhill 's Shopping and Fucking , portraying an ex @-@ heroin addict . 
 Hoffman took an unflattering role in Todd Solondz 's Happiness ( 1998 ) , a misanthropic comedy about the lives of three sisters and those around them . He played Allen , a strange loner who makes crude phone calls to women ; the character furiously masturbates during one conversation , producing what film scholar Jerry Mosher calls an " embarrassingly raw performance " . Jake Coyle of the Associated Press rated Allen as one of the creepiest characters in American cinema , but critic Xan Brooks highlighted the pathos that Hoffman brought to the role . Happiness was controversial but widely praised , and Hoffman 's role has been cited by critics as one of his best . His final 1998 release was more mainstream , as he appeared as a medical graduate in the Robin Williams comedy Patch Adams . The film was critically panned but one of the highest @-@ grossing of Hoffman 's career . In 1999 , Hoffman starred opposite Robert De Niro as drag queen Rusty Zimmerman in Joel Schumacher 's drama Flawless . Hoffman considered De Niro the most imposing actor that he had appeared with , and felt that working with the veteran performer profoundly improved his own acting . Hoffman 's ability to avoid clichés in playing such a delicate role was noted by critics , and Roger Ebert said it confirmed him as " one of the best new character actors " . He was rewarded with his first Screen Actors Guild Award nomination . Hoffman then reunited with Paul Thomas Anderson , where he was given an atypically virtuous role in the ensemble drama Magnolia . The film , set over one day in Los Angeles , features Hoffman as a nurse who cares for Jason Robards ' character . The performance was approved of by the medical industry , and Jessica Winter of the Village Voice considered it Hoffman 's most indelible work , likening him to a guardian angel in his caring for the dying father . Magnolia has been included in lists of the greatest films of all time , and it was a personal favorite of Hoffman 's . 
 One of the most critically and commercially successful films of Hoffman 's career was The Talented Mr. Ripley ( 1999 ) , which he considered " as edgy as you can get for a Hollywood movie " . He played a " preppy bully " who taunts Matt Damon 's Ripley in the thriller , a character which Jeff Simon of The Buffalo News called " the truest upper class twit in all of American movies " . Hoffman 's performance caught the attention of Meryl Streep – another of his cinematic idols – with his performance : " I sat up straight in my seat and said , ' Who is that ? ' I thought to myself : My God , this actor is fearless . He 's done what we all strive for – he 's given this awful character the respect he deserves , and he 's made him fascinating . " In recognition of his work in Magnolia and The Talented Mr. Ripley , Hoffman was named the year 's Best Supporting Actor by the National Board of Review . 
 = = = Theatrical success and leading roles ( 2000 – 04 ) = = = 
 Following a string of roles in successful films in the late 1990s , Hoffman had established a reputation as a top supporting player who could be relied on to make an impression with each performance . His film appearances were likened by David Kamp of GQ to " discovering a prize in a box of cereal , receiving a bonus , or bumping unexpectedly into an old friend " . According to Jerry Mosher , as the year 2000 began , " it seemed Hoffman was everywhere , poised on the cusp of stardom " . 
 Hoffman had begun to be recognized as a theater actor in 1999 , when he received a Drama Desk Award nomination for Outstanding Featured Actor for the off @-@ Broadway play The Author 's Voice . This success continued with the 2000 Broadway revival of Sam Shepard 's True West , where Hoffman alternated roles nightly with co @-@ star John C. Reilly , making 154 appearances between March and July 2000 . Ben Brantley of The New York Times felt that it was the best stage performance of Hoffman 's career , calling him " brilliant " , and the actor earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play . The following year , Hoffman appeared with Meryl Streep , Natalie Portman and John Goodman in a Delacorte Theater production of Chekhov 's The Seagull – although Brantley felt that this performance was less fully realized . As a stage director , Hoffman received two Drama Desk Award nominations for Outstanding Director of a Play : one for Jesus <unk> the ' A ' Train in 2001 ; another for Our Lady of 121st Street in 2003 . In a 2008 interview , Hoffman opined that " switching hats " between acting and directing helped him improve in both roles . 
 David Mamet 's comedy State and Main , about the difficulties of shooting a film in rural New England , was Hoffman 's first film role of 2000 and had a limited release . He had a more prominent supporting role that year in Almost Famous , Cameron Crowe 's popular coming @-@ of @-@ age film set around the 1970s music industry . Hoffman portrayed the enthusiastic rock critic Lester Bangs , a task that he felt burdened by , but he managed to convey the real figure 's mannerisms and sharp wit after watching him in a BBC interview . The following year , Hoffman featured as the narrator and interviewer in The Party 's Over , a documentary about the 2000 U.S. elections . He assumed the position of a " politically informed and alienated Generation @-@ <unk> " who seeks to be educated in U.S. politics , but ultimately reveals the extent of public dissatisfaction in this area . 
 In 2002 , Hoffman was given his first leading role ( despite joking at the time " Even if I was hired into a leading @-@ man part , I 'd probably turn it into the non @-@ leading @-@ man part " ) in Todd Louiso 's tragicomedy Love Liza ( 2002 ) . His brother Gordy wrote the script , which Hoffman had seen at their mother 's house five years earlier , about a widower who starts sniffing gasoline to cope with his wife 's suicide . He considered it the finest piece of writing he had ever read , " incredibly humble in its exploration of grief " , but critics were less enthusiastic about the production . A review for the BBC wrote that Hoffman had finally been given a part that showed " what he 's truly capable of " , but few witnessed this as the film had a limited release and earned only US $ 210 @,@ 000 . 
 Later in 2002 , Hoffman starred opposite Adam Sandler and Emily Watson in Anderson 's critically acclaimed fourth picture , the surrealist romantic comedy @-@ drama Punch @-@ Drunk Love ( 2002 ) , where he played an illegal phone @-@ sex " supervisor " . Drew Hunt of the Chicago Reader saw the performance as a fine example of Hoffman 's " knack for turning small roles into seminal performances " , and praised the actor 's comedic ability . In a very different film , Hoffman was next seen with Anthony Hopkins in the high @-@ budget thriller Red Dragon , a prequel to The Silence of the Lambs , portraying the meddlesome tabloid journalist Freddy Lounds . His fourth appearance of 2002 came in Spike Lee 's drama 25th Hour , playing an English teacher who makes a devastating drunken mistake . Both Lee and the film 's lead Edward Norton were thrilled to work with Hoffman , and Lee confessed that he had long wanted to do a picture with the actor but had waited until he found the right role . Hoffman considered his character , Jakob , to be one of the most reticent characters he had ever played , a straight @-@ laced " corduroy @-@ pants @-@ wearing kind of guy . " Roger Ebert promoted 25th Hour to one of his " Great Movies " in 2009 , and along with A. O. Scott , considered it to be one of the best films of the 2000s . 
 The drama Owning <unk> ( 2003 ) gave Hoffman his second lead role , starring opposite Minnie Driver as a bank employee who embezzles money to feed his gambling addiction . Based on the true story of Toronto banker Brian Molony , who committed the largest fraud in Canadian history , Hoffman met with Molony to prepare for the role and help him play the character as accurately as possible . He was determined not to conform to " movie character " stereotypes , and his portrayal of addiction won approval from the Royal College of Psychiatrists . Roger Ebert assessed Hoffman 's performance as " a masterpiece of discipline and precision " , but the film earned little at the box office . 
 Hoffman 's second 2003 appearance was a small role in Anthony Minghella 's successful Civil War epic Cold Mountain . He played an immoral preacher , a complex character that Hoffman described as a " mass of contradictions " . The same year , from April to August , he appeared with Vanessa Redgrave in a Broadway revival of Eugene O 'Neill 's Long Day 's Journey into Night . Director Robert Falls later commented on the dedication and experience that Hoffman brought to his role of alcoholic Jamie Tyrone : " Every night he ripped it up to an extent that he couldn 't leave [ the role ] . Phil carried it with him . " Hoffman received his second Tony Award nomination , this time for Best Featured Actor in a Play . In 2004 , he appeared as the crude , has @-@ been actor friend of Ben Stiller 's character in the box office hit Along Came Polly . Reflecting on the role , People magazine said it proved that " Hoffman could deliver comedic performances with the best of them " . 
 = = = Critical acclaim ( 2005 – 09 ) = = = 
 A turning point in Hoffman 's career came with the biographical film Capote ( 2005 ) , which dramatized Truman Capote 's experience of writing his true crime novel In Cold Blood ( 1966 ) . Hoffman took the title role , in a project that he co @-@ produced and helped come to fruition . Portraying the idiosyncratic writer proved highly demanding , requiring significant weight loss and four months of research – such as watching video clips of Capote to help him affect the author 's effeminate voice and mannerisms . Hoffman stated that he was not concerned with perfectly imitating Capote 's speech , but did feel a great duty to " express the vitality and the nuances " of the writer . During filming , he stayed in character constantly so as not to lose the voice and posture : " Otherwise " , he explained , " I would give my body a chance to bail on me . " Capote was released to great acclaim , particularly regarding Hoffman 's performance . Many critics commented that the role was designed to win awards , and indeed Hoffman received an Oscar , Golden Globe , Screen Actors Guild Award , BAFTA , and various other critics ' awards . In 2006 , Premiere magazine listed his role in Capote as the 35th greatest movie performance of all time . After the film , several commentators began to describe Hoffman as one of the finest , most ambitious actors of his generation . 
 Hoffman received his only Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his supporting role in the HBO miniseries Empire Falls ( 2005 ) , about life in a New England town , but lost to castmate Paul Newman . In 2006 , he appeared in the summer blockbuster Mission : Impossible III , playing the villainous arms dealer Owen <unk> opposite Tom Cruise . A journalist for Vanity Fair stated that Hoffman 's " black @-@ hat performance was one of the most delicious in a Hollywood film since Alan Rickman 's in Die Hard " , and he was generally approved of for bringing gravitas to the action film . With a gross of nearly US $ 400 million , it exposed Hoffman to a mainstream audience . 
 Returning to independent films in 2007 , Hoffman began with a starring role in Tamara Jenkins 's The Savages , where he and Laura Linney played siblings responsible for putting their dementia @-@ ridden father ( Philip Bosco ) in a care home . Jake Coyle of the Associated Press stated that it was " the epitome of a Hoffman film : a mix of comedy and tragedy told with subtlety , bone @-@ dry humor and flashes of grace " . Hoffman next received a Golden Globe nomination for his performance in Before the Devil Knows You 're Dead , the final film by veteran director Sidney Lumet , where he played a realtor who embezzles funds from his employer to support his drug habit . Mosher comments that the character was one of the most unpleasant of Hoffman 's career , but that his " fearlessness again revealed the humanity within a deeply flawed character " as he appeared naked in the opening anal sex scene . The film was viewed positively by critics as a powerful and affecting thriller . 
 Mike Nichols 's political film Charlie Wilson 's War ( 2007 ) gave Hoffman his second Academy Award nomination . It was again for playing a real individual – Gust <unk> , the CIA agent who conspired with Congressman Charlie Wilson ( played by Tom Hanks ) to aid Afghani rebels in their fight against the Soviet Union . Todd McCarthy wrote of Hoffman 's performance : " <unk> out with a <unk> ' 80s hairdo , moustache , protruding gut and ever @-@ present smokes ... whenever he 's on , the picture vibrates with conspiratorial electricity . " The film was a critical and commercial success , and along with his Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor , Hoffman was nominated for a BAFTA and a Golden Globe Award . 
 The year 2008 contained two significant Hoffman roles . In Charlie Kaufman 's enigmatic drama Synecdoche , New York , he starred as Caden <unk> , a frustrated dramatist who attempts to build a scale replica of New York inside a warehouse for a play . Hoffman again showed his willingness to reveal unattractive traits , as the character ages and deteriorates , and committed to a deeply psychological role . Critics were divided in their response to the " ambitious and baffling " film . Sonny Bunch of The Washington Times found it " impressionistic , inaccessible and endlessly frustrating " , likening Hoffman 's character to " God , if God lacked imagination " . Roger Ebert , on the contrary , named it the best film of the decade and considered it one of the greatest of all time , and Robbie Collin , film critic for The Daily Telegraph , believes Hoffman gave one of cinema 's best performances . 
 Hoffman 's second role of the year came opposite Meryl Streep and Amy Adams in John Patrick Shanley 's Doubt , where he played Father Brendan Flynn – a priest accused of sexually abusing a 12 @-@ year @-@ old African @-@ American student in the 1960s . Hoffman was already familiar with the play and appreciated the opportunity to bring it to the screen ; in preparing for the role , he talked extensively to a priest who lived through the era . The film had a mixed reception , with some critics such as Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian suspicious of it as Oscar bait , but Hoffman gained second consecutive Best Supporting Actor nominations at the Oscars , BAFTAs and Golden Globes , and was also nominated by the Screen Actors Guild . 
 On stage in 2009 , Hoffman played Iago in Peter Sellars ' futuristic production of Othello ( with the title role by John Ortiz ) , which received mixed reviews . Ben Brantley , theatre critic of The New York Times found it to be " exasperatingly misconceived " , remarking that even when Hoffman is attempting to " manipulate others into self @-@ destruction , he comes close to spoiling everything by erupting into genuine , volcanic fury " . Hoffman also did his first vocal performance for the claymation film Mary and Max , although the film did not initially have an American release . He played the male title character , a depressed New Yorker with Asperger syndrome , while Toni Collette voiced Mary – the Australian girl who becomes his pen pal . Continuing with animation , Hoffman then worked on an episode of the children 's show Arthur and received a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Performer In An Animated Program . Later in the year , he played a brash American DJ opposite Bill Nighy and Rhys Ifans in Richard Curtis 's British comedy The Boat That Rocked ( also known as Pirate Radio ) – a character based on Emperor <unk> , a host of Radio Caroline in 1966 . He also had a cameo role as a bartender in Ricky Gervais 's The Invention of Lying . 
 Reflecting on Hoffman 's work in the late 2000s , Mosher writes that the actor remained impressive but had not delivered a testing performance on the level of his work in Capote . The film critic David Thomson believed that Hoffman showed indecisiveness at this time , unsure whether to play spectacular supporting roles or become a lead actor who is capable of controlling the emotional dynamic and outcome of a film . 
 = = = Final years ( 2010 – 14 ) = = = 
 Hoffman 's profile continued to grow with the new decade , and he became an increasingly recognizable figure . Despite earlier reservations about directing for the screen , his first release of the 2010s was also his first as a film director . The independent drama Jack Goes Boating was adapted from Robert Glaudini 's play of the same name , which Hoffman had starred in and directed for the LAByrinth Theater Company in 2007 . He originally intended only to direct the film , but decided to reprise the main role of Jack – a lonely limousine driver looking for love – after the actor he wanted for it was unavailable . The low @-@ key film had a limited release , and was not a high earner , though it received many positive reviews . However , Dave Edwards of the Daily Mirror remarked that " Hoffman 's directing debut delivers a film so weak I could barely remember what it was about as I left " , while critic Mark Kermode appreciated the cinematic qualities that Hoffman brought to the film , and stated that he showed potential as a director . In addition to Jack Goes Boating , in 2010 Hoffman also directed Brett C. Leonard 's tragic drama The Long Red Road for the Goodman Theatre in Chicago . Steven Oxman of Variety described the production as " heavy handed " and " predictable " , but " intriguing and at least partially successful " . 
 Hoffman next had significant supporting roles in two films , both released in the last third of 2011 . In Moneyball , a sports drama about the 2002 season of the baseball team Oakland Athletics , he played the manager Art Howe . The film was a critical and commercial success , and Hoffman was described as " perfectly cast " by Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post , but the real @-@ life Art Howe accused the filmmakers of giving an " unfair and untrue " portrayal of him . Hoffman 's second film of the year was George Clooney 's political drama The Ides of March , in which he played the earnest campaign manager to the Democratic presidential candidate Mike Morris ( Clooney ) . The film was well @-@ received and Hoffman 's performance , especially in the scenes opposite Paul Giamatti – who played the rival campaign manager – was positively noted . Hoffman 's work on the film earned him his fourth BAFTA Award nomination . 
 In the spring of 2012 , Hoffman made his final stage appearance , starring as Willy Loman in a Broadway revival of Death of a Salesman . Directed by Mike Nichols , the production ran for 78 performances and was the highest @-@ grossing show in the Ethel Barrymore Theatre 's history . Many critics felt that Hoffman , at 44 , was too young for the role of 62 @-@ year @-@ old Loman , and Chris Jones of the Chicago Tribune felt that the character had been interpreted poorly . Hoffman admitted that he found the role difficult , but he nevertheless earned his third Tony Award nomination . 
 Hoffman collaborated with Paul Thomas Anderson for the fifth time in The Master ( 2012 ) , where he turned in what critic Peter Bradshaw considered the most memorable performance of his career . Set in 1950s America , the film featured Hoffman as Lancaster Dodd , the charismatic leader of a nascent Scientology @-@ type movement who brings a troubled man ( Joaquin Phoenix ) under his tutelage . Hoffman was instrumental in the project 's development , having been involved with it for three years . He assisted Anderson in the writing of the script by reviewing samples of it , and suggested making Phoenix 's character , Freddie Quell , the protagonist instead of Dodd . A talented dancer , Hoffman was able to showcase his abilities by performing a jig during a surreal sequence ; Bradshaw called it an " extraordinary moment " that " only Hoffman could have carried off . " The Master was praised as an intelligent and challenging drama , and Drew Hunt of the Chicago Reader also felt that it contained Hoffman 's finest work : " He 's inscrutable yet welcoming , intimidating yet charismatic , villainous yet fatherly . He epitomizes so many things at once that it 's impossible to think of [ Dodd ] as mere movie character " . Hoffman and Phoenix received a joint Volpi Cup Award at the Venice Film Festival for their performances , and Hoffman was also nominated for an Academy Award , a Golden Globe , a BAFTA Award and a SAG Award for the supporting role . 
 A Late Quartet was Hoffman 's other film release of 2012 , where he played a violinist in a string quartet whose members ( played by Christopher Walken , Catherine Keener and Mark Ivanir ) face a crisis when one is diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease . The drama received favorable reviews , and Stephen Holden of The New York Times called Hoffman 's performance " exceptional " . In 2013 , Hoffman joined the popular Hunger Games series in its second film , The Hunger Games : Catching Fire , where he played <unk> Plutarch Heavensbee . The film finished as the tenth @-@ highest grossing in history to that point , and made Hoffman recognizable to a new generation of film @-@ goers . In January 2014 , shortly before his death , he attended the Sundance Film Festival to promote two films . In Anton Corbijn 's A Most Wanted Man , a thriller based on John le Carré 's novel , Hoffman played a German intelligence officer . His performance was praised by Xan Brooks as one of " terrific , lip @-@ smacking relish : full of mischief , anchored by integrity . " The other was God 's Pocket , the directorial debut of actor John Slattery , in which Hoffman played a thief . In November 2014 , nine months after his death , Hoffman was seen in The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 1 . 
 At the time of his death , Hoffman was filming The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 2 , the final film in the series , and had already completed the majority of his scenes . His two remaining scenes were rewritten to compensate for his absence , and the film was released in November 2015 . Hoffman was also preparing for his second directorial effort , a Prohibition @-@ era drama titled Ezekiel Moss , which was to star Amy Adams and Jake Gyllenhaal . In addition , he had filmed a pilot episode for the Showtime series <unk> , in which he played the lead role of an advertising executive , but plans for a full season were put on hold following his death . The role was later passed on to Steve Coogan . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hoffman rarely mentioned his personal life in interviews , stating in 2012 that he would " rather not because my family doesn 't have any choice . If I talk about them in the press , I 'm giving them no choice . So I choose not to . " For the last 14 years of his life , he was in a relationship with costume designer Mimi O 'Donnell , whom he had met in 1999 when they were both working on the play In Arabia We 'd All Be Kings , which Hoffman directed . They lived in New York City and had a son , Cooper ( 2003 ) , and two daughters , Tallulah ( 2006 ) and Willa ( 2008 ) . Hoffman and O 'Donnell separated in the fall of 2013 , some months before his death . 
 Hoffman was also discreet about his religious and political beliefs , but it is known that he voted for the Green Party candidate Ralph Nader in the 2000 presidential election . He felt that keeping his personal life private was beneficial to his career : " The less you know about me the more interesting it will be to watch me do what I do " . 
 In a 2006 interview with 60 Minutes , Hoffman revealed he had engaged in drug and alcohol abuse during his time at New York University , saying he had used " anything I could get my hands on . I liked it all . " Following his graduation in 1989 , he entered a drug rehabilitation program at age 22 , and remained sober for 23 years . However , he relapsed in 2013 , and admitted himself to drug rehabilitation for approximately 10 days in May of that year . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Although friends stated that Hoffman 's drug use was under control at the time , on February 2 , 2014 he was found dead in the bathroom of his Manhattan apartment by a friend – playwright and screenwriter David Bar Katz . Hoffman was 46 years old . Detectives searching the apartment found heroin and prescription medications at the scene , and revealed that he was discovered with a syringe in his arm . The death was officially ruled an accident caused by " acute mixed drug intoxication , including heroin , cocaine , benzodiazepines and amphetamine " . It was not determined whether Hoffman had taken all of the substances on the same day , or whether any of the substances had remained in his system from earlier use . A funeral was held at St. Ignatius Loyola church in Manhattan on February 7 , 2014 and was attended by many of his former co @-@ stars . 
 Hoffman 's unexpected death was widely lamented by fans and the film industry , and was described by several commentators as a considerable loss to the profession . On February 5 , 2014 , the LAByrinth Theatre Company honored his memory by holding a candlelight vigil , and Broadway dimmed its lights for one minute . In another tribute , actress Cate Blanchett dedicated her BAFTA trophy to Hoffman when she received the award for Blue Jasmine on February 16 . Three weeks after Hoffman 's death , David Bar Katz established the American Playwriting Foundation in the actor 's memory . With the money received from a libel lawsuit against the National Enquirer ( which had inaccurately published that Hoffman and Katz were lovers ) , the foundation awards an annual prize of US $ 45 @,@ 000 to the author of an unproduced play . Katz named this the " Relentless Prize " in honor of Hoffman 's dedication to the profession . Regarding his material legacy , Hoffman left his entire fortune ( approximately US $ 35 million ) to Mimi O 'Donnell in his October 2004 will , trusting her to distribute money to their children . 
 = = Reception and acting style = = 
 Hoffman was held in high regard within the film and theater industry , and cited in the media as one of the finest actors of his generation . Despite this status among his peers and critics , he was never one of the most popular film stars , and has been overlooked in lists of all @-@ time greatest actors . He was not a typical movie actor , with a pudgy build and lacking matinée idol looks , but Hoffman claimed that he was grateful for his appearance as it made him believable in a wide range of roles . Joel Schumacher once said of him in 2000 , " The bad news is that Philip won 't be a $ 25 @-@ million star . The good news is that he 'll work for the rest of his life " . The Aiken Standard of South Carolina referred to him as an " anti @-@ star " , whose real identity remained " amorphous and unmoored " . Hoffman was acutely aware that he was often too unorthodox for the Academy voters . He remarked , " I 'm sure that people in the big corporations that run Hollywood don 't know quite what to do with someone like me , but that 's OK . I think there are other people who are interested in what I do . " 
 Most of Hoffman 's notable roles came in arthouse films , including particularly original ones , but he also featured in several Hollywood blockbusters . He generally played supporting roles , appearing in both dramas and comedies , but was noted for his ability to make small parts memorable . Peter Bradshaw , film critic for The Guardian , felt that " Almost every single one of his credits had something special about it " . Hoffman was praised for his versatility and ability to fully inhabit any role , but specialized in playing creeps and misfits : " his CV was populated almost exclusively by snivelling wretches , insufferable <unk> , <unk> and outright bullies " , writes the journalist Ryan Gilbey . Hoffman was appreciated for making these roles real , complex and even sympathetic ; while Todd Louiso , director of Love Liza , believed that Hoffman connected to people on screen because he looked like an ordinary man and revealed his vulnerability . Xan Brooks of The Guardian remarked that the actor 's particular talent was to " take thwarted , twisted humanity and ennoble it " . " The more pathetic or deluded the character , " writes Gilbey , " the greater Hoffman 's relish seemed in rescuing them from the realms of the merely monstrous . " When asked in 2006 why he undertook such roles , Hoffman responded , " I didn 't go out looking for negative characters ; I went out looking for people who have a struggle and a fight to tackle . That 's what interests me . " 
 = = = Work ethic = = = 
 The journalist Jeff Simon described Hoffman as " probably the most in @-@ demand character actor of his generation " , but Hoffman claimed never to take it for granted he would be offered roles . Although he worked hard and regularly , he was humble about his acting success , and when asked by a friend if he was having any luck he quietly replied , " I 'm in a film , Cold Mountain , that has just come out . " Patrick Fugit , who worked with Hoffman on Almost Famous , recalled the actor was intimidating but an exceptional mentor and influence in " a school @-@ of @-@ hard @-@ knocks way " , remarking that " there was a certain weight that came with him " . Hoffman admitted that he sometimes appeared in big @-@ budget studio films for the money , but said , " ultimately my main goal is to do good work . If it doesn 't pay well , so be it . " He kept himself grounded and invigorated as an actor by attempting to appear on stage once a year . 
 Hoffman occasionally changed his hair and lost or gained weight for parts , and he went to great lengths to reveal the worst in his characters . But in a 2012 interview he confessed that performing to a high standard was a challenge : " The job isn 't difficult . Doing it well is difficult . " In an earlier interview with The New York Times , he explained how deeply he loved acting but added , " that deep kind of love comes at a price : for me , acting is torturous , and it 's torturous because you know it 's a beautiful thing ... Wanting it is easy , but trying to be great – well , that 's absolutely torturous . " This struggle was confirmed by the author John le Carré , who met Hoffman during the adaptation of his novel A Most Wanted Man . While praising the actor 's intelligence and intuition , le Carré acknowledged the burden that Hoffman felt : " It was painful and exhausting work , and probably in the end his undoing . The world was too bright for him to handle . " 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 Hoffman appeared in 55 films and one miniseries during his screen career spanning 22 years . He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for Capote ( 2005 ) , and was nominated three times for Best Supporting Actor for Charlie Wilson 's War ( 2007 ) , Doubt ( 2008 ) , and The Master ( 2012 ) . He also received five Golden Globe Award nominations ( winning one ) , five BAFTA Award nominations ( winning one ) , three Screen Actors Guild Awards ( winning one ) , and won the Volpi Cup at the Venice Film Festival . Hoffman remained active in theater throughout his career , starring in ten and directing 19 stage productions ( predominantly in New York ) . He received three Tony Award nominations for his Broadway performances : two for Best Leading Actor , in True West ( 2000 ) and Death of a Salesman ( 2012 ) , and one for Best Featured Actor in Long Day 's Journey into Night ( 2003 ) . 
 = Syd Barrett = 
 Roger Keith " Syd " Barrett ( 6 January 1946 – 7 July 2006 ) was an English musician , composer , singer , songwriter , and painter . Best known as a founder member of the band Pink Floyd , Barrett was the lead singer , guitarist and principal songwriter in its early years and is credited with naming the band . Barrett was excluded from Pink Floyd in April 1968 after David Gilmour took over as their new guitarist , and was briefly hospitalised amid speculation of mental illness . 
 Barrett was musically active for less than ten years . With Pink Floyd , he recorded four singles , their debut album ( and contributed to the second one ) , and several unreleased songs . Barrett began his solo career in 1969 with the single " Octopus " from his first solo album , The Madcap Laughs ( 1970 ) . The album was recorded over the course of a year with five different producers ( Peter Jenner , Malcolm Jones , David Gilmour , Roger Waters and Barrett himself ) . Nearly two months after Madcap was released , Barrett began working on his second and final album , Barrett ( 1970 ) , produced by Gilmour and featuring contributions from Richard Wright . He went into self @-@ imposed seclusion until his death in 2006 . In 1988 , an album of unreleased tracks and outtakes , Opel , was released by EMI with Barrett 's approval . 
 Barrett 's innovative guitar work and exploration of experimental techniques such as dissonance , distortion and feedback influenced many musicians . His recordings are also noted for their strongly English @-@ accented vocal delivery . After leaving music , Barrett continued with painting and dedicated himself to gardening . Biographies began appearing in the 1980s . Pink Floyd wrote and recorded several tributes to him , most notably the 1975 album Wish You Were Here , which included " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " , as homage to Barrett . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Syd Barrett was born as Roger Keith Barrett in the English city of Cambridge to a middle @-@ class family living at 60 <unk> Road . Barrett was the fourth of five children . His father , Arthur Max Barrett , was a prominent pathologist and he was related to Elizabeth Garrett Anderson , through Max 's maternal grandmother Ellen Garrett , who was Elizabeth 's cousin . In 1951 his family moved to 183 Hills Road . 
 Barrett played piano occasionally , but usually preferred writing and drawing . He got a ukulele at 10 , a banjo at 11 and a Hofner acoustic guitar at 14 . A year after he got his first acoustic guitar , he bought his first electric guitar and built his own amplifier . One story of how Barrett acquired the nickname " Syd " is that at the age of 14 he was named after an old local Cambridge jazz double bassist , Sid " The Beat " Barrett , which claims Syd Barrett changed the spelling to differentiate himself from his namesake . Another story is that when he was 13 , his schoolmates nicknamed him " Syd " after he showed up to a field day at Abington Scout site wearing a flat cap instead of his Scout beret because " Syd " was a " working @-@ class " name . He used both names interchangeably for several years . His sister Rosemary stated , " He was never Syd at home . He would never have allowed it . " He was a Scout with the 7th Cambridge troop and went on to be a patrol leader . 
 At one point at Morley Memorial Junior School he was taught by Roger Waters ' mother , Mary . Later , in 1957 , he attended Cambridgeshire High School for Boys ( with Waters ) . His father died of cancer on 11 December 1961 , less than a month before Barrett 's 16th birthday . Also on this day , Barrett had left the entry in his diary for this date blank . By this time , his brothers and sisters had left home and his mother decided to rent out rooms to lodgers . Eager to help her son recover from his grief , Barrett 's mother encouraged the band in which he played , Geoff Mott and The Mottoes , a band which Barrett formed , to perform in their front room . Roger Waters and Syd Barrett were childhood friends , and Waters often visited such gigs . At one point , Waters even organised a gig , a CND benefit at Friends Meeting House on 11 March 1962 , but shortly afterwards Geoff Mott joined the Boston Crabs , and the Mottoes broke up . 
 In September 1962 , Barrett had taken a place at the Cambridge Technical College art department , where he met David Gilmour . During the winter of 1962 and early 1963 , the Beatles made an impact on Barrett , and he began to play Beatles songs at parties and at picnics . In 1963 , Barrett became a Rolling Stones fan and Barrett and then @-@ girlfriend Libby <unk> saw them perform at a village hall in Cambridgeshire . It was at this point Barrett started writing songs ; one friend recalls hearing " Effervescing Elephant " ( later to be recorded on his solo album Barrett ) . Also around this time , Barrett and Gilmour occasionally played acoustic gigs together . Barrett had played bass guitar with Those Without during the summer of 1963 and both bass and guitar with The <unk> ' Blues the next summer . In 1964 , Barrett and <unk> saw Bob Dylan perform . After this performance , Barrett was inspired to write " Bob Dylan Blues " . Barrett , now thinking about his future , decided to apply for Camberwell College of Arts in London . Barrett enrolled in the college in the summer of 1964 to study painting . 
 = = = Pink Floyd years ( 1965 – 68 ) = = = 
 Starting in 1964 , the band that would become Pink Floyd evolved through various line @-@ up and name changes including " The Abdabs " , " The Screaming Abdabs " , " Sigma 6 " , and " The Meggadeaths " . In 1965 , Barrett joined them as The Tea Set ( sometimes spelled T @-@ Set ) . When they found themselves playing a concert with another band of the same name , Barrett came up with " The Pink Floyd Sound " ( also known as " The Pink Floyd Blues Band " , later " The Pink Floyd " ) . During 1965 , they went into a studio for the first time , when a friend of Richard Wright 's gave the band free time to record . 
 During this summer Barrett had his first LSD trip in the garden of friend Dave Gale , with Ian Moore and Storm Thorgerson . During one trip , Barrett and another friend , Paul Charrier , ended up naked in the bath , reciting : " No rules , no rules " . That summer , as a consequence of the continuation of drug use , the band became absorbed in Sant Mat , a Sikh sect . Storm Thorgerson ( then living on Earlham Street ) and Barrett went to a London hotel to meet the sect 's guru ; Thorgerson managed to join the sect , while Barrett , however , was deemed too young to join . Thorgerson perceives this as a deeply important event in Barrett 's life , as he was intensely upset by the rejection . While living within proximity of his friends , Barrett decided to write more songs ( " Bike " was written around this time ) . 
 = = = = London Underground , Blackhill Enterprises and gigs = = = = 
 While Pink Floyd began by playing cover versions of American R & B songs , by 1966 they had carved out their own style of improvised rock and roll , which drew as much from improvised jazz . After Bob Klose departed from the band , the band 's direction changed . However , the change was not instantaneous , with more improvising on the guitars and keyboards . Mason reflected , " It always felt to me that most of the ideas were emanating from Syd at the time . " 
 At this time , Barrett 's reading reputedly included : Grimm 's Fairy Tales , Tolkien 's The Hobbit and Lord of the Rings , Carlos Castaneda 's The Teachings of Don Juan , and The I @-@ Ching . During this period , Barrett wrote most of the songs for Pink Floyd 's first album , and also songs that would later appear on his solo albums . In 1966 , a new rock concert venue , the UFO ( pronounced as " you @-@ foe " ) , opened in London and quickly became a haven for British psychedelic music . Pink Floyd , the house band , was its most popular attraction and after making appearances at the rival Roundhouse , became the most popular musical group of the " London Underground " psychedelic music scene . 
 By the end of 1966 , Pink Floyd had gained a reliable management team in Andrew King and Peter Jenner . Towards the end of October 1966 , Pink Floyd , with King and Jenner , set up Blackhill Enterprises , to manage the group 's finances . Blackhill was staffed by lodgers Jenner found in his <unk> Road house , and among others , Barrett 's flatmate , Peter Wynne Wilson ( who became road manager , however , since he had more experience in lighting , he was also lighting assistant ) . King and Jenner wanted to prepare some demo recordings for a possible record deal , so at the end of October , they booked a session at Thompson Private Recording Studio , in Hemel Hempstead . King said of the demos : " That was the first time I realised they were going to write all their own material , Syd just turned into a songwriter , it seemed like overnight . " 
 King and Jenner befriended American expatriate Joe Boyd , the promoter of the UFO Club , who was making a name for himself as one of the more important entrepreneurs on the British music scene . The newly hired booking agent , Bryan Morrison , and Boyd had proposed sending in better quality recordings . From Morrison 's agency the band played a gig outside London for the first time . In November , the band performed the first ( of many ) strangely named concerts : <unk> Music for Simian <unk> , a multimedia event arranged by the group 's former landlord , Mike Leonard , at Hornsey College of Art . They performed at the Free School for the following two weeks , before performing at the <unk> Versus Ian Smith event at the Roundhouse in December , arranged by the Majority Rule for Rhodesia Campaign , and an Oxfam benefit at the Albert Hall ( the band 's biggest venue up to this point ) . 
 = = = = Tonite Lets All Make Love in London = = = = 
 At the beginning of 1967 , Barrett was dating Jenny Spires ( who would later marry future Stars member Jack Monck ) . However , unknown to Barrett , Spires had an affair with Peter Whitehead . Spires convinced Whitehead ( who thought the band sounded like " bad Schoenberg " ) to use Pink Floyd in a film about the swinging London scene . So at the cost of £ 80 , in January , Whitehead took the band into John Wood 's Sound Techniques in Chelsea , with promoter Joe Boyd in tow . Here , the band recorded a 16 @-@ minute version of " Interstellar Overdrive " and another composition , " Nick 's Boogie " . Whitehead had filmed this recording , which was used in the film Tonite Let 's All Make Love in London and later on the video release of London ' 66 – ' 67 . Whitehead later commented about the band that : " They were just completely welded together , just like a jazz group " . 
 = = = = The Piper at the Gates of Dawn = = = = 
 Boyd attempted to sign the band with Polydor Records . However , Morrison had convinced King and Jenner to try to start a bidding war between Polydor and EMI . In late January , Boyd produced a recording session for the group , with them returning to Sound Techniques in Chelsea again . After the aforementioned bidding war idea was finished , Pink Floyd signed with EMI . Unusually for the time the deal included recording an album , which meant the band had unlimited studio time at EMI Studios , in return for a smaller royalty percentage . The band then attempted to re @-@ record " Arnold Layne " , but the Boyd version from January was released instead . 
 The band 's first studio album , The Piper at the Gates of Dawn , was recorded intermittently between February and July 1967 in Studio 3 at Abbey Road Studios , and produced by former Beatles engineer Norman Smith . At the same time , the Beatles were recording " Lovely Rita " for their album , Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , in Studio 2 . By the time the album was released on 4 August , " Arnold Layne " ( which was released months earlier , on 11 March ) had reached number 20 on the British singles charts ( despite being banned by Radio London ) and the follow @-@ up single , " See Emily Play " , had done even better , peaking at number 6 . The album was successful in the UK , hitting number 6 on the British album charts . Their first three singles ( including their third , " Apples and Oranges " ) , were written by Barrett , who also was the principal visionary / author of their critically acclaimed 1967 debut album . Of the eleven songs on Piper , Barrett wrote eight and co @-@ wrote another two . 
 = = = Departure from Pink Floyd = = = 
 Through late 1967 and early 1968 , Barrett 's behaviour became increasingly erratic and unpredictable , partly as a consequence of his reported heavy use of psychedelic drugs , most prominently LSD . There is also much speculation that he suffered from schizophrenia . Once described as joyful , friendly , and extroverted , he became increasingly depressed and socially withdrawn , and experienced hallucinations , disorganized speech , memory lapses , intense mood swings , and periods of catatonia . Although the changes began gradually , he went missing for a long weekend and , according to several friends including Rick Wright , came back " a completely different person . " One of the striking features of his change was the development of a blank , empty , dead @-@ eyed stare ( referred to in Pink Floyd 's " Shine on You Crazy Diamond " with the line " now there 's a look in your eye like black holes in the sky " ) . He was unable to recognize old friends that he had known for years , and often did not know where he was . At one point , while on a tour of the city of Los Angeles , Barrett is said to have exclaimed , " gee , it sure is nice to be in Las Vegas ! " Many reports described him on stage , strumming one chord through the entire concert , or not playing at all . At a show at The Fillmore in San Francisco , during a performance of " Interstellar Overdrive " , Barrett slowly detuned his guitar . The audience seemed to enjoy such antics , unaware of the rest of the band 's consternation . Interviewed on Pat Boone 's show during this tour , Syd 's reply to Boone 's questions was a " blank and totally mute stare , " according to Nick Mason , " Syd wasn 't into moving his lips that day . " Barrett exhibited similar behaviour during the band 's first appearance on Dick Clark 's popular TV show American Bandstand . Although surviving footage of this appearance shows Barrett miming his parts of the song competently , during a group interview afterwards , when asked two questions by Clark , Barrett 's answers were terse , almost to the point of rudeness ( though , Clark noted , they had been flying non @-@ stop from London to Los Angeles ) . During this time , Barrett would often forget to bring his guitar to sessions , damage equipment and occasionally was unable to hold his pick . Before a performance in late 1967 , Barrett reportedly crushed <unk> <unk> tablets and an entire tube of Brylcreem into his hair , which subsequently melted down his face under the heat of the stage lighting , making him look like " a <unk> candle " . Nick Mason later disputed the <unk> portion of this story , stating that " Syd would never waste good <unk> " . 
 During their UK tour with Jimi Hendrix in November 1967 , guitarist David O 'List from The Nice was called in to substitute for Barrett on several occasions when he was unable to perform or failed to appear . Sometime around Christmas , David Gilmour ( Barrett 's old school friend ) was asked to join the band as a second guitarist to cover for Barrett , with the idea of retaining a five @-@ member line @-@ up of the band . For a handful of shows Gilmour played and sang while Barrett wandered around on stage , occasionally deciding to join in playing . The other band members soon grew tired of Barrett 's antics and , on 26 January 1968 , when Waters was driving on the way to a show at Southampton University , the band elected not to pick Barrett up : one person in the car said , " Shall we pick Syd up ? " and another said , " Let 's not bother . " As Barrett had , up until then , written the bulk of the band 's material , the initial plan was to keep him in the group as a non @-@ touring member — as The Beach Boys had done with Brian Wilson — but this soon proved to be impractical . Gilmour subsequently became a full @-@ time member of the band . 
 According to Roger Waters , Barrett came into what was to be their last practice session with a new song he had dubbed " Have You Got It Yet ? " The song seemed simple enough when he first presented it , but it soon became impossibly difficult to learn and they eventually realised that while they were practising it , Barrett kept changing the arrangement . He would then play it again , with the arbitrary changes , and sing " Have you got it yet ? " Eventually they realised they never would , and that they were simply bearing the brunt of Barrett 's idiosyncratic sense of humour . Waters had called it " a real act of mad genius " . 
 Barrett did not contribute material to the band after A Saucerful of Secrets was released in 1968 . Of the songs he wrote for Pink Floyd after The Piper at the Gates of Dawn , only one , " Jugband Blues " , made it to the band 's second album ; one , " Apples and Oranges " , became a less @-@ than @-@ successful single ; and two others , " Scream Thy Last Scream " and " Vegetable Man " , were never officially released as they were deemed too dark and unsettling . Feeling guilty for ousting their friend , the members of Pink Floyd were unable to bring themselves to definitively tell Barrett that he was no longer in the band . According to Rick Wright , who lived with Barrett at the time , Wright had the awful job of telling Barrett that he was going out to buy cigarettes while he went off to play a gig . He would return hours later to find Barrett in the same position , sometimes with a cigarette burned completely down between his fingers ( an incident later referenced in Pink Floyd 's The Wall ) . Emerging from catatonia and unaware that a long period of time had elapsed , Barrett would ask , " Have you got the cigarettes ? " . Barrett supposedly spent time outside the recording studio , in the reception area , waiting to be invited in . He also showed up to a few gigs and glared at Gilmour . Barrett played slide guitar on " Remember a Day " ( which had been first attempted during the Piper sessions ) , and also played on " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " . On 6 April 1968 , the group officially announced Barrett was no longer a member , the same day the band 's contract with Blackhill Enterprises was terminated as the record label , considering Barrett to be the musical brains of the band , stayed with Barrett . 
 = = = Solo years ( 1968 – 72 ) = = = 
 After leaving Pink Floyd , Barrett was out of the public eye for a year . Then , in 1969 , at the behest of EMI and Harvest Records , he embarked on a brief solo career , releasing two solo albums , The Madcap Laughs and Barrett ( both 1970 ) , and a single , " Octopus " . Some songs , " Terrapin " , " Maisie " and " Bob Dylan Blues " , reflected Barrett 's early interest in the blues . 
 = = = = The Madcap Laughs = = = = 
 After Barrett left Pink Floyd , Jenner followed suit . He led Barrett into EMI Studios to record some tracks in May that would later be released on Barrett 's first solo album , The Madcap Laughs . However , Jenner said : " I had seriously underestimated the difficulties of working with him " . By the sessions of June and July , most of the tracks were in better shape ; however , shortly after the July sessions , Barrett broke up with girlfriend Lindsay Corner and went on a drive around Britain in his Mini , ending up in psychiatric care in Cambridge . During New Year 1969 , a somewhat recovered Barrett had taken up tenancy in a flat on Egerton Gardens , South Kensington , London , with the Post Modernist artist Duggie Fields . Here , Barrett 's flat was so close to Gilmour 's that Gilmour could look right into Barrett 's kitchen . Deciding to return to music , Barrett contacted EMI and was passed to Malcolm Jones , the then @-@ head of EMI 's new prog rock label , Harvest ( after Norman Smith and Jenner declined to produce Barrett 's record , Jones produced it ) . Barrett wanted to recover the Jenner @-@ produced sessions recordings ; several of the tracks were improved upon . 
 The Jones @-@ produced sessions started in April 1969 at EMI Studios . After the first of these sessions , Barrett brought in friends to help out : Humble Pie drummer , Jerry Shirley and Jokers Wild ( Gilmour 's old band ) drummer , Willie Wilson . For the sessions , Gilmour played bass . Talking to Barrett wasn 't easy , said Jones : " It was a case of following him , not playing with him . They were seeing and then playing so they were always a note behind " . A few tracks on the album feature overdubs by members of the band Soft Machine . During this time , Barrett also played guitar on the sessions for Soft Machine founder Kevin Ayers ' debut LP Joy of a Toy , although his performance on " Religious Experience " ( later titled " Singing a Song in the Morning " ) was not released until the album was reissued in 2003 . One time , Barrett had told his flatmate that he was going off " for an afternoon drive " . However , he followed Pink Floyd to Ibiza ( according to legend , he skipped check @-@ ins and customs , ran onto the runway and attempted to flag down a jet ) . One of his friends , J. Ryan Eaves , bass player for the short @-@ lived but influential Manchester band " York 's Ensemble " , later spotted him on a beach wearing messed @-@ up clothes and with a carrier bag full of money . At this point , during the trip , Barrett had asked Gilmour for his help in the recording sessions . 
 After two of the Gilmour / Waters @-@ produced sessions , they remade one track from the Soft Machine overdubs and recorded three tracks . These sessions came to a minor halt when Gilmour and Waters were mixing Pink Floyd 's newly recorded album , Ummagumma , to Barrett 's dismay . However , through the end of July , they managed to record three more tracks . The problem with the recording was that the songs were recorded as Barrett played them " live " in studio . On the released versions a number of them have false starts and commentaries from Barrett . Despite the track being closer to complete and better produced , Gilmour and Waters left the Jones @-@ produced track " Opel " off Madcap . 
 Gilmour later said of the sessions for The Madcap Laughs : 
 [ Sessions ] were pretty tortuous and very rushed . We had very little time , particularly with The Madcap Laughs . Syd was very difficult , we got that very frustrated feeling : Look , it 's your fucking career , mate . Why don 't you get your finger out and do something ? The guy was in trouble , and was a close friend for many years before then , so it really was the least one could do . 
 Upon the album 's release in January 1970 , Malcolm Jones was shocked by the substandard musicianship on the Gilmour and Waters @-@ produced songs : " I felt angry . It 's like dirty linen in public and very unnecessary and unkind " . Gilmour said : " Perhaps we were trying to show what Syd was really like . But perhaps we were trying to punish him " . Waters was more positive : " Syd is a genius " . 
 Barrett said " It 's quite nice but I 'd be very surprised if it did anything if I were to drop dead . I don 't think it would stand as my last statement . " 
 = = = = Barrett = = = = 
 The second album , Barrett , was recorded more sporadically than the first , with sessions taking place between February and July 1970 . The album was produced by David Gilmour , and featured Gilmour on bass guitar , Richard Wright on keyboard and Humble Pie drummer Jerry Shirley . The first two songs attempted were for Barrett to play and / or sing to an existing backing track . However , Gilmour thought they were losing the " Barrett @-@ ness " . One track ( " Rats " ) was originally recorded with Barrett on his own . That would later be overdubbed by musicians , despite the changing tempos . Shirley said of Barrett 's playing : " He would never play the same tune twice . Sometimes Syd couldn 't play anything that made sense ; other times what he 'd play was absolute magic . " At times Barrett , who experienced extreme synesthesia , would say : " Perhaps we could make the middle darker and maybe the end a bit middle <unk> . At the moment it 's too windy and icy " . 
 These sessions were happening while Pink Floyd had just begun to work on Atom Heart Mother . On various occasions , Barrett went to " spy " on the band as they recorded their album . 
 Wright said of the Barrett sessions : 
 Doing Syd 's record was interesting , but extremely difficult . Dave [ Gilmour ] and Roger did the first one ( The Madcap Laughs ) and Dave and myself did the second one . But by then it was just trying to help Syd any way we could , rather than worrying about getting the best guitar sound . You could forget about that ! It was just going into the studio and trying to get him to sing . 
 = = = = Performances = = = = 
 Despite the numerous recording dates for his solo albums , Barrett undertook very little musical activity between 1968 and 1972 outside the studio . On 24 February 1970 , he appeared on John Peel 's BBC radio programme Top Gear playing five songs — only one of which had been previously released . Three would be re @-@ recorded for the Barrett album , while the song " Two of a Kind " was a one @-@ off performance ( possibly written by Richard Wright ) . Barrett was accompanied on this session by Gilmour and Shirley who played bass and percussion , respectively . 
 Gilmour and Shirley also backed Barrett for his one and only live concert during this period . The gig took place on 6 June 1970 at the Olympia Exhibition Hall as part of a Music and Fashion Festival . The trio performed four songs , " Terrapin " , " Gigolo Aunt " , " Effervescing Elephant " and " Octopus " . Poor mixing left the vocals barely audible until part @-@ way through the last number . At the end of the fourth song , Barrett unexpectedly but politely put down his guitar and walked off the stage . The performance has been bootlegged . Barrett made one last appearance on BBC Radio , recording three songs at their studios on 16 February 1971 . All three came from the Barrett album . After this session , he took a hiatus from his music career that lasted more than a year , although in an extensive interview with Mick Rock and Rolling Stone in December , he discussed himself at length , showed off his new 12 @-@ string guitar , talked about touring with Jimi Hendrix and stated that he was frustrated in terms of his musical work because of his inability to find anyone good to play with . 
 = = = Later years ( 1972 – 2006 ) = = = 
 = = = = Stars and final recordings = = = = 
 In February 1972 , after a few guest spots in Cambridge with ex @-@ Pink Fairies member Twink on drums and Jack Monck on bass using the name The Last Minute Put Together Boogie Band ( backing visiting blues musician Eddie " Guitar " Burns and also featuring Henry Cow guitarist Fred Frith ) , the trio formed a short @-@ lived band called Stars . Though they were initially well received at gigs in the Dandelion coffee bar and the town 's Market Square , one of their gigs at the Corn Exchange in Cambridge with the MC5 proved to be disastrous . A few days after this final show , Twink recalled that Barrett stopped him on the street , showed him a scathing review of the gig they had played , and quit on the spot , despite having played at least one subsequent gig at the same venue supporting <unk> . 
 Free from his EMI contract on 9 May 1972 , Barrett signed a document that ended his association with Pink Floyd , and any financial interest in future recordings . Barrett attended an informal jazz and poetry performance by Pete Brown and former Cream bassist Jack Bruce in October 1973 . Brown arrived at the show late , and saw that Bruce was already onstage , along with " a guitarist I vaguely recognised " , playing the Horace Silver tune " Doodlin ' " . Later in the show , Brown read out a poem , which he dedicated to Syd , because , " he 's here in Cambridge , and he 's one of the best songwriters in the country " when , to his surprise , the guitar player from earlier in the show stood up and said , " No I 'm not " . By the end of 1973 , Barrett had returned to live in London , staying at various hotels and , in December of that year , settling in at Chelsea Cloisters . He had little contact with others , apart from his regular visits to his management 's offices to collect his royalties , and the occasional visit from his sister Rosemary . 
 In August 1974 , Jenner persuaded Barrett to return to Abbey Road Studios in hope of recording another album . According to John Leckie , who engineered these sessions , even at this point Syd still " looked like he did when he was younger .. long haired " . The sessions lasted three days and consisted of blues rhythm tracks with tentative and disjointed guitar overdubs . Barrett recorded 11 tracks , the only one of which to be titled was " If You Go , Don 't Be Slow " . Once again , Barrett withdrew from the music industry , but this time for good . He sold the rights to his solo albums back to the record label and moved into a London hotel . During this period , several attempts to employ him as a record producer ( including one by Jamie Reid on behalf of the Sex Pistols , and another by The Damned , who wanted him to produce their second album ) were all fruitless . 
 = = = = Withdrawal to Cambridge = = = = 
 In 1978 , when Barrett 's money ran out , he moved back to Cambridge to live with his mother . He returned to live in London again in 1982 , but lasted only a few weeks and soon returned to Cambridge for good . Barrett walked the 50 miles ( 80 km ) from London to Cambridge . Until his death , Barrett received royalties from his work with Pink Floyd from each compilation and some of the live and studio albums and singles that featured his songs ; Gilmour said that he " made sure the money got to [ Barrett ] . " 
 In 1996 , Barrett was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Pink Floyd , but he did not attend the ceremony . 
 According to a 2005 profile in the book Madcap by biographer and journalist Tim Willis , Barrett , who had reverted to using his original name of Roger , continued to live in his late mother 's semi @-@ detached home in Cambridge , and had returned to painting , creating large abstract canvases . He was also said to have been an avid gardener and his main point of contact with the outside world was his sister , Rosemary , who lived nearby . He was reclusive , and his physical health declined , as he suffered from stomach ulcers and type 2 diabetes . 
 Although Barrett had not appeared or spoken in public since the mid @-@ 1970s , time did little to diminish interest in his life and work . Reporters and fans still travelled to Cambridge to seek him out , despite his attempts to live a quiet life and public appeals from his family for people to leave him alone . Many photos of Barrett being harassed by paparazzi when walking or cycling from the 1980s until his death in 2006 , have been published in various media . Apparently , Barrett did not like being reminded about his musical career and the other members of Pink Floyd had no direct contact with him . However , he did visit his sister 's house in November 2001 to watch the BBC Omnibus documentary made about him – reportedly he found some of it " a bit noisy " , enjoyed seeing Mike Leonard of Leonard 's Lodgers again , calling him his " teacher " , and enjoyed hearing " See Emily Play " again . 
 Barrett made a final public acknowledgement of his musical past in 2002 , his first since the 1970s , when he autographed 320 copies of photographer Mick Rock 's book Psychedelic Renegades , which contained a number of photos of Barrett . Rock was perhaps the last person in the music industry with whom Barrett kept in contact . In 1971 , Rock conducted the final interview of Barrett before his retirement from the music industry a few years later , and Barrett subsequently turned up on Rock 's London doorstep " four , maybe five times " for a cup of tea and conversation through 1978 , before Barrett moved back to Cambridge . They had not spoken in more than twenty years when Rock approached Barrett to autograph his photography book , and Barrett uncharacteristically agreed . Having reverted to his birth name " Roger " from his stage name " Syd " many years before , he had autographed the book simply " Barrett . " 
 = = = = Death and aftermath = = = = 
 After suffering from diabetes for several years , Barrett died at home in Cambridge on 7 July 2006 , aged 60 . The cause of death was pancreatic cancer . The occupation on his death certificate was " retired musician " . He was cremated , with his ashes given to a family member or friend . In 2006 , his home in St. Margaret 's Square , Cambridge , was put on the market and reportedly attracted considerable interest . After over 100 showings , many by fans , it was sold to a French couple who bought it simply because they liked it ; reportedly they knew nothing about Barrett . On 28 November 2006 , Barrett 's other possessions were sold at an auction at <unk> auction house in Cambridge , raising £ 120 @,@ 000 for charity . Items sold included paintings , scrapbooks and everyday items that Barrett had decorated . NME produced a tribute issue to Barrett a week later with a photo of him on the cover . In an interview with The Sunday Times , Barrett 's sister revealed that he had written a book : 
 He read very deeply about the history of art and actually wrote an unpublished book about it , which I 'm too sad to read at the moment . But he found his own mind so absorbing that he didn 't want to be distracted . 
 In response to the news of Barrett 's death , fellow Pink Floyd bandmate David Gilmour said : 
 We are very sad to say that Roger Keith Barrett – Syd – has passed away . Do find time to play some of Syd ’ s songs and to remember him as the madcap genius who made us all smile with his wonderfully eccentric songs about bikes , gnomes and scarecrows . His career was painfully short , yet he touched more people than he could ever know . 
 According to local newspapers , Barrett left approximately £ 1 @.@ 7 million to his two brothers and two sisters . This sum was apparently largely acquired from royalties from Pink Floyd compilations and live recordings featuring songs he had written while with the band . A tribute concert called Games for May was held at the Barbican Centre , London on 10 May 2007 with Robyn Hitchcock , Captain Sensible , Damon Albarn , Chrissie Hynde , Kevin Ayers and his Pink Floyd bandmates performing . A series of events called The City Wakes was held in Cambridge in October 2008 to celebrate Barrett 's life , art and music . Barrett 's sister , Rosemary Breen , supported this , the first @-@ ever series of official events in memory of her brother . After the festival 's success , arts charity Escape Artists announced plans to create a centre in Cambridge , using art to help people suffering from mental health problems . A memorial bench has been placed in the Botanic Gardens in Cambridge and a more prominent tribute is planned in the city . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Wish You Were Here sessions = = = 
 Barrett had one noted reunion with the members of Pink Floyd , in 1975 during the recording sessions for Wish You Were Here . He attended the Abbey Road session unannounced , and watched the band record " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " — a song that happened to be about Barrett . By that time , the 29 @-@ year @-@ old Barrett had become quite overweight , had shaved off all of his hair ( including his eyebrows ) , and his ex @-@ bandmates did not at first recognise him . Barrett 's behaviour at the session was erratic ; he spent part of the session brushing his teeth . Roger Waters finally managed to ask him what he thought of the song and he simply said " sounds a bit old " . He briefly attended the reception for Gilmour 's wedding to Ginger that immediately followed the recording sessions ; however , he left early without saying goodbye . 
 Apart from a brief encounter between Waters and Barrett in Harrods a couple of years later ( during which , when Barrett saw Waters he ran outside , dropping his bags full of sweets in the process ) , this was the last time any member of Pink Floyd saw him . A reflection on the day appears in Nick Mason 's book Inside Out : A Personal History of Pink Floyd . A reference to this reunion also appears in the film The Wall , where the character Pink , played by Bob Geldof , shaves his body hair after having a mental breakdown , just as Barrett had . 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 In 1988 , EMI Records ( after constant pressure from Malcolm Jones ) released an album of Barrett 's studio out @-@ takes and previously unreleased material recorded from 1968 to 1970 under the title Opel . The disc was originally set to include the unreleased Barrett Pink Floyd songs " Scream Thy Last Scream " and " Vegetable Man " , which had been remixed for the album by Jones , but the band pulled two songs before Opel was finalised . In 1993 EMI issued another release , Crazy Diamond , a boxed set of all three albums , each with further out @-@ takes from his solo sessions that illustrated Barrett 's inability / refusal to play a song the same way twice . EMI also released The Best of Syd Barrett : Wouldn 't You Miss Me ? in the UK on 16 April 2001 and in the US on 11 September 2001 . This was the first time his song " Bob Dylan Blues " was officially released , taken from a demo tape that Gilmour had kept after an early 1970s session . Gilmour kept the tape , which also contains the unreleased " Living Alone " from the Barrett sessions . In October 2010 Harvest / EMI and Capitol Records released An Introduction to Syd Barrett — a collection of both his Pink Floyd and remastered solo work . The 2010 compilation An Introduction to Syd Barrett includes the downloadable bonus track " <unk> " , a 20 @-@ minute track recorded at one of Syd 's earliest solo sessions , in May 1968 . In 2011 , it was announced that a vinyl double album version would be issued for Record Store Day . 
 Bootleg editions of Barrett 's live and solo material exist . For years the " off air " recordings of the BBC sessions with Barrett 's Pink Floyd circulated , until an engineer who had taken a tape of the early Pink Floyd gave it back to the BBC — which played it during a tribute to John Peel on their website . During this tribute , the first Peel programme ( Top Gear ) was aired in its entirety . This show featured the 1967 live versions of " Flaming " , " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " , and a brief 90 @-@ second snippet of the instrumental " Reaction in G " . In 2012 , engineer Andy Jackson said he had found " a huge box of assorted tapes " , in Mason 's possession , containing versions of R & B songs that ( the Barrett @-@ era ) Pink Floyd played in their early years . 
 = = = Creative impact and technical innovation = = = 
 Barrett wrote most of Pink Floyd 's early material . He was also an innovative guitarist , using extended techniques and exploring the musical and sonic possibilities of dissonance , distortion , feedback , the echo machine , tapes and other effects ; his experimentation was partly inspired by free improvisation guitarist Keith Rowe of the group AMM , active at the time in London . One of Barrett 's trademarks was playing his guitar through an old echo box while sliding a Zippo lighter up and down the fret @-@ board to create the mysterious , otherworldly sounds that became associated with the group . Barrett was known to have used Binson delay units to achieve his trademark echo sounds . <unk> Allen , founder member of Soft Machine and Gong , has cited Barrett 's use of slide guitar with echo as a key inspiration for his own " glissando guitar " style . 
 His recordings both with Pink Floyd and in later solo albums were delivered with a strongly British @-@ accented vocal delivery , specifically that of southern @-@ England . He was described by Guardian writer Nick Kent as having a " quintessential English style of vocal projection " . David Bowie was quoted as saying that Barrett , along with Anthony Newley , was the first person he had heard sing rock or pop music with a British accent . 
 Barrett 's free @-@ form sequences of " sonic carpets " pioneered a new way to play the rock guitar . He played several different guitars during his tenure , including an old Harmony <unk> electric , a Harmony acoustic , a Fender acoustic , a single @-@ coil Danelectro 59 DC , several different Fender <unk> and a white Fender Stratocaster in late 1967 . A silver Fender Esquire with mirrored discs glued to the body was the guitar he was most often associated with and the guitar he " felt most close to . " 
 = = = Musical and pop culture influence = = = 
 Many artists have acknowledged Barrett 's influence on their work . Paul McCartney , Pete Townshend , Blur , Kevin Ayers , Gong , Marc Bolan , Tangerine Dream , Julian Cope and David Bowie were inspired by Barrett ; Jimmy Page , Brian Eno , and The Damned all expressed interest in working with him at some point during the 1970s . Bowie recorded a cover of " See Emily Play " on his 1973 album Pin Ups . The track " Grass " , from XTC 's album <unk> was influenced when Andy Partridge let fellow band member Colin Moulding borrow his Barrett records . Robyn Hitchcock 's career was dedicated to being Barrett @-@ esque ; he even played " Dominoes " for the 2001 BBC documentary The Pink Floyd and Syd Barrett Story . 
 Barrett 's decline had a profound effect on Roger Waters ' songwriting , and the theme of mental illness permeated Pink Floyd 's later albums , particularly 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon and 1975 's Wish You Were Here which was a deliberate and affectionate tribute to Barrett , the song , " Shine on You Crazy Diamond " , and also 1979 's The Wall . " Wish You Were Here " , partly about Barrett , borrows imagery of a " steel rail " from Barrett 's solo song , " If It 's in You , " from The Madcap Laughs album . 
 In 1987 , an album of Barrett cover songs called Beyond the Wildwood was released . The album was a collection of cover songs from Barrett 's tenure with Pink Floyd and from his solo career . Artists appearing were UK and US indie bands including The <unk> , Opal , The Soup Dragons , and <unk> . 
 Other artists who have written tributes to Barrett include his contemporary Kevin Ayers , who wrote " O Wot a Dream " in his honour ( Barrett provided guitar to an early version of Ayers ' song " Religious Experience : Singing a Song in the Morning " ) . Robyn Hitchcock has covered many of his songs live and on record and paid homage to his forebear with the song " ( Feels Like ) 1974 " . Phish covered " Bike " , " No Good Trying " , " Love You " , " Baby Lemonade " and " Terrapin " . The Television Personalities ' single " I Know Where Syd Barrett Lives " from their 1981 album And Don 't the Kids Love It is another tribute . In 2008 , The Trash Can <unk> released a single in tribute to the life and work of Syd Barrett called " Oranges and Apples " , from their 2009 album In the Music . Proceeds from the single go to the Syd Barrett Trust in support of arts in mental health . 
 Johnny Depp showed interest in a biographical film based on Barrett 's life . Barrett is portrayed briefly in the opening scene of Tom Stoppard 's play Rock ' n ' Roll ( 2006 ) , performing " Golden Hair " . His life and music , including the disastrous Cambridge Corn Exchange concert and his later reclusive lifestyle , are a recurring motif in the work . Barrett died during the play 's run in London . 
 = = = Statue = = = 
 In October 2015 , a proposed statue of Barrett to be erected in the foyer of Cambridge Corn Exchange was announced . With £ 10 @,@ 000 funded by Cambridge City Council , the unveiling is planned for 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 There has been much speculation concerning Barrett 's psychological well @-@ being . His family have denied that he suffered from mental illness , ( despite displaying an almost textbook case of schizophrenia ) , but in a 2016 interview , his sister <unk> Breen said that his mind was brilliant , bordering on that seen in <unk> Syndrome . Barrett 's use of psychedelic drugs , especially LSD , during the 1960s is well documented , and there were theories he subsequently suffered from schizophrenia . Rick Wright asserts that Syd 's problems stemmed from a massive overdose of acid , as the change in his personality and behavior came on quite suddenly . However , Roger Waters maintains that Syd suffered " without a doubt " from schizophrenia and in an article published in 2006 , in response to notions that Barrett 's problems came from the drug , and Gilmour was quoted as saying : 
 In my opinion , his nervous breakdown would have happened anyway . It was a deep @-@ rooted thing . But I 'll say the psychedelic experience might well have acted as a catalyst . Still , I just don 't think he could deal with the vision of success and all the things that went with it . " 
 Many stories of Barrett 's erratic behaviour off stage as well as on are also well @-@ documented . In Saucerful of Secrets : The Pink Floyd Odyssey , author Nicholas Schaffner interviewed people who knew Barrett before and during his Pink Floyd days . These included friends Peter and Susan Wynne @-@ Wilson , artist Duggie Fields ( with whom Barrett shared a flat during the late 1960s ) , June Bolan and Storm Thorgerson , among others . 
 " For June Bolan , the alarm bells began to sound only when Syd kept his girlfriend under lock and key for three days , occasionally shoving a ration of biscuits under the door . " A claim of cruelty against Barrett committed by the groupies and hangers @-@ on who frequented his apartment during this period was described by writer and critic Jonathan Meades . " I went [ to Barrett 's flat ] to see Harry and there was this terrible noise . It sounded like heating pipes shaking . I said , ' What 's up ? ' and he sort of giggled and said , ' That 's Syd having a bad trip . We put him in the linen cupboard ' " . Storm Thorgerson responded to this claim by stating " I do not remember locking Syd up in a cupboard . It sounds to me like pure fantasy , like Jonathan Meades was on dope himself . " Other friends assert that Barrett 's infamous flatmates , " Mad Jock " and " Mad Sue , " believed that acid held all the answers and thought of Barrett as a genius or " god , " and were spiking his morning coffee with LSD every day without his knowledge , leaving him in a never @-@ ending trip . He was later rescued from that flat by friends and moved elsewhere , but his erratic behavior continued . Watkinson and Anderson included quotes from a story told to them by Thorgerson that underscored how volatile Barrett could be . " On one occasion , I had to pull him off Lindsay ( Barrett 's girlfriend at the time ) because he was beating her over the head with a mandolin " . On one occasion , Barrett threw a woman called Gilly across the room , because she refused to go to Gilmour 's house . These strange behaviors contradicted Barrett 's usually gentle nature . According to Gilmour in an interview with Nick Kent , the other members of Pink Floyd approached psychiatrist R. D. Laing with the ' Barrett problem ' . After hearing a tape of a Barrett conversation , Laing declared him " incurable " . 
 After Barrett died , his sister Rosemary insisted that Barrett neither suffered from mental illness nor received treatment for it at any time since they resumed regular contact in the 1980s . She allowed that he did spend some time in a private " home for lost souls " — <unk> in Essex — but claimed there was no formal therapy programme there . Some years later , Barrett apparently agreed to sessions with a psychiatrist at <unk> psychiatric hospital in Cambridge , but Breen claimed that neither medication nor therapy was considered appropriate . His sister denied he was a recluse or that he was vague about his past : 
 Roger may have been a bit selfish — or rather self @-@ absorbed — but when people called him a recluse they were really only projecting their own disappointment . He knew what they wanted , but he wasn 't willing to give it to them . 
 Barrett , she said , took up photography and sometimes they went to the seaside together . She also said he took a keen interest in art and horticulture and continued to devote himself to painting : 
 Quite often he took the train on his own to London to look at the major art collections — and he loved flowers . He made regular trips to the Botanic Gardens and to the dahlias at Anglesey Abbey , near Lode . But of course , his passion was his painting . 
 Despite his relationships with various women such as Libby <unk> , Lindsay Korner , Jenny Spires and Iggy the Eskimo ; Barrett never married or had children , he was briefly engaged to marry Gayla Pinion and planned to relocate to Oxford , but the marriage never happened . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The Madcap Laughs ( 1970 ) 
 Barrett ( 1970 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Syd Barrett 's First Trip ( 1966 ) directed by Nigel <unk> @-@ Gordon 
 London ' 66 – ' 67 ( 1967 ) 
 Tonite Lets All Make Love in London ( 1967 ) 
 The Pink Floyd and Syd Barrett Story ( 2003 ) 
 = The Prestige ( film ) = 
 The Prestige is a 2006 mystery thriller drama film directed by Christopher Nolan , from a screenplay adapted by Nolan and his brother Jonathan from Christopher Priest 's 1995 World Fantasy Award @-@ winning novel of the same name . The story follows Robert Angier and Alfred Borden , rival stage magicians in London at the end of the 19th century . Obsessed with creating the best stage illusion , they engage in competitive one @-@ upmanship with tragic results . 
 The American @-@ British co @-@ production features Hugh Jackman as Robert Angier , Christian Bale as Alfred Borden , and David Bowie as Nikola Tesla . It also stars Michael Caine , Scarlett Johansson , Piper Perabo , Andy Serkis , and Rebecca Hall . The film reunites Nolan with actors Bale and Caine from Batman Begins , and returning cinematographer Wally Pfister , production designer Nathan Crowley , film score composer David Julyan , and editor Lee Smith . 
 A co @-@ production between Touchstone Pictures and Warner Bros. Pictures , the film was released on October 20 , 2006 , receiving positive reviews and strong box office results , and received Academy Award nominations for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction . Along with The Illusionist and Scoop , The Prestige was one of three films in 2006 to explore the world of stage magicians . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In early 1900s London , magician Robert Angier ( Hugh Jackman ) performs his trick , ' The Real Transported Man ' to a sold out theater . A disguised Alfred Borden ( Christian Bale ) sneaks under the stage . At the trick 's culmination , Angier drops through a trap door and into a waiting water tank , where Borden watches him drown . 
 At Borden 's murder trial , Angier 's ingénieur , John Cutter , testifies that he believes Borden pushed the water tank under the trap door to catch and kill Angier during his Transported Man trick . In prison , Borden is visited by an agent of Lord Caldlow , who offers to care for Borden 's daughter Jess in exchange for all of Borden 's secrets . As a show of good faith , Caldlow gives Borden a copy of Angier 's diary , which he begins reading . 
 In flashback , Angier and Borden work as <unk> for " Milton the Magician , " ( Ricky Jay ) alongside John Cutter ( Michael Caine ) then Milton 's ingénieur , and Julia ( Piper Perabo ) , Milton 's assistant and Angier 's wife . Milton 's famous trick is the water tank trick , where Julia is bound in ropes and dropped in a water tank , from which she frees herself and escapes . Borden , with Julia 's consent , ties her hands with a more secure , yet difficult knot . Julia fails to slip the knot and drowns , infuriating Angier and fueling his deep @-@ seated grudge against Borden . 
 Borden launches a solo magic career and hires Fallon , a silent , mysterious man as his ingénieur . Borden courts and eventually marries a woman named Sarah ( Rebecca Hall ) , who becomes pregnant . At his first show , Borden 's bullet catch trick is sabotaged by Angier , destroying two of Borden 's fingers . Angier launches his own magic career , hiring Olivia <unk> ( Scarlett Johansson ) as his assistant and Cutter as his ingénieur . During the finale of Angier 's show , a disguised Borden sabotages Angier 's bird cage act , which <unk> an audience member and ruins Angier 's reputation . 
 Angier decides to steal Borden 's fantastic , yet understated , trick , " The Transported Man , " where Borden instantly travels between two wardrobes on opposite ends of a stage . Cutter and Olivia groom Root , an out @-@ of @-@ work actor , into a " double " for Angier , mimicking his appearance and mannerisms . ' The New Transported Man ' is a huge success , but Angier is displeased , as he ends the trick hidden under the stage while Root basks in the applause . Obsessed with finding Borden 's secret , Angier sends Olivia to spy on him . Instead , Olivia revamps Borden 's act , making it more elaborate and successful . Borden sabotages Angier 's show , humiliating him and leaving him with a permanent limp . Angier confronts Olivia , who confesses that she is in love with Borden , before giving Angier a copy of Borden 's diary , its contents scrambled by a coded cipher . Angier and Cutter kidnap Fallon and extort from Borden his codeword , " Tesla , " which Borden claims is also his secret . As Angier leaves for America to find Tesla , Borden begins an affair with Olivia . Sarah becomes increasingly disturbed with Borden 's emerging fickle and contradictory nature and succumbs to depression and alcoholism , committing suicide . 
 Angier meets scientist Nikola Tesla ( David Bowie ) and asks him to build him the machine he built for Borden . While waiting for Tesla to finish , Angier fully deciphers Borden 's diary , which he discovers to be fraudulent : Borden confesses that Tesla has nothing to do with Borden 's trick and how Borden ordered Olivia to give Angier the diary . Angier confronts Tesla , who admits to never building any teleporting device for Borden , but has successfully built a replicating machine for Angier , capable of reproducing animate and inanimate objects a distance from the original machine . Tesla departs , advising Angier to destroy the machine . 
 In London , Angier debuts The Real Transported Man where he vanishes within the machine 's electrical field and appears atop the balcony at the back of the hall . Baffled by the trick 's success , Borden sneaks backstage to find Angier 's secret , only to witness Angier drop through a trap door and plunge into a waiting water tank , where he drowns . Cutter stumbles upon the scene , and Borden is arrested . 
 In the present , Borden is found guilty and sentenced to death . He agrees to Lord Caldlow 's terms , and writes down the secrets to all his tricks . When Caldlow visits , Borden recognizes him as Angier . Baffled by Angier 's return , Borden begs for his life , but Angier ignores Borden 's pleas . Borden is hanged and dies . Cutter learns that Caldlow has bought Angier 's machine and visits him to plead for its destruction . He discovers that Caldlow is Angier , and faked his death to kill Borden in revenge for Julia . Cutter agrees to assist Angier in disposing of his machine at a private theater . As the two work , Cutter discovers numerous water tanks containing duplicates of Angier : Angier used the machine to create clones of himself atop the balcony , while unbeknownst to anyone , the original Angier would fall through the trap door to be drowned in the tanks under the stage . The night that Borden ventured backstage , Angier 's clone disappeared into the crowd , making it appear Borden had killed him under the stage . 
 Disgusted by Angie 's framing for Borden and adopting Jess , Cutter leaves the theater , nodding casually to a man about to enter . The man fatally shoots Angier , and reveals himself as Borden . Angier realises that " Alfred Borden " is actually an identity assumed by twin brothers , Albert and Frederick , who take turns being Borden and Fallon , each living half of Alfred 's life to prepare for their " Transported Man " trick , right down to each having separate spouses , Sarah and Olivia . As Angier dies , Albert leaves to pick up Jess at Cutter 's workshop , exchanging a silent goodbye and leaving . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hugh Jackman as Robert Angier / Lord Caldlow ( The Great Danton ) , an aristocratic magician . After reading the script , Jackman expressed interest in playing the part . Christopher Nolan discovered Jackman was interested in the script , and after meeting him , saw that Jackman possessed the qualities of stage showmanship that Nolan was looking for in the role of Angier . Nolan explained that Angier had a " wonderful understanding of the interaction between a performer and a live audience " , a quality he believed that Jackman had . Nolan said that Jackman " has the great depth as an actor that hasn 't really been explored . People haven 't had the chance to really see what he can do as an actor , and this is a character that would let him do that . " Jackman based his portrayal of Angier on 1950s @-@ era American magician Channing Pollock . Jackman also portrays Gerald Root , an alcoholic double used for Angier 's New Transported Man . 
 Christian Bale as Alfred Borden ( The Professor ) / Fallon , a working class magician . Christian Bale expressed interest in playing the part , and was cast after Jackman . Although Nolan had previously cast Bale as Batman in Batman Begins , he did not consider Bale for the part of Borden until Bale contacted him about the script . Nolan said that Bale was " exactly right " for the part of Borden , and that it was " unthinkable " for anyone else to play the part . Nolan described Bale as " terrific to work with " , who " takes what he does very , very seriously " . Nolan suggested that the actors should not read the book , but Bale ignored his advice . 
 Michael Caine as John Cutter , the stage engineer ( <unk> ) who works with Angier and Borden . Caine had previously collaborated with Nolan and Bale in Batman Begins . Nolan said that even though it felt like the character of Cutter was written for Caine , it was not . Nolan noted that the character was written " before I 'd ever met " Caine . Caine describes Cutter as " a teacher , a father and a guide to Angier " . Caine , in trying to create Cutter 's nuanced portrait , altered his voice and posture . Nolan later said that " Michael Caine ’ s character really becomes something of the heart of the film . He has a wonderful warmth and emotion to him that draws you into the story and allows you to have a point of view on these characters without judging them too harshly . " 
 Piper Perabo as Julia McCullough , Milton the Magician 's assistant and Angier 's wife . 
 Rebecca Hall as Sarah Borden , Borden 's wife . Hall had to relocate from North London to Los Angeles in order to shoot the film , although the film itself takes place in London . Hall said that she was " starstruck just to be involved in [ the film ] " . 
 Scarlett Johansson as Olivia <unk> , Angier 's assistant and lover . Nolan said that he was " very keen " for Johansson to play the role , and when he met with her to discuss it , " she just loved the character " . Johansson praised Nolan 's directing methods , saying that she " loved working with [ him ] " ; he was " incredibly focused and driven and involved , and really involved in the performance in every aspect . " 
 David Bowie as Nikola Tesla , the real @-@ life inventor who creates a teleportation device for Angier . For the role of Nikola Tesla , Nolan wanted someone who was not necessarily a film star , but was " extraordinarily charismatic " . Nolan said that " David Bowie was really the only guy I had in mind to play Tesla because his function in the story is a small but very important role " . Nolan contacted Bowie , who initially turned down the part . A lifelong fan , Nolan flew out to New York to pitch the role to Bowie in person , telling him no one else could possibly play the part ; Bowie accepted after a few minutes . 
 Andy Serkis as Mr. Alley , Tesla 's assistant . Serkis said that he played his character with the belief that he was " once a corporation man who got excited by this maverick , Tesla , so jumped ship and went with the maverick " . Serkis described his character as a " gatekeeper " , a " conman " , and " a mirror image of Michael Caine ’ s character . " Serkis , a big fan of Bowie , said that he was enjoyable to work with , describing him as " very unassuming , very down to earth ... very at ease with himself and funny . " 
 Ricky Jay as Milton the Magician , an older magician who employs Borden and Angier at the beginning of their careers . Jay and Michael Weber trained Jackman and Bale for their roles with brief instruction in various stage illusions . The magicians gave the actors limited information , allowing them to know enough to pull off a scene . 
 Roger Rees as Owens , a solicitor working for Angier / Lord Caldlow . 
 W. Morgan Sheppard as Merrit , the owner of a theatre where Angier initially performs . 
 Daniel Davis as the judge presiding over Borden 's trial . 
 = = Production = = 
 Julian Jarrold 's and Sam Mendes ' producer approached Christopher Priest for an adaptation of his novel The Prestige . Priest was impressed with Nolan 's films Following and Memento , and subsequently , producer Valerie Dean brought the book to Nolan 's attention . In October 2000 , Nolan traveled to the United Kingdom to publicize Memento , as Newmarket Films was having difficulty finding a United States distributor . While in London , Nolan read Priest 's book and shared the story with his brother while walking around in Highgate ( a location later featured in the scene where Angier ransoms Borden 's ingénieur in Highgate Cemetery ) . The development process for The Prestige began as a reversal of their earlier collaboration : Jonathan Nolan had pitched his initial story for Memento to his brother during a road trip . 
 A year later , the option on the book became available and was purchased by Aaron Ryder of Newmarket Films . In late 2001 , Nolan became busy with the post @-@ production of Insomnia , and asked his brother Jonathan to help work on the script . The writing process was a long collaboration between the Nolan brothers , occurring intermittently over a period of five years . In the script , the Nolans emphasized the magic of the story through the dramatic narrative , playing down the visual depiction of stage magic . The three @-@ act screenplay was deliberately structured around the three elements of the film 's illusion : the pledge , the turn , and the prestige . " It took a long time to figure out how to achieve cinematic versions of the very literary devices that drive the intrigue of the story , " Christopher Nolan told Variety : " The shifting points of view , the idea of journals within journals and stories within stories . Finding the cinematic equivalents of those literary devices was very complex . " Although the film is thematically faithful to the novel , two major changes were made to the plot structure during the adaptation process : the novel 's spiritualism subplot was removed , and the modern @-@ day frame story was replaced with Borden 's wait for the gallows . Priest approved of the adaptation , describing it as " an extraordinary and brilliant script , a fascinating adaptation of my novel . " 
 In early 2003 , Nolan planned to direct the film before the production of Batman Begins accelerated . Following the release of Batman Begins , Nolan started up the project again , negotiating with Bale and Jackman in October 2005 . While the screenplay was still being written , production designer Nathan Crowley began the set design process in Nolan 's garage , employing a " visual script " consisting of scale models , images , drawings , and notes . Jonathan and Christopher Nolan finished the final shooting draft on January 13 , 2006 , and began production three days later on January 16 . Filming ended on April 9 . 
 Crowley and his crew searched Los Angeles for almost seventy locations that resembled fin de siècle London . Jonathan Nolan visited Colorado Springs to research Nikola Tesla and based the electric bulb scene on actual experiments conducted by Tesla . Nathan Crowley helped design the scene for Tesla 's invention ; It was shot in the parking lot of the Mount Wilson Observatory . Influenced by a " Victorian modernist aesthetic , " Crowley chose four locations in the Broadway theater district in downtown Los Angeles for the film 's stage magic performances : the Los Angeles Theatre , the Palace Theatre , the Los Angeles Belasco , and the Tower Theatre . Crowley also turned a portion of the Universal back lot into Victorian London . 
 Osgood Castle in Colorado was used as a location . 
 Nolan built only one set for the film , an " under @-@ the @-@ stage section that houses the machinery that makes the larger illusions work , " preferring to simply dress various Los Angeles locations and sound stages to stand in for Colorado and Victorian England . In contrast to most period pieces , Nolan kept up the quick pace of production by shooting with handheld cameras , and refrained from using artificial lighting in some scenes , relying instead on natural light on location . Costume designer Joan Bergin chose attractive , modern Victorian fashions for Scarlett Johansson ; cinematographer Wally Pfister captured the mood with soft earth tones as white and black colors provided background contrasts , bringing actors ' faces to the foreground . 
 Editing , scoring and mixing finished on September 22 , 2006 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The rivalry between Borden and Angier dominates the film . Obsession , secrecy , and sacrifice fuel the battle , as both magicians contribute their fair share to a deadly duel of one @-@ upmanship , with disastrous results . Angier 's obsession with beating Borden costs him a great deal of money and Cutter 's friendship , while providing him with a collection of his own suicide victims ; Borden 's obsession with maintaining the secrecy of his twin leads Sarah to question their relationship eventually resulting in her suicide when she suspects the truth . Angier and one of the twins both lose Olivia 's love because of their inhumanity . Finally , Borden is hanged and the last copy of Angier shot . Their struggle is also expressed through class warfare : Borden as The Professor , a working @-@ class magician who gets his hands dirty , versus Angier as The Great Danton , a classy , elitist showman whose accent makes him appear American . Film critic Matt Brunson claimed that a complex theme of duality is exemplified by Angier and Borden , that the film chooses not to depict either magician as good or evil . 
 Angier 's theft of Borden 's teleportation illusion in the film echoes many real @-@ world examples of stolen tricks among magicians . Outside the film , similar rivalries include magicians John Nevil Maskelyne and Harry <unk> 's dispute over a levitation illusion . Gary Westfahl of Locus Online also notes a " new proclivity for mayhem " in the film over the novel , citing the murder / suicide disposition of Angier 's duplicates and intensified violent acts of revenge and counter @-@ revenge . This " relates to a more general alteration in the events and tone of the film " rather than significantly changing the underlying themes . 
 Nor is this theme of cutthroat competition limited to prestidigitation : the script incorporates the popular notion that Nikola Tesla and Thomas Edison were directly engaged in the War of Currents , a rivalry over electrical standards , which appears in the film in parallel to Borden and Angier 's competition for magical supremacy . In the book , Tesla and Edison serve as foils for Borden and Angier , respectively . 
 Den Shewman of Creative Screenwriting says the film asks how far one would go to devote oneself to an art . The character of Chung Ling Soo , according to Shewman , is a metaphor for this theme . Film critic Alex Manugian refers to this theme as the " meaning of commitment . " For example , Soo 's pretense of being slow and feeble misdirects his audience from noticing the physical strength required to perform the goldfish bowl trick , but the cost of maintaining this illusion is the sacrifice of individuality : Soo 's true appearance and freedom to act naturally are consciously suppressed in his ceaseless dedication to the art of magic . 
 Nicolas Rapold of Film Comment addresses the points raised by Shewman and Manugian in terms of the film 's " refracted take on Romanticism " : 
 Angier 's technological solution — which suggests art as sacrifice , a phoenix @-@ like death of the self — and Borden 's more meat @-@ and @-@ potatoes form of stagecraft embody the divide between the artist and the social being . 
 For Manugian the central theme is " obsession , " but he also notes the supporting themes of the " nature of deceit " and " science as magic . " Manugian criticizes the Nolans for trying to " ram too many themes into the story . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Touchstone Pictures opted to move the release date up a week , from the original October 27 , to October 20 , 2006 . The film earned $ 14 @.@ 8 million on opening weekend in the United States , debuting at # 1 . It grossed $ 109 million , including $ 53 million from the United States . The film received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Art Direction ( Nathan Crowley and Julie <unk> ) and the Academy Award for Best Cinematography ( Wally Pfister ) , as well as a nomination for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form in 2007 . Along with The Illusionist and Scoop ( also starring Jackman and Johansson ) , The Prestige was one of three films in 2006 to explore the world of stage magicians . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Prestige received largely positive reviews from film critics . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 76 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , with an average score of 7 @.@ 1 / 10 , based upon a sample of 179 reviews . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 66 , based on 36 reviews . Claudia Puig of USA Today described the film as " one of the most innovative , twisting , turning art films of the past decade . " Drew McWeeny gave the film a glowing review , saying it demands repeat viewing , with Peter Travers of Rolling Stone agreeing . Richard Roeper and guest critic A.O. Scott gave the film a " two thumbs up " rating . Todd Gilchrist of IGN applauded the performances of Bale and Jackman whilst praising Nolan for making " this complex story as easily understandable and effective as he made the outwardly straightforward comic book adaptation ( Batman Begins ) dense and sophisticated ... any truly great performance is almost as much showmanship as it is actual talent , and Nolan possesses both in spades . " CNN.com and Village Voice film critic Tom Charity listed it amongst his best films of 2006 . Philip French of The Observer recommended the film , comparing the rivalry between the two main characters to that of Mozart and Salieri in the highly acclaimed Amadeus . 
 On the other hand , Dennis Harvey of Variety criticized the film as gimmicky , though he felt the cast did well in underwritten roles . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter felt that characters " ... are little more than sketches . Remove their obsessions , and the two magicians have little personality . " Nonetheless , the two reviewers praised David Bowie as Tesla , as well as the production values and cinematography . On a simpler note , Emanuel Levy has said : " Whether viewers perceive The Prestige as intricately complex or just unnecessarily complicated would depend to a large degree on their willingness to suspend disbelief for two hours . " He gave the film a B grade . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four , describing the revelation at the end a " fundamental flaw " and a " cheat . " He wrote , " The pledge of Nolan 's The Prestige is that the film , having been metaphorically sawed in two , will be restored ; it fails when it cheats , as , for example , if the whole woman produced on the stage were not the same one so unfortunately cut in two . " R.J. Carter of The Trades felt , " I love a good science fiction story ; just tell me in advance . " He gave the film a B- . Christopher Priest , who wrote the novel the film is based on , saw it three times as of January 5 , 2007 , and his reaction was " ' Well , holy shit . ' I was thinking , ' God , I like that , ' and ' Oh , I wish I 'd thought of that . ' " 
 In 2009 , The A.V. Club included The Prestige in their best films of the decade list . The film was included in American Cinematographer 's " Best @-@ Shot Film of 1998 @-@ 2008 " list , ranking at 36 . More than 17 @,@ 000 people around the world participated in the final vote . As with much of Nolan 's work , The Prestige is rated highly on IMDb ; the film holds an average rating of 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , ranking it # 51 on the site 's top 250 films . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score was written by English musician and composer David Julyan . Julyan had previously collaborated with director Christopher Nolan on Following , Memento and Insomnia . Following the film 's narrative , the soundtrack had three sections : the Pledge , the Turn , and the Prestige . 
 = = = = Track listing = = = = 
 All music composed by David Julyan . 
 Some critics were disappointed with the score , acknowledging that while it worked within the context of the film , it was not enjoyable by itself . Jonathan Jarry of SoundtrackNet described the score as " merely functional , " establishing the atmosphere of dread but never taking over . Although the reviewer was interested with the score 's notion , Jarry found the execution was " extremely disappointing . " 
 Christopher Coleman of Tracksounds felt that though it was " ... a perfectly fitting score , " it was completely overwhelmed by the film , and totally unnoticed at times . Christian Clemmensen of Filmtracks recommended the soundtrack for those who enjoyed Julyan 's work on the film , and noted that it was not for those who expected " any semblance of intellect or enchantment in the score to match the story of the film . " Clemmensen called the score lifeless , " constructed on a bed of simplistic string chords and dull electronic soundscapes . " 
 The song " Analyse " by Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke is played over the credits . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Region 1 disc is by Buena Vista Home Entertainment , and was released on February 20 , 2007 , and is available on DVD and BD formats . The Warner Bros. Region 2 DVD was released on March 12 , 2007 . It is also available in both BD and <unk> HD DVD in Europe ( before HD DVD was cancelled ) . Special features are minimal , with the documentary Director 's Notebook : The Prestige – Five Making @-@ of <unk> , running roughly twenty minutes combined , an art gallery and the trailer . Nolan did not contribute to a commentary as he felt the film primarily relied on an audience 's reaction and did not want to remove the mystery from the story . 
 = 2012 United States federal budget = 
 The 2012 United States federal budget was the budget to fund government operations for the fiscal year 2012 , which lasted from October 1 , 2011 through September 30 , 2012 . The original spending request was issued by President Barack Obama in February 2011 . That April , the Republican @-@ held House of Representatives announced a competing plan , The Path to Prosperity , emboldened by a major victory in the 2010 Congressional elections associated with the Tea Party movement . The budget plans were both intended to focus on deficit reduction , but differed in their changes to taxation , entitlement programs , defense spending , and research funding . 
 The House resolution did not pass the Senate , nor did the Senate pass a resolution of their own , so there was no 2012 budget of record . The actual appropriations bills for Fiscal Year 2012 included four continuing resolutions and three full @-@ year appropriations bills enacted in November and December 2011 , in accordance with the United States budget process . These appropriations were greatly affected by the Budget Control Act of 2011 , passed in August 2011 as a resolution to the debt @-@ ceiling crisis ; it mandated budget cuts over a ten @-@ year period beginning with Fiscal Year 2012 . 
 In addition , legislation was passed to extend a cut in the Social Security payroll tax for the entirety of calendar year 2012 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 2010 , President Obama formed the bipartisan Bowles – Simpson Commission to recommend steps that could be taken to reduce future budget deficits . The commission released its report on November 10 , 2010 , which recommended deep domestic and military spending cuts , reforming the tax system by eliminating many tax breaks in return for lower overall rates , and reducing benefits for Social Security and Medicare . The plan did not receive the supermajority vote within the commission which it needed to be directly sent to Congress , and portions of the plan were rejected by both parties . 
 = = Budget proposals = = 
 The Obama administration proposed its 2012 budget on February 14 , 2011 . It aimed to reduce annual deficits to more sustainable levels by making selective cuts in spending , while increasing support in specific areas such as education and clean energy to foster long @-@ term economic growth . The plan did not contain specific proposals to rein in spending on entitlement programs such as Medicare , Medicaid , and Social Security , which were expected to make up much of the increase in the deficit in future years . The budget represented a shift from the Obama administration 's strategy in previous years of using increased government spending , such as the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , to combat the late 2000s recession . The 2012 budget plan was instead projected to reduce deficits by $ 1 @.@ 1 trillion over the next ten years . Republicans criticized the plan for not going far enough to reduce future deficits . 
 A competing plan , called The Path to Prosperity , was announced by House Republicans , led by House Budget Committee chairman Paul Ryan , on April 5 , 2011 . This plan would cut $ 5 @.@ 8 trillion in spending over ten years , but would also reduce tax income by $ 4 @.@ 2 trillion below current projections . The plan would make no further reduction in defense spending beyond the Obama administration 's plan , but would make major changes to Medicare , Medicaid , and Social Security , which was expected to pass more of the cost of these programs onto individuals . It would also cut energy research and other applied research and development . This plan was criticized by Democrats for disproportionately cutting programs which benefit the disadvantaged and stifling innovation , while not cutting defense spending further and containing deep tax cuts . The House Republican plan was defeated in the Senate by a margin of 40 – 57 votes on May 25 , 2011 , the same day that the Obama budget was also defeated . 
 In response to the Republican plan and a recent deal on the 2011 budget , President Obama on April 13 , 2011 presented an alternative plan in a major policy speech . This new plan would cut deficits by $ 4 trillion over 12 years through a combination of broad spending cuts and tax increases , including the expiration of the Bush tax cuts for incomes over $ 200 @,@ 000 and proposed a cap on increases in Medicare and Medicaid spending , to be paid for by individuals . Obama criticized the Republican plan for enriching the wealthy through tax cuts while placing a greater economic burden on the elderly through Medicare cuts . Obama 's plan was criticized by Republicans for its large cuts in defense spending and for its lack of specific detail . On June 23 , at a hearing of the Budget Committee , CBO director Douglas Elmendorf was asked what his agency made of the proposals in that presidential address . “ We don ’ t estimate speeches , ” he said . “ We need much more specificity than was provided in that speech . " A motion to proceed on a Republican @-@ sponsored bill meant to represent the original Obama administration budget proposal was defeated in the Senate by a margin of 0 – 97 votes on May 25 , 2011 ; the lack of Democratic support was said to have been because the original budget had been superseded by Obama 's April speech . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 = = = Implications of debt limit deal = = = 
 A controversy arose in July 2011 over the raising of the federal debt limit , which was needed to prevent a default by the United States government . Republicans in Congress demanded spending cuts in the budgets for 2012 and subsequent years in return for raising the debt limit . On July 19 , 2011 , the Republican @-@ led House passed a bill , the Cut , Cap and Balance Act , by a margin of 234 – 190 which would require $ 111 billion in cuts in 2012 spending levels , exempting defense , Medicare , and Social Security from these cuts , and would limit subsequent federal spending to about 20 % of the gross national product as compared to the current 24 % . It did not immediately increase the debt limit , but would have required Congress to pass a Balanced Budget Amendment to the United States Constitution before increasing the debt limit . The bill was tabled by a vote of 51 – 46 in the Senate on July 22 , and thus defeated . An alternate plan proposed by the bipartisan Gang of Six senators and favored by the Obama administration would contain about $ 3 @.@ 7 trillion in deficit reduction over the next decade , including both new revenue and large spending cuts , including in entitlement healthcare and defense , failed to gain traction . 
 Two rival plans were then prepared by the Senate Democrats and House Republicans . The Democratic plan would immediately raise the debt limit by $ 2 @.@ 7 trillion , enough to last beyond the 2012 elections , and would decrease spending by $ 900 billion over ten years . The Republican plan would cut a total of $ 850 billion over ten years , and would raise the debt limit in two stages : by $ 1 trillion immediately , enough to last until early 2012 , and then would form a bipartisan committee to recommend the second half of the budget cuts , which upon being passed by Congress would increase the debt limit by another $ 1 @.@ 6 trillion . Neither plan included revenue increases or cuts to entitlement programs . The vote on the Republican plan was delayed several times as more conservative members of the caucus refused to support it . After being altered to again require passage of a Balanced Budget Amendment before the second stage of debt limit increases , it passed the House 218 – 210 , with 22 Republicans opposing the bill . It was defeated in the Senate two hours later by a vote of 59 – 41 , as the Democratic plan was prepared to be taken up there . 
 On July 31 , 2011 , President Obama and the leadership of both legislative chambers reached a deal on the debt limit legislation . The deal guaranteed $ 2 @.@ 4 trillion in immediate and eventual debt limit increases . It mandated $ 917 billion in spending cuts over ten years , of which $ 21 billion would be included in the FY2012 budget . It would then give Congress a choice between either accepting the recommendation of a Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction which would cut the deficit by $ 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 trillion through spending cuts and / or revenue increases , or accepting automatic budget cuts to national security funding ( including defense spending ) and to Medicare , which would start in the FY2013 budget . Congress would also be required to vote on a Balanced Budget Amendment . On August 1 , the Budget Control Act of 2011 passed the House 269 – 161 , with 66 Republicans and 95 Democrats voting against the bill . On August 2 , it passed in the Senate 74 – 26 , and was signed into law by President Obama the same day . August 2 was also the date estimated by the department of the Treasury that the borrowing authority of the US would be exhausted . 
 = = = Initial continuing resolutions and FEMA controversy = = = 
 Because the federal budget legislation was not expected to be enacted by the September 30 , 2011 deadline , work began on a continuing resolution to fund the government temporarily through November 18 , 2011 with an across @-@ the @-@ board reduction of 1 @.@ 503 % below the 2011 budget levels . However , a dispute arose between the Republican @-@ led House and the Democrat @-@ led Senate over the amount of additional funding for the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) for costs associated with relief from Hurricane Irene , and whether this extra funding should be partially offset with cuts elsewhere . FEMA 's disaster relief fund had $ 792 million remaining in it just prior to the hurricane 's landfall in August 2011 , which was below the $ 1 billion threshold that caused FEMA to act under " immediate @-@ needs status , " delaying long @-@ term projects in favor of urgent tasks . The proposed cuts targeted a program to fund development of fuel @-@ efficient automobiles as well as the program that had guaranteed a loan to the recently bankrupt <unk> corporation . The Senate rejection of the House bill on September 23 , 2011 raised the possibility of a government shutdown on October 1 . 
 However , FEMA subsequently determined that the $ 114 million left in the fund as of late September would suffice for the final week of the fiscal year , and the fund would thus not in fact run out of money . This led to the Senate passing a pair of continuing resolutions on September 26 : one lasting until October 4 , 2011 to give the then @-@ out @-@ of @-@ session House of Representatives time to consider the second resolution , which funded the government through the first seven weeks of the 2012 fiscal year , until November 18 , 2011 . The House passed the short @-@ term resolution on September 29 , 2011 by unanimous consent in an unusual example of passing legislation during a pro forma session . After the House came back into normal session , the second continuing resolution was passed by a vote of 352 – 66 on October 4 , 2011 . 
 = = = Appropriations legislation passed = = = 
 On November 18 , 2011 , the first appropriations bill was enacted , the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act , 2012 . It combined the three appropriations bills for Agriculture , Commerce / Justice / Science ( <unk> ) , and Transportation / Housing and Urban Development ( <unk> ) , and also contained a continuing resolution providing funding for other departments until December 16 , 2011 . 
 On December 15 , 2011 , a deal was reached on the remaining nine appropriations bills , which were combined into the Consolidated Appropriations Act , 2012 . One point of contention was that an earlier draft of the bill supported by Republicans contained new restrictions on travel to Cuba , which had been relaxed by the Obama administration in 2009 . These restrictions were removed in the enacted bill at the insistence of the Obama administration . A separate Disaster Relief Appropriations Act , 2012 was also included in the package , as well as a concurrent resolution which offset the increased disaster funding by imposing a 1 @.@ 83 % across @-@ the @-@ board spending cut to all discretionary programs except Defense and Veterans Affairs . Two more continuing resolutions were also passed , one extending the deadline by one day so that the Senate could vote on the package , and one until December 23 , 2011 . The two appropriations bills were enacted on December 23 , 2011 , but the concurrent resolution failed in the Senate . 
 On December 17 , 2011 , the Senate passed legislation to extend the Social Security payroll tax cut which had been previously enacted during the FY2011 budget negotiations . That legislation had reduced the rate from 6 @.@ 2 % to 4 @.@ 2 % for the 2011 calendar year only . The initial 2012 extension was for two months , rather than the full @-@ year extension which had been sought ; the legislation also extended unemployment benefits as well as a measure preventing a drop in rates for Medicare reimbursement ; the spending for these was offset by enacting new fees on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . Points of contention included a Democratic plan to fund the tax cut with a new surtax on income over $ 1 million , which was dropped in later stages of negotiation , as well as attempts by Republicans to insert language which would speed the approval of the Keystone XL pipeline , which had recently been delayed by the Obama administration . The bill was initially rejected in the House , whose leaders insisted on a full @-@ year extension , despite the fact that the Senate had already adjourned for the year . However , after criticism from other Republicans that the impasse would harm their prospects in the upcoming 2012 elections , the House leadership on December 23 , 2011 announced that it would pass the Senate bill in return for Democrats promptly beginning negotiations on a full @-@ year extension . The bill , the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2011 , was passed by the House and signed by the President later that day . 
 The tax cut extension for the remainder of the year was passed as the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 on February 17 , 2012 , by a vote of 293 – 132 in the House and 60 – 36 in the Senate . The bill also contained a further extension of unemployment benefits and the Medicare reimbursement rates . The cost of the tax cut was not offset by spending cuts , but the other provisions were offset by cuts in federal healthcare and pension programs . Republican support for the bill was motivated by a desire to not oppose a tax cut in an election year . Some Democrats criticized the bill for directing spending cuts at federal employees rather than generating funds by increasing taxes on the wealthy or closing tax loopholes . 
 = = Major initiatives = = 
 The following provisions were enacted in the final budget legislation : 
 No new funding for long @-@ distance intercity and high @-@ speed rail was included in the budget . This funding had originally been introduced as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act stimulus bill in 2009 , but had proved controversial as several Republican governors elected in the 2010 elections subsequently rejected the federal funding for rail projects in their states . However , funding for 26 short @-@ distance routes eliminated in the House version was restored in the enacted bill . 
 The National Science Foundation 's budget was increased 2 @.@ 5 % , to $ 7 @.@ 03 billion , and the National Institutes of Health 's was increased slightly from $ 30 @.@ 4 billion to $ 30 @.@ 7 billion . However , the Office of Science and Technology Policy 's budget was cut by 32 % to $ 4 @.@ 5 million , in retaliation for the office allegedly ignoring a provision in 2011 budget legislation banning it from pursuing collaborations with China . Funding for the James Webb Space Telescope , the successor to the Hubble Space Telescope , was maintained , as was funding for the Joint Polar Satellite System . 
 The legislation contained a ban on using federal funds to enforce the phase @-@ out of incandescent light bulbs that had been mandated in the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 , but requires recipients of more than $ 1 million in Department of Energy grants to comply with the energy efficiency standards . 
 Regular funding for the Department of Defense increased from $ 513 billion to $ 518 billion , including a 1 @.@ 6 % pay raise for military personnel . Funding for the wars in Iraq and in Afghanistan was reduced from $ 158 billion to $ 115 billion . 
 Funding for the Race to the Top education program was cut from $ 698 million to $ 550 million . A proposal to create an educational technology research and development program , Advanced Research Projects Agency @-@ Education ( ARPA @-@ ED ) , in a similar vein to the successful DARPA research agency within the Department of Defense , was not enacted . 
 The Obama administration had requested to create a Climate Service within NOAA , similar to the National Weather Service . This request was not enacted . 
 Transfers of prisoners from the Guantanamo Bay detention camp to the United States was prohibited , and language on transfers to other countries was revised . 
 The Department of Justice was forbidden from consolidating or maintaining certain firearms records , and it was prohibited for health officials to use federal money to advocate gun control . 
 = = Total revenues and spending = = 
 The Obama administration 's budget request contained $ 2 @.@ 627 trillion in revenues and $ 3 @.@ 729 trillion in outlays ( expenditures ) for 2012 , for a deficit of $ 1 @.@ 101 trillion . The April 2011 Republican plan contained $ 2 @.@ 533 trillion in revenues and $ 3 @.@ 529 trillion in outlays , for a deficit of $ 0 @.@ 996 trillion . The enacted budget contained $ 2 @.@ 469 trillion in receipts and $ 3 @.@ 796 trillion in outlays , for a deficit of $ 1 @.@ 327 trillion . 
 = = = Total receipts = = = 
 = = = Total outlays by agency = = = 
 The Department of Defense budget is divided into two parts : the base budget , and Overseas Contingency Operations which includes the Iraq War and the War in Afghanistan . 
 = = = Total outlays by budget function = = = 
 = The Client ( The Office ) = 
 " The Client " is the seventh episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's thirteenth episode overall . Written by Paul Lieberstein , who also acts in the show as Toby Flenderson , and directed by Greg Daniels , the episode first aired in the United States on November 8 , 2005 on NBC . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) and Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) begin a relationship after landing an important client ( Tim Meadows ) . Meanwhile , the rest of the office finds a screenplay written by Michael and they decide to read it together . 
 The idea for Jan and Michael to have a romantic relationship was conceived by Steve Carell as far back as the filming of the pilot episode . The kiss between the two was rehearsed and filmed " many , many , many times " , according to B.J. Novak . While filming , Steve Carell and Tim Meadows improvised a good majority of their dinner scene , but most of it never made the final cut . During the production of the episode , the cast and crew were informed by NBC that the show would be picked up for a whole 22 episodes , a move that " surprised " them . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics and earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 8 in the 18 – 49 demographic , being viewed by 7 @.@ 5 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) meet with a potential client , Christian ( Tim Meadows ) , at Chili 's . Jan is disgusted with Michael 's antics ( which began with Michael changing the meeting location from a hotel meeting room to Chili 's without permission ) and refusal to talk business , but discovers at the end of the day that there is a method to his madness when the client bonds with Michael , allowing him to close the deal . Afterwards , in the parking lot , Michael and the recently divorced Jan kiss and leave together . 
 Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) finds a screenplay written by Michael called Threat @-@ Level Midnight starring himself as " Agent Michael Scarn " , and the staff read it together . While reading the script , the character sequence " <unk> " appears . Pam explains to the camera that originally , Michael based his incompetent sidekick on Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , but later changed the name with a search and replace . Unfortunately , the search and replace mechanism failed to change Dwight 's misspelled name . Dwight is upset and quickly shuts down the exercise to invite everyone to set off fireworks outside , but only Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) follows . 
 Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam break off their respective evening plans to enjoy an impromptu dinner on the roof and watch Dwight and Kevin fool around with fireworks . The next day , Jim jokes about their " first date " , and Pam , in an unexpectedly blunt tone , tells him it was not a date . Surprised and obviously disappointed , Jim makes an unwise comment that at least he didn 't leave her at a high school hockey game , in reference to Pam 's earlier revelation of what Roy had done on her worst date ever . Pam is clearly upset and gets up to go send some faxes , leaving it awkward between her and Jim , who tries unsuccessfully to apologize . 
 Word quickly spreads that Jan and Michael spent the night together . Michael initially tells the documentary crew that " nothing happened " , that they just talked for several hours , but his story gradually changes to imply that they did more than that . Jan calls , clearly regretting what happened , but Michael refuses to accept her change of heart . 
 Jim and Michael share a glance at each other , both disappointed in the days ' events . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was the third episode of the series directed by Greg Daniels . Daniels had previously directed the episodes " Basketball " and " The Dundies " . " The Client " was written by Paul Lieberstein , who acts on the show as human resources director Toby Flenderson . The idea for Jan and Michael to have a romantic relationship was conceived by Steve Carell as far back as the filming of the pilot episode . According to writer and producer Greg Daniels " it was like he ( Michael ) was turned on by his teacher . " Writer and actor Paul Lieberstein said that the first idea that anybody came up for the episode was the final shot , where Jim and Michael look at each other and shake their heads , suggesting that they had been through similar experiences . The rest of the episode was written to lead to that scene . The scene where Oscar tells a story about a date getting a background check on him was based on an actual date that Paul Lieberstein went on . 
 While filming , Steve Carell and Tim Meadows improvised a lot of their dinner scene , but most of it never made the final cut . One improvised scene that did make the final cut was the " Baby Back Ribs " song . In an interview , Jenna Fischer said that the rooftop scene was her favorite to shoot . Fischer recalled that " there was a very small crew up on the roof and they had the cameras really far away . " After the main shooting ended , producers decided to do a re @-@ shoot to explain the " <unk> " situation clearly and concisely . The kiss between Michael and Jan was rehearsed and filmed " many , many , many times " , according to B.J. Novak . While editing the kiss between Michael and Jan , Greg Daniels brought many people into the editing room to see if they thought the kiss was too long or not long enough . 
 During the production of the episode , the cast and crew were informed by NBC that the show would be picked up for a whole 22 episodes . Initially , the show 's second season had only been brought back for six episodes , to test the water . Despite the lackluster reception the first season had , ratings jumped during the second season to 7 @.@ 7 million in the fall alone . After the ratings success , Kevin Reilly , NBC Entertainment president , " surprised " the cast and crew of the staff and ordered a full season ; he later likened the series to Seinfeld and Cheers , noting that they too had " slow starts " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael tells Jan that he moved their meeting from a Radisson to a Chili 's , per advice — that he sent in — to the magazine Small Businessman . During their meeting , Michael tells Christian and Jan the Lighthouse and naval vessel joke . Dwight reveals to the camera that he was once in a production of Oklahoma ! , and played the part of " <unk> The Mailman " . He explains that the production had too many kids , so they made up extra roles . 
 Michael 's screenplay is a parody of secret agent films , most notably the James Bond franchise . In Michael 's screenplay , his love interest is named Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones . The name of Michael 's movie has been referenced several other times through the series . In the third season episode " Product Recall " , Michael frantically states that , due to the amount of angry customers , the office has been " put at Threat Level Midnight . " Michael 's screenplay was eventually turned into a home movie , and is viewed by the entire office in the seventh season episode " Threat Level Midnight . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Client " originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 8 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 5 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 9 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode retained 73 percent of its lead @-@ in " My Name is Earl " audience , the best the show had done up until that point . An encore presentation of the episode , on April 25 , 2006 , received 2 @.@ 4 rating / 7 % share was viewed by over 4 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . TV Squad 's Michael Sciannamea gave the episode a largely positive review wrote that Michael is " totally taken with himself " , but still " has shown us his vulnerabilities " . Sciannamea noted that , by showing the audience Michael 's humanity , the writers were making " this sitcom so compelling " . Sciannamea , however , did point out that this is the second week in a row that " Pam is offended by something Jim has said or done " , which in his mind " will get tiresome quickly if it continues " . " Miss Alli " of Television Without Pity graded the episode with a " B + " . Rolling Stone named the scene wherein the employees read Threat Level : Midnight as the tenth funniest in The Office 's first three seasons . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " and called it " a series @-@ best episode of The Office whose series @-@ best status sneaks up on you " . He was largely complimentary towards the way the episode built towards a climax , and followed various successful " setup @-@ punchline rhythms " . He also applauded the introduction of the <unk> : Midnight screenplay , calling it " a subplot so crucial to the mythology of the series , it would form the basis of an entire episode near the end of Steve Carell ’ s time in Scranton . " Adams ultimately concluded that the episode is " a top @-@ notch Office installment overall " , thanks in large part to the Pam @-@ Jim and Michael @-@ Jan subplots and dynamics . 
 = Neville McNamara = 
 Air Chief Marshal Sir Neville Patrick McNamara , KBE , AO , AFC , AE ( 17 April 1923 – 7 May 2014 ) was a senior commander of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , the RAAF 's highest @-@ ranking position , from 1979 until 1982 , and as Chief of the Defence Force Staff ( CDFS ) , Australia 's top military role at the time , from 1982 until 1984 . He was the second RAAF officer to hold the rank of air chief marshal . 
 Born in Queensland , McNamara joined the RAAF during World War II and saw action in the South West Pacific , flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . He also flew combat missions in Gloster Meteors during the Korean War . In 1961 , he was awarded the Air Force Cross for his leadership of No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit . He gained further operational experience heading the RAAF presence in Ubon , Thailand , in the late 1960s . Promoted to air commodore , McNamara was Commander RAAF Forces Vietnam , and Deputy Commander Australian Forces Vietnam , in 1971 – 72 , for which he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . As Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in 1976 , he was named an Officer of the Order of Australia . Knighted while CAS in 1980 , he retired after completing his term as CDFS in 1984 . 
 = = Early life and World War II = = 
 Neville Patrick McNamara was born on 17 April 1923 in Toogoolawah , Queensland . He was educated at Toogoolawah State School , and by the Christian Brothers in Warwick and at St. Joseph 's <unk> College . He enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) on 12 October 1941 . Following aircrew training , he graduated as a sergeant pilot on 15 October 1942 . He served as an instructor before being posted to the South West Pacific as a fighter pilot with No. 75 Squadron , flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks . He gained his commission in 1944 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 = = = Rise to senior command = = = 
 After the war , McNamara was posted to air traffic control duties at Headquarters North @-@ Eastern Area . During 1947 , he was stationed at Bofu , Japan , with No. 82 Squadron , as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) . He married Dorothy Miller on 27 May 1950 ; the couple had two daughters . From 1951 to 1953 , he served as an instructor at Central Flying School in East Sale , Victoria . Ranked squadron leader , he then saw operational service in the Korean War as the Executive Officer of No. 77 Squadron , flying Gloster Meteors . Initially employed in the conflict as a fighter unit , by this time No. 77 Squadron 's role was primarily ground attack , using the Meteors ' cannon augmented by newly fitted rocket armament . McNamara briefly took charge of the unit in November – December when there was a hiatus between commanding officers rotating out and rotating in . 
 Returning to Australia in 1954 , McNamara was posted to Headquarters Training Command as pilot training officer . From 1955 until 1957 he served as staff officer fighter operations at the Department of Air , before being appointed Commanding Officer No. 25 Squadron . Promoted wing commander , he took charge of No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 2 OCU ) at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales in 1959 . No. 2 OCU was responsible for training pilots to fly the CAC Sabre jet fighter , which was operated by Nos. 3 , 75 and 77 Squadrons . His performance as commanding officer earned him the Air Force Cross in the 1961 Queen 's Birthday Honours . 
 In 1961 McNamara was posted to England as senior air staff officer at RAAF Overseas Headquarters , London , and then in 1964 was appointed Director of Personnel ( Officers ) at the Department of Air . He received the Air Efficiency Award in 1965 , and the following year took command of RAAF Ubon , Thailand . Operating under the provisions of the SEATO agreement during the early years of the Vietnam War , the Australian contingent included No. 79 Squadron , flying Sidewinder @-@ equipped CAC Sabres . Although only fifty kilometres from the Laotian border and occasionally scrambled to intercept North Vietnamese fighters , the Sabres never saw action , in contrast to their USAF brethren also based at Ubon . Limited as its military role was , however , the RAAF presence was judged politically valuable . After completing his tour in Thailand , McNamara served as air staff officer at RAAF Base Richmond , New South Wales , until 1968 , before being appointed Director General Organisation at the Department of Air . 
 = = = Senior RAAF and Australian Defence Force command = = = 
 Promoted to air commodore , in April 1971 , McNamara became the last Commander RAAF Forces Vietnam and Deputy Commander Australian Force Vietnam ( AFV ) . Believing that the Air Force paid " lip service " to its army co @-@ operation responsibilities in the 1950s and 1960s , he familiarised himself with the finer points of air / ground operations by accompanying No. 9 Squadron helicopters on missions supporting 1st Australian Task Force in Phuoc Tuy Province . Given the responsibility of overseeing the withdrawal of the RAAF from Vietnam in 1972 , McNamara was praised for his " wise and patient counsel , devotion to duty and firm control " , leading to his appointment as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in September that year . In 1973 , he was posted to the United States as the Australian Air Attache to Washington , D.C. Promoted to air vice marshal , he returned to Australia in 1975 and took up duties as the Deputy Chief of Air Staff , which he later described as " an invaluable learning experience for the top job " . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia ( AO ) on 7 June 1976 for " distinguished service in responsible positions " . 
 McNamara was promoted to air marshal and became Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) in March 1979 . He succeeded Air Marshal Sir James Rowland , who had been the first CAS to personally command the RAAF in a legal sense , following the abolition of the Australian Air Board in 1976 . Previously , the CAS position was more akin to a chairman , " first among equals " with the other members of the Air Board . Under this earlier arrangement , McNamara considered that some senior commanders tended to behave like " regional war lords " who thought that the CAS existed purely to handle politicians and paperwork , while they ( the commanders ) got on with the Air Force 's " real work " . As CAS , McNamara put in train development of new strategies for the air defence of Australia , later remarking that " capability must be matched by ideas " . He also supervised the selection process that chose the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet to the replace the RAAF 's Mirage III fighters . McNamara personally favoured the F / A @-@ 18 due to its multi @-@ role capability . Appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) on 31 December 1980 , he was the last CAS to be knighted before Australia abandoned the imperial honours system . 
 In 1982 , McNamara became the first Air Force member to directly command all three of Australia 's armed services as Chief of the Defence Force Staff ( CDFS ) , which had replaced the earlier senior position in the defence force , Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee . He also became only the second RAAF officer to be raised to the rank of air chief marshal . As CDFS , McNamara had to work to repair strained relations between the Defence Department 's military and civilian components . He sought to accomplish this through a restrained management style and respect for the department 's public servants . At the same time , he maintained the need for military and civilian personnel to be easily distinguishable , and reversed a trend for armed force personnel to wear suits " in the office " and uniforms only " on parade " , which was the preference of Secretary of Defence Arthur Tange . The military and public service wings of the department still clashed over the question of enlarging the CDFS 's role to achieve more coherent defence planning . Shortly after McNamara completed his term as CDFS in 1984 , the position was redesignated Chief of the Defence Force ( CDF ) , to more clearly reflect its authority over the Australian armed services . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Air Chief Marshal McNamara retired from military life in April 1984 . He was awarded the Centenary Medal on 1 January 2001 for his " service to Australian society through the Royal Australian Air Force " . That year he joined celebrations at Point Cook , Victoria , to mark the 80th anniversary of the founding of the RAAF . McNamara published his autobiography , The Quiet Man , in 2005 . He died at Jervis Bay , New South Wales , on 7 May 2014 , and was survived by his wife and two daughters . He is commemorated by Sir Neville McNamara Drive in North Turramurra , New South Wales . 
 = Kenneth Widmerpool = 
 Kenneth Widmerpool is a fictional character in Anthony Powell 's novel sequence A Dance to the Music of Time , a 12 @-@ volume account of upper @-@ class and bohemian life in Britain between 1920 and 1970 . Regarded by critics as one of the more memorable characters of 20th century fiction , Widmerpool is the antithesis of the sequence 's narrator @-@ hero Nicholas Jenkins . Initially presented as a comic , even pathetic figure , he becomes increasingly formidable , powerful and ultimately sinister as the novels progress . He is successful in business , in the army and in politics , and is awarded a life peerage . His only sphere of failure is his relationships with women , exemplified by his disastrous marriage to Pamela Flitton . The sequence ends with Widmerpool 's downfall and death , in circumstances arising from his involvement with a New Age @-@ type cult . 
 Literary analysts have noted Widmerpool 's defining characteristics as a lack of culture , small @-@ mindedness , and a capacity for intrigue ; generally , he is thought to embody many of the worst aspects of the British character . However , he has the ability to rise above numerous insults and humiliations that beset him to achieve positions of prominence through dogged industry and self @-@ belief . In this respect he represents the meritocratic middle class 's challenge to the declining power of the traditional " establishment " or ruling group , which is shown to be vulnerable to a determined assault from this source . 
 Among the more prominent names suggested as real @-@ life models for Widmerpool have been Edward Heath , the British prime minister 1970 – 74 , and Reginald Manningham @-@ Buller who was Britain 's Attorney General in the 1950s . Others of Powell 's contemporaries have made claims to be the character 's source , although Powell gave little encouragement to such speculation . Widmerpool has been portrayed in two British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) radio dramatisations of the novel sequence ( 1979 – 82 and 2008 ) and in Channel 4 's television filmed version broadcast in 1997 . 
 = = Context : A Dance to the Music of Time = = 
 The novel sequence A Dance to the Music of Time comprises 12 volumes spanning a period of approximately 50 years ; from the early 1920s to the first years of the 1970s . The title is taken from Nicolas Poussin 's 1634 – 36 painting of the same name . Through the eyes of a narrator , Nicholas Jenkins , the reader observes the changing fortunes of a varied collection of mainly upper @-@ class characters . Their ambience is a bohemian world of art , literature and music , intermingled with more the practical spheres of politics , business and the military . In a 1971 study of the novels , the journalist and editor Dan McLeod summarised the theme of the sequence as that of a decaying establishment , confronted by " aggressive representatives from the middle classes elbowing their way up " . The latter are prepared to suffer any number of indignities in their pursuit of power but the establishment proves capable of resisting the advance of " all but the most thick @-@ <unk> and persevering " of outsiders . Kenneth Widmerpool becomes the principal embodiment of these incomers . 
 The first three volumes are set in the 1920s and follow the main characters through school , university and their first steps towards social and professional acceptance . The next three are placed in the 1930s ; the protagonists become established , put down roots , watch the international situation anxiously and prepare for war . The background for the seventh , eighth and ninth volumes is the Second World War , which not all the characters survive . The final three books cover the 25 years from the early days of the post @-@ war Attlee government to the counterculture and protests of the early 1970s . During the long narrative , the focus changes frequently from one group to another ; new faces appear while established characters are written out , sometimes reappearing after many volumes , sometimes not at all , though news of their doings may reach Jenkins , through one or other of his many acquaintances . Apart from Jenkins , Widmerpool is the only one of the 300 @-@ odd characters who takes part in the action of each of the 12 volumes . Richard Jones , writing in the Virginia Quarterly Review , suggests that the novels may be regarded as " the dance of Kenneth Widmerpool , who is Jenkins 's fall @-@ guy , tormentor , and antithesis " . Widmerpool dogs Jenkins 's career and life ; in the opening pages of the first book at school , he is encountered running through the mists , in the vain hope of athletic glory . In the final stages of the last book he is running again , this time at the behest of the quasi @-@ religious cult that has claimed him . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Origins , appearance , personality = = = 
 The name " Widmerpool " was assumed by many critics to derive from Widmerpool a Nottinghamshire village . In a 1978 interview , Powell said he first came across the name in a 17th @-@ century book , Memoirs of the Life of Colonel Hutchinson , which features a Captain of Horse , Major Joseph <unk> , who served in Cromwell 's army under John Hutchinson during the English Civil War . Powell viewed this <unk> as a mean @-@ spirited and disagreeable character and " had his name down for really quite a long time as a name I was going to use " . 
 The fictional Widmerpool 's background is meritocratic rather than aristocratic . His paternal grandfather was a Scottish businessman surnamed Geddes , who on marriage to a woman of higher social standing , adopted her name as his own . The family appears to have settled in either Nottinghamshire or Derbyshire ; Widmerpool 's father trades as a fertiliser manufacturer , a matter of extreme embarrassment to his son , who never mentions him . His mother is a woman of strong opinions and a great admirer of Stalin ; her passion is her son 's career and advancement . Mother and son live together , from Widmerpool père 's death in the mid @-@ 1920s until Widmerpool 's marriage in 1945 . 
 Jenkins 's descriptions of Widmerpool 's appearance are unflattering ; at school he is painted as " heavily built , [ with ] thick lips and metal @-@ rimmed spectacles giving his face as usual an aggrieved expression ... [ as if ] he suspected people of trying to worm out of him important information ... " A few years later , he is wearing more fashionable spectacles but Jenkins notes that he still has a curiously fishlike ( " <unk> " ) countenance . He has a propensity to put on weight ; although barely 30 , Widmerpool appears to Jenkins as portly and middle @-@ aged . At the outbreak of war in 1939 , in an badly cut army uniform , he resembles a music @-@ hall burlesque of a military officer or else " a railway official of some obscure country " . After the war as an MP , his demeanour and shape are " demanding of treatment by political cartoonists " . In 1958 , meeting Widmerpool ( then in his mid @-@ fifties ) after some years , Jenkins is shocked by his elderly appearance . His clothes are ill @-@ fitting through weight loss , giving him the look of a scarecrow ; his grey hair is sparse and his facial flesh hangs in pouches . The final glimpse of Widmerpool , in his cult milieu , reveals him as a physical wreck , looking aged , desperate and worn out . 
 Widmerpool 's chief characteristic in his youth is an exaggerated respect for and deference to authority . This is first indicated by his obsequious response to being hit in the face by a banana , thrown by the school 's cricket captain . It is further shown by his outrage over a prank played by his <unk> Charles Stringham on their housemaster , Le Bas . He has a craving for acceptance , even at the price of humiliation , and has a natural talent for aligning himself with the dominant power . Many of Widmerpool 's traits are evident quite early in his career : his pomposity , his aversion to all forms of culture ( " the embodiment of thick @-@ skinned , self @-@ important philistinism " according to one commentator ) , his bureaucratic obsessions and his snobbishness . He is politically naïve and his contribution to the pre @-@ war appeasement of Nazi Germany is to suggest that Hermann Göring be awarded the Order of the Garter and given a tour of Buckingham Palace . Yet , as the novel sequence progresses , Widmerpool emerges as far less of a buffoon and becomes , against all expectations , powerful and power @-@ obsessed . In his analysis of Powell 's fiction , Nicholas Birns identifies an incident in The Acceptance World ( the third volume of the series ) as the point at which the assessment of Widmerpool by his contemporaries begins to change . Widmerpool takes charge of a drunken Stringham after a reunion dinner , guides him home and despite resistance puts him firmly to bed : " Widmerpool , once so derided by all of us , had in some mysterious manner become a person of authority . Now , in a sense , it was he that derided us " . 
 Widmerpool 's egotism and will @-@ power enable him , once set , to carry all before him , although before his ultimate downfall his powers develop in somewhat sinister directions . In a review of the early novels in the sequence , Arthur Mizener wrote : " Powell makes his great <unk> , for all their absurdity , something not essentially different from all the rest of us ; even Widmerpool , the most extravagant of the lot , is not . However sublimely ridiculous he becomes , he continues to remind us , not so much , perhaps , of what we have done , as what we have , in our time , known we might do " . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 At school ( not identified but generally recognised as Eton ) , Widmerpool is undistinguished academically and athletically , a " gauche <unk> " in the words of one literary commentator . He is the object of some ridicule , chiefly remembered for wearing the " wrong kind of overcoat " on his arrival at the school . Driven by ambition , instead of going on to university ( " much better get down to work right away " ) he is articled to a firm of solicitors , declaring this to be a springboard to wider horizons in business and politics . When Jenkins encounters him a few years after school , Widmerpool has achieved some social success and is a regular invitee at dinner @-@ dances . He has also acquired a commission as a lieutenant in the Territorial Army . 
 Through his social contacts Widmerpool secures a job in the politico @-@ legal department of the Donners @-@ Brebner industrial conglomerate , a post that brings him into close contact with Sir Magnus Donners , for whom he exhibits a respect bordering on reverence . He develops a talent for intrigue , which irritates Sir Magnus to the extent that Widmerpool is asked to leave the organisation . He joins a City firm of bill @-@ brokers and still under the age of 30 , becomes an influential and respected figure in the financial world . By the late 1930s , Widmerpool is advising Donners @-@ Brebner again . Just before the outbreak of war in September 1939 , he oversees a scheme on behalf of Donners to corner the Turkish market in chromite and emerges unscathed when the project collapses . 
 At the beginning of the war Widmerpool joins the army and with the advantage of his Territorial commission is rapidly promoted . By mid @-@ 1940 he holds the rank of major and is serving as Deputy @-@ Assistant @-@ Adjutant @-@ General at Divisional Headquarters in Northern Ireland . Jenkins becomes his junior officer and observes Widmerpool 's industry and his skill as a manipulator . Among the rank and file troops at headquarters , serving as a mess waiter , is Charles Stringham . Widmerpool is embarrassed by the presence of his former school @-@ fellow , and engineers his transfer to a mobile laundry unit , which is sent to Singapore where Stringham meets his death . In June 1941 , Widmerpool is transferred to London as a Military Assistant Secretary at the Cabinet Office . Promotions to lieutenant colonel and colonel follow and he is appointed an OBE . In his new post he is close to the centres of power and is able to influence war policy and settle old scores . He is complicit in the death of another school rival , Peter Templer , who as the result of a policy recommendation by Widmerpool , is abandoned while on a secret mission in the Balkans . Just after the end of the war , Widmerpool surprises his acquaintances by marrying Stringham 's niece , Pamela Flitton , an ATS driver , whose sex life is rumoured to be " gladiatorial " . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1930s , Widmerpool 's political leanings have been generally to the left , ( possibly as a result of his brief association with the radical Gypsy Jones in the late 1920s ) . In 1945 he becomes a Labour Member of Parliament during the postwar Attlee government and eventually receives ( unspecified ) minor ministerial office in the administration . He is also one of the backers of a left @-@ leaning magazine , Fission , through which he hopes to propagate his economic and political views . He is an assiduous promoter of good relations with eastern European countries and is suspected by some of a secret communist allegiance . After losing his parliamentary seat in the 1955 General Election Widmerpool continues to promote east – west friendship and trade and is thought to have become wealthy as a result . Doubts as to his motives remain and rumours connect him with Burgess and Maclean . In 1958 , Widmerpool is appointed a life peer and takes his seat in the House of Lords . His eastern European activities again arouse suspicion , questions are asked in parliament and it seems likely that he will be charged with spying but the investigation is dropped without explanation . His marriage to Pamela is disintegrating ; for years he has tolerated her constant infidelities and she publicly accuses him of voyeurism . After Pamela 's sudden death in 1959 , Widmerpool leaves the country to take up an academic post in California . 
 In America Widmerpool becomes something of a figurehead among youth protest movements ; there are suggestions that his earlier problems may have resulted from a CIA plot . He returns to England in the late 1960s and is installed as Chancellor of a new university . During the ceremony he is pelted with red paint but immediately identifies with the demonstrators and becomes a central figure in the counter @-@ culture movement . He resigns the chancellorship after a year , to run a commune for dissident youth . By late 1969 , he has been drawn into a more sinister cult , led by the young mystic Scorpio <unk> , which gradually overwhelms his life and independence . He is last heard of late in 1971 , when during a ritual dawn run through the woods he collapses and dies . 
 = = = Love life = = = 
 The novels leave open the nature and extent of Widmerpool 's sexuality , an aspect on which critics have often speculated . Stephen McGregor of the Spectator describes him as " impotent " ; another commentator used the words " sexual incompetent " . At school he gets <unk> a fellow @-@ pupil , expelled for sending a presumably compromising note to Peter Templer ; afterwards , Jenkins and Stringham discuss Templer 's belief that Widmerpool was motivated by sexual jealousy . A few years later , Jenkins recalls how Widmerpool recoiled when touched gently on the arm by Berthe , a French girl encountered during the pair 's summer sojourn at La <unk> , shortly after leaving school . 
 In his mid @-@ twenties , Widmerpool confesses to Jenkins his love for Barbara Goring , a girl whom he had known since his childhood . Their families had been neighbours and Widmerpool 's father had supplied Lord Goring with liquid manure . This unrequited passion ends suddenly , when Barbara pours sugar over Widmerpool 's head at a ball , as a means of " sweetening " him . Shortly afterwards , Widmerpool becomes obsessed by Gypsy Jones , a fiery street radical he meets by chance , who according to Jenkins resembles " a thoroughly ill @-@ conditioned errand boy " . The nature of the Widmerpool – Jones relationship is not made explicit ; it culminates in his paying for an abortion , even though he is not responsible for her condition and apparently receives no favours from her in return . His actions in this respect haunt Widmerpool for a long time thereafter ; he vows that he will never again allow a woman to take his mind off his work . 
 When he is about 30 , Widmerpool becomes engaged to a considerably older widow , Mildred Haycock . His main motivation appears to be his craving for social status ; she is the daughter of Lord <unk> . In his analysis of Powell 's works , Nicholas Birns wrote : " What Widmerpool wants to do is to ' marry up ' , to make a marriage that will cement his upward social mobility , and he is willing to take an older woman with two teenage children in order to accomplish this . " The engagement ends abruptly , over Widmerpool 's impotence during an attempted premarital sexual union . 
 After this episode , the issue of Widmerpool 's sex life is not mentioned until , in the later stages of the Second World War , he admits to picking up " tarts " during the blackout . After the war his disastrous marriage to Pamela Flitton appears to provide him with no normal physical satisfaction ; according to Pamela he gave up trying after two abortive attempts to sleep with her and was reduced to furtive pleasure from observing her sexual activities with others . He is also reported to have had some depraved dealings with a prostitute known as " Pauline " . In old age , within the <unk> cult , he is said to have " watched [ girls ] naked , whenever he could " . 
 = = Critical and popular reception = = 
 Critics generally find Widmerpool the most interesting and absorbing of the sequence 's major characters . He has been described as " one of the most memorable characters of 20th century fiction " , and according to the literary critic John Bayley is as " famous a character in the annals of English fiction as either Pickwick or Jeeves " . Powell , in a 1978 interview , confessed that he had used Widmerpool as a bait to catch readers , but found that the character had taken over , to a greater extent than he would have wished . 
 The essayist Tariq Ali views Widmerpool as a giant among fictional characterisations of his kind , comparable to Baron de Charlus in Proust 's epic In Search of Lost Time and Ulrich in Robert Musil 's trilogy The Man Without Qualities . Ali asserts that Widmerpool is " in many ways a more inspired creation than Charlus " . The circumstances of Widmerpool 's death , whereby he is transformed from a believable person into " a sub @-@ Dickensian grotesque " is , says Ali , a cause for much regret . Powell 's A Writer 's Notebook ( 2001 ) reveals that Powell originally considered a different ending for Widmerpool , in which he simply disappears into the mists , his ultimate fate an enigma . Ali argues that this would have been " much more in keeping with the dance of life and death " . 
 Norman Shrapnel , in his obituary of Powell , speculates whether the author ever regretted creating the " maddening , mysterious , apparently indestructible Widmerpool " and , like Ali , expresses disappointment with the manner of the character 's death . Conversely , in a biographical sketch of Powell , Michael Barber believes that Widmerpool 's demise accords with a principal theme of the novels , expressed in Casanova 's Chinese Restaurant ( fifth book in the sequence ) , that " in the end most things in life — perhaps all things — turn out to be appropriate " . Michael <unk> , reviewing Powell 's autobiography To Keep the Ball Rolling , presents the view that , while the novels are built around Widmerpool , they are not essentially about him : " He is an organising principle , a means , not an end , and serves primarily to establish a system of judgement . " 
 Evelyn Waugh , who reviewed the early novels as they appeared at two @-@ year intervals , found Widmerpool particularly compelling . He wrote to Powell after reading At Lady Molly 's ( fourth volume ) : " In the opening pages I felt the void of Widmerpool really aching – I could not have borne another page 's delay for his entry . Did you intend him to dominate the series ? " After reviewing Casanova 's Chinese Restaurant Waugh complained of a " sad disappointment – only three pages of Widmerpool " . 
 = = Real @-@ life models = = 
 Many readers and literary analysts have assumed that Widmerpool was drawn from Powell 's acquaintances . Powell was circumspect and chose not to confirm any of the suggestions put to him . Candidates include Powell 's Eton contemporary Sir Reginald Manningham @-@ Buller ( nicknamed " Bullying @-@ Manner " ) , later ennobled as Lord Dilhorne , who served as Attorney General and Lord Chancellor during the 1950s . According to Powell , Manningham @-@ Buller was an unattractive figure at school ; he was instrumental in the dismissal of a master who sent an inappropriate note to a junior boy , an action reflected in the novels when Widmerpool instigates the sacking of <unk> . Powell 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Labour peer Lord Longford , believed that he was the model for Widmerpool , a proposition that Powell rejected ; Longford had also claimed to be <unk> , another character from the novels . The Labour politician Denis Healey thought that Powell had based Widmerpool on Edward Heath , the British prime minister between 1970 and 1974 . It is possible that the episodes relating to Widmerpool 's spying career are drawn from the activities of Denis Nowell Pritt , a Labour MP who was expelled from the party for his pro @-@ Soviet stance . Powell 's biographer Michael Barber wrote that Cyril Connolly declared his long @-@ standing enemy , the art historian Douglas Cooper , to be a Widmerpool prototype ; Cooper 's companion John Richardson thought that Connolly was joking . 
 Powell came close to endorsing a real @-@ life model in Denis Capel @-@ Dunn , a lawyer and wartime lieutenant @-@ colonel in the Intelligence Corps , who was briefly Powell 's senior officer . Capel @-@ Dunn was nicknamed " The Papal Bun " , and was derided by his subordinates for his appearance and demeanour . He was described by his contemporaries as " a very fat , extremely boring , overwhelmingly ambitious arriviste . His conversations were hideously detailed and humourless " . He was responsible , apparently through spite , for preventing Powell 's promotion to the rank of major . When the historian Desmond Seward proposed Capel @-@ Dunn as the original Widmerpool , Powell hinted that he " might be on to something " . 
 In the Catholic Herald , Alexander Lucie @-@ Smith wrote that everyone has <unk> in their lives ; these are usually " impenetrable <unk> ... who have nevertheless carried all before them " . He includes in this category several recent and current politicians : " Some have thought Gordon Brown resembled him . One might point out that our current Prime Minister [ David Cameron ] has certain shades of Widmerpool , and like him , went to Eton " . 
 The Anthony Powell Society , a literary society founded in 2000 to promote public interest in Powell 's life and works , has from time to time offered a " Widmerpool Award " to persons in public life whose behaviour is deemed suitably " <unk> " , specifically abuse of power . The recipient is presented with an engraved award representing a " wrong kind of overcoat " and the former Labour Lord Chancellor , Lord Irvine , the journalist Max Hastings and the political analyst Karl Rove have received awards . The name of John Bercow , Speaker of the House of Commons since 2009 , has been mentioned as a possible recipient . 
 = = Dramatic portrayals = = 
 Widmerpool has twice been portrayed in BBC radio broadcasts of the Dance to the Music of Time sequence . The first was a 26 @-@ part serial , transmitted on Radio Four between summer 1979 and autumn 1982 , in four batches . The novels were dramatised by Frederick <unk> and the series was produced by Graham Gauld . The part of Widmerpool was played — with , according to one listener " audible pomposity " — by Brian Hewlett , more generally known as a longstanding cast member of the BBC radio serial The Archers . A later radio adaptation was broadcast in six episodes , in Radio Four 's " Classic Serial " of April and May 2008 . The dramatisation was by Michael Butt ; the youthful Widmerpool was played by Anthony Hoskyns and the adult character by Mark Heap . 
 In October and November 1997 , Channel 4 presented the novel sequence in four television films , with a screenplay by Hugh Whitemore , produced by Peter <unk> . Widmerpool was played by Simon Russell Beale ; in a generally critical review of the first film of the series , Thomas Sutcliffe in The Independent refers to Beale 's performance as particularly good , bearing in mind the " thin ledges of characterisation " the script provides to the cast . The journalist David Aaronovitch thought Beale 's interpretation of the character definitive : " ... the Widmerpool who insinuated his <unk> bulk into my private space was ... Simon Russell Beale 's Widmerpool , who has come to stay " . Reviewing the reissue of the films in DVD in 2012 , Stuart Jeffries in The Guardian describes Widmerpool as " one of fiction 's most intriguing monsters " and likens Beale 's portrayal to that of " a kind of grown @-@ up Billy Bunter with the charm sucked out " . Christopher Hitchens , writing in the New York Review of Books , criticised the production ( though not Beale 's performance ) , for depicting Widmerpool as " a hapless rather than a hateful figure " . 
 Beale was the reader for the cassette recordings of the first two novels : A Question of Upbringing and A Buyer 's Market . As a result of his television portrayal of Widmerpool , he was asked by the Wallace Collection to open its Powell centenary exhibition in October 2005 . In the following year he accepted a request from the Anthony Powell Society to serve as its president , a post he held until 2011 . 
 = Second Avenue Subway = 
 The Second Avenue Subway ( officially the IND Second Avenue Line ; abbreviated to SAS ) is a future New York City Subway line that has been under discussion for almost a century . The line will run primarily under Second Avenue on the East Side of Manhattan . A first phase of this new line is expected to open on December 30 , 2016 , having been under construction since 2007 . It will run between 96th Street and Second Avenue and the existing 63rd Street Lines , where it will connect to the BMT Broadway Line and the rest of the subway system . The Q train will provide full @-@ time service on phase one and will serve about 200 @,@ 000 daily riders . The full line , when funded , will be built in three additional phases , allowing portions of the line to open before the entire line is completed . When complete , it will be served by a proposed T train and is projected to serve about 560 @,@ 000 daily riders . The full proposed Second Avenue line would consist of 16 stations and 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) of tunnel , and is expected to cost over $ 17 billion . 
 The line was originally proposed in 1919 as part of a massive expansion of what would become the Independent Subway System ( IND ) . Work on the line never commenced , as the Great Depression crushed the economy . Numerous plans for the Second Avenue Subway appeared throughout the 20th century , but these were usually deferred due to lack of funds . In anticipation of the never @-@ built new subway line , the Second and Third Avenue elevated lines were demolished in 1942 and 1955 , respectively . This left the Lexington Avenue Subway as the only rapid transit line on much of Manhattan 's east side ; today , it is by far the busiest subway line in the United States with an estimated 1 @.@ 3 million daily riders . 
 Construction on the Second Avenue line started in 1972 , but was halted in 1975 because of the city 's major fiscal crisis ; only a few small segments of the line were completed at the time . Simultaneously , construction work on the 63rd Street Lines , which would connect the Second Avenue Line and the IND Queens Boulevard Line to the BMT Broadway Line and the IND Sixth Avenue Line , started in 1969 . Work on the 63rd Street line continued even after construction on the Second Avenue line ended . The first segment of the 63rd Street Lines — which opened in October 1989 and extended to 21st Street – Queensbridge in Long Island City , Queens — left provisions for future construction to the Second Avenue Line . 
 Construction restarted in 2007 following the development of a financially secure construction plan . The Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) awarded a tunneling contract for the first phase of the project to the consortium of Schiavone / Shea / Skanska ( S3 ) on March 20 , 2007 . This followed preliminary engineering and a final tunnel design completed by a joint venture between AECOM and Arup . Parsons Brinckerhoff is serving as the Construction Manager of the project . A full funding grant agreement with the Federal Transit Administration for the first phase of the project was received in November 2007 . A ceremonial ground @-@ breaking for the Second Avenue Subway was held on April 12 , 2007 . The first phase of the line consists of three new stations and two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of tunnel , costing $ 4 @.@ 45 billion . The contractor prepared the initial construction site at 96th Street on April 23 , 2007 . The tunnel boring machine launch box was completed in May 2010 , and on May 14 , MTA 's contractors completed the TBM installation and turned it on . On March 28 , 2011 , S3 , having completed the west tunnel to 65th Street , began drilling for the east tunnel , which completed its run to the Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station 's bellmouth on September 22 , 2011 . As of July 1 , 2016 , the first phase was 96 @.@ 3 % complete . 
 = = Initial attempts = = 
 From 1919 through the 1980s , several different entities came up with many distinct plans for the Second Avenue subway line that were never carried out . The complex reasons for these delays are why the line is sometimes called " The Line That Time Forgot " . 
 = = = 1919 – 41 : Initial planning = = = 
 After World War I , the New York City Subway experienced a surge in ridership . By 1920 , 1 @.@ 3 billion annual passengers were riding the subway , compared to 523 million annual riders just seven years before the war . In 1919 , the New York Public Service Commission launched a study at the behest of engineer Daniel L. Turner to determine what improvements were needed in the city 's public transport system . Turner 's final paper , titled Proposed Comprehensive Rapid Transit System , was a massive plan calling for new routes under almost every north @-@ south Manhattan avenue , extensions to lines in Brooklyn and Queens , and several crossings of the Narrows to Staten Island . Massively scaled @-@ down versions of some of Turner 's plans were found in proposals for the new city @-@ owned Independent Subway System ( IND ) . Among the plans was a massive trunk line under Second Avenue consisting of at least six tracks and numerous branches throughout Brooklyn , Queens , and the Bronx . Turner also proposed that the two elevated lines be knocked down to make room for the 6 @-@ track Second Avenue Subway . The plan was to connect the new line to the then @-@ unbuilt Sixth Avenue and Eighth Avenue subway lines . 
 In January 1927 , Turner submitted a revised proposal . It was now going to connect to a Tenth Avenue trunk line as well as to crosstown lines in the Bronx and Queens . The Second Avenue Subway was still a six @-@ track line through Manhattan , except for a short eight @-@ track tunnel at its junction with the Queens lines . The plan called for a connection to the IND Concourse Line in the Bronx , as well as another one to the IND Fulton Street Line in Brooklyn . Such a plan would have cost $ 165 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 248 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , including connections and underwater crossings . As the IRT Lexington Avenue Line got more crowded , some suggested ideas that were considered unusual . One suggestion included a new tunnel under Lexington Avenue , while another included a tunnel under a separate right @-@ of @-@ way between Second and Third Avenue . 
 In 1929 , the Board of Transportation of the City of New York tentatively approved the expansion , which included a Second Avenue Line with a projected construction cost of $ 98 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 351 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , not counting land acquisition . From north to south , the 1929 plan included four tracks from the Harlem River ( where it would continue north as a Bronx trunk line with several branches ) to 125th Street , six tracks from 125th Street to a link with the Sixth Avenue Line at 61st Street , four tracks from 61st Street to Chambers Street , and two tracks from Chambers Street to Pine Street . The plan was soon modified with the addition of another Bronx branch , as well as an extension of the subway to Water and Wall Streets . At the time , it was supposed to be completed between 1938 and 1941 . In anticipation of the line 's opening , real estate prices along the proposed route rose by an average of 50 % . 
 Due to the Great Depression , the soaring costs of the expansion became unmanageable . Construction on the first phase of the IND was already behind schedule , and the city and state were no longer able to provide funding . By 1930 , the line was shortened to between 125th and 34th Streets , with a turnoff at 34th Street and a crosstown connection there ; this line was to be complete by 1948 . The line above 32nd Street was to start construction in 1931 , with construction of a southern extension to Houston Street to commence in 1935 ; these segments would open in 1937 and 1940 , respectively . This scaled @-@ down plan was postponed in 1931 . By 1932 , the Board of Transportation had come up with another plan , which omitted a branch in the Bronx in order to cut costs . The new line 's southern terminus would be truncated to the Nassau Street Loop . 
 Further revision of the plan and more studies followed . By 1939 , construction had been postponed indefinitely , and Second Avenue line was relegated to " proposed " status , and was number 14 on the Board of Transportation 's list of important transportation projects . The Second Avenue line was also cut to two tracks , but now had a connection to the BMT Broadway Line . The reduced plan now had a single northern branch through Throggs Neck , Bronx , and a branch south into Brooklyn , connecting to a stub of the IND Fulton Street Line at the Court Street station , which is now the site of the New York Transit Museum . The subway was now also US $ 249 million ( equivalent to $ 4 @,@ 006 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The United States ' entry into World War II in 1941 halted all but the most urgent public works projects , delaying the Second Avenue Line once again . 
 = = = 1940s – 50s : After World War II = = = 
 As part of the unification of the three subway companies that comprised the New York City Subway , elevated lines were being shut down all over the city and replaced by subways , continuing the IND 's trend of phasing out elevated lines and streetcars in favor of new subways . For example , the IND Sixth Avenue Line replaced the Sixth Avenue Elevated , while the IND Fulton Street Line replaced the Fulton Street Elevated . Demolition of the <unk> also had the perceived effect of revitalizing the neighborhoods . The northern half of the Second Avenue Elevated , serving the Upper East Side and East Harlem closed in 1940 ; the southern half , running through Lower Manhattan , East Midtown and across the Queensborough Bridge to Queens , closed on June 13 , 1942 . The demolition of the Second Avenue elevated caused overcrowding on the Astoria and Flushing Lines in Queens , which no longer had direct service along Manhattan 's far East Side . Because of the elevated line 's closure , as well as a corresponding increase in the East Side population , the need for a Second Avenue subway increased . 
 In 1944 , Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia announced that work on the Second Avenue subway line was progressing . The same year , BOT superintendent Philip E. Pheifer came up with a map of train frequencies for the line , with about 56 trains per hour projected to go through the Second Avenue line . Pheifer also put forth a proposal for Second Avenue Subway services , which would branch extensively off to B Division lines , including the IND Sixth Avenue Line , BMT Broadway Line , and BMT Nassau Street Line , via pre @-@ existing BMT trackage over the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges . From Canal Street to 57th Street the line was to be four tracks , with six tracks north of 57th Street . South of Canal Street there would be two tracks . The subway was to be opened by 1951 . In addition , a new Bronx Branch would replace the Third Avenue El in the Bronx . By 1945 , though , plans for the Second Avenue Subway were again revised . The southern two @-@ track portion was abandoned as a possible future plan for connecting the line to Brooklyn , through a Bronx route to Throggs Neck was put forth . 
 Under Mayor William O 'Dwyer and General Charles P. Gross , another plan was put forth in 1947 by Colonel Sidney H. Bingham , a city planner and former Interborough Rapid Transit Company ( IRT ) engineer . O 'Dwyer and Gross believed that construction of a Second Avenue subway line would be vital to both increasing capacity on existing lines and allowing new branch lines to be built . This plan would again connect the Second Avenue Line to Brooklyn . As with Pheifer 's proposal , a train frequency map was created ; however , Bingham 's proposal involved more branch lines and track connections . A connection to Brooklyn was to be made via the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridge , and would allow trains from these bridges to go onto the Sixth Avenue Line or the Second Avenue Line . Other connections to the Second Avenue Line were to be provided at 57th Street , via a line connecting to the Sixth Avenue Line ; two express tracks would be built along that line north of West Fourth Street . The IRT Pelham Line would be switched to the combined IND / BMT division ( this plan also includes other connections , which have been built ) , and connected to the Second Avenue Line . The Second Avenue Line would end just north of that connection , at 149th Street , with transfers to the IRT White Plains Road Line and the elevated IRT Third Avenue Line , the latter of which would be demolished south of 149th Street . There would also be a connection to the IND Concourse Line . The line was to be built in sections . The Manhattan section was top @-@ priority , but the Brooklyn section was 19th on the priority list , and the Bronx section did not have a specific priority . 
 By the next year , New York City had budget shortfalls . The City was short of $ 145 million ( in 1948 dollars ) that were needed for rehabilitation and proposed capital improvements , which cost a total of $ 800 million . The City petitioned the New York State Legislature to exceed its $ 655 million debt ceiling so that the city could spend $ 500 million on subway construction , but this request was denied . 
 The New York Board of Transportation ordered ten new prototype subway cars made of stainless steel from the Budd Company . These R11 cars , so called because of their contract number , were delivered in 1949 and specifically intended for the Second Avenue Subway . They cost US $ 100 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) each ; the train became known as the " million dollar train " . The cars featured porthole style round windows and a new public address system . Reflecting public health concerns of the day , especially regarding polio , the R11 cars were equipped with electrostatic air filters and ultraviolet lamps in their ventilation systems to kill germs . 
 By 1949 , Queens and Lower Manhattan residents complained that the Second Avenue Subway would not create better transit options for them . A year later , revised plans called for a connection from Second Avenue at 76th Street to Queens , under 34th Avenue and Northern Boulevard , via a new tunnel under the East River . Connections would also be made to the Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) ' s Rockaway Beach Branch . New York voters approved a bond measure for its construction in 1951 , and the city was barely able to raise the requisite $ 559 million for the construction effort . However , the onset of the Korean War caused soaring prices for construction materials and saw the beginning of massive inflation . Money from the 1951 bond measure was diverted to buy new cars , lengthen platforms , and maintain other parts of the aging New York City Subway system . Out of a half @-@ billion @-@ dollar bond measure , only $ 112 million ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 021 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , or 22 % of the original amount , went toward the Second Avenue Subway . By then , construction was due to start by either 1952 or 1957 , with estimated completion by 1958 at the earliest . Because many people thought that the bonds were solely to be used on the new subway , many people accused the New York City Transit Authority ( NYCTA ) of misusing the bonds . 
 A block to the west of the proposed subway line , the Manhattan section of the Third Avenue Elevated , the only other elevated line in the area , closed on May 13 , 1955 , and was demolished in 1956 . Contrary to what many East Side residents thought , the demolition of the <unk> did not help the travel situation , as the Lexington Avenue Line was now the only subway transportation option on the East Side . 
 By 1957 , it had been made clear that the 1951 bond issue was not going to be able to pay for the Second Avenue Line . The money had been used for other projects , such as the integration of the IRT Dyre Avenue Line , and IND Rockaway Line , and reconfiguration of the DeKalb Avenue Interlocking . By then , the New York Times despaired of the line 's ever being built . In March of that year , NYCTA chairman Charles L. Patterson stated that the NYCTA had used the bond funds properly and that the bonds were not dedicated solely to fund the Second Avenue Line . He stated that the bonds had been allocated to the corridor based on increasing ridership on the Second Avenue Line , but admitted that currency inflation , as well as necessary rehabilitation work to the existing lines , made the Second Avenue Line unlikely in the near future . 
 = = = 1960s – 1970s : Original construction efforts = = = 
 As the early 1960s progressed , the East Side experienced an increase in development , and the Lexington Avenue Line became overcrowded . In 1962 , construction began on a connection between the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges and the Sixth Avenue Line . This segment , the Chrystie Street Connection , was first proposed in the 1947 plan as the southern end of the Second Avenue line , which would feed into the two bridges . When opened in 1967 , the connection included a new station on the Sixth Avenue Line — Grand Street ( another station , 57th Street , opened in July 1968 ) — and introduced the most significant service changes ever carried out in the subway 's history . Grand Street , located under Chrystie Street ( the southern end of Second Avenue ) was designed to include cross @-@ platform transfers between the Sixth Avenue and Second Avenue Lines . Although the connection only served Sixth Avenue Line trains , it was essentially the first part of the Second Avenue line constructed . 
 In 1964 , Congress passed the Urban Mass Transportation Act , promising federal money to fund mass transit projects in America 's cities via the Urban Mass Transportation Administration ( <unk> ) . Three years later , voters approved a $ 2 @.@ 5 billion ( worth about $ 17 @,@ 742 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in current dollars ) Transportation Bond Issue , which provided over $ 600 million ( worth $ 4 @,@ 258 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) for New York City projects , including for a 1968 Program for Action . The Second Avenue project , for a line from 34th Street to the Bronx , was given top priority . The City secured a $ 25 million <unk> grant for initial construction . 
 The Program for Action proposed a Second Avenue line to be built in two phases : The first phase would start from 34th Street in Midtown , running up Second Avenue to 126th Street and continuing to the Bronx , with stops planned at 34th , 48th , 57th , 86th , 106th , and 125th Streets . The 48th Street stop would connect to a planned Metropolitan Transportation Center at Third Avenue and 48th Street , which would contain a new east side terminal for the Long Island Rail Road . The line included older proposals for connections to the Sixth Avenue and Broadway lines in Midtown via a new crosstown line , which would now be located on 63rd Street . The BMT 63rd Street Line would also include a connection allowing Second Avenue line trains to run to Queens . In the Bronx , the line would run along East 138th Street , with a cross @-@ platform transfer to Lexington Avenue Line trains at Brook Avenue on the IRT Pelham Line , which would be reconfigured . After that , Second Avenue line trains would use a new express bypass line along East 138th Street , and the former tracks of the New York , Westchester and Boston Railway ( NY & WB ) near the Bruckner Expressway . In Hunts Point , service would split into two branches . One branch would continue to use former NY & WB trackage to East 180th Street , at which point the line would connect to the IRT Dyre Avenue Line . A second branch would connect to the IRT Pelham Line in the vicinity of Whitlock Avenue station , another element from earlier plans . The first branch would take over all service on the Dyre Avenue Line , offering cross @-@ platform transfers to IRT White Plains Road Line trains at East 180th Street station , which would also be reconfigured . The second branch would take over service on the upper portion of the Pelham Line , between Whitlock Avenue and Pelham Bay Park . All stations on the Dyre Avenue and upper Pelham Lines would have platforms shaved back to accommodate larger B Division trains . 
 The second phase of construction would extend the Second Avenue line south from 34th Street in Midtown to Lower Manhattan , with stations at 23rd , 14th , Houston and Grand Streets , Chatham Square , Pine / Wall Streets , and a terminal at Whitehall Street . Free transfers would be offered to existing lines at 14th Street , Houston Street and Whitehall Street , while Grand Street would be reconstructed . Pine @-@ Wall and Whitehall Street stations would both have four tracks ( two platform levels with two tracks each ) in order to increase the capacity of Whitehall Street terminal above 30 trains per hour , and to improve passenger flow . Also during this phase , service on the upper Pelham Line would be extended to Co @-@ op City , Bronx . A third branch of the Second Avenue line to replace the Third Avenue El in the Bronx would also be built , running adjacent to the right @-@ of @-@ way of Metro @-@ North ’ s Harlem Line on Park Avenue . 
 The line 's planned stops in Manhattan , spaced farther apart than those on existing subway lines , proved controversial ; the Second Avenue line was criticized as a " rich man 's express , circumventing the Lower East Side with its complexes of high @-@ rise low- and middle @-@ income housing and slums in favor of a silk stocking route . ” People protested for almost a year over the lack of stations at 72nd and 96th Streets ; while a 72nd Street station was added in October 1970 , the 96th Street station was still not in the official plans , despite the proximity of the Metropolitan Hospital Center to the proposed station . In response to public outcry , the MTA announced the addition of a station at 96th Street in 1971 . The line ’ s planned route on Second Avenue , Chrystie Street and the Bowery in the Lower East Side also drew criticism from citizens and officials . In January 1970 , the MTA issued a plan for a spur line , called the " <unk> " , to serve the heart of the Lower East Side : branching off from the IND Sixth Avenue Line near the Second Avenue station , the spur would run east on Houston Street , turn north on Avenue C , and turn west on 14th Street , connecting to the BMT Canarsie Line . 
 Despite the controversy over the number of stops and route , a groundbreaking ceremony was held on October 27 , 1972 at Second Avenue and 103rd Street . Construction began shortly thereafter on what was to be the 99th – 105th Streets segment , which was projected to cost $ 17 @.@ 48 million ( worth about $ 98 @,@ 886 @,@ 000 today ) . Construction costs for the entire line were pegged at $ 1 billion ( about $ 5 @.@ 657 billion today ) , and rose to $ 1 @.@ 3 billion ( about $ 6 @.@ 93 billion today ) a year later . On October 25 , 1973 , the line 's Chinatown segment commenced construction at Canal Street under the foot of the Manhattan Bridge ; this segment , between Canal and Pell Streets , was due to be completed by 1980 and was being built at a cost of $ 8 @.@ 3 million ( equal to about $ 44 @,@ 244 @,@ 000 in current dollars ) . Less than a year later , on July 25 , 1974 , construction for an East Village segment of the line started near Second Street , spanning between 2nd Street and 9th Street . Another contract , for a Midtown segment between 50th and 54th Streets , was awarded that year , but construction never commenced . In total , construction on the Second Avenue Line during the 1970s spanned over 27 blocks . A segment between 110th and 120th Streets in East Harlem was also completed at a cost of $ 34 @.@ 45 million ( equivalent to $ 194 @,@ 888 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . 
 However , the city soon experienced its most dire fiscal crisis yet , due to the stagnant economy of the early 1970s , combined with the massive outflow of city residents to the suburbs . By 1974 , New York City mayor Abraham Beame was considering reallocating $ 5 @.@ 1 billion of funding from the Second Avenue Line to the existing infrastructure , which was rapidly deteriorating and in dire need of repair . In September 1975 , Beame issued a stop @-@ work order for the line . Construction of the line was halted , and no other funding was to be allocated to the line 's construction . Besides the Chrystie Street Connection , only three sections of tunnel had been completed ; these tunnels were sealed . By 1978 , when the New York City Subway was at its lowest point in its existence , State Comptroller Arthur Levitt stated that there were no plans to finish the line . During the 1980s , plans for the Second Avenue line stagnated . Construction on the 63rd Street Lines continued ; the IND portion of the line opened in 1989 , but it did not include a connection to the Second Avenue line . Of this failure to complete construction , Gene <unk> , an advocate for subway riders since 1981 , stated : " It 's the most famous thing that 's never been built in New York City , so everyone is skeptical and rightly so . It 's much @-@ promised and never delivered . " 
 = = = = Segments completed in the 1970s = = = = 
 When construction on the line was halted in 1975 , three tunnel segments were completed : one from 99th to 105th Streets and a second from 110th to 120th Streets , both under Second Avenue in East Harlem , and a third from Pell to Canal Streets in Chinatown , under the Confucius Apartments complex next to the Bowery . They were not initially outfitted with track or signals . Over the next few decades , the MTA regularly inspected and maintained the tunnel segments ( spending $ 20 @,@ 000 a year by the early 1990s ) , to maintain the structural integrity of the streets above , and in case construction would ever resume . Trespassers would often camp in the tunnels until the MTA increased security . 
 The modern construction plan for the Second Avenue Subway , developed in 2004 , would make use of most of these tunnel segments . The first phase of service , which will reroute Q train service from the 60th Street Line ( to Queens ) to the BMT 63rd Street Line ( and north to 96th Street ) , would use the tunnel segment between 99th and 105th Streets for storage of up to four trainsets . By mid @-@ 2013 , work had resumed in this tunnel segment , involving the addition of track and signals , mechanical and plumbing equipment , and upgrading the tunnels to meet modern fire code standards . Phase 2 , which does not have a set timetable for construction , is planned to extend Q train service from 96th Street to 125th Street . During Phase 2 , both East Harlem segments will be connected , modified , and used for normal train service . In 2007 , the MTA reported that the segments were in pristine condition . 
 The fourth phase of construction will bring the Second Avenue line through Chinatown at an undetermined date . However , the tunnel under the Confucius Apartments is not planned to be used ; while original plans involved the Second Avenue line running at the same depth of the Sixth Avenue Line at the Grand Street station , that option would require the utilization of cut @-@ and @-@ cover construction methods , which would disrupt the community and require the demolition of several nearby structures . Instead the MTA has proposed a deeper tunnel alignment in this area , including a new lower level at Grand Street , to reduce construction impacts on the Chinatown community . As a result , trains will be unable to use this tunnel segment ; however , the MTA suggests that the tunnel segment could be used to store ancillary facilities for the subway line , such as a power substation or a ventilation facility . 
 Some construction work also took place between 2nd and 9th Streets , though the extent is disputed . Some reports say that only utilities were relocated , while others say that this section was excavated but later filled back in . 
 = = 2000s – present : Construction and development = = 
 With the city 's economic and budgetary recovery in the 1990s , there was a revival of efforts to complete construction of the SAS . Rising ridership on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line , the only subway trunk line east of Central Park , demonstrated the need for the Second Avenue Line , as capacity and safety concerns rose . The four @-@ track IRT Lexington Avenue Line , the lone rapid transit option in the Upper East Side and East Harlem since the 1955 closure of the Third Avenue elevated , is the most crowded subway line in the country . The line sees an average of 1 @.@ 3 million daily riders , more than the entire Washington Metro system ( which has the second @-@ highest ridership in the U.S. ) and more than the rail transit systems of San Francisco and Boston combined . Local bus routes are just as crowded during various times of the day , with the surface Second Avenue Line , carrying the M15 and M15 SBS buses , seeing an annual ridership of 17 @.@ 5 million , or a daily ridership of about 47 @,@ 945 . The construction of the Second Avenue line would add another two tracks to fill the gap that has existed since the elevated Second and Third Avenue Lines were demolished in the 1950s . 
 = = = 1995 – 2007 : Planning = = = 
 In the early 1990s , New York governor Mario Cuomo allocated $ 22 million to renew planning and design efforts for the Second Avenue line , but in 1993 the MTA , facing budget cuts , removed these funds from its capital budget . In 1995 , the MTA began its Manhattan East Side Alternatives ( MESA ) study , seeking ways to alleviate overcrowding on the Lexington Avenue Line and improve mobility on Manhattan 's East Side . The study analyzed several alternatives , such as improvements to the Lexington Avenue Line to increase capacity , enhanced bus service with dedicated lanes , and light rail or ferry service on the East Side . The favored alternative , build alternative 1 included a subway running down Second Avenue , from 125th Street in Harlem to the existing Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station with provisions for expansion to the Bronx and to Lower Manhattan . Build alternative two would involve the addition of a separate light rail service between Union Square and Broad Street that would serve the Lower East Side and Lower Manhattan . Due in part to strong public support , the MTA committed in 2000 to building a full @-@ length subway line along the East Side , from East Harlem to Lower Manhattan . In 2001 , a contract for subway design was awarded to <unk> Harris / Arup Joint Venture . 
 The MTA 's final environmental impact statement was approved in April 2004 ; this latest proposal is for a two @-@ track line from 125th Street and Lexington Avenue in Harlem , down Second Avenue to Hanover Square in the Financial District . The new subway line will actually carry two services . The full @-@ length Second Avenue line , extending from Harlem to the Financial District , is to be given the color turquoise and the letter designation T. However , a rerouted Q , the line 's other service , will begin carrying passengers first . The MTA plan calls for building the Second Avenue Subway in four segments with connections to other subway lines . The first segment ( Phase One ) is a proposed reroute of the Q , the Broadway Express via the BMT 63rd Street Line and north along Second Avenue to the Upper East Side at 96th Street . Phase Two will extend the rerouted Q train to 125th Street . In Phase Three , the new T train will run from 125th Street to Houston Street . The final phase will extend T train service from Houston Street to Hanover Square in Lower Manhattan . Track maps on the MTA 's website show that all stations , except for 125th Street , will have two tracks and one island platform . ( 72nd Street was conceived as a three @-@ track , two @-@ platform station , as is 125th Street . However , the 72nd Street station is being constructed with two tracks and one platform . ) 
 In August 2006 , the MTA revealed that all future subway stations , including ones built for the Second Avenue subway , the 7 Subway Extension , and the new South Ferry station will be outfitted with air @-@ cooling systems to reduce the temperature along platforms by as much as 10 ° F ( 6 ° C ) . The Second Avenue Subway was also to have platform screen doors to assist with air @-@ cooling and ventilation , but this plan was scrapped in 2012 as cost @-@ prohibitive . 
 The first phase will be within budget , at $ 4 @.@ 45 billion . The total cost of the 8 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) line is expected to exceed $ 17 billion . According to MTA Capital Construction President Dr. Michael Horodniceanu , the whole line may be completed as early as 2029 and would serve 560 @,@ 000 daily passengers upon completion . 
 = = = 2007 – present : First phase = = = 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Second Avenue Subway plans for Phase 1 were only allowed to proceed because New York voters passed a transportation bond issue on November 8 , 2005 , allowing for dedicated funding allocated for that phase . Its passage had been seen as critical to its construction . After warning that failure to pass the act would doom the project , MTA chairman Peter S. <unk> stated that " Now it 's up to us to complete the job " given its approval by a 55 – 45 percent margin . In addition , the U.S. Department of Transportation announced , on December 18 , 2006 , that they would allow the MTA to commit up to $ 693 million in funds to begin construction of the Second Avenue Subway Line and that the federal share of such costs would be reimbursed with FTA transit funds , subject to appropriations and final labor certification . 
 The Phase 1 construction site was designated as being from 105th Street and Second Avenue to 63rd Street and Third Avenue . Deep bore tunneling methods were to be used in order to avoid the disruptions for road traffic , pedestrians , utilities and local businesses produced by cut @-@ and @-@ cover methods of past generations . Stations were to retain cut @-@ and @-@ cover construction . 
 Preliminary engineering and a final tunnel design was completed by a joint venture between AECOM and Arup . On March 20 , 2007 , upon completion of preliminary engineering , the MTA awarded a contract for constructing the tunnels between 92nd and 63rd Streets , a launch box for the tunnel boring machine ( TBM ) at 92nd to 95th Streets , and access shafts at 69th and 72nd Streets . This contract , valued at $ 337 million , was awarded to S3 , a joint venture of Schiavone Construction , Skanska USA Civil , and J.F. Shea Construction . A ceremonial groundbreaking took place on April 12 , 2007 , in a tunnel segment built in the 1970s at 99th Street . At the time , it was announced that passengers would be able to ride trains on the new line by the end of 2013 . Actual construction work began , on the surface of Second Avenue between 91st and 95th Streets , on April 23 , 2007 . Initial construction work involved moving utility pipes , wires , and other infrastructure , which took 14 months , far more than the MTA 's anticipated eight months . For boring , a trench was dug from 96th to 93rd Streets . 
 In November 2007 , Mary Peters , the United States Secretary of Transportation , announced that the Second Avenue Subway would receive $ 1 @.@ 3 billion in federal funding for the project 's first phase , to be funded over a seven @-@ year period . However , due to cost increases for construction materials and diesel fuel affecting the prices of contracts not yet signed , the MTA announced in June 2008 that certain features of the Second Avenue Subway would be simplified to save money . One set of changes , which significantly reduces the footprint of the subway in the vicinity of 72nd Street , is the alteration of the 72nd Street Station from a three @-@ track , two @-@ platform design to a two @-@ track , single island platform design , paired with a simplification of the connection to the Broadway Line spur . Supplemental environmental impact studies covering the changes for the proposed 72nd Street and 86th Street stations were completed in June 2009 . 
 On May 28 , 2009 , the MTA awarded a $ 303 @.@ 8 million contract to E.E. Cruz and Tully Construction Co . , a joint venture and limited liability company , to construct the 96th Street station box . Work began in July on site clearing and utility relocation necessary to prepare for the installation of slurry walls between 95th and 99th Streets where the station connects to the existing tunnel section . In June 2009 , the first of three contracts for the 86th Street station was awarded for the advance utility relocation work and construction of cut and cover shaft areas at 83rd and 86th Streets . This contract provided two vertical starter shafts that were used by a subsequent contractor to excavate the station cavern in the rock between 83rd and 86th Streets . 
 During construction , two buildings had to be evacuated in June 2009 due to construction work . On June 5 , 2009 , an apartment building at 1772 Second Avenue was evacuated by the NYC Department of Buildings ( DOB ) after it was determined that the building was in danger of collapse . Then on June 29 , 2009 , the DOB evacuated a mixed use building at 1768 Second Avenue / 301 East 92nd Street because it too was in danger of collapse . The evacuation of these two buildings delayed the contractor 's plan to use controlled blasting to remove bedrock in the southern section of the launch box . Until the blasting permits could be issued , MTA required contractors to use mechanical equipment to remove the bedrock , which is slower than blasting out the rock . 
 The tunnel boring machine was originally expected to arrive six to eight months after construction began , but the utility relocation and excavation required to create its " launch box " delayed its deployment until May 2010 . On May 14 , 2010 , MTA 's contractors completed the TBM installation and turned it on at the Second Avenue Subway launch box at 96th Street and boring southward to connecting shafts built at 86th and 72nd Streets . 
 On October 1 , 2010 , MTA awarded a $ 431 million contract to joint venture SSK Constructors for the mining of the tunnels connecting the 72nd Street station to the existing Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station , and for the excavation and heavy civil structures of the 72nd Street station . A subsequent contract was awarded to Skanska Traylor Joint Venture for excavation of the cavern at the 86th Street station on August 4 , 2011 . In January 2011 , MTA awarded <unk> Contracting a 40 @-@ month , $ 176 @.@ 4 million contract to rebuild and enlarge the Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station . 
 Meanwhile , the tunnel boring machine dug at a rate of approximately 50 feet ( 15 m ) per day . The machine finished its run at the planned endpoint under 65th Street on February 5 , 2011 . S3 partially disassembled the TBM and backed it out of the tunnel . It was repositioned in the east starter tunnel to begin boring again . Because the east side of Second Avenue has some soft ground not compatible with the Robbins TBM , ground @-@ freezing was undertaken to prepare the soil for the TBM . On March 28 , 2011 , S3 , having completed its task of completing the 7 @,@ 200 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 200 m ) west tunnel to 65th Street , began drilling the east tunnel , with the first 200 feet ( 61 m ) being through soil frozen by S3 using calcium chloride solution fed through a network of pipes . The TBM drilling the east tunnel will negotiate the curve onto 63rd Street and break through the bellmouth at the existing 63rd Street subway station . The portion of the west tunnel remaining to be created will be mined using conventional drill @-@ and @-@ blast methods , because the curve S3 construction teams would have to negotiate is too tight for the TBM . On September 22 , 2011 , the TBM completed its run to the Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station 's bellmouth . 
 The final contract , for architectural and mechanical and electrical work at 72nd , 86th , and 96th Street stations ; rehabilitation of the Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street station ; and the Systems Contract ( track , signals , and communications ) for the entire Phase 1 area was awarded on June 1 , 2013 . On a July 2013 " report card " that indicated the progress of the subway by Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney , the construction progress got a " B " . Blasting for the station caverns was finished in November 2013 , and the muck houses were taken down at around the same time . 
 In the winter of 2013 , many of the tracks and signal panels began to arrive at the construction site , to be installed on the line over the next few years . It was reported in November 2013 that one third of the tracks for the line had arrived , for the segments of track between 87th and 105th Streets ; the tracks were being stored at 96th Street station . As of May 21 , 2015 , the first phase of construction was more than 80 % complete . By August 2015 , the construction project was 84 @.@ 3 % complete , with all 10 Phase 1 construction contracts having been awarded and 5 of them having been completed . As of July 1 , 2016 , the first phase was 96 @.@ 3 % complete . 
 = = = = Schedules for construction and planning = = = = 
 The MTA and its contractors on the project meet on a regular basis with the Manhattan Community Board 8 Second Avenue Subway Task Force and Manhattan Community Board 11 to report on construction progress and to seek input from the community . 
 The MTA 's forecasted opening date for Phase I is December 30 , 2016 , as of January 2 , 2015 . Horodniceanu called earlier estimates lacking " the precision required " . On May 2 , 2014 , it was reported that Phase 1 of the line was 66 % complete , and six of the ten construction contracts awarded were already being worked on . The agency was still targeting December 2016 as a completion date , and the project is still within budget at a cost of $ 4 @.@ 45 billion , while serving approximately 200 @,@ 000 daily riders . As of April 2015 , the first phase is 82 % complete . 
 Estimated completion schedules have been widely varying . As of 2009 , the proposed construction schedule showed the Second Avenue Subway opening for passenger service in 2016 . Other publications have listed expected construction dates for Phase 1 , as well as mentioned the possible December 2016 opening . In its 2008 capital improvement budget proposal , the MTA pushed back completion of Phase 1 from 2014 to 2015 , and in 2009 , the MTA pushed it back again to 2016 . As of February 2016 , the line is still scheduled to open in December 2016 . On February 24 , 2016 , the MTA allocated $ 66 million to speed up the construction of the first phase so that it could open in December . However , in June 2016 , it was reported that contractors for the MTA were not expending extra resources to accelerate the last portion of Phase 1 construction , and that the MTA had only completed 67 % of testing , with the line requiring another 1 @,@ 100 equipment tests by October 2016 in order to be deemed operational . The contractors and the MTA blamed the delays on each other , with the MTA saying that the contractors did not show up to work on certain days ; the contractors , on the other hand , said that the MTA had asked for over 2 @,@ 500 design changes during construction , and in some cases , the contractors had to destroy and rebuild sidewalks , rooms , entrances , and other design elements that had already been built . 
 In a public meeting in May 2016 , the MTA unveiled the first iteration New York City Subway map that included the Second Avenue Subway and a rerouted Q service . At the meeting , the MTA also made several suggestions for service changes , including making the N train express in Manhattan and replacing the Queens section of the Q , as well as the Manhattan local section of the N , with a resurrected W train . 
 In July 2016 , news outlets reported that the Second Avenue Line had a " significant risk " of a delayed opening . The test train for the subway line was not set to run until October 2016 , despite the line being projected to open within two months of that date . Also , contractors had only reached 70 % of the construction milestones for June 2016 , and 80 % of the May 2016 milestones . For instance , communications systems at the stations were not finished , despite the fact that these systems should have been wired already , and the elevator at 72nd Street had not been delivered yet . As of July 25 , 2016 , construction spending was only $ 32 million for the month , even though a monthly spending goal of $ 46 million was needed to complete the project on time . 
 = = = = Controversies = = = = 
 In February 2011 , a lawsuit was filed by the Yorkshire Towers at 86th Street over the location of two proposed Second Avenue Subway entrances that were located right in front of the building but facing away from its semicircular driveway . The quality of life for building tenants was allegedly to be destroyed if the entrances were to be built in the location ; however , the lawsuit was later dismissed . In an unrelated 2012 controversy , some residents in the 72nd Street station area claimed to have come down with a " Second Avenue cough " caused by dust from construction , and local doctors saw that the air quality of the area had decreased while nasal sicknesses had increased . The MTA tried to combat this by creating new structures and using other methods to reduce dust inhalation . The MTA prepared a report that said in the 86th Street station area " all monitored concentrations were below the established benchmark levels " . 
 The New York Daily News alleged that the subway project was very unsafe . For example , on August 8 , 2012 , an explosion caused rocks to fly all over an intersection . Less than two weeks later , on August 21 , 2012 , an uncontrolled blast for the station was done incorrectly , causing a large explosion that sent debris into the air and broke windows of buildings in the area and damaged nearby sidewalks . In another instance , contaminated rocks were carried away from a construction site on 63rd Street , and the incident went unnoticed . On March 19 , 2013 , in yet another allegation of wrongdoing , a construction worker got stuck in waist @-@ deep muck at the 96th Street station site , but while he was extricated after four hours of rescue efforts , he nearly died after the incident . 
 In a product @-@ related controversy involving the Second Avenue Subway project , American Standard Testing and Consulting Laboratories ( <unk> ) , company president Alan <unk> , and five other executives admitted filing false documents on the subway tunnels and " thousands " of other New York City construction projects within 10 years . <unk> had replaced <unk> Inc . , another firm indicted for faking concrete tests , in 2008 . 
 = = = Construction methods = = = 
 Planned construction methods varied depending on the section of the line , due to varying underground conditions . The methods planned for each section were as follows : 
 A number of methods will be used to tunnel for 13 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 8 @.@ 5 mi ) underneath Manhattan , which is densely populated . About 90 % of the tunneling is to be performed by a tunnel boring machine . The rest will be done using the cut and cover method and mined drill and blast , for sections , generally the 16 stations , that average 275 meters ( 902 ft ) in length . The stations at 86th and 72nd Streets were mined . This was challenging , given the number of expensive high rise properties in their vicinities . The 96th Street cut @-@ and @-@ cover station was about 15 meters ( 49 ft ) deep , making it one of the shallowest stations being built on the line ; the shallowness was so that the new line could align with the preexisting piece of subway tunnel built in the 1970s between 99th and 105th Streets . Stations at the two mined stations are between 25 @.@ 9 and 27 @.@ 4 meters ( 85 and 90 ft ) deep in rock . The construction method that was used was supposed to ease concerns for buildings above the station sites , because only two shafts were required for excavation . 
 In Phase 1 , there was tunneling between East 63rd and 92nd Streets and a 248 @-@ by @-@ 23 @-@ meter @-@ wide ( 814 by 75 ft ) TBM launch box was built . That tunnel box is now part of the 96th Street station . Two access shafts were constructed for the 72nd Street station . <unk> or diaphragm walls , 1 @.@ 1 meters ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) wide and 6 @.@ 1 meters ( 20 ft ) long and about 35 meters ( 115 ft ) deep , were built alongside the sections between East 93rd and 95th Streets . Since the rock is shallower between East 91st and 93rd Streets , 1 @.@ 1 @-@ meter @-@ diameter ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) secant piles did the same work at shallower depths . 
 Earth excavation was conducted between walls once they were installed , and box structures were built using a bottom @-@ up construction method . Temporary decking constituted the top of the boxes , and the decking both braced the excavation and supported the walls and Second Avenue traffic . Of the below @-@ ground obstacles , Arup director of construction David <unk> stated : " It 's a spaghetti of tunnels , utilities , pipes and cables — I 've never seen anything like it . " Complicating the process , the project must go over , or under , subway lines , Amtrak railway lines , and the Queens @-@ Midtown Tunnel linking Manhattan and Queens , in later phases . 
 There are three options for subway construction between 11th Street and Hanover Square . One option known as the Shallow Chrystie Option would mainly use cut and cover , while the Deep Chrystie Street and Forsyth Option would use a combination of the Earth Pressure Balance Machine ( <unk> ) and cut and cover . 
 There were geological anomalies along the way . Manhattan 's geology changes along the subway 's length , passing through rock and soft ground , consisting of sands , silts , and clays over Manhattan schist , and there are faults and shear zones as well as fractured rock . Hard @-@ rock Tunnel Boring Machines 6 @.@ 7 meters ( 22 ft ) in diameter tunneled during the first phase , progressing at a rate of about 20 meters ( 66 ft ) per day . 
 The stations on the line were built so that they are more wide open than most other underground subway stations in the system ; because of this , Horodniceanu likened the Second Avenue Subway stations to the stations on the Washington Metro . The tracks themselves are built atop rubber padding so as to reduce the noise from the trains . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Route = = = 
 The plans for the Second Avenue Subway involve digging 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) of new tunnel from 125th Street in Harlem south to Hanover Square , which is located in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan . During Phase 1 , the initial phase , the line was to begin at the intersection of Second Avenue and 96th Street , running south to join the BMT Broadway Line via the existing , but rarely used , BMT 63rd Street Line . Phase I stations will be located at 96th Street , 86th Street and 72nd Street . The Q service will be routed to 96th Street . The Q service will initially have a rush @-@ hour service frequency of 7 @.@ 5 to 10 trains per hour , or one train every 8 to 6 minutes in each direction ; by contrast , the IRT Lexington Avenue Line 's express tracks ( 4 5 trains ) have an estimated rush @-@ hour frequency of 30 trains per hour , or one train approximately every 2 minutes in each direction . 
 In Phase 2 , Q service would be extended to 125th Street and Lexington Avenue . After Phase 3 , a new T service will operate from 125th Street to Houston Street . After Phase 4 opens , T service will run the full length of the line , from 125th Street to Hanover Square . 
 The Second Avenue Subway 's infrastructure also includes a connection to the BMT Broadway Line , utilizing an existing connection via the 63rd Street Line as part of phase 1 . The Q service will operate northward from 57th Street – Seventh Avenue , curving east under Central Park on the 63rd Street Line . The Q train would stop at Lexington Avenue – 63rd Street with a cross @-@ platform interchange to the F train before merging with the Second Avenue Line at 64th Street . Thus , after Phase 4 is completed , the residents of Spanish Harlem and the Upper East Side will have direct mass transit service down both Second Avenue and Broadway ( via transfer ) to the Financial District , and across the Manhattan Bridge to Brooklyn via the Q train . 
 An additional two @-@ track connection is planned between the line toward Lower Manhattan ( around 63rd Street ) and the IND 63rd Street Line toward Queens ; current plans do not call for it to be used by regular service . Provisions are also being made for an extension north under Second Avenue past 125th Street to the Bronx , and an extension south to Brooklyn . 
 = = = = Other phases = = = = 
 The second phase , between 125th and 96th Streets , was allocated $ 525 million in the MTA 's 2015 – 2019 Capital Plan for planning , design , environmental studies , and utility relocation . This budget originally carried $ 1 @.@ 5 billion , which would be used to start construction of the tunnels ; the MTA reduced the amount of money allocated in the budget , projecting that the agency would not be able to start construction by the end of the 5 @-@ year cycle in 2019 . Now , construction of the tunnels will likely be funded in future 5 @-@ year capital programs , and possibly not start until 2020 . Although the MTA previously expressed concerns about funding the Capital Program , spokesman Adam <unk> stated that the reduction in funding was a result of uncertain timing and not money issues . The delay had upset politicians and residents of East Harlem , who objected to the 3 @-@ to @-@ 4 @-@ year delay . In March 2016 , the MTA began advertising Requests for Proposals ( RFP ) for three new contracts for the second phase , which were planned to be awarded in summer 2016 . In April 2016 , the MTA and the State of New York reached a deal to restore funding to Phase 2 . 
 Phase 3 , from 63rd to Houston Streets , has no funding commitments . Phase 4 , from Houston Street to Hanover Square , also has no funding commitments . 
 = = = Stations = = = 
 = = = Future full @-@ length designation = = = 
 The MTA had decided to designate the future , full @-@ length Second Avenue service with the letter T , in part because : 
 The letters O and I are too easily confused with the digits 0 and 1 , respectively . 
 The letter K was used until the late 1980s to denote services on the IND Eighth Avenue Line , and earlier on the BMT Jamaica Line , and thus is not preferred . H was the Rockaway Park Shuttle 's internal route designator . 
 The letters P , U and Y are more easily confused with common words . 
 The T 's route emblem was colored turquoise ( hex triplet # <unk> , which could also be considered robin 's egg blue or teal ) because the color had also been used for the JFK Express in the past . In 2011 , turquoise was considered " the color of the year " , and at the time of the color 's selection in the 2000s , it was also considered a very upscale color . 
 = Mascarene parrot = 
 The Mascarene parrot or Mascarin ( Mascarinus mascarin ) is an extinct species of parrot that was endemic to the Mascarene island of Réunion in the western Indian Ocean . The taxonomic relationships of this species has been subject to debate . It has been connected to the Psittaculini parrots based on anatomical grounds , but to the vasa parrots based on genetic grounds . The exact placement is unresolved . 
 The Mascarene parrot was 35 cm ( 14 in ) in length with a large red bill and long , rounded tail feathers . Its legs were red , and it had naked red skin around the eyes and nostrils . It had a black facial mask and partially white tail feathers , but the colouration of the body , wings and head is unclear . Descriptions from life indicate the body and head were ash grey , and the white part of the tail had two dark central feathers . In contrast , descriptions based on stuffed specimens state that the body was brown and the head bluish but do not mention the dark central tail feathers . This may be due to the specimens having changed colour as a result of aging and exposure to light , as well as other forms of damage . Very little is known about the bird in life . 
 The Mascarene parrot was first mentioned in 1674 , and live specimens were later brought to Europe , where they lived in captivity . The species was scientifically described in 1771 . Only two stuffed specimens exist today , in Paris and Vienna . The date and cause of extinction for the Mascarene parrot is unclear . The latest account from 1834 is considered dubious , so it is probable that the species became extinct prior to 1800 , and may have become extinct in the wild even earlier . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Mascarene parrot was first mentioned by the French traveller Sieur Dubois in his 1674 travelogue and only described a few times from life afterwards . At least three live specimens were brought to France in the late 18th century and kept in captivity , two of which were described while alive . Today , two stuffed specimens exist . The holotype , specimen MNHN 211 , is in the Muséum National d 'Histoire Naturelle in Paris , while the other , specimen <unk> 50 @.@ 688 , is in the Naturhistorisches Museum in Vienna . The latter specimen was bought from the Leverian Museum during a sale in London in 1806 . A third stuffed specimen existed around the turn of the 18th century . 
 The Mascarene parrot was scientifically described as Psittacus mascarinus ( abbreviated as " mascarin " ) by Swedish zoologist Carolus Linnaeus in 1771 . This name was first used by French zoologist and natural philosopher Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760 but was not intended as a scientific name . The name is a reference to the Mascarene Islands , which were themselves named after their Portuguese discoverer , Pedro Mascarenhas . 
 Early writers claimed the Mascarene parrot was found on Madagascar , an idea that led French naturalist and ornithologist René Primevère Lesson to coin the junior synonym Mascarinus madagascariensis in 1831 . His new genus name prevailed and , when Tommaso Salvadori combined it with the earlier specific name in 1891 , it became a tautonym ( a scientific name in which the two parts are identical ) . Lesson also included species of the Tanygnathus and Psittacula genera in Mascarinus , but this was not accepted by other writers . The following year , German herpetologist Johann Georg Wagler erected the genus Coracopsis for the Mascarene parrot ( which became Coracopsis <unk> under this system ) and the lesser vasa parrot ( Coracopsis nigra ) . English zoologist William Alexander Forbes , believing that mascarinus was invalid as a specific name , since it was identical to the genus name , coined the new name Mascarinus <unk> in 1879 , in honour of Dubois . The binomial name was emended from M. mascarinus to M. mascarin in 2014 . 
 An unidentified dark parrot seen alive by Swedish naturalist Fredrik <unk> in Africa was given the name Psittacus obscurus by Linnaeus in 1758 , who again synonymised it with the Mascarene parrot in 1766 . Because of this association , some authors believed it was from the Mascarene Islands as well , but this dark parrot 's description differs from that of the Mascarene parrot . This disagreement led some authors to use now @-@ invalid combinations of the scientific names , such as Mascarinus obscurus and Coracopsis obscura . The unidentified parrot may have been an African grey parrot ( Psittacus <unk> ) instead . 
 Another unidentified parrot specimen , this one brown and housed in Cabinet du Roi , was described by French naturalist Comte de Buffon in 1779 under his entry for the Mascarene parrot , in which he pointed out similarities and differences between the two . The English palaeontologist Julian Hume has suggested the possibility that this might have been a lesser vasa parrot , if not a discoloured old Mascarene grey parakeet ( Psittacula bensoni ) . The specimen is now lost . English zoologist and author George Robert Gray assigned some <unk> parrot ( <unk> <unk> ) subspecies from the Moluccas to Mascarinus in his book A List of the Genera of Birds from the 1840s , but this idea was soon dismissed by other writers . 
 Subfossil parrot remains were later excavated from grottos on Réunion . X @-@ rays of the two existing stuffed Mascarene parrots made it possible to compare the remaining bones with the subfossils and showed these were intermediate in measurements in comparison to the modern specimens . The lesser vasa parrot was introduced to Réunion as early as 1780 but , though the subfossil parrot bones were similar to that species in some aspects , they were more similar to those of the Mascarene parrot and considered to belong to it . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The affinities of the Mascarene parrot are unclear , and two hypotheses have competed since the mid @-@ 19th century . Some authors grouped it with the <unk> ( of African origin ) due to its dark plumage , and others with the <unk> parrots ( of Asian origin ) based on the large red beak , a feature which is diagnostic for that group . Its plumage pattern was mostly atypical for a <unk> , though other members have black facial patterns . 
 Sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene , so it was possible for species to colonise the Mascarene Islands from other areas . Although little is known about most extinct parrot species of the Mascarenes , subfossil remains show that they shared common features , such as enlarged heads and jaws , reduced pectoral bones , and robust leg bones . Hume supported their common origin in the radiation of the Psittaculini tribe based on morphological features and the fact that Psittacula parrots have managed to colonise many isolated islands in the Indian Ocean . According to this theory , the Psittaculini could have invaded the area several times , as many of the species were so specialised that they may have evolved significantly on hotspot islands before the Mascarenes emerged from the sea . 
 Réunion is 3 million years old , which is enough time for new genera to evolve , but many endemics would have been wiped out by the eruption of the volcano Piton des Neiges between 300 @,@ 000 and 180 @,@ 000 years ago . Most recent and extant species would therefore probably be descendants of animals which had recolonised the island from Africa or Madagascar after this event . If the Mascarene parrot had in fact evolved into a distinct genus on Réunion prior to the volcanic eruption , it would have been one of the few survivors of this extinction event . 
 A 2011 genetic study instead found the Mascarene parrot to be nested among the subspecies of the lesser vasa parrot from Madagascar and nearby islands and therefore not related to the Psittacula parrots . It also found that the Mascarene parrot line diverged 4 @.@ 6 to 9 million years ago , prior to the formation of Réunion , indicating this must have happened elsewhere . The cladogram accompanying the study is shown below : 
 Another group of scientists later acknowledged the finding but pointed out that the sample might have been damaged and that further testing was needed before the issue could be fully resolved . They also noted that if Mascarinus was confirmed to be embedded within the Coracopsis genus , the latter would become a junior synonym , since the former name is older . Hume has expressed surprise at these findings due to the anatomical similarities between the Mascarene parrot and other parrots from the Mascarene islands that are believed to be <unk> . He also points out that there is no fossil evidence found on other islands to support the hypothesis that the species evolved elsewhere before reaching Réunion . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Mascarene parrot was 35 cm ( 14 in ) in length . The wing was 211 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) , the tail 144 – 152 mm ( 5 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 0 in ) , the culmen 32 – 36 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 4 in ) , and the tarsus 22 – 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 – 0 @.@ 94 in ) . It had a large red bill and moderately long , rounded tail feathers . It had a black velvet @-@ like facial mask on the front part of the head . There are several discrepancies in how the colour of the body , wings , tail feathers and the head have historically been described and depicted . In 1674 , Dubois described live specimens as being " petit @-@ gris " which is the colour of the dark phase of the red squirrel . This colour is a dark blackish @-@ grey or brown . 
 In 1760 , Brisson published the following description based on a captive bird ( which may have been the specimen now preserved in Paris ) : 
 <unk> of head and neck clear ( ash ) grey . Back , rump , underparts of neck , breast , belly , sides , legs , scapular feathers , <unk> of tail very @-@ dark ( ash ) grey . Wing feathers of the same colour . The tail is composed of 12 feathers : the two median ones are also very @-@ dark ( ash ) grey . All the lateral ones are of the same colour , except that they have a little white at their base . The eyes are surrounded by a naked skin , bright red . Pupil black , iris red . The base of the superior half of the beak is also surrounded by a red naked skin in which the nostrils are placed . Beak similarly red . Legs pale flesh . Claws grey @-@ brown . I am unaware from which country it is found . I have seen it living in Paris . 
 Instead of grey , several later authors described the body as brown and the head as bluish @-@ lilac , based on stuffed specimens , and this has become the orthodox image of the bird . Live birds were never described with these colours . Hume has proposed that this colouration is an artifact of the taxidermy specimens having aged and being exposed to light , which can turn grey and black to brown . Such a transformation has also turned an aberrant <unk> specimen ( sometimes referred to as a distinct species , Townsend 's <unk> , <unk> townsendi ) from grey to brown . The two extant specimens also differ from each other in colouration . The Paris specimen has a greyish @-@ blue head , and a brown body , paler on the underparts . Its tail and wing feathers were severely damaged by sulphuric acid in an attempt at fumigation in the 1790s . The Vienna specimen is a pale brown on the head and body overall , with an irregular distribution of white feathers on the tail , back , and wings . 
 Confusion over the colouration of the Mascarene parrot has also been furthered by a plate by French engraver and naturalist François @-@ Nicolas Martinet in Buffon 's 1779 Histoire Naturelle Des Oiseaux , the first coloured illustration of this species . It shows the bird as brown with a purplish head , and the strength of these colours differs considerably between copies , a result of having been hand @-@ coloured by many different artists who worked under Martinet in his workshop . Across these copies , the body ranges from chestnut brown to greyish chocolate , the tail from light grey to blackish grey @-@ brown , and the head from bluish @-@ grey to dove @-@ grey . The plate also lacks two dark central tail feathers without white bases , a feature described by Brisson , and these features have been repeated by subsequent artists . Martinet 's illustration and Buffon 's description were perhaps based on the Paris specimen . 
 In 1879 , Forbes stated the cere was covered by feathers which concealed the nostrils . This contradicts other accounts that mention that the nostrils were surrounded by red skin . Forbes based his description on the Paris specimen which had previously had its skull and mandible removed for study by French mammalogist and ornithologist Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards . This may have led to the distortion of the shape of the head and nostrils as indicated by the illustration in Forbes ' article . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Very little is known about the Mascarene parrot in life . Since several specimens were kept alive in captivity , it was probably not a specialised feeder . That the Vienna specimen was partially white may have been the result of food deficiency during a long period in captivity ; the clipped primary wing feathers indicate it was caged . Little was known about parrot @-@ diet in the 1700s , and the Vienna specimen may not have received enough of the amino acid tyrosine through its food , which it would have needed for melanin synthesis . In other parrots , this would have resulted in orange instead of white colour in the affected feathers , due to the presence of the pigment psittacin , but Coracopsis parrots and the Mascarene parrot are the only parrots that lack this pigment . The specimen has also been described as " partially albinistic " at times , though true albinism ( lack of the enzyme tyrosinase ) can by definition never only be partial . 
 In 1705 , Jean Feuilley gave a description of the parrots of Réunion and their ecology which indicates that they fattened themselves seasonally : 
 There are several sorts of parrot , of different sizes and colours . Some are the size of a hen , grey , the beak red [ Mascarene parrot ] ; others the same colour the size of a pigeon [ Mascarene grey parakeet ] , and yet others , smaller , are green [ Réunion parakeet ] . There are great quantities , especially in the Sainte @-@ Suzanne area and on the mountainsides . They are very good to eat , especially when they are fat which is from the month of June until the month of September , because at that time the trees produce a certain wild seed that these birds eat . 
 The Mascarene parrot may have once inhabited Mauritius as well based on a 17th @-@ century account by the English traveller Peter Mundy which mentioned " russet parrots " . This is a possibility , since Réunion and Mauritius do share some types of animals , but no fossil evidence has yet been discovered . 
 Many other endemic species of Réunion became extinct after the arrival of man and the resulting disruption of the island 's ecosystem . The Mascarene parrot lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the hoopoe starling , the Réunion ibis , the Réunion parakeet , the Mascarene grey parakeet , the Réunion swamphen , the Réunion owl , the Réunion night heron , and the Réunion pink pigeon . Extinct Réunion reptiles include the Réunion giant tortoise and an undescribed Leiolopisma skink . The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail Tropidophora carinata lived on Réunion and Mauritius but vanished from both islands . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Of the eight or so parrot species endemic to the Mascarenes , only the echo parakeet ( Psittacula echo ) of Mauritius has survived . The others probably all became extinct due to a combination of excessive hunting and deforestation . The cause and date of extinction for the Mascarene parrot itself is uncertain . In 1834 , German zoologist and author Carl Wilhelm Hahn published an often @-@ cited account of a live Mascarene parrot in the possession of Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria . The bird must have been very old at the time , and Hahn claimed an accompanying illustration was drawn after this specimen . The IUCN Red List accepts the 1834 account as the last mention of a live specimen . 
 The veracity of Hahn 's claim was questioned as early as 1876 , and the illustration appears to be plagiarised from the plate by François @-@ Nicolas Martinet which was published at least 50 years earlier . After King Maximilian died in 1825 , his collection was auctioned off , but no Mascarene parrot was mentioned in the inventory list of species . Hahn did not mention the date in which he actually saw the bird which could have been long before 1834 . However , the fact that Martinet 's image was copied and that no mounted specimen exists ( though such a rare bird would probably have been preserved ) makes Hahn 's account dubious . He may instead have based his account on other sources or even hearsay . 
 If Hahn 's account is disregarded , the Mascarene parrot probably became extinct prior to 1800 . The last account of wild specimens on Réunion is from the 1770s . It is thought that the Mascarene parrot went extinct in the wild while captive specimens still survived in Europe , since specimens are known to have lived there after the last mention of wild birds . In the 1790s , French author , explorer , and naturalist François Levaillant stated that the bird was rare and that he had seen three specimens in France . 
 One of the last definite accounts of live specimens is the following 1784 description by <unk> based on captive birds : 
 The Mascarin is found at Ile Bourbon [ Réunion ] ; I have seen several alive in Paris , they were rather gentle birds ; they had in their favour only that the red beak contrasted agreeably with the dark background of their plumage ; they had not learnt to talk . 
 Contrary to Feuilley 's claims , Dubois mentioned that the Mascarene parrot was not edible which may have led to Réunion visitors mostly ignoring it . It was the last of the indigenous parrots of Réunion to become extinct . The only endemic bird species on Réunion that disappeared after the Mascarene parrot was the hoopoe starling in the mid @-@ 19th century . 
 = Tourism in Nunavut = 
 Tourism in Nunavut focuses on outdoor activities and culture of the local Inuit , the indigenous people of Nunavut . Wildlife watching is a popular tourist attraction , as the territory is home to a number of wildlife and bird sanctuaries . It is possible to spot walrus , polar bears , a large variety of birds and belugas throughout Nunavut . Outdoor adventure activities are also popular . Nunavut has a wide and lengthy river system , meaning that there are a large number of canoeing and kayaking opportunities to suit experienced travellers . Nunavut 's vast expanse of uninhabited territory offers many opportunities for hiking and camping . However , the region 's often extreme conditions and remote location often necessitates a guide , even for experienced campers . 
 Nunavut Tourism does not regularly publish tourism statistics . However , an exit survey conducted by the Department of Economic Development and Transportation between June and October 2008 revealed that 33 @,@ 378 people visited Nunavut during that period , up from 28 @,@ 802 in June @-@ October 2006 . The vast majority of visitors to Nunavut are Canadian , with 96 % of travellers arriving from Canada . However , the leisure travel market is not as dominated by Canadian visitors , with 28 % of foreign visitors . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 Nunavut features a number of outdoor adventure activity opportunities as a result of the territory 's vast uninhabited area . Wildlife watching is one particularly popular activity - the territory is home to walrus and belugas , as well as eleven bird sanctuaries housing millions of birds . <unk> are also spread throughout Nunavut , although the territory 's tourism authority does not promote ' muskox watching ' trips specifically . The territory is also home to a population of polar bears , and trips designed to increase tourists ' chances of spotting a polar bear are common . A number of private operators offer wildlife , bird , polar and whale watching tours , in addition to other activities . 
 Other popular activities for tourists in Nunavut involve the Canadian territory 's vast opportunities for adventuring . Canoeing and kayaking are possible on the territory 's lengthy rivers , with the <unk> River being the most famous of these . This river is most popular during summer - despite not having road access direct to the river , many visitors participate in kayaking or canoeing along the river each year , as it is not as difficult to navigate as some of the other rivers in Nunavut . Another popular outdoor adventure activity is hiking . Nunavut Tourism promotes Nunavut as having a number of short and long hikes available to tourists , with camping possible in the middle of " caribou birthing grounds ... [ and at Whale Cove , ] at the river , teeming with chirping white whales . " However , due to Nunavut 's rugged terrain and often extreme conditions , Nunavut Tourism recommends the use of a guide for all campers and hikers staying the night outdoors to enhance safety . 
 One tourism activity unique to the Arctic North is iceberg watching . During the summer season of April to July , it is possible to watch icebergs moving down rivers while the ice around them melts . In addition , watching the floe edge is also a popular activity due to wildlife movement during this time . Whales can often be seen swimming metres from the ice , polar bears can be observed swimming briefly in the icy water and amphibious animals often bring themselves up on to dry land or on to the ice to sunbathe . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Nunavut Tourism did not , as of 2002 , produce detailed statistics about tourism numbers , trends and characteristics . However , by 2010 , this appeared to have changed , with Nunavut Tourism providing media outlets with general figures on trends in tourism in Nunavut . Tourism brings approximately CAD $ 30 million to Nunavut 's economy each year according to Nunavut Tourism , with one in five of its tourists arriving on cruise ships . Between June and October 2008 , 33 @,@ 378 people visited Nunavut by air and sea , according to the territory 's Department of Economic Development and Transportation . This is an almost 16 percent increase on the number of people who visited Nunavut by air and sea during the same period in 2006 , which was 28 @,@ 802 people . The average age of people arriving in Nunavut was 46 during the period in 2008 that the Department of Economic Development and Transportation conducted its survey , and the majority of visitors were in the territory for business purposes . 96 percent of all business travellers entering the territory were domestic travellers ( Canadian residents ) . However , among the leisure traveller sub @-@ group , the proportion of domestic travellers declines - Canadians make up only 72 percent of the leisure traveller arrival numbers , with travellers from the United States ( 20 percent ) and other countries ( 8 percent ) making up the difference . September and July account for 46 percent of arrivals , making them the busiest arrival months . 
 The most popular tourist destination among arrivals to Nunavut was <unk> ( Baffin Island ) , home to the territory 's capital , Iqaluit . Visitors to Baffin Island comprised 63 percent of all travellers to Nunavut . 11 percent visited the <unk> Region , seven percent travelled to the <unk> Region and the remainder were cruise ship passengers who visited a number of Nunavut towns during their journeys . 76 percent of visitors to the <unk> Region travelled for business , leisure tourism was the most popular reason given for travel to the <unk> Region , and visiting friends and family was the most popular reason given for travel to Baffin Island . 21 cruise ships visited Nunavut communities in 2009 . 
 = = Market issues = = 
 In the 2002 Nunavut Tourism publication The Time is Right : A Vision and Strategy for Tourism Development in Nunavut , a number of issues facing Nunavut tourism operators were highlighted . One major issue for the Nunavut tourism industry is the territory 's remote nature . This imposes high travel costs on visitors to Nunavut , and drives tourism numbers down . In addition , Nunavut 's position north of the Arctic Circle reduces the opportunity for spring activities , and results in a highly seasonally based tourism market . This limits opportunities for year @-@ round employment in the territory . Many tourism organisations and operators faced difficulty attracting high @-@ quality staff members to their ranks , and experienced high levels of turnover . There are limited links between tourism operators , inhibiting opportunities for inter @-@ sector growth . 
 A number of governmental and human resource issues also exist . Employees in the tourism industry are often poorly trained and tourism operators also face high staff turnover . A lack of interest in tourism development also exists in many Nunavut governmental organisations as well as in the private sector , and a policy put in place to prevent " market disruption " by new businesses has led to many businesses being denied licences to operate due to the new competition they would bring to the market . This policy has not only acted to the detriment of competition in the tourism sector but has also limited the opportunities for industry growth . Finally , a lack of in @-@ depth and relevant statistics about trends and growth in tourism in Nunavut has prevented businesses from planning for their short- and long @-@ term futures . 
 = James A. Garfield = 
 James Abram Garfield ( November 19 , 1831 – September 19 , 1881 ) was the 20th President of the United States , serving from March 4 , 1881 , until his assassination later that year . Garfield had served nine terms in the House of Representatives , and had been elected to the Senate before his candidacy for the White House , though he declined the senatorship once he was president @-@ elect . He is the only sitting House member to be elected president . 
 Garfield was raised in humble circumstances on an Ohio farm by his widowed mother . He worked at various jobs , including on a canal boat , in his youth . Beginning at age 17 , he attended several Ohio schools , then studied at Williams College in Williamstown , Massachusetts , from which he graduated in 1856 . A year later , Garfield entered politics as a Republican . He married Lucretia Rudolph in 1858 , and served as a member of the Ohio State Senate ( 1859 – 1861 ) . Garfield opposed Confederate secession , served as a major general in the Union Army during the American Civil War , and fought in the battles of Middle Creek , Shiloh , and Chickamauga . He was first elected to Congress in 1862 to represent Ohio 's 19th District . Throughout Garfield 's extended congressional service after the Civil War , he firmly supported the gold standard and gained a reputation as a skilled orator . Garfield initially agreed with Radical Republican views regarding Reconstruction , but later favored a moderate approach for civil rights enforcement for freedmen . 
 At the 1880 Republican National Convention , Senator @-@ elect Garfield attended as campaign manager for Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman , and gave the presidential nomination speech for him . When neither Sherman nor his rivals – Ulysses S. Grant and James G. Blaine – could get enough votes to secure the nomination , delegates chose Garfield as a compromise on the 36th ballot . In the 1880 presidential election , Garfield conducted a low @-@ key front porch campaign , and narrowly defeated Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock . 
 Garfield 's accomplishments as president included a resurgence of presidential authority against senatorial courtesy in executive appointments , energizing American naval power , and purging corruption in the Post Office , all during his extremely short time in office . Garfield made notable diplomatic and judiciary appointments , including a U.S. Supreme Court justice . He enhanced the powers of the presidency when he defied the powerful New York senator Roscoe Conkling by appointing William H. Robertson to the lucrative post of Collector of the Port of New York , starting a fracas that ended with Robertson 's confirmation and Conkling 's resignation from the Senate . Garfield advocated agricultural technology , an educated electorate , and civil rights for African Americans . He also proposed substantial civil service reform , eventually passed by Congress in 1883 and signed into law by his successor , Chester A. Arthur , as the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act . With his term cut short by his death after only 200 days , and much of it spent in ill health trying to recover from the attack , Garfield is little @-@ remembered in the American cultural memory other than for his assassination ; historians often forgo listing him in rankings of U.S. presidents due to the short length of his presidency . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 James Garfield was born the youngest of five children on November 19 , 1831 , in a log cabin in Orange Township , now Moreland Hills , Ohio . Orange Township was located in the Western Reserve , and like many who settled there , Garfield 's ancestors were from New England . James ' father Abram had been born in Worcester , New York , and came to Ohio to woo his childhood sweetheart , Mehitabel Ballou , only to find her married . He instead wed her sister Eliza , who had been born in New Hampshire . James was named for an older brother , dead in infancy . 
 In early 1833 , Abram and Eliza Garfield joined the Disciples of Christ , a decision that would help shape their youngest son 's life . Abram Garfield died later that year ; his son was raised in poverty in a household led by the strong @-@ willed Eliza . James was her favorite child , and the two remained close for the rest of her life . Eliza Garfield remarried in 1842 , but soon left her second husband , Warren Belden ( possibly Alfred Belden ) , and a then @-@ scandalous divorce was awarded against her in 1850 . James took his mother 's side and when Belden died in 1880 , noted the fact in his diary with satisfaction . Garfield enjoyed his mother 's stories about his ancestry , especially his Welsh great @-@ great @-@ grandfathers and his ancestor who served as a knight of Caerffili Castle . 
 Poor and fatherless , Garfield was mocked by his fellow boys , and throughout his life was very sensitive to slights . He escaped through reading , devouring all the books he could find . He left home at age 16 in 1847 . Rejected by the only ship in port in Cleveland , Garfield instead found work on a canal boat , responsible for managing the mules that pulled it . This labor would be used to good effect by Horatio Alger , who penned Garfield 's campaign biography in 1880 . 
 After six weeks , illness forced Garfield to return home and , during his recuperation , his mother and a local education official got him to promise to postpone his return to the canals for a year and go to school . Accordingly , in 1848 , he began at Geauga Seminary , in nearby Chester Township . Garfield later said of his childhood , " I lament that I was born to poverty , and in this chaos of childhood , seventeen years passed before I caught any inspiration ... a precious 17 years when a boy with a father and some wealth might have become fixed in manly ways . " 
 = = Education , marriage and early career = = 
 At Geauga Academy , which he attended from 1848 to 1850 , Garfield learned academic subjects he had not previously had time for . He shone as a student , and was especially interested in languages and elocution . He began to appreciate the power a speaker had over an audience , writing that the speaker 's platform " creates some excitement . I love agitation and investigation and glory in defending unpopular truth against popular error . " Geauga was co @-@ educational , and Garfield was attracted to one of his fellow students , Lucretia Rudolph , whom he later married . To support himself at Geauga , he worked as a carpenter 's assistant and as a teacher . The need to go from town to town to find a place as a teacher disgusted Garfield , and he thereafter developed a dislike of what he called " place @-@ seeking " , which became , he said , " the law of my life " . In later years , he would astound his friends by letting positions pass that could have been his with a little politicking . Garfield had attended church more to please his mother than to worship God , but in his late teens underwent a religious awakening , and attended many camp meetings , at one of which he was born again . The next day , March 4 , 1850 , he was baptized into the Disciples by being submerged in the icy waters of the Chagrin River . 
 After leaving Geauga , Garfield worked for a year at various jobs , including teaching . Finding that some New Englanders worked their way through college , Garfield determined to do the same , and first sought a school that could prepare him for the entrance examinations . From 1851 to 1854 , he attended the Western Reserve Eclectic Institute ( later named Hiram College ) in Hiram , Ohio , a school run by the Disciples . While there , he was most interested in the study of Greek and Latin , but was inclined to learn about and discuss any new thing he encountered . Securing a position on entry as janitor , he was hired to teach while still a student . Lucretia Rudolph had also enrolled at the Institute , and Garfield wooed her while teaching her Greek . He developed a regular preaching circuit at neighboring churches , in some cases earning a gold dollar per service . By 1854 , Garfield had learned all the Institute could teach him and was a full @-@ time teacher . Garfield then enrolled at Williams College in Williamstown , Massachusetts , as a third @-@ year student , given credit for two year 's study at the Institute after passing a cursory examination . Garfield was impressed with the college president , Mark Hopkins , who had responded warmly to Garfield 's letter inquiring about admission . He said of Hopkins , " The ideal college is Mark Hopkins on one end of a log with a student on the other . " Hopkins later stated about Garfield in his student days , " There was a large general capacity applicable to any subject . There was no pretense of genius , or alternation of spasmodic effort , but a satisfactory accomplishment in all directions . " After his first term , Garfield was hired to teach penmanship to the students of nearby Pownal , Vermont , a post whose previous incumbent was Chester A. Arthur . 
 Garfield graduated from Williams in August 1856 as salutatorian , giving an address at the commencement . Garfield biographer Ira Rutkow pointed out that the future president 's years at Williams gave Garfield the opportunity to know and respect those of different social backgrounds , and despite his origin as an unsophisticated Westerner , he was liked and respected by socially conscious New Englanders . " In short , " as Rutkow later wrote , " Garfield had an extensive and positive first experience with the world outside the Western Reserve of Ohio . " 
 On his return to Ohio , the degree from a prestigious Eastern school made Garfield a man of distinction . He returned to Hiram to teach at the Institute , and in 1857 was made its president . He did not see education as a field in which he could realize his full potential . At Williams , he had become more politically aware in the intensely anti @-@ slavery atmosphere of the Massachusetts school , and began to consider politics as a career . In 1858 , he married Lucretia ; they would have seven children , five of whom survived infancy . Soon after the wedding , he formally entered his name to read law at a Cleveland firm , although he did his studying in Hiram . He was admitted to the bar in 1861 . 
 Local Republican Party leaders invited Garfield to enter politics upon the death of Cyrus Prentiss , the presumptive nominee for the local state senate seat . He was nominated by the party convention on the sixth ballot , and was elected , serving until 1861 . Garfield 's major effort in the state senate was a bill providing for Ohio 's first geological survey to measure its mineral resources , though it failed . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 After Abraham Lincoln 's election as president , several Southern states announced their secession from the Union to form a new government , the Confederate States of America . Garfield read military texts while anxiously awaiting the war effort , which he regarded as a holy crusade against the Slave Power . In April 1861 , the rebels bombarded Fort Sumter , one of the last federal outposts in the South , beginning the Civil War . Although he had no military training , Garfield knew that his place was in the Union Army . 
 At Governor William Dennison 's request , Garfield deferred his military ambitions to remain in the legislature , where he helped appropriate the funds to raise and equip Ohio 's volunteer regiments . Afterward , the legislature adjourned and Garfield spent the spring and early summer on a speaking tour of northeastern Ohio , encouraging enlistment in the new regiments . Following a trip to Illinois to purchase muskets , Garfield returned to Ohio and , in August 1861 , received a commission as a colonel in the 42nd Ohio Infantry regiment . The 42nd Ohio existed only on paper , so Garfield 's first task was to fill its ranks . He did so quickly , recruiting many of his neighbors and former students . The regiment traveled to Camp Chase , outside Columbus , Ohio , to complete training . In December , Garfield was ordered to bring the 42nd to Kentucky , where they joined the Army of the Ohio under Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell . 
 = = = Buell 's command = = = 
 Buell quickly assigned Garfield the task of driving Confederate forces out of eastern Kentucky , giving him the 18th Brigade for the campaign which , besides his own 42nd , included the 40th Ohio Infantry , two Kentucky infantry regiments and two cavalry units . They departed Catlettsburg , Kentucky , in mid @-@ December , advancing through the valley of the Big Sandy River . The march was uneventful until Union forces reached <unk> , Kentucky , on January 6 , 1862 , where Garfield 's cavalry engaged the rebels at Jenny 's Creek . Confederate troops under Brigadier General Humphrey Marshall held the town in numbers roughly equal to Garfield 's own , but Garfield positioned his troops so as to deceive Marshall into believing that rebel forces were outnumbered . Marshall ordered his troops to withdraw to the forks of Middle Creek , on the road to Virginia ; Garfield ordered his troops to pursue the Confederates . They attacked the rebel positions on January 9 , 1862 , in the Battle of Middle Creek , the only pitched battle Garfield personally commanded . At the end of the fighting , the Confederates withdrew from the field , and Garfield sent his troops to Prestonsburg to reprovision . 
 In recognition of his success , Garfield was promoted to brigadier general . After Marshall 's retreat , Garfield 's command was the sole remaining Union force in eastern Kentucky , and he announced that any men who had fought for the Confederacy would be granted amnesty if they returned to their homes and lived peaceably and remained loyal to the Union . The proclamation was surprisingly lenient , as Garfield now believed the war was a crusade for eradication of slavery . Following a brief skirmish at Pound Gap , the last rebel units in the area were outflanked , and they retreated to Virginia . 
 Garfield 's promotion gave him command of the 20th Brigade of the Army of the Ohio , which was ordered in early 1862 to join Major General Ulysses S. Grant 's forces as they advanced on Corinth , Mississippi . Before the 20th Brigade arrived , however , Confederate forces under General Albert Sidney Johnston surprised Grant 's men in their camps , driving them back . Garfield 's troops got word of the battle and advanced quickly , joining the rest of the army on the second day to drive the Confederates back across the field and into retreat . The action , later known as the Battle of Shiloh , was the bloodiest of the war to date ; Garfield was exposed to fire for much of the day , but emerged uninjured . Major General Henry W. Halleck , Grant 's superior , took charge of the combined armies and advanced ponderously toward Corinth ; when they arrived , the Confederates had fled . 
 That summer Garfield suffered from jaundice and significant weight loss . He was forced to return home , where his wife nursed him back to health . While he was home , Garfield 's friends worked to gain him the Republican nomination for Congress , although he refused to <unk> with the delegates . He returned to military duty that autumn and went to Washington to await his next assignment . During this period of idleness , a rumor of an extra @-@ marital affair caused friction in the Garfield marriage until Lucretia eventually chose to overlook it . Garfield repeatedly received tentative assignments that were quickly withdrawn , to his frustration . In the meantime , he served on the court @-@ martial of Fitz John Porter , a sensational trial in which Porter was tried for his tardiness at the Second Battle of Bull Run . He was convinced of Porter 's guilt , and voted with his fellow generals to convict . The trial lasted almost two months , from November 1862 to January 1863 , and by the end of it , Garfield had at last procured an assignment as Chief of Staff to Major General William S. Rosecrans . 
 = = = Chief of staff for Rosecrans = = = 
 The position of Chief of Staff for a general was usually held by a more junior officer , but Garfield 's influence with Rosecrans was greater than usual , with duties extending beyond mere communication of orders to duties that involved actual management of his Army of the Cumberland . Rosecrans had a voracious appetite for conversation , especially when he was unable to sleep ; in Garfield , he found " the first well read person in the Army " and the ideal candidate for discussions that ran deep into the night . The two became close in spite of Garfield 's being twelve years junior to Rosecrans , and their talks covered all topics , especially religion ; Rosecrans , who had converted from Methodism to Roman Catholicism , succeeded in softening Garfield 's view of his faith . Garfield recommended that Rosecrans replace wing commanders Alexander McCook and Thomas Crittenden , whom he believed ineffective , but Rosecrans ignored the suggestions . With Rosecrans , Garfield devised the Tullahoma Campaign to pursue and trap Confederate General Braxton Bragg in Tullahoma . After initial Union success , Bragg retreated toward Chattanooga , where Rosecrans stalled and requested more troops and supplies . Garfield argued for an immediate advance , in line with demands from Halleck and Lincoln . After a council of war and lengthy deliberations , Rosecrans agreed to attack . 
 At the ensuing Battle of Chickamauga on September 19 and 20 , 1863 , confusion among the wing commanders over Rosecrans 's orders created a gap in the lines , resulting in a rout of the right flank . Rosecrans concluded that the battle was lost and fell back on Chattanooga to establish a defensive line . Garfield , however , thought that part of the army had held and , with Rosecrans 's approval , headed across Missionary Ridge to survey the scene . Garfield 's hunch was correct . His ride became legendary , while Rosecrans ' error reignited criticism about his leadership . While Rosecrans 's army had avoided disaster , they were stranded in Chattanooga , surrounded by Bragg 's army . Garfield sent a telegram to Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton alerting Washington to the need for reinforcements to avoid annihilation , and Lincoln and Halleck delivered 20 @,@ 000 troops by rail within nine days . In the meantime , Grant was promoted to command of the western armies , and quickly replaced Rosecrans with George H. Thomas . Garfield was ordered to report to Washington , where he was promoted to major general , a commission he would resign before taking a seat in the House of Representatives . According to historian Jean Edward Smith , Grant and Garfield had a " guarded relationship " , since Grant promoted Thomas to command of the Army of the Cumberland , rather than Garfield , after Rosecrans was dismissed . 
 = = Congressional career = = 
 = = = Election in 1862 ; Civil War years = = = 
 While serving in the army in early 1862 , Garfield was approached by friends about running for Congress from Ohio 's newly redrawn , heavily Republican 19th district . He was worried that he and other state @-@ appointed generals would get obscure assignments , and running for Congress would allow him to resume his political career . The fact that the new Congress would not hold its first regular session until December 1863 would allow him to continue his war service for a time . Home on medical leave , he refused to campaign for the nomination , leaving that to political managers who secured it at the local convention in September 1862 , on the eighth ballot . In October , he defeated D.B. Woods by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin in the general election for a seat in the 38th Congress . 
 Soon after the nomination , Garfield was ordered to report to War Secretary Edwin Stanton in Washington to discuss his military future . There , Garfield met Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase , who befriended him , seeing him as a younger version of himself . The two men agreed politically , and both were part of the Radical wing of the Republican Party . Once he took his seat in December 1863 , Garfield was frustrated that Lincoln seemed reluctant to press the South hard . Many radicals , led in the House by Pennsylvania 's Thaddeus Stevens , wanted lands owned by rebels to be confiscated , but Lincoln threatened to veto any bill that would do that on a widespread basis . Garfield , in debate on the House floor , supported such legislation and , discussing England 's Glorious Revolution , hinted that Lincoln might be thrown out of office for resisting the bills . Although Garfield had supported Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation , the congressman marveled that it was a " strange phenomenon in the world 's history , when a second @-@ rate Illinois lawyer is the instrument to utter words which shall form an epoch memorable in all future ages " . 
 Garfield not only favored abolition of slavery , but believed that the leaders of the rebellion had forfeited their constitutional rights . He supported the confiscation of southern plantations and even exile or execution of rebellion leaders as a means to ensure the permanent destruction of slavery . Garfield felt Congress was obliged " to determine what legislation is necessary to secure equal justice to all loyal persons , without regard to color . " Garfield was more supportive of Lincoln when Lincoln took action against slavery . Early in his tenure , he differed from his party on several issues ; his was the solitary Republican vote to terminate the use of bounties in recruiting . Some financially able recruits had used the bounty system to buy their way out of service ( called commutation ) , which Garfield considered reprehensible . Garfield gave a speech pointing out the flaws in the existing conscription law : that of 300 @,@ 000 called upon to enlist , barely 10 @,@ 000 had , the remainder claiming exemption or providing money or a substitute . Lincoln appeared before the Military Affairs committee on which Garfield served , demanding a more effective bill ; even if it cost him re @-@ election , Lincoln was confident he could win the war before his term expired . After many false starts , Garfield , with the support of Lincoln , procured the passage of a conscription bill which excluded commutation . 
 Under Chase 's influence , Garfield became a staunch proponent of a dollar backed by a gold standard , and was therefore a strong opponent of the " greenback " ; he regretted very much , but understood , the necessity for suspension of payment in gold or silver during the emergency presented by the Civil War . Garfield voted with the Radical Republicans in passing the Wade – Davis Bill , designed to give Congress more authority over Reconstruction , but it was defeated by Lincoln 's pocket veto . 
 Garfield did not consider Lincoln particularly worthy of re @-@ election , but no viable alternative seemed available . " He will probably be the man , though I think we could do better . " The Ohioan attended the party convention and promoted Rosecrans as Lincoln 's running mate , but delegates chose Military Governor of Tennessee Andrew Johnson . Both Lincoln and Garfield were re @-@ elected . By then , Chase had left the Cabinet and had been appointed Chief Justice , and his relations with Garfield became more distant . 
 Garfield took up the practice of law in 1865 as a means to improve his personal finances . His efforts took him to Wall Street where , the day after Lincoln 's assassination , a riotous crowd led him into an impromptu speech to calm it : " Fellow citizens ! Clouds and darkness are round about Him ! His pavilion is dark waters and thick clouds of the skies ! Justice and judgment are the establishment of His throne ! Mercy and truth shall go before His face ! Fellow citizens ! God reigns , and the Government at Washington still lives ! " The speech , with no mention or praise of Lincoln , was according to Garfield biographer Robert G. Caldwell " quite as significant for what it did not contain as for what it did " . In the following years , Garfield had more praise for Lincoln ; a year after the Illinoisan 's death Garfield stated that " greatest among all these developments were the character and fame of Abraham Lincoln " , and in 1878 called Lincoln " one of the few great rulers whose wisdom increased with his power " . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 After the war , Garfield became a proponent of black suffrage , though he admitted that the idea of African Americans as political equals with whites gave him " a strong feeling of repugnance " . The new president , Johnson , sought the rapid restoration of the Southern states during the months between his accession and the meeting of Congress in December 1865 ; Garfield hesitantly supported this policy as an experiment . Johnson , an old friend , sought Garfield 's backing , and their conversations led Garfield to assume that differences between president and Congress were not large . When Congress assembled in December ( to Johnson 's chagrin without the elected representatives of the Southern states , who were excluded ) , Garfield urged conciliation on his colleagues , although he feared that Johnson , a former Democrat , might combine with other Democrats to gain political control if he rejoined the party . Garfield foresaw conflict even before February 1866 when Johnson vetoed a bill to extend the life of the Freedmen 's Bureau , charged with aiding the former slaves . By April , Garfield had concluded that Johnson was either " crazy or drunk with opium " . 
 The conflict between the branches of government was the major issue of the 1866 campaign , with Johnson taking to the campaign trail in a Swing Around the Circle and Garfield facing opposition within his party in his home district . With the South still disenfranchised and Northern public opinion behind them , the Republicans gained a two @-@ thirds majority in both houses of Congress . Garfield , having overcome his challengers at his district nominating convention , was easily re @-@ elected . 
 Garfield opposed the initial talk of impeaching President Johnson when Congress convened in December 1866 . However , he supported legislation to limit Johnson 's powers , such as the Tenure of Office Act , which restricted Johnson in removing presidential appointees . Distracted by committee duties , he rarely spoke in connection with these bills , but was a loyal Republican vote against Johnson . Due to a court case , he was absent on the day in April 1868 when the House impeached Johnson , but soon gave a speech aligning himself with Thaddeus Stevens and others who sought Johnson 's removal . When the president was acquitted in trial before the Senate , Garfield was shocked , and blamed the outcome of the trial on its presiding officer , Chief Justice Chase , his onetime mentor . 
 By the time Ulysses S. Grant succeeded Johnson in 1869 , Garfield had moved away from the remaining radicals ( Stevens , their leader , had died in 1868 ) . He hailed the ratification of the 15th Amendment in 1870 as a triumph , and he favored the re @-@ admission of Georgia to the Union as a matter of right , not politics . In 1871 , Garfield opposed passage of the Ku Klux Klan Act , saying " I have never been more perplexed by a piece of legislation " . He was torn between his indignation at " these terrorists " and his concern for the freedoms endangered by the power the bill gave to the president to enforce the act through suspension of habeas corpus . 
 = = = Tariffs and finance = = = 
 Throughout his political career , Garfield favored the gold standard and decried attempts to increase the money supply through the issuance of paper money not backed by gold , and later , through the free and unlimited coinage of silver . In 1865 , Garfield was placed on the House Ways and Means Committee , a long @-@ awaited opportunity to focus on financial and economic issues . He reprised his opposition to the greenback , saying , " any party which commits itself to paper money will go down amid the general disaster , covered with the curses of a ruined people . " In 1868 Garfield gave a two @-@ hour speech on currency in the House , which was widely applauded as his best oratory to that point ; in it he advocated a gradual resumption of specie payments , that is , the government paying out silver and gold , rather than paper money that could not be redeemed . 
 Tariffs had been raised to high levels during the Civil War . Afterwards , Garfield , who made a close study of financial affairs , advocated moving towards free trade , though the standard Republican position was a protective tariff that would allow American industries to grow . This break with his party likely cost him his place on the Ways and Means Committee in 1867 , and though Republicans held the majority in the House until 1875 , Garfield remained off that committee during that time . Garfield came to chair the powerful House Appropriations Committee , but it was Ways and Means , with its influence over fiscal policy , that he really wanted to lead . Part of the reason Garfield was denied a place on Ways and Means was the opposition of the influential Republican editor , Horace Greeley . 
 In September 1870 , Garfield , who was then chairman of the House Banking Committee , led an investigation into the Black Friday Gold Panic scandal . The committee investigation into corruption was thorough , but found no indictable offenses . Garfield blamed the easy availability of fiat money greenbacks for financing the speculation that led to the scandal . 
 Garfield was not at all enthused about the re @-@ election of President Grant in 1872 — until Horace Greeley , who emerged as the candidate of the Democrats and Liberal Republicans , became the only serious alternative . Garfield opined , " I would say Grant was not fit to be nominated and Greeley is not fit to be elected . " Both Grant and Garfield won overwhelming re @-@ election victories . 
 = = = Crédit Mobilier scandal ; Salary Grab = = = 
 The Crédit Mobilier of America scandal involved corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad , part of the transcontinental railroad that was completed in 1869 . Union Pacific officers and directors secretly purchased control of the Crédit Mobilier of America company , then contracted with the firm to have it undertake the construction of the railroad . The grossly inflated invoices submitted by the company were paid by the railroad , using federal funds appropriated to subsidize the project , and the company was allowed to purchase Union Pacific securities at par value , well below the market rate . Crédit Mobilier showed large profits and stock gains , and distributed substantial dividends . The high expenses meant that Congress was called upon to appropriate more funds . One of the railroad officials who controlled Crédit Mobilier was also a congressman , Oakes Ames of Massachusetts . He offered some of his colleagues the opportunity to buy Crédit Mobilier stock at par value , well below what it sold for on the market , and the railroad got its additional appropriations . 
 The story broke in July 1872 , in the middle of the presidential campaign . Among those named were Vice President ( and former House Speaker ) Schuyler Colfax , Grant 's second @-@ term running mate ( Massachusetts Senator Henry Wilson ) , Speaker James G. Blaine of Maine , and Garfield . Greeley had little luck taking advantage of the scandal . When Congress reconvened after the election , Blaine , seeking to clear his name , demanded a House investigation . Evidence before the special committee exonerated Blaine . Garfield had stated , in September 1872 , that Ames had offered him stock , but he had repeatedly refused it . Testifying before the committee in January , Ames alleged that he had offered Garfield ten shares of stock at par value , but that Garfield had never taken the shares , or paid for them . A year had passed , from 1867 to 1868 , before Garfield had finally refused it . Garfield , appearing before the committee on January 14 , 1873 , confirmed much of this . Ames testified several weeks later that Garfield agreed to take the stock on credit , and that it was paid for by the company 's huge dividends . The two men differed over a sum of some $ 300 that Garfield received and later paid back , with Garfield deeming it a loan and Ames a dividend . 
 Garfield 's biographers were unwilling to exonerate him in Crédit Mobilier , with Allan Peskin writing " Did Garfield lie ? Not exactly . Did he tell the truth ? Not completely . Was he corrupted ? Not really . Even Garfield 's enemies never claimed that his involvement ... influenced his behavior " . Rutkow wrote that " Garfield 's real offense was that he knowingly denied to the House investigating committee that he had agreed to accept the stock and that he had also received a dividend of $ 329 . " Caldwell suggested that Garfield " while he told the truth [ before the committee ] , certainly failed to tell the whole truth , clearly evading an answer to certain vital questions and thus giving the impression of worse faults than those of which he was guilty " . That Crédit Mobilier was a corrupt organization had been a secret badly kept , even mentioned on the floor of Congress , and editor Sam Bowles wrote at the time that Garfield , in his positions on committees dealing with finance , " had no more right to be ignorant in a matter of such grave importance as this , than the sentinel has to snore on his post " . 
 Another issue that caused Garfield trouble in his 1874 re @-@ election bid was the so @-@ called " Salary Grab " of 1873 , which increased the compensation for members of Congress by 50 percent , retroactive to 1871 . Garfield was responsible , as Appropriations Committee chairman , for shepherding the legislative appropriations bill through the House ; during the debate in February 1873 , Massachusetts Representative Benjamin Butler offered the increase as an amendment , and despite Garfield 's opposition , it passed the House and eventually became law . The law was very popular in the House , as almost half the members were lame ducks , but the public was outraged , and many of Garfield 's constituents blamed him , though he refused to accept the increase . In what was a bad year for Republicans , who lost control of the House for the first time since the Civil War , Garfield had his closest congressional election , winning with only 57 percent of the vote . 
 = = = Minority leader ; Hayes administration = = = 
 With the Democratic takeover of the House of Representatives in 1875 , Garfield lost his chairmanship of the Appropriations Committee . The Democratic leadership in the House appointed Garfield as a Republican member of Ways and Means . With many of his leadership rivals defeated in the 1874 Democratic landslide , and Blaine elected to the Senate , Garfield was seen as the Republican floor leader and the likely Speaker should the party regain control of the chamber . 
 As the 1876 presidential election approached , Garfield was loyal to the candidacy of Senator Blaine , and fought for the former Speaker 's nomination at the 1876 Republican National Convention in Cincinnati . When it became clear , after six ballots , that Blaine could not prevail , the convention nominated Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes . Although Garfield had supported Blaine , he had kept good relations with Hayes , and wholeheartedly supported the governor . Garfield had hoped to retire from politics after his term expired to devote himself full @-@ time to the practice of law , but to help his party , he sought re @-@ election , and won it easily that October . Any celebration was short lived , as Garfield 's youngest son , Neddie , fell ill with whooping cough shortly after the congressional election , and soon died . 
 When Hayes appeared to have lost the presidential election the following month to Democrat Samuel Tilden , the Republicans launched efforts to reverse the result in Southern states where they held the governorship : South Carolina , Louisiana , and Florida . If Hayes won all three states , he would take the election by a single electoral vote . Grant asked Garfield to serve as a " neutral observer " in the recount in Louisiana . The observers soon recommended to the state electoral commissions that Hayes be declared the winner — Garfield recommended that the entire vote of West Feliciana Parish , which had given Tilden a sizable majority , be thrown out . The Republican governors of the three states certified that Hayes had won their states , to the outrage of Democrats , who had the state legislatures submit rival returns , and threatened to prevent the counting of the electoral vote — under the Constitution , Congress is the final arbiter of the election . Congress then passed a bill establishing the Electoral Commission , to determine the winner . Although he opposed the Commission , feeling that Congress should count the vote and proclaim Hayes victorious , Garfield was appointed to it over the objections of Democrats that he was too partisan . Hayes emerged the victor by a Commission vote of 8 to 7 , with all eight votes being cast by Republican politicians or appointees of that party to the Supreme Court . As part of the deal whereby they recognized Hayes as president , Southern Democrats secured the removal of federal troops from the South , ending Reconstruction . 
 Although a Senate seat would be disposed of by the Ohio General Assembly after the resignation of John Sherman to become Treasury Secretary , Hayes needed Garfield 's expertise to protect him from the agenda of a hostile Congress , and asked him not to seek it . Garfield , as the president 's key legislator , gained considerable prestige and respect from his role . When Congress debated what became the Bland @-@ Allison Act , to have the government purchase large quantities of silver and strike it into fully legal tender dollar coins , Garfield fought against this deviation from the gold standard , but it was enacted over Hayes 's veto in February 1878 . 
 Garfield during this time purchased the property in Mentor that reporters later dubbed <unk> , and from which he would conduct the first successful front porch campaign for the presidency . Hayes suggested that Garfield run for governor in 1879 , seeing that as a road that would likely put Garfield in the White House . Garfield preferred to seek election as senator , and devoted his efforts to seeing that Republicans won the 1879 election for the General Assembly , with the likely Democratic candidate the incumbent , Allen G. Thurman . The Republicans swept the legislative elections . Rivals were spoken of for the seat , such as Secretary Sherman , but he had presidential ambitions ( for which he sought Garfield 's support ) , and other candidates fell by the wayside . Garfield was elected to the Senate by the General Assembly in January 1880 , though his term was not to begin until March 4 , 1881 . 
 = = = Legal career and other activities = = = 
 Garfield was one of three attorneys who argued for the petitioners in the landmark Supreme Court case Ex parte Milligan in 1866 . The petitioners were pro @-@ Confederate northern men who had been found guilty and sentenced to death by a military court for treasonous activities . The case turned on whether the defendants should instead have been tried by a civilian court , and resulted in a ruling that civilians could not be tried before military tribunals while the civil courts were operating . The oral argument was Garfield 's first court appearance . Jeremiah Black had taken him in as a junior partner a year before , and assigned the case to him in light of his highly regarded oratory skills . With the result , Garfield instantly achieved a reputation as a preeminent appellate lawyer . 
 During Grant 's first term , discontented with public service , Garfield pursued opportunities in the law , but declined a partnership offer when told his prospective partner was of " intemperate and licentious " reputation . In 1873 , after the death of Chase , Garfield appealed to Grant to appoint Justice Noah H. Swayne as Chief Justice . Grant , however , appointed Morrison R. Waite . 
 Garfield thought the land grants given to expanding railroads to be an unjust practice ; as well , he opposed some monopolistic practices by corporations , as well as the power sought by the workers ' unions . Garfield supported the proposed establishment of the United States civil service as a means of ridding officials of the annoyance of aggressive office seekers . He especially wished to eliminate the common practice whereby government workers , in exchange for their positions , were forced to kick back a percentage of their wages as political contributions . 
 In 1876 , Garfield displayed his mathematical talent when he developed a trapezoid proof of the Pythagorean theorem . His finding was placed in the New England Journal of Education . Mathematics historian William Dunham stated that Garfield 's trapezoid work was " really a very clever proof " . 
 = = Presidential election of 1880 = = 
 = = = Republican nomination = = = 
 Having just been elected to the Senate with Sherman 's support , Garfield entered the 1880 campaign season committed to Sherman as his choice for the Republican presidential nominee . Even before the convention began , however , a few Republicans , including Wharton Barker of Philadelphia , thought Garfield the best choice for the nomination . Garfield denied any interest in the position , but the attention was enough to make Sherman suspicious of his lieutenant 's ambitions . Besides Sherman , the early favorites for the nomination were Blaine and former president Grant , but several other candidates attracted delegates as well . 
 As the convention began , Senator Roscoe Conkling of New York , the floor leader for the Grant forces ( known as the Stalwart faction ) , proposed that the delegates pledge to support the eventual nominee in the general election . When three West Virginia delegates declined to be so bound , Conkling sought to expel them from the convention . Garfield rose to defend the men , giving a passionate speech in defense of their right to reserve judgement . The crowd turned against Conkling , and he withdrew the motion . The performance delighted Garfield 's boosters , who now believed more than ever that he was the only man who could attract a majority of the delegates ' votes . 
 After speeches in favor of the other front @-@ runners , Garfield rose to place Sherman 's name in nomination ; his nominating speech was well @-@ received , but the delegates mustered little excitement for the idea of Sherman as the next president . The first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes and Blaine in second with 284 ; Sherman 's 93 placed him in a distant third . Subsequent ballots quickly demonstrated a deadlock between the Grant and Blaine forces , with neither having the 379 votes needed for nomination . Jeremiah McLain Rusk , a member of the Wisconsin delegation , and Benjamin Harrison , an Indiana delegate , sought to break the deadlock by shifting a few of the anti @-@ Grant votes to a dark horse candidate — Garfield . Garfield gained 50 votes on the 35th ballot , and the stampede began . Garfield protested to the other members of his Ohio delegation that he had not sought the nomination and had never intended to betray Sherman , but they overruled his objections and cast their ballots for him . In the next round of voting , nearly all of the Sherman and Blaine delegates shifted their support to Garfield , giving him 399 votes and the Republican nomination . Most of the Grant forces backed the former president to the end , creating a disgruntled Stalwart minority in the party . To obtain that faction 's support for the ticket , former New York customs collector Chester A. Arthur , a member of Conkling 's political machine , was chosen as the vice @-@ presidential nominee . 
 = = = Campaign against Hancock = = = 
 Despite including a Stalwart on the ticket , animosity between the Republican factions carried over from the convention , and Garfield traveled to New York to meet with party leaders there . After convincing the Stalwart crowd to put aside their differences and unite for the coming campaign , Garfield returned to Ohio , leaving the active campaigning to others , as was traditional at the time . Meanwhile , the Democrats settled on their nominee , Major General Winfield Scott Hancock of Pennsylvania , a career military officer . Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South , while much of the North was considered safe territory for Garfield and the Republicans ; most of the campaign would involve a few close states , including New York and Indiana . 
 Practical differences between the candidates were few , and Republicans began the campaign with the familiar theme of waving the bloody shirt : reminding Northern voters that the Democratic Party was responsible for secession and four years of civil war , and that if they held power they would reverse the gains of that war , dishonor Union veterans , and pay Confederate veterans pensions out of the federal treasury . With fifteen years having passed since the end of the war , and Union generals at the head of both tickets , the bloody shirt was of diminishing value in exciting the voters . With a few months to go before the election , the Republicans switched tactics to emphasize the tariff . Seizing on the Democratic platform 's call for a " tariff for revenue only " , Republicans told Northern workers that a Hancock presidency would weaken the tariff protection that kept them in good jobs . Hancock made the situation worse when , attempting to strike a moderate stance , he said " the tariff question is a local question " . The ploy proved effective in uniting the North behind Garfield . In the end , fewer than two thousand votes , of the more than 9 @.@ 2 million popular votes cast , separated the two candidates , but in the Electoral College Garfield had an easy victory over Hancock , 214 to 155 . 
 = = Presidency , 1881 = = 
 = = = Cabinet and inauguration = = = 
 Between his election and his inauguration , Garfield was occupied with assembling a cabinet that would establish peace between Conkling 's and Blaine 's warring factions . Blaine 's delegates had provided much of the support for Garfield 's nomination , and the Maine senator received the place of honor : Secretary of State . Blaine was not only the president 's closest advisor , he was obsessed with knowing all that took place in the White House , and was even said to have spies posted there in his absence . Garfield nominated William Windom of Minnesota as Secretary of the Treasury , William H. Hunt of Louisiana as Secretary of the Navy , Robert Todd Lincoln as Secretary of War , and Samuel J. Kirkwood of Iowa as Secretary of the Interior . New York was represented by Thomas Lemuel James as Postmaster General . Garfield appointed Pennsylvania 's Wayne MacVeagh , an adversary of Blaine 's , as Attorney General . Blaine tried to sabotage the appointment by convincing Garfield to name an opponent of MacVeagh , William E. Chandler , as Solicitor General under MacVeagh . Only Chandler 's rejection by the Senate forestalled MacVeagh 's resignation over the matter . 
 Distracted by cabinet maneuvering , Garfield 's inaugural address was not up to his typical oratorical standards . In one high point , Garfield emphasized the civil rights of African @-@ Americans , saying " Freedom can never yield its fullness of blessings so long as the law or its administration places the smallest obstacle in the pathway of any virtuous citizen . " After discussing the gold standard , the need for education , and an unexpected denunciation of Mormon polygamy , the speech ended . The crowd applauded , but the speech , according to Peskin , " however sincerely intended , betrayed its hasty composition by the flatness of its tone and the conventionality of its subject matter . " 
 Garfield 's appointment of James infuriated Conkling , a factional opponent of the Postmaster General , who demanded a compensatory appointment for his faction , such as the position of Secretary of the Treasury . The resulting squabble occupied much of Garfield 's brief presidency . The feud with Conkling reached a climax when the president , at Blaine 's instigation , nominated Conkling 's enemy , Judge William H. Robertson , to be Collector of the Port of New York . This was one of the prize patronage positions below cabinet level , and was then held by Edwin A. Merritt . Conkling raised the time @-@ honored principle of senatorial courtesy in an attempt to defeat the nomination , to no avail . Garfield , who believed the practice to be corrupt , would not back down and threatened to withdraw all nominations unless Robertson was confirmed , intending to " settle the question whether the President is registering clerk of the Senate or the Executive of the United States . " Ultimately , Conkling and his New York colleague , Senator Thomas C. Platt , resigned their Senate seats to seek vindication , but found only further humiliation when the New York legislature elected others in their places . Robertson was confirmed as Collector and Garfield 's victory was clear . To Blaine 's chagrin , the victorious Garfield returned to his goal of balancing the interests of party factions , and nominated a number of Conkling 's Stalwart friends to offices . 
 = = = Reforms = = = 
 Grant and Hayes had both advocated civil service reform , and by 1881 , civil service reform associations had organized with renewed energy across the nation . Garfield sympathized with them , believing that the spoils system damaged the presidency and distracted from more important concerns . Some reformers were disappointed that Garfield had advocated limited tenure only to minor office seekers and had given appointments to his old friends , but many remained loyal and supported Garfield . 
 Corruption in the post office also cried out for reform . In April 1880 , there had been a congressional investigation into corruption in the Post Office Department , in which profiteering rings allegedly stole millions of dollars , securing bogus mail contracts on star routes . After obtaining contracts with the lowest bid , costs to run the mail routes would be escalated and profits would be divided among ring members . That year , Hayes stopped the implementation of any new star route contracts . Shortly after taking office , Garfield received information from Attorney General MacVeagh and Postmaster General James of postal corruption by an alleged star route ringleader , Second Assistant Postmaster @-@ General Thomas J. Brady . Garfield demanded Brady 's resignation and ordered prosecutions that would end in trials for conspiracy . When told that his party , including his own campaign manager , Stephen W. Dorsey , was involved , Garfield directed MacVeagh and James to root out the corruption in the Post Office Department " to the bone " , regardless of where it might lead . Brady resigned and was eventually indicted for conspiracy . After two " star route " ring trials in 1882 and 1883 , the jury found Brady not guilty . 
 = = = Civil rights and education = = = 
 Garfield believed that the key to improving the state of African American civil rights would be found in education aided by the federal government . During Reconstruction , freedmen had gained citizenship and suffrage that enabled them to participate in government , but Garfield believed their rights were being eroded by Southern white resistance and illiteracy , and was concerned that blacks would become America 's permanent " peasantry " . His answer was to propose a " universal " education system funded by the federal government . Congress and the northern white public , however , had lost interest in African @-@ American rights , and federal funding for universal education did not find support in Congress during Garfield 's term . Garfield also worked to appoint several African Americans to prominent positions : Frederick Douglass , recorder of deeds in Washington ; Robert Elliot , special agent to the Treasury ; John M. Langston , Haitian minister ; and Blanche K. Bruce , register to the Treasury . Garfield believed that Southern support for the Republican party could be gained by " commercial and industrial " interests rather than race issues and began to reverse Hayes 's policy of conciliating Southern Democrats . He appointed William H. Hunt , a carpetbagger Republican from Louisiana , as Secretary of the Navy . To break the hold of the resurgent Democratic Party in the Solid South , Garfield took patronage advice from Virginia Senator William Mahone of the biracial independent Readjuster Party , hoping to add the independents ' strength to the Republicans ' there . 
 = = = Foreign policy and naval reform = = = 
 Entering the presidency , Garfield had little foreign policy experience , so he leaned heavily on Blaine . Blaine , a former protectionist , now agreed with Garfield on the need to promote freer trade , especially within the Western Hemisphere . Their reasons were twofold : firstly , Garfield and Blaine believed that increasing trade with Latin America would be the best way to keep Great Britain from dominating the region . Secondly , by encouraging exports , they believed they could increase American prosperity , and by doing so position the Republican party as the author of that prosperity , ensuring continued electoral success . Garfield authorized Blaine to call for a Pan @-@ American conference in 1882 to mediate disputes among the Latin American nations and to serve as a forum for talks on increasing trade . At the same time , they hoped to negotiate a peace in the War of the Pacific then being fought by Bolivia , Chile , and Peru . Blaine favored a resolution that would not result in Peru yielding any territory , but Chile , which had by 1881 occupied the Peruvian capital , Lima , rejected any settlement that restored the previous status quo . Garfield sought to expand American influence in other areas , calling for renegotiation of the Clayton @-@ Bulwer Treaty to allow the United States to construct a canal through Panama without British involvement , as well as attempting to reduce British influence in the strategically located Kingdom of Hawaii . Garfield 's and Blaine 's plans for the United States ' involvement in the world stretched even beyond the Western Hemisphere , as he sought commercial treaties with Korea and Madagascar . Garfield also considered enhancing the United States ' military strength abroad , asking Navy Secretary Hunt to investigate the condition of the navy with an eye toward expansion and modernization . In the end , these ambitious plans came to nothing after Garfield was assassinated . Nine countries had accepted invitations to the Pan @-@ American conference , but the invitations were withdrawn in April 1882 after Blaine resigned from the cabinet and Arthur , Garfield 's successor , cancelled the conference . Naval reform continued under Arthur , if on a more modest scale than Garfield and Hunt had envisioned , ultimately ending in the construction of the Squadron of Evolution . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 = = Assassination = = 
 = = = Guiteau and shooting = = = 
 Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau , a disgruntled office seeker , at the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station in Washington , D.C. on July 2 , 1881 . After eleven weeks of intensive and other care Garfield died in Elberon , New Jersey , the second of four Presidents to be assassinated , following Abraham Lincoln . Guiteau had followed various professions in his life , but in 1880 had determined to gain federal office by supporting what he expected to be the winning Republican ticket . He composed a speech , " Garfield vs. Hancock " , and got it printed by the Republican National Committee . One means of persuading the voter in that era was through orators expounding on the candidate 's merits , but with the Republicans seeking more famous men , Guiteau received few opportunities to speak . On one occasion , according to Kenneth D. Ackerman in his book about Garfield 's candidacy and assassination , Guiteau was unable to finish his speech due to nerves . Guiteau , who considered himself a Stalwart , deemed his contribution to Garfield 's victory sufficient to justify the position of consul in Paris , despite the fact he spoke no French , nor any foreign language . 
 One of President Garfield 's more wearying duties was seeing office seekers , and he saw Guiteau at least once . White House officials suggested to Guiteau that he approach Blaine , as the consulship was within the Department of State . Blaine also saw the public regularly , and Guiteau became a regular at these sessions ; Blaine , who had no intention of giving Guiteau a position for which he was not qualified nor one he had not earned , simply stated that the deadlock in the Senate over Robertson 's nomination made it impossible to consider the Paris consulship , which required Senate confirmation . Once the New York senators had resigned , and Robertson had been confirmed as Collector , Guiteau pressed his claim , and Blaine told him he would not receive the position . 
 Guiteau came to believe he had lost the position because he was a Stalwart . The office @-@ seeker decided that the only way to end the internecine warfare in the Republican Party was for Garfield to die — though he had nothing personal against the president . Arthur 's succession would restore peace , he felt , and lead to rewards for fellow Stalwarts , including Guiteau . 
 The assassination of Abraham Lincoln was deemed a fluke due to the Civil War , and Garfield , like most people , saw no reason why the president should be guarded ; Garfield 's movements and plans were often printed in the newspapers . Guiteau knew the president would leave Washington for cooler climes on July 2 , and made plans to kill him before then . He purchased a gun he thought would look good in a museum , and followed Garfield several times , but each time his plans were frustrated , or he lost his nerve . His opportunities dwindled to one — Garfield 's departure by train for New Jersey on the morning of July 2 , 1881 . 
 Guiteau concealed himself by the ladies ' waiting room at the Sixth Street Station of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad , from where Garfield was scheduled to depart . Most of Garfield 's cabinet planned to accompany him at least part of the way ; Blaine , who was to remain in Washington , came to the station to see him off . The two men were deep in conversation and did not notice Guiteau before he took out his revolver and shot Garfield twice , once in the back and once in the arm . The time was 9 : 30 a.m. The assassin attempted to leave the station , but was quickly captured . As Blaine recognized him and Guiteau made no secret of why he had shot Garfield , the assassin 's motivation to benefit the Stalwarts reached many with the early news of the shooting , causing rage against that faction . 
 = = = Treatment and death = = = 
 Garfield was hit by two shots ; one glanced off his arm while the other pierced his back , shattering a rib and embedding itself in his abdomen . " My God , what is this ? " he exclaimed . Guiteau , as he was led away , stated , " I did it . I will go to jail for it . I am a Stalwart and Arthur will be President . " 
 Among those at the station was Robert Todd Lincoln , who sixteen years before had watched his father die from an assassin 's bullet . Garfield was taken on a mattress upstairs to a private office , where several doctors examined him , probing the wound with unwashed fingers . At his request , Garfield was taken back to the White House , and his wife , then in New Jersey , was sent for . Blaine sent word to Vice President Arthur in New York City , who received threats against his life because of his animosity toward Garfield and Guiteau 's statements . 
 Although Joseph Lister 's pioneering work in antisepsis was known to American doctors , with Lister himself having visited America in 1876 , few of them had confidence in it , and none of his advocates were among Garfield 's treating physicians . The physician who took charge at the depot and then at the White House was Doctor Willard Bliss . A noted physician and surgeon , Bliss was an old friend of Garfield , and about a dozen doctors , led by Bliss , were soon probing the wound with unsterilized fingers and instruments . Garfield was given morphine for the pain , and asked Bliss to frankly tell him his chances , which Bliss put at one in a hundred . " Well , Doctor , we 'll take that chance . " 
 Over the next few days , Garfield made some improvement , as the nation viewed the news from the capital and prayed . Although he never stood again , he was able to sit up and write several times , and his recovery was viewed so positively that a steamer was fitted out as a seagoing hospital to aid with his convalescence . He was nourished on oatmeal ( which he detested ) and milk from a cow on the White House lawn . When told that Indian chief Sitting Bull , a prisoner of the army , was starving , Garfield said , " Let him starve " , then , " Oh , no , send him my oatmeal . " Alexander Graham Bell tried to locate the bullet with a primitive metal detector ; he was not successful . One means of keeping the president comfortable in Washington 's summer heat was one of the first successful air conditioning units : air that was propelled by fans over ice and then dried had reduced the temperature in the sickroom by 20 degrees Fahrenheit ( 11 degrees Celsius ) . 
 Beginning on July 23 , Garfield took a turn for the worse . His temperature increased to 104 ° F ( 40 ° C ) ; doctors , concerned by a pus sac that had developed by the wound , operated and inserted a drainage tube . This initially seemed to help , and Garfield , in his bed , was able to hold a brief cabinet meeting on July 29 , though members were under orders from Bliss to discuss nothing that might excite Garfield . Doctors probed the sac , which went into Garfield 's body , hoping to find the bullet ; they most likely only made the infections worse . Garfield performed only one state act in August , signing an extradition paper . By the end of the month , the president was much more feeble than he had been , and his weight had decreased to 130 pounds ( 59 kg ) . 
 Garfield had long been anxious to escape hot , unhealthy Washington , and in early September the doctors agreed to move him to Elberon , where his wife had recovered earlier in the summer . He left the White House for the last time on September 5 , traveling in a specially cushioned railway car ; a spur line to the Franklyn Cottage , a seaside mansion given over to his use , was built in a night by volunteers . There , Garfield could see the ocean as officials and reporters maintained what became ( after an initial rally ) a death watch . Garfield 's personal secretary , Joe Stanley Brown , wrote 40 years later , " to this day I cannot hear the sound of the low slow roll of the Atlantic on the shore , the sound which filled my ears as I walked from my cottage to his bedside , without recalling again that ghastly tragedy . " 
 On September 18 , Garfield asked A. F. Rockwell , a friend , if he would have a place in history . Rockwell assured him he would , and told Garfield he had much work still before him . But his response was , " No , my work is done . " The following day , Garfield , by then also suffering from pneumonia and heart pains , marveled that he could not pick up a glass despite feeling well , and went to sleep without discomfort . He awoke that evening around 10 : 15 pm with great pain in his chest . The attendant watching him sent for Bliss , who found him unconscious . Despite efforts to revive him , Garfield never awoke , and died at 10 : 35 pm that evening . 
 According to some historians and medical experts , Garfield might have survived his wounds had the doctors attending him had at their disposal today 's medical research , techniques , and equipment . Standard medical practice at the time dictated that priority be given to locating the path of the bullet . Several of his doctors inserted their unsterilized fingers into the wound to probe for the bullet , a common practice in the 1880s . Historians agree that massive infection was a significant factor in President Garfield 's demise . Biographer Peskin stated that medical malpractice did not contribute to Garfield 's death ; the inevitable infection and blood poisoning that would ensue from a deep bullet wound resulted in damage to multiple organs and spinal bone fragmentation . Rutkow , a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey , has argued that starvation also played a role . Rutkow suggests that " Garfield had such a nonlethal wound . In today 's world , he would have gone home in a matter of two or three days . " 
 Guiteau was indicted on October 14 , 1881 , for the murder of the President . In a chaotic trial in which Guiteau often interrupted and argued , and in which his counsel used the insanity defense , the jury found him guilty on January 5 , 1882 , and he was sentenced to death by hanging . Guiteau might have had syphilis , a disease that causes physiological mental impairment . He was executed on June 30 , 1882 . 
 = = Funeral , memorials and commemorations = = 
 Garfield 's funeral train left Long Branch on the same special track that brought him there , traveling over tracks blanketed with flowers and past houses adorned with flags . His body was transported to the Capitol and then continued on to Cleveland for burial . More than 70 @,@ 000 citizens , some waiting over three hours , passed by Garfield 's coffin as his body lay in state in Washington ; later , on September 25 , 1881 , in Cleveland , more than 150 @,@ 000 — a number equal to the entire population of that city — likewise paid their respects . His body was temporarily interred in a vault in Cleveland 's Lake View Cemetery until his permanent memorial was built . 
 Memorials to Garfield were erected across the country . On April 10 , 1882 , seven months after Garfield 's death , the U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp in his honor , the second stamp issued by the U.S. to honor an assassinated president . In 1884 , sculptor Frank <unk> completed a monument on the grounds of the San Francisco Conservatory of Flowers . In 1887 , the James A. Garfield Monument was dedicated in Washington . Another monument , in Philadelphia 's Fairmount Park , was erected in 1896 . In Victoria , Australia , Cannibal Creek was renamed Garfield in his honor . 
 On May 19 , 1890 , Garfield 's body was permanently interred , with great solemnity and fanfare , in a mausoleum in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland . Attending the dedication ceremonies were former president Hayes , President Benjamin Harrison , and future president William McKinley . Garfield 's Treasury Secretary , William Windom , also attended . Harrison said that Garfield was always a " student and instructor " and that his life works and death would " continue to be instructive and inspiring incidents in American history " . Three panels on the monument display Garfield as a teacher , Union major general , and orator ; another shows him taking the Presidential oath , and a fifth shows his body lying in state at the Capitol rotunda in Washington D.C. 
 Garfield 's murder by a deranged office @-@ seeker awakened public awareness of the need for civil service reform legislation . Senator George H. Pendleton , a Democrat from Ohio , launched a reform effort that resulted in the Pendleton Act in January 1883 . This act reversed the " spoils system " where office seekers paid up or gave political service in order to obtain or keep federally appointed positions . Under the act , appointments were awarded on merit and competitive examination . To ensure the reform was implemented , Congress and Arthur established and funded the Civil Service Commission . The Pendleton Act , however , covered only 10 % of federal government workers . For Arthur , previously known for having been a " veteran spoilsman " , civil service reform became his most noteworthy achievement . 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 For a few years after his assassination , Garfield 's life story was seen as an exemplar of the American success story : that even the poorest boy might someday become President of the United States . Peskin noted that " in mourning Garfield , Americans were not only honoring a president ; they were paying tribute to a man whose life story embodied their own most cherished aspirations " . As the rivalry between Stalwarts and Half @-@ Breeds faded from the scene in the late 1880s and after , so too did memories of Garfield . Beginning in 1882 , the year after Garfield 's death , the U.S. Post Office began issuing postage stamps honoring the late President . Despite his short term as President , nine different issues were printed over the years . In the 1890s , Americans became disillusioned with politicians , and looked elsewhere for inspiration , focusing on industrialists , labor leaders , scientists , and others as their heroes . Increasingly , Garfield 's short time as president was forgotten . 
 The 20th century saw no revival for Garfield . Thomas Wolfe deemed the presidents of the Gilded Age , including Garfield , " lost Americans " whose " gravely vacant and bewhiskered faces mixed , melted , swam together " . The politicians of the Gilded Age faded from the public eye , their luster eclipsed by those who had influenced America outside of political office during that time : the robber barons , the inventors , those who had sought social reform , and others who had lived as America rapidly changed . Current events and more recent figures occupied America 's attention : according to Ackerman , " the busy Twentieth Century has made Garfield 's era seem remote and irrelevant , its leaders ridiculed for their very obscurity . " 
 Garfield 's biographers , and those who have studied his presidency , tend to think well of him , and that his presidency saw a promising start before its untimely end . Historian Justus D. Doenecke , while deeming Garfield a bit of an enigma , chronicles his achievements , " by winning a victory over the Stalwarts , he enhanced both the power and prestige of his office . As a man , he was intelligent , sensitive , and alert , and his knowledge of how government worked was unmatched . " Yet Doenecke criticizes Garfield 's dismissal of Merritt in Robertson 's favor , and wonders if the president was truly in command of the situation even after the latter 's confirmation . According to Caldwell , writing in 1931 , " If Garfield lives in history , it will be partly on account of the charm of his personality — but also because in life and in death , he struck the first shrewd blows against a dangerous system of boss rule which seemed for a time about to engulf the politics of the nation . Perhaps if he had lived he could have done no more . " Rutkow writes , " James Abram Garfield 's presidency is reduced to a tantalizing ' what if . ' " 
 Peskin believes Garfield deserves more credit for his political career than he has received : 
 True , his accomplishments were neither bold nor heroic , but his was not an age that called for heroism . His stormy presidency was brief and , and in some respects , unfortunate , but he did leave the office stronger than he found it . As a public man he had a hand in almost every issue of national importance for almost two decades , while as a party leader he , along with Blaine , forged the Republican Party into the instrument that would lead the United States into the twentieth century . 
 = These Are Special Times = 
 These Are Special Times is the sixth English @-@ language studio album and the first English @-@ language holiday album by Canadian singer Celine Dion . Released by Sony Music Entertainment on October 30 , 1998 , it features cover versions of popular Christmas tunes and original material . Dion worked with David Foster and Ric Wake , who produced most of the tracks for the album . Other producers include R. Kelly and Bryan Adams . Critics praised Dion 's commitment to the recorded material , as well as the production of the songs . 
 These Are Special Times was released after two of Dion 's most successful albums , Falling into You ( 1996 ) and Let 's Talk About Love ( 1997 ) . It includes the US number @-@ one single , " I 'm Your Angel " ( duet with R. Kelly ) and the Golden Globe winning song , " The Prayer " ( also featured in Quest for Camelot ) . The album has sold 5 @.@ 4 million copies in the United States as of May 2016 , according to Nielsen SoundScan , and has been certified five @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA . In Canada , the album has sold one million copies and been certified Diamond by the CRIA . The album has sold twelve million copies worldwide and is one of the best @-@ selling Christmas albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Celine Dion released two French @-@ language Christmas albums in her early career : Céline Dion chante Noël ( 1981 ) and Chants et contes de Noël ( 1983 ) . Later , in 1993 , she recorded " The Christmas Song " which appears on David Foster 's The Christmas Album . The next year , Dion was featured on Alvin and the Chipmunks ' " Petit Papa Noël " which is on their album A Very Merry Chipmunk . In 1996 , she recorded " Brahms ' Lullaby " for the compilation For Our Children Too to benefit the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation . " The Christmas Song " and " Brahms ' Lullaby " were included on These Are Special Times in 1998 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Celine Dion worked on These Are Special Times with her longtime partners David Foster and Ric Wake , who produced most of the songs . The album contains seven original compositions : " Don 't Save It All for Christmas Day " ( co @-@ written by Celine Dion ; covered by Avalon in 2000 and Clay Aiken in 2004 ) , " Another Year Has Gone By " ( written and produced by Bryan Adams ) , a solo version of " The Magic of Christmas Day " ( recorded in 1999 as a duet with Rosie O 'Donnell and included on a charity album , A Rosie Christmas ) , " The Prayer " ( duet with Andrea Bocelli ; each artist sang it solo on the 1998 soundtrack to Quest for Camelot ) , " Christmas Eve , " " These Are the Special Times " ( written by Diane Warren ; covered by Christina Aguilera in 2000 ) and " I 'm Your Angel " ( duet with R. Kelly , written and produced by Kelly ) . Other tracks include inspired arrangements of standards like " O Holy Night , " " Blue Christmas " ( Diana Krall on acoustic piano ) , " Adeste Fideles , " " Ave Maria " and new versions of the modern classics " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " and " Feliz Navidad . " On the latter track and " Les cloches du <unk> , " Dion is joined by her family . In October 2007 , the album was re @-@ released as a Collector 's Edition that includes a DVD of Dion 's CBS television special for These Are Special Times . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Celine Dion promoted the album in the United States with a television special which aired on CBS on November 25 , 1998 . It included two musical guests : Andrea Bocelli on " The Prayer " and Rosie O 'Donnell on " Do You Hear What I Hear ? . " Dion also performed album tracks ( " O Holy Night , " " These Are the Special Times " ) , her number @-@ one hits ( " The Power of Love , " " Because You Loved Me , " " My Heart Will Go On " ) , as well as favorites ( " Let 's Talk About Love , " " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " ) . These Are Special Times was a television ratings champion , ranking number @-@ one for the night and drawing an audience of more than sixteen million viewers . The show was nominated for two Emmy Awards . Celine Dion and Andrea Bocelli also performed " The Prayer " at the 41st Grammy Awards on February 24 , 1999 and at the 71st Academy Awards on March 21 , 1999 . She also performed " Blue Christmas " at " The Today Show " and " Another Year Has Gone By " at " The Rosie O 'Donnell Show " and with Bryan Adams at the " Late Show with David Letterman " . " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " was performed in 1992 at the TV show " Good Morning America " , in 1993 with David Foster on his TV special , " David Foster 's Christmas Album " on NBC on December 10 , 1993 and at The Rockefeller Center on November 28 , 2007 . Additionally , Dion performed " Don 't Save It All for Christmas Day " and " Adeste Fideles ( O Come All Ye Faithful ) " at the 2009 Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade , which aired on ABC . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " I 'm Your Angel " was released as the first single from the album . It became Dion 's fourth number @-@ one on the US Billboard Hot 100 , topping the chart for six consecutive weeks . On December 9 , 1998 , it was certified Platinum by the RIAA for shipment of one million copies in the United States . The song was also successful in Europe , peaking at number three in the United Kingdom . In March 1999 , " The Prayer " ( duet with Andrea Bocelli ) was sent to adult contemporary radio stations in the United States and peaked at number twenty @-@ two on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . In February 2008 , Dion recorded a live version of this song in a duet with Josh Groban . Thanks to the digital sales , the track entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 These Are Special Times garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Paul Verna from Billboard gave it a very positive review , praising Dion 's maturity and the album 's production . He wrote , " sounding at complete ease and wielding a wildly creative wand , an ever @-@ maturing Dion conjures up surprise on what should be regarded as her next " big " album . " Verna noted that this " grade @-@ A effort " is " no ordinary holiday project . " He praised " grandiose versions of standards " ( " O Holy Night , " " Adeste Fideles " ) , " modern classics " ( " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) , " " Feliz Navidad " ) and " thoughtfully produced original compositions " ( " Another Year Has Gone By , " " Don 't Save It All for Christmas Day " ) . According to him , other highlights include " The Prayer , " a " gorgeous duet " with Andrea Bocelli , the " Phil Spector @-@ esque " " Christmas Eve , " and a " sparkling reading " of " Ave Maria . " 
 Chuck Taylor from Billboard also praised " I 'm Your Angel , " a duet with R. Kelly . He wrote that " this wonderfully restrained ballad delights with the most graceful vocal performances either of these artists has ever offered to radio . " Taylor commented , " what raises the roof is the tune 's elegant , epic instrumental base , which includes sweeping strings , a soulful choir , and gentle but determined percussive drive . " He continued , that " I 'm Your Angel " " sells big at the bridge , where the instrumentation drops and Kelly and Dion harmonize in a gorgeous minor key – it truly makes the song . " Chuck Taylor also reviewed " The Prayer " , calling it " a breathtaking , ultra @-@ lush song , and the tour de force combination of Dion and Bocelli [ which ] will send a half @-@ dozen chills up your spine . " Although he felt that the song is " an unorthodox track for the radio " , Taylor called it " affecting , " " heartwarming , " " absolutely exquisite " and " one of Dion 's most radiant performances ever . " 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that " any fan of Dion , or of ' 90s adult contemporary pop in general , should find this [ album ] very enjoyable . " Although according to him , " at times , the production is too slick " and " at other times Dion 's vocals are a little mannered , " overall , These Are Special Times " is very effective , because the songs are good and she 's committed to the material . " Erlewine wrote that These Are Special Times is " an especially successful holiday album since Dion wisely balances " popular carols ( " Blue Christmas , " " The Christmas Song , " " Feliz Navidad " ) with new songs ( " I 'm Your Angel , " " Don 't Save It All for Christmas " ) , hymns ( " Adeste Fideles , " " Ave Maria " ) , and Christmas songs with a distinct religious theme ( " The Prayer , " " O Holy Night " ) . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 These Are Special Times debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 , selling 126 @,@ 000 copies . The next week , it became a greatest gainer , jumping to number three and selling 163 @,@ 000 units . In its third week , despite selling 210 @,@ 000 copies , These Are Special Times fell to number five . In the fourth week , thanks to Dion 's CBS television special , the album rose to number three , with a 94 % sales increase ( 409 @,@ 000 copies ) becoming a greatest gainer again . The next week , it moved to its peak position on the Billboard 200 , number two , with sales of 366 @,@ 000 units . These Are Special Times tied Amy Grant 's 1992 Home for Christmas as the highest @-@ charting holiday album ever by a female artist . It stayed at number two for the second week , selling 413 @,@ 000 copies . In the seventh week , These Are Special Times reached its highest weekly sales of 462 @,@ 000 copies , despite falling to number three . In the last week inside the top ten , the album fell to number five selling another 461 @,@ 000 copies . On the Top Holiday Albums , it topped the chart for nine consecutive weeks . 
 These Are Special Times became the best @-@ selling holiday album of 1998 in the US with a total of 2 @,@ 684 @,@ 000 copies sold . Dion 's album also sold more copies in its first year of release than any other holiday album by a female artist . On December 6 , 2005 , the album was certified five @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA for shipment of five million copies in the US . On November 16 , 2008 , it also became the first holiday album by a female artist to top the five million mark in Nielsen SoundScan history . These Are Special Times is also the highest selling Christmas album by an artist born outside the US . It is the fourth best @-@ selling Christmas album of the entire Nielsen SoundScan era with US sales of 5 @.@ 4 million copies . 
 In Canada , These Are Special Times peaked at number one . The album shipped one million copies and was certified Diamond by the CRIA . In Japan , the album reached number four and exceeded sales of more than 500 @,@ 000 copies . These Are Special Times was also successful in Australasia and Europe , hitting the top ten in most countries and peaking at number one in Switzerland and Norway . It has sold twelve million copies worldwide , and is one of the best @-@ selling Christmas album of all time . 
 = = Awards = = 
 These Are Special Times received the 1999 Japan Gold Disc Award for International Pop Album of the Year . At the 56th Golden Globe Awards , " The Prayer " won the award for Best Original Song . " I 'm Your Angel " and " The Prayer " were nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 41st and 42nd Grammy Awards , respectively . " The Prayer " was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 71st Academy Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 250 = 
 The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 250 ( a.k.a. <unk> N ) was a Soviet fighter aircraft developed as part of a crash program in 1944 to develop a high @-@ performance fighter to counter German turbojet @-@ powered aircraft such as the Messerschmitt Me @-@ 262 . The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich design bureau decided to focus on a design that used something more mature than the jet engine , which was still at an experimental stage in the Soviet Union , and chose a mixed @-@ power solution with the VRDK ( <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> – air reaction compressor jet ) motorjet powered by the Klimov VK @-@ 107 V12 engine . While quite successful when it worked , with a maximum speed of 820 km / h ( 510 mph ) being reached during trials , production problems with the VRDK fatally delayed the program and it was canceled in 1948 as obsolete . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 By January 1944 the Soviets were aware of successful British and American jet aircraft projects and that the Germans were about to deploy jet and rocket @-@ propelled aircraft of their own . The <unk> ordered on 18 February that the NKAP ( People 's Commissariat for Aviation Industry ) centralize jet research under its control and that the NKAP was to present proposals to alleviate the situation within a month . As a result of this meeting the NKAP ordered the Lavochkin , Sukhoi , Yakovlev and Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich design bureaux ( <unk> ) to develop and build jet aircraft with the utmost dispatch . Aware of earlier problems encountered with other novel propulsion systems such as ramjets both Sukhoi and Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich chose to use the VRDK booster engine that had been under development since 1942 . 
 The VRDK was a motorjet , a rudimentary type of jet engine where an external power source drove the engine 's compressor . It forced air into the stainless steel combustion chamber where fuel was sprayed from seven nozzles and ignited to exhaust out the variable rear nozzle . In the I @-@ 250 a 1 @,@ 650 @-@ horsepower ( 1 @,@ 230 kW ) Klimov VK @-@ <unk> V @-@ 12 piston engine was used as the primary powerplant . After takeoff a clutch at the end of the crankshaft could be engaged which drove a step up gearbox with a ratio of 13 : 21 to an extension shaft that powered the compressor of the VRDK . The air for the compressor was fed through a long duct that ran from the inlet underneath the propeller spinner , thence under the engine and through the belly of the aircraft . This duct also fed air to the oil cooler near the engine , but the water radiator was positioned behind the compressor to maximize airflow over it . A secondary duct led from the main duct to the VK @-@ 107 's supercharger ; when the VRDK was running the secondary duct diverted some of that additional air to the supercharger which boosted the engine 's output to 2 @,@ 500 @-@ horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) at 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 966 ft ) . The increased airflow over the engine radiator helped to dump the engine 's excess heat into the exhaust stream . However the VRDK was limited to only ten minutes ' operating time per sortie , which meant that it was useless weight during the rest of the flight . 
 The I @-@ 250 was a low @-@ wing , all @-@ metal aircraft with a monocoque fuselage . Other than the VRDK the aircraft was largely conventional in layout , although the cockpit was set very far back in the fuselage , almost to the base of the vertical tail . The two @-@ spar wings had a thickness of 10 % to preserve aileron control and avoid tip stall . They were fitted with Frise ailerons and slotted flaps . Fuel was contained in a 412 @-@ litre ( 91 imp gal ; 109 US gal ) fuselage tank and a 100 @-@ litre ( 22 imp gal ; 26 US gal ) tank in each wing . The conventional landing gear mainwheels had a levered suspension and retracted inwards . The tail wheel retracted aft into the very small ventral fin . The VK @-@ 107A engine initially drove a 3 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) VISh @-@ <unk> propeller . 
 The NKAP had asked Mikoyan to begin preliminary design work on a high @-@ altitude interceptor in January 1944 , but ordered two prototypes of an all @-@ metal interceptor using the VRDK for testing in February and March 1945 . The aircraft was to reach an altitude of 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) in 4 @.@ 5 minutes with full power and 5 @.@ 5 minutes using the piston engine alone . Its maximum speed was to be 810 km / h ( 500 mph ) at 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 966 ft ) with full power and 700 km / h ( 430 mph ) at 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 966 ft ) using the VK @-@ 107 by itself . Its intended armament was one 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) autocannon and two 12 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine guns . To assist Mikoyan TsAGI was ordered to provide help with aerodynamic and stress calculations and to test a full @-@ size mockup in their wind tunnel in one month 's time . TsIAM was ordered to deliver three VRDK engines with 9 @-@ <unk> ( 2 @,@ 000 lbf ) at 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 966 ft ) with a specific fuel consumption of 1 @,@ 200 kg ( 2 @,@ 600 lb ) per hour . The plane was designated I @-@ 250 by the NKAP ; but the internal OKB designation was N. 
 The NKAP approved the preliminary specifications of the I @-@ 250 on 19 September 1944 which included a maximum speed of 825 km / h ( 513 mph ) a take @-@ off weight of 3 @,@ 500 kg ( 7 @,@ 700 lb ) and a time to 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) of 3 @.@ 9 minutes . A mock @-@ up was inspected on 26 October and rejected because of the poor cockpit layout , although this decision was reversed because the fuselage of the first prototype was too far along for major changes that would have significantly delayed the program . That same month the combustion chamber was sent to TsIAM for testing which revealed it to be too weak . The complete powerplant was tested in December , but the drive shaft connecting them failed several times . 
 The first prototype was completed on 26 February 1945 , although the VRDK was not yet ready . It was fitted with a new 3 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) AV @-@ 10P @-@ 60 propeller before making its first flight on 4 April according to Gordon and Komissarov , although Belyakov and <unk> say 3 March . It was armed with three 20 mm Berezin B @-@ 20 cannon with 160 rounds each . One gun was fitted on each side of the nose and the third fired through the hollow propeller shaft . The VRDK was tested for the first time on 8 April in a dive , attaining a speed of 710 km / h ( 440 mph ) , but a leak was found in the oil cooler after landing and the VRDK had to be returned to the factory for repairs . The VRDK was reinstalled by 14 April , but was still troublesome . It twice reached 809 km / h ( 503 mph ) at about 7 @,@ 000 m ( 22 @,@ 966 ft ) during these early tests , but its service life had been exceeded by 30 May and it had to be returned to TsIAM , which postponed any further tests until the second aircraft was finished . 
 The unarmed second prototype was completed on 19 May , but did not make its first flight until 26 May . It was later discovered to have several major defects , including an oil leak from the VRDK compressor 's sleeve . The VRDK 's designer was summoned in an attempt to solve its problems although not all of these were design issues . The first prototype was grounded for most of June to remedy magneto problems and to add extra air intakes to cool the spark plugs . It attained a speed of 820 km / h ( 510 mph ) at 6 @,@ 700 m ( 21 @,@ 982 ft ) on 3 July . Unfortunately its port tailplane failed at low altitude two days later , killing the test pilot , Alexandr <unk> , when his parachute failed to open in time . Post @-@ crash analysis revealed that he had exceeded the airframe 's G limit while maneuvering . 
 Despite the accident , a pre @-@ production batch of ten aircraft was ordered on 27 July 1945 as it was felt that mixed @-@ power aircraft would be of some use easing the transition of pilots from piston @-@ engine fighters to jet @-@ engined ones . At the same time Sukhoi 's Su @-@ 5 was cancelled as it was judged inferior to the I @-@ 250 . 
 In the meantime the horizontal stabilizer of the second prototype was strengthened and it resumed flying on 20 July . The pilot complained of excess torque pull to the right so the vertical stabilizer was enlarged by 0 @.@ 63 m2 ( 6 @.@ 8 sq ft ) , but this was just one of numerous problems , and it was not ready to pass State acceptance trials without more development work on the powerplant . However , the second prototype continued flight testing until 12 July 1946 when an engine fire forced an emergency landing and it was damaged beyond repair . 
 The order for the pre @-@ production I @-@ 250s had been placed with Factory No. 381 in Moscow for two aircraft to be delivered in September , three more in October and the remainder by the end of the year . This proved to be very optimistic and it was revised to a single aircraft by the end of the year . The airframe was completed on this revised schedule , but its engine was not ready in time . The factory management was much criticized for these problems which were not entirely under their control as changes to the design and drawings were constant . The criticism was not limited to just the I @-@ 250 program as the other jet programs could not be developed as fast as the leadership wanted as well and Alexei <unk> , the head of MAP ( Ministry of Aviation Industry ) and its NKAP predecessor since 1940 , was arrested in March 1946 as a sign of their displeasure . The new Minister severely reprimanded the designer of the VRDK and three factory directors on 13 April 1946 and set up a commission to determine why Factory No. 381 and TsIAM had failed to meet their deadlines . He refused to accept its findings as it apportioned blame fairly evenly among those responsible for the production program and he had the director of Factory No. 381 and his quality control manager arrested for industrial sabotage . 
 Despite these production problems and the fact that the I @-@ 250 had yet even to be submitted for State acceptance trails , an order had been placed for fifty more aircraft on 26 February ( these aircraft have been referred to as the MiG @-@ 13 , which presumably would have been their designation if they had actually entered service ) . A new deadline of 5 July 1946 was set for the delivery of the first pre @-@ production aircraft , but it was stymied , again , for a lack of an engine . By this time seven airframes had been completed , but all lacked engines . The first I @-@ 250 was finally accepted on 8 August and flown for the first time three days later , although its engine seals failed and a number of ignition cables were scorched . The engine replacement and repairs forced the aircraft to miss its scheduled appearance at the Tushino Air Display . It was handed over to the NII VVS ( Air Force Institute ) on 15 September to finally begin its State acceptance tests . All ten aircraft had been delivered by 30 October , although construction number <unk> ( Factory No. 381 , first batch , seventh aircraft ) was used as a static test airframe and <unk> became a static engine testbed . 
 Stalin convened a meeting on 29 November 1946 to settle the future policy on jet fighters for the VVS and PVO . The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 9 was selected as the primary fighter with the Yakovlev Yak @-@ 15 relegated to conversion training and familiarization . The imminent availability of British jet engines and access to German jet technology and engineers meant that there was no longer any need for mixed @-@ power aircraft , but Stalin insisted that the I @-@ 250 finish its trials and that the tooling and drawings should be retained along with <unk> parts even though the program was cancelled . 
 Completion of the trials would be delayed until May 1947 when the trials of the VRDK itself would be completed and Mikoyan tried to sell the aircraft to Naval Aviation for use as escorts for torpedo bombers . Additional fuel tanks were fitted in the wings and fuselage of <unk> to carry an additional 218 litres ( 48 imp gal ; 58 US gal ) of fuel and the capacity of the oil tank was increased to 78 litres ( 17 imp gal ; 21 US gal ) . These changes increased its empty weight to 3 @,@ 028 kg ( 6 @,@ 676 lb ) and its take @-@ off weight to 3 @,@ 931 kg ( 8 @,@ 666 lb ) . A new round of State trials began on 9 October 1947 , but these were delayed by bad weather and reliability issues . Only six flights totaling two hours and twenty @-@ five minutes had been completed by 21 January 1948 and the VRDK had only been run for a minute and half during a ground test . The I @-@ 250 was unsurprisingly declared to have failed the trials on 3 April 1948 . 
 = = Specifications ( first prototype ) = = 
 Data from Gordon and Komissarov , OKB Mikoyan : A History of the Design Bureau and its Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 8 @.@ 19 m ( 26 ft 10 in ) 
 Wingspan : 9 @.@ 5 m ( 31 ft 2 in ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft 2 in ) 
 Wing area : 15 m2 ( 160 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 2 @,@ 797 kg ( 6 @,@ 166 lb ) 
