 Gross weight : 3 @,@ 680 kg ( 8 @,@ 113 lb ) 
 Fuel capacity : 612 litres ( 135 imp gal ; 162 US gal ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Klimov VK @-@ <unk> liquid @-@ cooled V12 engine , 1 @,@ 230 kW ( 1 @,@ 650 hp ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × VRDK ( <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> – air reaction compressor jet ) motorjet , 6 kN ( 1 @,@ 300 lbf ) thrust 
 Propellers : 3 @-@ bladed AV @-@ 10P @-@ 60 , 3 @.@ 1 m ( 10 ft 2 in ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 820 km / h ( 510 mph ; 443 kn ) 
 Range : 790 km ( 491 mi ; 427 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 11 @,@ 900 m ( 39 @,@ 042 ft ) 
 Time to altitude : 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) in 3 @.@ 9 min ( with VRDK ) 
 Wing loading : 245 kg / m2 ( 50 lb / sq ft ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 3 × 20 mm Berezin B @-@ 20 cannons ( 160 rounds each ) 
 = Jesus College , Oxford = 
 Jesus College ( in full : Jesus College in the University of Oxford of Queen Elizabeth 's Foundation ) is one of the colleges of the University of Oxford in England . It is in the centre of the city , on a site between Turl Street , Ship Street , Cornmarket Street and Market Street . The college was founded by Elizabeth I on 27 June 1571 for the education of clergy , though students now study a broad range of secular subjects . A major driving force behind the establishment of the college was Hugh Price ( or Ap Rhys ) , a churchman from Brecon in Wales . The oldest buildings , in the first quadrangle , date from the 16th and early 17th centuries ; a second quadrangle was added between about 1640 and about 1713 , and a third quadrangle was built in about 1906 . Further accommodation was built on the main site to mark the 400th anniversary of the college , in 1971 , and student flats have been constructed at sites in north and east Oxford . 
 The life of the college was disrupted by the English Civil War . Leoline Jenkins , who became principal after the war in 1661 , put the college on a more stable financial footing . Little happened at the college during the 18th century , and the 19th century saw a decline in numbers and academic standards . Reforms of Oxford University after two Royal Commissions in the latter half of the 19th century led to removal of many of the restrictions placed on the college 's fellowships and scholarships , such that the college ceased to be predominantly full of Welsh students and academics . Students ' academic achievements rose in the early 20th century as fellows were appointed to teach in new subjects . Women were first admitted in 1974 and now form a large part of the undergraduate population . 
 There are about 475 students at any one time ; the Principal of the college is Sir Nigel Shadbolt . Former students include Harold Wilson ( who was twice British Prime Minister ) , Norman Washington Manley ( Chief Minister of Jamaica ) , T. E. Lawrence ( " Lawrence of Arabia " ) , Angus Buchanan ( winner of the Victoria Cross ) , and Viscount Sankey ( Lord Chancellor ) . The university 's professorship of Celtic is attached to the college , a post held by scholars such as Sir John Rhys , Ellis Evans and Thomas Charles @-@ Edwards . Past or present fellows of the college include the historians Sir Goronwy Edwards and Niall Ferguson , the philosopher Galen Strawson and the political philosopher John Gray . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 Jesus College was founded on 27 June 1571 , when Elizabeth I issued a royal charter . It was the first Protestant college to be founded at the university , and it is the only Oxford college to date from Elizabeth 's reign . It was the first new Oxford college since 1555 , in the reign of Queen Mary , when Trinity College and St John 's College were founded as Roman Catholic colleges . The foundation charter named a principal ( David Lewis ) , eight fellows , eight scholars , and eight commissioners to draw up the statutes for the college . The commissioners included Hugh Price , who had petitioned the queen to found a college at Oxford " that he might bestow his estate of the maintenance of certain scholars of Wales to be trained up in good letters . " The college was originally intended primarily for the education of clergy . The particular intention was to satisfy a need for dedicated , learned clergy to promote the Elizabethan Religious Settlement in the parishes of England , Ireland and Wales . The college has since broadened the range of subjects offered , beginning with the inclusion of medicine and law , and now offers almost the full range of subjects taught at the university . The letters patent issued by Elizabeth I made it clear that the education of a priest in the 16th century included more than just theology , however : 
 ... to the Glory of God Almighty and Omnipotent , and for the spread and maintenance of the Christian religion in its sincere form , for the eradication of errors and heresies , for the increase and perpetuation of true loyalty , for the extension of good literature of every sort , for the knowledge of languages , for the education of youth in loyalty , morality , and methodical learning , for the relief of poverty and distress , and lastly for the benefit and well @-@ being of the Church of Christ in our realms , [ ... ] we have decreed that a College of learning in the sciences , philosophy , humane pursuits , knowledge of the Hebrew , Greek and Latin languages , to the ultimate profession of Sacred Theology , to last for all time to come , be created , founded , built , and established .... 
 Price continued to be closely involved with the college after its foundation . On the strength of a promised legacy , worth £ 60 a year on his death ( approximately £ 15 @,@ 100 in present day terms ) , he requested and received the authority to appoint the new college 's principal , fellows and scholars . He financed early building work in the college 's front quadrangle , but on his death in 1574 it transpired that the college received only a lump sum of around £ 600 ( approximately £ 151 @,@ 000 in present day terms ) . Problems with his bequest meant that it was not received in full for about 25 years . As the college had no other donors at this time , " for many years the college had buildings but no revenue " . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The main benefactor , other than the King , was Eubule Thelwall , from Ruthin , North Wales , who became Principal in 1621 ; he succeeded in securing a new charter and statutes for the college from James I , having spent £ 5 @,@ 000 of his own money on the hall and chapel , which earned him the title of its second founder . Thelwall died on 8 October 1630 , aged 68 and was buried in Jesus College Chapel where a monument was erected to his memory by his brother Sir Bevis Thelwall ( Page of the King 's Bedchamber and Clerk of the Great Wardrobe ) . 
 Other benefactions in the 17th century include Herbert <unk> , the Bishop of Hereford , left enough property to support two fellowships and scholarships ( with the significant proviso that " my kindred <unk> always preferred before <unk> others " ) . Sir Eubule Thelwall ( principal 1621 – 30 ) spent much of his own money on the construction of a chapel , hall and library for the college . The library , constructed above an over @-@ weak colonnade , was pulled down under the principalship of Francis Mansell ( 1630 – 49 ) , who also built two staircases of residential accommodation to attract the sons of Welsh gentry families to the College . 
 The English Civil War " all but destroyed the corporate life of the college . " Mansell was removed from his position as principal and Michael Roberts was installed . After the Restoration , Mansell was briefly reinstated as principal , before resigning in favour of Leoline Jenkins . It was Jenkins ( principal 1661 – 73 ) who secured the long @-@ term viability of the college . On his death , in 1685 , he bequeathed a large complex of estates , acquired largely by lawyer friends from the over @-@ mortgaged landowners of the Restoration period . These estates allowed the college 's sixteen fellowships and scholarships to be filled for the first time – officially , sixteen of each had been supported since 1622 , but the college 's income was too small to keep all occupied simultaneously . In 1713 , the bequest of Welsh clergyman and former student Edmund Meyricke established a number of scholarships for students from north Wales . 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 The 18th century , in contrast to the disruption of the 17th century , was a comparatively quiet time for the college . A historian of the college , J. N. L. Baker , wrote that the college records for this time " tell of little but routine entries and departures of fellows and scholars " . The Napoleonic Wars saw a reduction in the numbers of students and entries in the records for the purchase of muskets and other items for college members serving in the university corps . After the war , numbers rose , to an average of twenty new students per year between 1821 and 1830 . However , debts owed to the college had increased , perhaps due to the economic effects of the war – by 1832 , the college was owed £ 986 10s 5d ( approximately £ <unk> in present day terms ) . During the first half of the 19th century , the academic strength of the college diminished : scholarships were sometimes not awarded because of a lack of suitable candidates , and numbers fell : there were only seven new entrants in 1842 . Ernest Hardy wrote in his history of the college in 1899 that it had been becoming " increasingly evident for years ... that the exclusive connection with Wales was ruining the college as a place of education . " 
 A Royal Commission was appointed in 1852 to investigate the university . The college wished to retain its links with Wales , and initial reforms were limited despite the wishes of the commissioners : those scholarships that were limited to particular parts of Wales were opened to the whole of Wales , and half of the fellowships awarded were to remain open only to Welshmen " ' if and so long as the Principal and Fellows shall deem it expedient for the interests of education in connection with the Principality of Wales ' " . All the scholarships at the college , except for two , and all the exhibitions were still restricted to students from Wales . The numbers of students at the college still fell , despite prizes being awarded for success in university examinations . Daniel Harper , principal from 1877 to 1895 , noted the continuing academic decline . Speaking in 1879 , he noted that fewer students from the college were reaching high standards in examinations , and that more Welsh students were choosing to study at other Oxford colleges in preference to Jesus . A further Royal Commission was appointed . This led to further changes at the college : in 1882 , the fellowships reserved to Welshmen were made open to all , and only half ( instead of all ) of the 24 scholarships were to be reserved for Welsh candidates . Thereafter , numbers gradually rose and the non @-@ Welsh element at the college increased , so that by 1914 only about half of the students were Welsh . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 During the First World War , " the college in the ordinary sense almost ceased to exist " . From 129 students in the summer of 1914 , numbers dropped to 36 in the spring of 1916 . Some refugee students from Belgium and Serbia lodged in empty rooms in the college during 1916 , and officers of the Royal Flying Corps resided from August 1916 to December 1918 . After the war , numbers rose and fellowships were added in new subjects : history ( 1919 and 1933 ) ; theology ( 1927 ) ; physics ( 1934 ) ; a second fellowship in chemistry ( 1924 ) ; and modern languages ( lectureship 1921 , fellowship 1944 ) . The improved teaching led to greater success in university examinations and prizes . 
 In the inter @-@ war years ( 1918 – 39 ) Jesus was seen by some as a small college and something of a backwater ; it attracted relatively few pupils from the public schools traditionally seen as the most prestigious . The college did , however , attract many academically able entrants from the grammar schools ( particularly those in northern England and Scotland ) . Among these grammar @-@ school boys was Harold Wilson , who would later become Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . During the Second World War , many of the fellows served in the armed forces or carried out war work in Oxford . The college remained full of students , though , as it provided lodgings for students from other colleges whose buildings had been requisitioned , and also housed officers on military courses . 
 The college had its own science laboratories from 1907 to 1947 , which were overseen ( for all but the last three years ) by the physical chemist David Chapman , a fellow of the college from 1907 to 1944 . At the time of their closure , they were the last college @-@ based science laboratories at the university . They were named the Sir Leoline Jenkins laboratories , after a former principal of the college . The laboratories led to scientific research and tuition ( particularly in chemistry ) becoming an important part of the college 's academic life . The brochure produced for the opening ceremony noted that the number of science students at the college had increased rapidly in recent years , and that provision of college laboratories would assist the tuition of undergraduates , as well as attracting to Jesus College graduates of the University of Wales who wished to continue their research at Oxford . A link between one of the college science lecturers and Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) led to 17 students joining ICI between the two World Wars , some , such as John Rose , reaching senior levels in the company . The laboratories became unnecessary when the university began to provide centralised facilities for students ; they were closed in 1947 . 
 The quatercentenary of the college , in 1971 , saw the opening of the Old Members ' Buildings in the third quadrangle . Further student accommodation has been built at the sports ground and at a site in north Oxford . In 1974 , Jesus was among the first group of five men 's colleges to admit women as members , the others being Brasenose , Wadham , Hertford and St Catherine 's ; between one @-@ third and one @-@ half of the undergraduates are women . A long @-@ standing rivalry with nearby Exeter College reached a peak in 1979 , with seven police vehicles and three fire engines involved in dealing with trouble in Turl Street . Sir John Habakkuk ( principal 1967 – 84 ) and Sir Peter North ( principal 1984 – 2005 ) both served terms as Vice @-@ Chancellor of the university , from 1973 to 1977 and from 1993 to 1997 respectively . 
 = = Location and buildings = = 
 The main buildings are located in the centre of Oxford , between Turl Street , Ship Street , Cornmarket Street and Market Street . The main entrance is on Turl Street . The buildings are arranged in three quadrangles , the first quadrangle containing the oldest college buildings and the third quadrangle the newest . The foundation charter gave to the college a site between Market Street and Ship Street ( which is still occupied by the college ) as well as the buildings of a defunct university academic hall on the site , called White Hall . The buildings that now surround the first quadrangle were erected in stages between 1571 and the 1620s ; the principal 's lodgings were the last to be built . Progress was slow because the new college lacked the " generous endowments " that earlier colleges enjoyed . Before new buildings were completed , the students lived in the old buildings of White Hall . 
 = = = First quadrangle = = = 
 The chapel was dedicated on 28 May 1621 , and extended in 1636 . The architectural historian Giles Worsley has described the chapel 's east window ( added in 1636 ) as an instance of Gothic Revival architecture , rather than Gothic Survival , since a choice was made to use an outdated style – classical architecture had become accepted as " the only style in which it was respectable to build " . Jonathan Edwards ( principal from 1686 to 1712 ) is reported to have spent £ 1 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 134 @,@ 900 in present day terms ) during his lifetime on the interior of the chapel , including the addition of a screen separating the main part of the chapel from the ante @-@ chapel ( at the west end ) in 1693 . In 1853 , stained glass by George Hedgeland was added to the east window . In 1863 , the architect George Edmund Street was appointed to renovate the chapel . The arch of the chancel was widened , the original Jacobean woodwork was removed ( save for the screen donated by Edwards and the pulpit ) , new seats were installed , new paving was placed in the main part of the chapel and a stone reredos was added behind the altar . Views of the changes have differed . On 21 October 1864 , Building News reported that the restoration was nearing completion and was of " a very spirited character " . It said that the new " handsome " arch showed the east window " to great advantage " , with " other improvements " including a " handsome reredos " . Ernest Hardy , principal from 1921 to 1925 , said that the work was " ill @-@ considered " , described the reredos as " somewhat tawdry " and said that the Jacobean woodwork had been sold off too cheaply . In contrast , the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner called the reredos " heavily gorgeous " . 
 The principal of the college resides in the lodgings , a Grade I listed building , on the north side of the first quadrangle between the chapel ( to the east ) and the hall ( to the west ) . They were the last part of the first quadrangle to be built . Sir Eubule Thelwall , principal from 1621 to 1630 , built the lodgings at his own expense , to include ( in the words of the antiquarian Anthony Wood ) " a very fair dining @-@ room adorned with wainscot curiously engraven " . The shell @-@ hood over the doorway ( which Pevsner called " beautiful " ) was added at some point between 1670 and 1740 ; Pevsner dates it to about 1700 . 
 The hall has been said to be " among the most impressive of all the Oxford college halls " , with its " fine panelling , austere ceiling , and its notable paintings " . Like the chapel , it was largely built by Griffith Powell between 1613 and 1620 , and was finally completed soon after his death in 1620 . Pevsner noted the " elaborately decorated columns " of the screen ( installed in 1634 ) and the dragons along the frieze , and said that it was one of the earliest examples in Oxford of panelling using four " L " shapes around a centre . In 1741 and 1742 , the oak @-@ beamed roof was covered with plaster to make rooms in the roof space . Pevsner described the 1741 cartouche on the north wall , which contains the college crest , as " large [ and ] rich " . The hall contains a portrait of Elizabeth I , as well as portraits of former principals and benefactors . There are also portraits by court artists of two other monarchs who were college benefactors : Charles I ( by Anthony van Dyck ) and Charles II ( by Sir Peter Lely ) . 
 = = = Second quadrangle = = = 
 In 1640 , Francis Mansell ( appointed principal in 1630 ) began construction of a second quadrangle with buildings along the north and south sides ; further work was interrupted by the English Civil War . Work began again in 1676 , and the library ( now the Fellows ' Library ) was completed by 1679 . Under Jonathan Edwards ( principal from 1688 to 1712 ) , further rooms were built to complete the quadrangle ; the project was completed just after his death in 1712 . Pevsner described the second quadrangle as " a uniform composition " , noting the " regular fenestration by windows with round @-@ arched lights , their hood @-@ moulds forming a continuous frieze " . The Dutch gables have ogee sides and semi @-@ circular pediments . The writer Simon Jenkins said that the quadrangle has " the familiar Oxford Tudor windows and decorative Dutch gables , crowding the skyline like Welsh dragons ' teeth and lightened by exuberant flower boxes " . 
 The Fellows ' Library contains bookcases decorated with strapwork dating from about 1628 , which were used in an earlier library in the college . Hardy 's opinion was that , " if only it had an open timber roof instead of the plain ceiling , it would be one of the most picturesque College Libraries " . Another author said ( in 1914 , after the provision of a library for undergraduates elsewhere in the quadrangle ) that it was " one of the most charming of Oxford libraries , and one of the least frequented " . It holds 11 @,@ 000 antiquarian printed books and houses many of the college 's rare texts , including a Greek bible dating from 1545 and signed by Philipp Melanchthon and others , much of the library of the scholar and philosopher Lord Herbert of Cherbury and 17th @-@ century volumes by Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton . 
 = = = Third quadrangle = = = 
 The long but narrow third quadrangle adjoins Ship Street , on the north of the site and to the west of the garden of the principal 's lodgings , where the college has owned some land since its foundation . In the 18th century , this was home to the college stables . A fire in 1904 led to the demolition of the stables and the gateway to Ship Street . Replacement buildings adjoining Ship Street , effectively creating a third quadrangle for the college , were constructed between 1906 and 1908 . It contained the college 's science laboratories ( now closed ) and a new gate @-@ tower , as well as further living accommodation and a library for students , known as the Meyricke Library , after a major donor – there had been an undergraduate library in the second quadrangle since 1865 , known as the Meyricke Library from 1882 onwards . 
 The Old Members ' Building , which contains a music room , 24 study @-@ bedrooms and some lecture rooms , was built between 1969 and 1971 . It was built after a fundraising appeal to Old Members to mark the college 's quatercentenary , and was opened by the Prince of Wales in 1971 . The Fellows ' Garden is between the Old Members ' Building and the rear of the rooms on the west side of the second quadrangle . In 2002 , a two @-@ year project to rebuild the property above the college @-@ owned shops on Ship Street was completed . As part of the work , the bottom floor was converted from rooms occupied by students and fellows into a new Junior Common Room ( JCR ) , to replace the common room in the second quadrangle , which was by then too small to cope with the increased numbers of students . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 The college purchased 10 acres ( 0 @.@ 040 km2 ; 0 @.@ 016 sq mi ) of land in east Oxford ( near the Cowley Road ) in 1903 for use as a sports ground . Residential accommodation was first built at the sports ground in 1967 ( Thelwall House , rebuilt in 1998 ) , with additions between 1988 and 1990 ( Hugh Price House and Leoline Jenkins House ) . A further development , known as Hazel Court ( after Alfred Hazel , principal 1925 – 1944 ) , was built in 2000 , bringing the total number of students who can be housed at the sports ground to 135 . 
 Donations from Edwin Stevens , an Old Member of the college , enabled the construction in 1974 of student flats at a site in north Oxford on the Woodstock Road , named " Stevens Close " in his honour . The college also owns a number of houses on Ship Street , which are used for student accommodation . It has purchased a further site in Ship Street at a cost of £ 1.8M , which will be converted at a projected cost of £ 5.5M to provide 31 student rooms with en @-@ suite facilities , a 100 @-@ seat lecture theatre and other teaching rooms . The Ship Street Centre was officially opened by the Chancellor of the University of Oxford , Lord Patten of Barnes , on 25 September 2010 . 
 = = People associated with the college = = 
 = = = Principals and Fellows = = = 
 The college is run by the Principal and Fellows . The Principal must be " a person distinguished for literary or scientific attainments , or for services in the work of education in the University or elsewhere " . The Principal has " pre @-@ eminence and authority over all members of the College and all persons connected therewith " and exercises " a general superintendence in all matters relating to education and discipline " . The current Principal , Sir Nigel Shadbolt , was appointed in 2015 . Fourteen Principals have been former students of the college : Griffith Powell ( elected in 1613 ) was the first and Alfred Hazel ( elected in 1925 ) was the most recent . The longest @-@ serving principal was Henry Foulkes , from 1817 to 1857 . 
 When the college was founded in 1571 , the first charter installed David Lewis as Principal and named eight others as the first Fellows of the college . The statutes of 1622 allowed for 16 Fellows . There is now no limit on the number of Fellowships that the Governing Body can create . The college statutes provide for various categories of Fellows . Professorial Fellows are those Professors and Readers of the University who are allocated to the college by the University . One of these professorships is the Jesus Professor of Celtic , which is the only chair in Celtic Studies at an English university . Celtic scholars such as Sir John Rhys and Ellis Evans have held the position since its creation in 1877 . The chair is currently vacant , having been held by Thomas Charles @-@ Edwards until his retirement in 2011 . The zoologists Charles <unk> and Paul Harvey are both Professorial Fellows . Official Fellows are those who hold tutorial or administrative appointments in the college . Past Official Fellows include the composer and musicologist John Caldwell , the historians Sir Goronwy Edwards and Niall Ferguson , the philosopher Galen Strawson and the political philosopher John Gray . There are also Senior and Junior Research Fellows . Principals and Fellows who retire can be elected as Emeritus Fellows . 
 A further category is that of Welsh Supernumerary Fellows , who are , in rotation , the Vice @-@ Chancellors of Cardiff University , Swansea University , Lampeter University , Aberystwyth University , Bangor University and the University of Wales College of Medicine . There is one Welsh Supernumerary Fellow at a time , holding the position for not longer than three years . The first of these was John <unk> Jones in 1897 . 
 The college formerly had a category of missionary Fellows , known as Leoline Fellows after their founder , Leoline Jenkins ( a former principal ) . In his will in 1685 , he stated that " It is but too obvious that the persons in Holy Orders employed in his Majesty 's fleet at sea and foreign plantations are too few . " To address this , he established two Fellowships at Jesus College , whose holders should serve as clergy " in any of his Majesty 's fleets or in his Majesty 's plantations " under the direction of the Lord High Admiral and the Bishop of London respectively . The last of these , Frederick de Winton , was appointed in 1876 and held his Fellowship until his death in 1932 . This category was abolished in 1877 by the Oxford and Cambridge Universities Commission , without prejudice to the rights of existing holders such as de Winton . Another category of Fellowship that was abolished in the 19th century was that of the King Charles I Fellows , founded by King Charles in 1636 and tenable by natives of the Channel Islands in an attempt by him to " reclaim the Channel Islands from the extreme Calvinism which characterised them . " The first such Fellow was Daniel <unk> . 
 = = = Honorary Fellows = = = 
 The Governing Body has the ability to elect " distinguished persons " to Honorary Fellowships . Under the current statutes of the college , Honorary Fellows cannot vote at meetings of the Governing Body and do not receive financial reward . They can be called upon , however , to help decide whether to dismiss or discipline members of academic staff ( including the Principal ) . 
 All but one of the Honorary Fellows – the journalist and broadcaster Francine Stock – have been men . Three former Principals of the College ( John Christie , Sir John Habakkuk and Sir Peter North ) have been elected Honorary Fellows on retirement . Some Honorary Fellows were formerly Fellows of the college , others were Old Members of the college , and some were in both categories . Others had no previous academic connection with the college before their election . Some of these were distinguished Welshmen – for example , the Welsh businessman Sir Alfred Jones was elected in 1902 and the Welsh judge Sir Samuel Evans , President of the Probate , Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High Court , was elected in 1918 . The Welsh politician David Lloyd George was elected to an Honorary Fellowship in 1910 when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer . He wrote to Sir John Rhys , the Principal at the time , to thank the college for the honour , saying : 
 I wish to express to you and to the Fellows of Jesus College my deep sense of the great honour which you have done me in electing me to be one of your body . It is a very special gratification to me to be associated in this intimate way with Jesus College . As a Welshman , I have watched with pleasure and pride the prosperity , especially since you have been Principal , of the college which is so closely connected with our country , little thinking ever to find myself a member of it ; and I can honestly say that no honour can fall to my lot which I shall prize more highly than this Fellowship which you have conferred upon me . Please accept and express to the Fellows of the college my hearty and sincere thanks . Ever yours sincerely , D. <unk> GEORGE . 
 The first three Honorary Fellows , all former students of the college , were elected in October 1877 : John Rhys , the first Jesus Professor of Celtic ( later an Official Fellow ( 1881 – 1895 ) and Principal ( 1895 – 1915 ) ) ; the historian John Richard Green ; and the poet Lewis Morris . The college noted in 1998 that the number of Honorary Fellows of the college was markedly below the average of other Oxford colleges and it adopted a more methodical approach to increase numbers . Seven Honorary Fellows were elected that year , followed by another five in 1999 . The college 's Honorary Fellows have included two Old Members who later became Prime Minister of their respective countries : Norman Washington Manley , who studied at Jesus College as a Rhodes Scholar and who was Chief Minister of Jamaica from 1955 to 1962 , and Harold Wilson , who was twice British Prime Minister ( 1964 – 1970 and 1974 – 1976 ) . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Notable former students of the college have included politicians , scientists , writers , entertainers and academics . T. E. Lawrence ( " Lawrence of Arabia " ) , known for his part in the Arab Revolt of 1916 – 1918 and for his writings including Seven Pillars of Wisdom , studied history at the college . His thesis on Crusader castles ( the fieldwork for which marked the beginning of his fascination with the Middle East ) is held in the Fellows ' Library . Other former students include Pixley ka <unk> <unk> ( a founder and president of the African National Congress ) , Sir William Williams ( Speaker of the House of Commons 1680 – 1685 ) , and Lord Sankey ( Lord Chancellor 1929 – 1935 ) . Members of Parliament from the three main political parties in the United Kingdom have attended the college , as have politicians from Australia ( Neal Blewett ) , New Zealand ( Harold Rushworth ) , Sri Lanka ( <unk> <unk> ) and the United States ( Heather Wilson ) . 
 The founders ' hopes that their college would produce prominent Welsh clergy were fulfilled in no small measure when a former student , Alfred George Edwards , was elected the first Archbishop of Wales when the Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920 . Two later Archbishops of Wales , Glyn Simon ( Archbishop from 1968 to 1971 ) and Gwilym Owen Williams ( Archbishop 1971 – 1982 ) were also educated at the college . <unk> associated with the college include Sir John Rhys , Sir John Morris @-@ Jones , and Sir Thomas ( T. H. ) Parry @-@ Williams , whilst the list of historians includes the college 's first graduate , David Powel , who published the first printed history of Wales in 1584 , and the Victorian historian J. R. Green . Angus Buchanan won the Victoria Cross during the First World War . Record @-@ breaking quadriplegic solo sailor Hilary Lister was also a student here , whilst from the field of arts and entertainment there are names such as Magnus Magnusson , presenter of Mastermind , the National Poet of Wales Gwyn Thomas , and television weather presenters Kirsty McCabe and Siân Lloyd . Nigel Hitchin , the <unk> Professor of Geometry at Oxford since 1997 , studied at the college , as did Edward Hinds ( a physicist who won the Rumford Medal in 2008 ) , Chris Rapley ( director of the Science Museum ) , and the zoologists Edward Bagnall Poulton and James Brontë <unk> . 
 = = Student life = = 
 There are about 325 undergraduates and 150 postgraduates . About half of the undergraduates studied at state schools before coming to Oxford , and about 10 % are from overseas . Students from the college participate in a variety of extracurricular activities . Some contribute to student journalism for Cherwell or The Oxford Student . The Turl Street Arts Festival ( a week @-@ long student @-@ organised event ) is held annually in conjunction with the two other colleges on Turl Street , Exeter and Lincoln colleges . The festival , which takes place in Fifth Week of Hilary term , includes exhibitions , plays and concerts . Although the college does not award choral scholarships , the chapel choir is well @-@ attended by college members and others . The choir is non @-@ auditioning for college members , and is run by one or more undergraduate organ scholars . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 In common with many Oxford colleges , Jesus provides sporting facilities for students , including playing fields at a site in east Oxford off the Cowley Road known as Bartlemas ( for its proximity to St Bartholomew 's Chapel ) . Football , rugby , netball , field hockey , cricket , and tennis can be played there . Squash courts are at a separate city @-@ centre site on St Cross Road . The college also provides students with membership of the university 's gym and swimming pool on Iffley Road . 
 Jesus College Boat Club ( commonly abbreviated to JCBC ) is the rowing club for members of the college . The club was formed in 1835 , but rowing at the college predates the foundation of the club : a boat from the college was involved in the earliest recorded races between college crews at Oxford in 1815 , when it competed against a crew from Brasenose College . These may have been the only two colleges who had boats racing at that time , and the Brasenose boat was usually victorious . Neither the men 's nor the women 's 1st VIIIs have been " Head of the River " during Eights Week , the main college races , but the women 's 1st VIII was Head of the River in the spring races , Torpids , between 1980 and 1983 . Jesus boats have also had other successful seasons : the 1896 Jesus College boat had a reputation of being one of the faster boats in the university , and the women 's 1st VIII of 1993 won their " blades " in the first divisions of both Torpids and Eights Week , an achievement that led to the crew being described in the Jesus College Record as vying " not just for the College team of the decade , but perhaps for the team of the last three decades " , in any sport . 
 A number of college members have rowed for the university against Cambridge University in the Boat Race and the Women 's Boat Race . Barney Williams , a Canadian rower who studied at the college , won a silver medal in rowing at the 2004 Summer Olympics , and participated in the Boat Race in 2005 and 2006 . Other students who rowed while at the college have achieved success in other fields , including John Sankey , who became Lord Chancellor , Alwyn Williams , who became Bishop of Durham , and Maurice Jones , who became Principal of St David 's College , Lampeter . Another college rower , James Page , was appointed Secretary of the Amateur Rowing Association and coached both the Oxford and Cambridge University boat clubs . 
 The college boathouse , which is shared with the boat club of Keble College , is in Christ Church Meadow , on the Isis ( as the River Thames is called in Oxford ) . It dates from 1964 and replaced a moored barge used by spectators and crew @-@ members . The last college barge had been purchased from one of the Livery Companies of the City of London in 1911 . It is now a floating restaurant further down the Thames at Richmond , and for some years was painted in the college colours of green and white . 
 = = = Welsh connection = = = 
 Education in Wales had been stimulated by the foundation of grammar schools during the reigns of Henry VIII and Edward VI : King Henry VIII Grammar School in Abergavenny and Christ College , Brecon were established in the 1540s , and Friars School , Bangor dates from 1557 . However , despite the numbers of Welsh students coming to Oxford University as a result , there was no special provision for Welshmen before 1571 . Despite the links with Wales that Hugh Price and many of the founding Fellows had , neither the 1571 charter nor any of the later charters limited entry to the college to Welshmen . Nevertheless , the college students were predominantly Welsh from the outset , and the college became " the pinnacle of the academic ambition of the young men of Wales " . Many of the fellows in the past were Welsh , since when new fellowships were created by benefactions ( often by people of Welsh descent ) there was frequently a stipulation that the recipients would be related to the donor or come from a specified part of Wales . These specific limitations were removed as part of reforms of Oxford University during the 19th century . Between 1571 and 1915 , only one Principal ( Francis Howell , 1657 – 1660 ) was not from Wales or of Welsh descent . 
 Jesus still has a particular association with Wales and is often referred to as " the Welsh college " . The college is home to the university 's Professor of Celtic , and a specialist Celtic library in addition to the college 's normal library . Meyrick scholarships , from the bequest of Edmund Meyrick in 1713 , are awarded for academic merit where the student is a native of Wales ( or the child of a native of Wales ) , able to speak Welsh or was educated for the last three years of secondary school in Wales . 
 The college 's undergraduate gossip sheet is entitled The <unk> in allusion to an offensive joke about Welsh people 's supposed penchant for sheep . Furthermore , the Welshness of the College is self @-@ perpetuating , as Welsh students will often apply to Jesus because it is seen as the Welsh college . Old members recall the college having a majority of Welsh members until well into the 20th century ; today , however , around 15 % of undergraduates come from Wales . For comparison , residents of Wales comprise just under 5 % of the United Kingdom population ( 2 @.@ 9 million out of a total of 58 @.@ 8 million at the time of the 2001 Census ) . 
 In modern times , the Welsh roots of the college come to the fore most prominently on Saint David 's Day . The feast is marked by a choral Evensong in the chapel , decorated for the occasion with daffodils . The service , including music , is conducted entirely in Welsh ( despite only a small minority of the choir usually being native speakers of the language ) . It is generally well attended by members of the Welsh community in Oxford . The college 's annual St. David 's Day Dinner traditionally culminates with the serving of Sir Watkin Williams @-@ Wynn 's Pudding . The name recalls the Welsh politician and prominent Jacobite who attended the college early in the 18th century . 
 = = Silverware = = 
 The college 's collection of silverware includes a silver @-@ gilt punch bowl , presented by Sir Watkin Williams @-@ Wynn in 1732 . The bowl , which weighs more than 200 ounces ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) and holds 10 imperial gallons ( 45 L ) , was used at a dinner held in the Radcliffe Camera in 1814 , to celebrate what was supposed to be the final defeat of Napoleon . Those present at the dinner included the Tsar , the King of Prussia , Blücher , Metternich , the Prince Regent , the Duke of York and the Duke of Wellington . There is a college tradition that the bowl will be presented to anyone who can meet two challenges . The first is to put arms around the bowl at its widest point ; the second is to drain the bowl of strong punch . The bowl measures 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) at its widest point , and so the first challenge has only been accomplished rarely ; the second challenge has not been met . 
 = = Coat of arms = = 
 The college 's coat of arms , in heraldic terminology , is Vert , three stags <unk> argent attired or . The arms are not those of Hugh Price . His arms , according to their depiction in the margins of his will , were gules ( red ) a chevron ermine between three fleurs @-@ des @-@ lis . The arms were not granted or authorised by the College of Arms , but the length of time for which they have been used has given them a prescriptive authority . 
 The earliest depiction of the arms was thought to be about 1590 , in a document held by the College of Arms , which refers to the stags appearing on a blue ( in heraldic terms , azure ) background but subsequent examination of this document by Peter Donoghue , Bluemantle Pursuivant shows that the arms were added <unk> . The first known appearance of the arms is therefore on John Speed ’ s Map of Oxfordshire in 1605 with a blue field . The green field made its appearance by 1619 in an armorial quarry painted by one of the Van Linge brothers . The green background became generally ( but not universally ) used by the 1730s , still appearing as horizontal hatchings indicating azure were in use on bookplates for the college library as late as 1761 . 
 There are similarities with the arms of Lincoln College , Oxford , where one of the elements consists of three golden stags statant ( standing still ) ; this was derived from the coat of arms of Lincoln 's so @-@ called " second founder " , Thomas Rotherham . It was once claimed that Jesus had stolen the stags from Lincoln , but the counter @-@ argument ( from an antiquarian with close Lincoln connections ) was that the origins of each were distinct . One suggestion ( by Paul Langford , the Rector of Lincoln College ) is that Jesus College continued the arms adopted by a theological college founded by Rotherham in his home town – Jesus College , Rotherham – which had been suppressed in the time of Edward VI . 
 The arms of Maud Green , Lady Parr , mother of Catherine Parr ( the last of the six wives of Henry VIII and stepmother to Elizabeth I ) , were of three stags on an azure background , and this became one of the elements of the arms of Catherine Parr on her marriage . Her sister , Anne Parr , married William , 1st Earl of Pembroke , whose grandson ( the 3rd Earl , also called William ) became the first Visitor of the college in 1622 . Maud Green 's arms are depicted in plasterwork from about 1592 at Powis Castle , owned by a kinsman of the earls . One writer has suggested that the college may have adopted the arms in order to be associated with one of the leading Welsh families of the day . 
 This latter theory is not heraldically tenable as the quarters in an achievement after the first and pronominal quarter brought into the family by marriage to heraldic heiresses cannot meaningfully exist on their own to represent the person who now quarters them . It is more probable then that the arms of the College really are those of Archbishop Rotherham and were assumed to be those of the College by John Speed who saw them on one of its buildings in 1605 when preparing his map . Lawrence Hall in Ship Street was given to Rotherham in 1476 and leased to Jesus in 1572 . It may well have displayed the Archbishop ’ s arms in its structure as did the building on the south side of the front quad of Lincoln which he completed . These arms for Jesus College could not be confused with those of Lincoln as that College , since 1574 , already had a complex tripartite coat granted to it by Richard Lee , Portcullis Pursuivant , in which the colour of the stags in the centre section had been changed to Or ( gold ) and their attitude to statant . 
 = = Graces = = 
 Grace is said by a scholar of the college at Formal Hall ( the second , more elaborate sitting of dinner ) . 
 = = = Before dinner = = = 
 Nos <unk> et <unk> homines pro <unk> quem ad <unk> corporis <unk> nobis es <unk> , ut eo <unk> <unk> , tibi Deus omnipotens , Pater <unk> , <unk> <unk> agimus , <unk> <unk> ut cibum <unk> , verum <unk> <unk> , verbum Dei aeternum , Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum nobis <unk> , ut illo mens nostra <unk> et per <unk> et <unk> eius <unk> , <unk> et <unk> . 
 Translation : 
 We wretched and needy men reverently give thee thanks , almighty God , heavenly Father , for the food which thou hast sanctified and bestowed for the sustenance of the body , so that we may use it thankfully ; at the same time we beseech thee that thou wouldst impart to us the food of angels , the true bread of heaven , the eternal word of God , Jesus Christ our Lord , so that our mind may feed on him and that through his flesh and blood we may be nourished , sustained and strengthened . 
 = = = After dinner = = = 
 <unk> nos , Domine , donis <unk> , omnipotens et <unk> Deus , <unk> , <unk> ut <unk> quid per nos <unk> aut <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , atque <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum . 
 <unk> — Domine , <unk> fac <unk> . 
 Response — Et exaudi nos in die qua <unk> te . 
 Deus , in cuius manu sunt corda regum , qui es <unk> <unk> et fidelium <unk> et protector omnium in Te <unk> , da Reginae <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , ut per te semper <unk> ad gloriam , per Christum Dominum nostrum . 
 Translation : 
 Since , O Lord , almighty and most merciful God , thou hast satisfied us with thy gifts , ensure from henceforth that we may diligently regard what thou <unk> to be done or left undone by us and cause this to be effected with sincere heart , through Jesus Christ our Lord . 
 <unk> : — O Lord , keep the Queen safe . 
 Response : — And hear us in the day in which we call on thee . 
 God in whose hands are the hearts of Kings , who art the <unk> of the humble and the protector of all who hope in thee , grant to our Queen Elizabeth and to the Christian people to celebrate wisely the triumph of thy goodness so that they may be always renewed to glory through thee , through Jesus Christ our Lord . 
 Modern Grace 
 Benedictus <unk> . 
 = Cardinal protector of England = 
 The Cardinal protector of England was an appointed crown @-@ cardinal of England from 1492 until 1539 . A cardinal protector is the representative of a Roman Catholic nation or organisation within the College of Cardinals , appointed by the pope . The role was terminated as a result of the English Reformation . 
 The role of national <unk> within the College developed during the fifteenth century , due to developments in the emergence of national monarchies and Renaissance diplomacy . Cardinal protectors of Roman Catholic religious orders date back farther to the thirteenth century . According to King Henry VIII , the cardinal protector " <unk> as it were our owne Person , for the defence of Us and our Realme in al <unk> [ in the Curia ] ... touching the same " . The cardinal protector represented the monarch in consistory , especially in cases where the right of investiture was divided between the pope and the monarch , and also led the English diplomatic corps in Rome . 
 Although earlier cardinals had filled similar roles , " the existence of national <unk> was first openly and regularly recognized only " by Pope Julius II . The terms ' cardinal protector ' and ' cardinal procurator ' were " used very loosely and sometimes interchangeably during the fifteenth century " . The earliest reference to a ' cardinal protector ' of England dates from 1492 , but according to Wilkie , this results from a confusion between this office and that of cardinal procurator . 
 Unlike other national cardinal protectors , the cardinal protectors of England , Scotland , and Ireland were generally chosen exclusively by the pope . The cardinal was " imposed from above , rather than chosen " and often had no direct relationship with the governments of these countries . The English cardinal protector played a large role in English ecclesiastical appointments , and a substantial role in similar appointments in Scotland and Ireland . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Piccolomini ( 1492 – 1503 ) = = = 
 Francesco Piccolomini , the future Pope Pius III , was the first cardinal protector of England , elevated on the initiative of King Henry VII , and also the first officially approved cardinal protector of " any nation whatever " . Henry VII viewed good relations with Rome as a protection against domestic and foreign enemies and sent Christopher <unk> , his " almoner and trusted councillor " to Rome after receiving a bull of dispensation to marry Elizabeth of York . When Henry VII first sought a cardinal protector in 1492 , he feared that many of the English bishops would support his Yorkist opponents ( to whom they owed their appointments ) . 
 A variety of other disagreements existed , such as the papal income tax and the refusal of the pope to create John Morton , the archbishop of Canterbury , a cardinal ; Innocent VII had passed over Morton in his first consistory , despite creating two French cardinals . Nor had John Sherwood , the English ambassador in Rome , been created a cardinal in 1484 , despite the request of King Richard III . Piccolomini 's creation as cardinal protector was requested by Henry VII in a letter congratulating the newly elected Pope Alexander VI , and was confirmed in a response which was probably written by Giovanni Gigli . 
 Piccolomini was already the protector of the <unk> Benedictines and was close to German princes , although he was not the German protector in any official sense , and his protectorship of England is " the first official one of any cardinal which can be firmly established " . Henry VII did not object to Piccolomini 's German connections , even viewing them as an asset against the French . 
 = = = Castellesi ( 1503 – 1504 ) = = = 
 The appointment of Adriano Castellesi as cardinal on 31 May 1503 " eclipsed England 's cardinal protector " , with appointments to the English sees thereafter being referred through Castellesi instead of through Piccolomini . Piccolomini was himself elected as Pope Pius III on 22 September 1503 , only to die less than a month later , on 18 October ; Castellesi did not vote for him and Piccolomini was chosen for his perceived neutrality rather than for his English connections . According to the account of Castellesi , Pius III acknowledged him as his de facto successor as protector . 
 Castellesi was a favourite of Pope Alexander VI , which became a liability during the reign of Pope Julius II . During Julius II 's reign , Castellesi , " although neither requesting nor mentioning the office of protector of England , certainly presented himself to Henry VII as the cardinal responsible for English affairs in the Curia " . In an attempt to secure his status against the intrigues of Silvestro Gigli , Castellesi donated his residence , the Palazzo Giraud Torlonia on the present Via della Conciliazione , to Henry VII . In 1504 , Henry VII named six official members of his embassy , headed by Castellesi , and also including Sir Gilbert Talbot , Richard Beere , Robert Sherborne , Silvestro Gigli , and Edward Scott . 
 Paris de Grassi , the master of papal ceremonies , referred to Castellesi as " Regis Protector " in his notes of a meeting between the embassy and the pope . 
 = = = della Rovere ( 1504 – 1508 ) = = = 
 A letter from Julius II to Henry VII dated 6 July 1504 , remarks that the king had chosen the pope 's cardinal @-@ nephew Galeotto della Rovere as cardinal protector ; the letter does not mention <unk> della Rovere 's selection was likely arranged by Gigli . Castellesi was compensated by being promoted to the wealthier See of Bath and Wells . Castellesi lost favour with the king and fled Rome until the death of Julius II . 
 Rovere died on 11 September 1508 , leaving England without a cardinal protector . <unk> and Hugh Inge were back in England ; Scott was dead ; Gigli was in England as nuncio . The " only man on whose loyalty the king could truly rely " was Christopher Fisher , who was a " single , bumbling amateur " compared to the more seasoned curial diplomats who surrounded him . Henry VII himself died on 21 April 1509 . 
 Another cardinal @-@ nephew , Sisto della Rovere , who received the vice @-@ chancellorship and all the benefices of his half @-@ brother , was not explicitly named as protector , although he wrote to Henry VII stating his intent to " maintain his brother 's friendships " . Henry VIII replied to Sisto that he considered his friendship especially valuable , asserting that Sisto had been close to his father . There is no evidence that Sisto was offered the protectorship . 
 = = = <unk> ( 1509 – 1510 ) = = = 
 Cardinal Francesco Adiosi may have become cardinal protector , but this appointment " cannot be exactly established " as his only surviving letters to England do not mention the protectorate . Adiosi is explicitly mentioned as protector in a 1509 letter from Christopher Bainbridge ( the first English curial cardinal since the death of Adam Easton in 1397 ) , by which point Adiosi and go @-@ between Girolamo <unk> were on the " brink of disgrace " . 
 <unk> disclosed the contents of his discussions with the king to a French agent and confessed his being employed by <unk> under threat of torture ; by this point Adiosi was no longer protector . According to an 6 April 1510 letter from the Venetian ambassador , the king dismissed Adiosi as protector and gave the post to Sisto della Rovere . There is no direct evidence that Sisto ever received the official title before he died in March 1517 . Until the death of Julius II , Bainbridge " filled the vacuum , real or in effect , in the protectorship of England " . 
 Castellesi returned to Rome on the death of Julius II on 21 February 1513 for the papal conclave , 1513 ; although Castellesi " <unk> " voted for Bainbridge on the second ballot , the two inevitably came into conflict as " rival representatives of England " . The lack of <unk> records , which would list which cardinals referred the nominations of which bishops , are missing for this period , making it impossible to assess the extent of Bainbridge 's role . 
 = = = Medici ( 1514 – 1523 ) = = = 
 In 1514 , Gigli ( as the agent of Wolsey and Henry VIII ) arranged for another cardinal @-@ nephew Giulio de 'Medici ( future Pope Clement VII ) to be cardinal protector of England . Medici 's letter of appointment makes no reference to Sisto della Rovere . A 8 February 1514 letter from Pope Leo X to Henry VIII of England flatters the king for having elevated the pope 's cardinal @-@ nephew and cousin as protector . The pope 's brother Giuliano de ' Medici was also made a Knight of the Garter ( just as <unk> II della Rovere had been made when della Rovere had been made protector ) . 
 Bainbridge was " short @-@ circuited " by the appointment of Medici , although he continued to play a role until his death on 14 July 1514 . Gigli was accused of having played a role in the death of Bainbridge and Medici was charged with examining the facts , concluding that Gigli was innocent . The period between Piccolomini and Medici ( from 1503 to 1514 ) is one where the role of the protector was not well @-@ defined . The importance of the office increased significantly with the appointment of Medici in 1514 , due in no small part to the friendship between Medici and Wolsey . According to Wilkie , " its importance stemmed from the special relationship of the papacy with England as the most reliable supporter of papal independence " . 
 Medici accepted the protectorship of France as well in 1516 , meeting Francis I of France personally in Bologna , much to the " discomfiture of England " . Medici was elected Clement VII on 19 November 1523 . 
 = = = Campeggio ( 1524 – 1539 ) = = = 
 Lorenzo Campeggio was close to Medici and served as cardinal protector to Germany at the time of Medici 's election . Campeggio received a variety of appointments from Clement VII before Henry VIII chose him as protector on 22 February 1524 ( conditional on the pope 's acceptance of Wolsey as legate for life ) . 
 Campeggio found his loyalty divided when he was appointed with Wolsey to judge the issue of the requested annulment of Henry VIII of England from Catherine of Aragon , the aunt of Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor . Campeggio came out in favour of the legitimacy of the marriage , after considerable delay in travelling and reviewing the canonical evidence . The final sentence in the case was handed down in Rome in 1534 , the same year the English Parliament passed the First Act of Supremacy . Henry VIII was particularly displeased by Campeggio 's " constant company with the emperor " in the years prior to his verdict and Campeggio 's rapidly growing income , having been granted the bishopric of Huesca and <unk> in 1530 , and the bishopric of Mallorca in 1532 , both by Charles V. 
 In January 1531 , Campeggio was dismissed as cardinal protector , although it did not become public knowledge until May . At first it was unclear whether Henry VIII intended to appoint a successor , with Giovanni Domenico de <unk> emerging as an active candidate in March 1532 . The king favoured Alessandro Farnese ( future Pope Paul III ) , and instructed his ambassadors on 21 March to offer it to Farnese , and then de <unk> or Giovanni del Monte ( future Pope Julius III ) in the event that Farnese declined or was not approved . 
 Not knowing that Henry VIII had already secretly married the pregnant Anne Boleyn , Clement VII decided to reach out to the monarch by appointing Thomas Cranmer , an outspoken proponent of Henry VIII 's annulment , as archbishop of Canterbury . A threatened excommunication was handed down when Cranmer pronounced Henry VIII 's marriage null and void ; Henry VIII responded by telling Campeggio 's vicar general for Salisbury to stop all revenues from his bishopric until further notice . Henry VIII then claimed the authority to act on behalf of Campeggio in making various ecclesiastical appointments . The fifth session of the Reformation Parliament deprived Campeggio and Girolamo <unk> of their English sees ( unless they swore loyalty to the king ) . Unaware of this statute , two days later on 23 March 1534 Campeggio entered Consistory for the final ruling against annulment . 
 According to Wilkie , " years of cooperation from both popes and cardinal protectors had taught a wilful Henry VIII to expect to have his way over the church of England " . Clement VII died on 25 September before learning of the denial of papal authority on 31 March by the Convocation of Canterbury . In the papal conclave , 1534 , Campeggio was the only cardinal to oppose Farnese 's proposal for non @-@ secret voting and the only cardinal not to kiss the feet of the newly elected Farnese as Paul III . 
 = = Attempts at reconciliation = = 
 Many in Rome still thought reconciliation with England was possible , and Paul III elevated two English cardinals , John Fisher ( at the time imprisoned and sentenced to death by Henry VIII ) and Girolamo <unk> . The execution of Fisher prompted Paul III to excommunicate and purportedly depose Henry VIII . While Campeggio lived , no attempt was made in Rome to fill any of the thirteen episcopal vacancies in England . 
 Queen Mary I of England briefly reconciled with Rome and appointed Reginald Pole as archbishop of Canterbury . However , " papal restoration in England was doomed even before it was accomplished " when Mary I married Philip II of Spain . In 1555 , Pope Paul IV named a new cardinal protector , Giovanni Morone , but the queen did not confirm the nomination and Campeggio remained the last cardinal protector " chosen by the crown " . 
 Meanwhile , loyalty to the pope became a defining feature of the movement for Irish nationalism and bishops appointed by the pope garnered a larger following than the hierarchy of the church of Ireland appointed by the crown . According to Wilkie , " the cardinal protectors had assisted in the loss of England to the papacy , and Ireland remained loyal to the papacy in spite of them " . 
 = = List of Cardinal protectors = = 
 Francesco Piccolomini ( future Pope Pius III ) , first cardinal protector of England ( ante 8 February 1492 – 1503 ) , de facto protector of Germany 
 Adriano Castellesi , de facto protector of England and official protector of Germany 
 Galeotto <unk> della Rovere ( 1505 – 11 September 1508 ) 
 Francesco Adiosi ( 1508 – 1510 ) 
 Giulio de 'Medici ( 1514 – 1523 ) ( future Pope Clement VII ) 
 Lorenzo Campeggio ( 1523 – 1534 , died 1539 ) 
 Not confirmed by the crown 
 Giovanni Morone , ( 1578 – 1579 ) 
 Philip Howard ( 1682 – 1694 ) 
 Filippo Antonio <unk> ( circa 1717 ) 
 Cardinal <unk> ( circa 4 November 1797 ) 
 Ercole <unk> ( circa 1817 , acting ) 
 Similar prior offices 
 Thomas of <unk> , proctor for Kings Edward I and Edward II of England ( 1305 – 1310 ) 
 Ferry de <unk> , employed in Rome by Edward IV of England ( d . 1483 ) 
 = Mackensen @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Mackensen class was the last class of battlecruisers to be built by Germany in World War I. The design initially called for seven ships , but three of them were redesigned as the Ersatz Yorck class . Of the four ships of the Mackensen class , Mackensen , Graf Spee , and Prinz Eitel Friedrich were launched , and Fürst Bismarck was not — but none were completed , after wartime shipbuilding priorities were redirected towards U @-@ boat — and the ships were broken up in the early 1920s . The lead ship of the class was named for August von Mackensen , a prominent military commander during the war . In response to the Mackensen @-@ class ships , the British Royal Navy laid down the Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers , all but one of which would eventually be cancelled ; the sole survivor , HMS Hood , was completed after the end of the war . 
 The design of the Mackensens was a much improved version of the previous Derfflinger class . The most significant improvement was a new , more powerful 35 cm ( 14 in ) gun , compared to the 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) gun of the earlier ships . The Mackensen @-@ class ships also featured more powerful engines that gave the ships a higher top speed and a significantly greater cruising range . The Mackensen design provided the basis for the subsequent Ersatz Yorck class , armed with 38 cm ( 15 in ) main @-@ battery guns , after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 made the need for the larger guns clear . 
 = = Design = = 
 The fourth and final Naval Law , passed in 1912 , governed the building program of the German navy during World War I. The Imperial Naval Office ( Reichsmarineamt ) decided the Navy should construct one battleship and one battlecruiser every year between 1913 and 1917 , with an additional unit of both types in 1913 and 1916 . Design work on the new class began in 1912 , with construction intended to begin in the 1914 budget year . The question about the main battery for the new battlecruisers was the most pressing ; the previous Derfflinger class was armed with 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , though some consideration had been given to redesigning the last two ships — SMS Lützow and Hindenburg — with 35 cm ( 14 in ) guns . 
 The 35 cm guns were of course heavier than the 30 @.@ 5 cm guns , but there were problems with enlarging the new ships to accommodate the heavier armament . The Imperial dry docks were deep enough only for ships with a draft of 9 m ( 30 ft ) , and simply accepting an increased displacement on the same hull as the Derfflinger class would entail a reduction in speed . This meant that an increase in displacement would necessitate a longer and wider hull to keep any increases in draft minimal and avoid reducing the speed . The constraints on enlarging the hull were compounded by restrictions on width imposed by the locks of the canal in Wilhelmshaven . As a result , Großadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) Alfred von Tirpitz , the head of the RMA , prohibited a design displacement greater than 30 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 29 @,@ 526 long tons ) . 
 The initial design was approved on 30 September 1912 , though the heads of the General Navy Department — Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Günther von Krosigk and Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Reinhard Scheer — and the Weapons Department head , Vizeadmiral Gerhard Gerdes , had to submit any revisions they deemed were necessary . The design staff suggested using triple or even quadruple gun turrets to keep the displacement under the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ ton limit . Another suggested alternative was to use six 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns in twin turrets , one forward and two aft ; Wilhelm II accepted that design on 2 May 1913 , though Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet , preferred the 30 @.@ 5 cm gun of the Derfflinger @-@ class ships . As a compromise , the new battlecruisers were to be armed with eight 35 cm ( 13 @.@ 8 inch ) guns . 
 The question of whether the new ships should be powered entirely by oil @-@ fired boilers was less controversial . The design staff was generally in agreement with the standard practice of using coal @-@ fired boilers for two @-@ thirds of the power plant , with the remainder being oil @-@ fired boilers . Coal @-@ fired boilers were preferred because the coal , stored in the sides of the ship , provided additional protection , particularly for the battlecruisers , which carried less armor than their battleship counterparts . The finalized design was approved on 23 May 1914 . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Mackensen @-@ class ships were 223 m ( 731 ft 8 in ) long and had a beam of 30 @.@ 4 m ( 99 ft 9 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 3 m ( 30 ft 6 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 4 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) aft . The ships were designed to displace 31 @,@ 000 t ( 30 @,@ 510 long tons ) on a standard load , and up to 35 @,@ 300 t ( 34 @,@ 742 long tons ) fully laden . The Mackensens ' hulls were composed of longitudinal steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted . This was the same type of construction as in the preceding Derfflinger @-@ class battlecruisers , and was intended to save weight compared to the traditional method of construction , which incorporated both longitudinal and transverse frames . The ships ' hulls contained 18 watertight compartments and a double bottom that ran for 92 percent of the length of the hull . This was significantly greater than the older Derfflinger @-@ class ships , which had a double bottom for only 65 percent of the length of the hull . 
 Experience with previous battlecruiser designs led to the adoption of a continuous upper deck , which raised the level of the deck aft . This was necessary because the aft decks of earlier designs were usually awash when steaming at high speed , even in calm seas . The ships were also equipped with a bulbous bow to reduce drag on the hull , the first time the feature was used in the German Navy . The ships as designed required a crew of 46 officers and 1 @,@ 140 enlisted sailors . Service as a squadron flagship would increase that number by an additional 14 officers and 62 sailors . The vessels carried a number of small boats , including two picket boats , one barge , two launches , two cutters , and three yawls . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Mackensen class were equipped with four sets of marine @-@ type turbine engines , each of which drove a three @-@ bladed screw propeller that was 4 @.@ 2 m ( 13 ft 9 in ) in diameter . The turbines mounted in Fürst Bismarck were equipped with Föttinger fluid transmission , while those on the other three ships were two sets of direct @-@ coupled turbines with geared transmissions . The ships had 24 coal @-@ fired marine @-@ type single ended boilers and eight oil @-@ fired marine @-@ type boilers . The power plants were designed to provide 88 @,@ 769 shaft horsepower ( 66 @,@ 195 kW ) and 295 revolutions per minute . Maximum speed was rated at 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . The ships were equipped with a pair of rudders mounted side by side , as opposed to the tandem rudders used on the Derfflinger @-@ class ships . 
 The ships ' turbines were equipped with Föttinger gears , which significantly improved performance at cruising speeds and provided a corresponding increase in range of about 20 percent . The vessels were designed to store 800 t ( 790 long tons ) of coal and 250 t ( 250 long tons ) of oil in purpose @-@ built storage spaces ; the hull areas between the torpedo bulkhead and the outer wall of the ship were used to store additional fuel . Maximum fuel capacity was 4 @,@ 000 t ( 3 @,@ 900 long tons ) of coal and 2 @,@ 000 t ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) of oil . This was estimated to give a range of up to about 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a cruising speed of 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Electrical power on the vessels was provided by eight diesel generators that put out 2 @,@ 320 kilowatts at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Mackensens were equipped with a main battery of eight new 35 cm SK L / 45 guns in four twin gun turrets . The turrets were mounted in superfiring pairs fore and aft of the main superstructure . The guns were placed in Drh LC / 1914 mountings , which could elevate to 20 degrees and depress to − 5 degrees . The guns were supplied with a total of 720 armor @-@ piercing shells , or 90 per gun . The weapons were designed to fire 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 323 lb ) shells at a rate of fire of around 2 @.@ 5 shots per minute . The shells were fired with a muzzle velocity of 820 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . As with other heavy German guns , these weapons used a fore propellant charge in a silk bag with a main charge in a brass case . These guns could hit targets out to a maximum distance of 23 @,@ 300 m ( 25 @,@ 500 yd ) . 
 The ships ' secondary battery consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns mounted in armored casemates along the central superstructure . Each gun was supplied with 160 rounds , and had a maximum range of 13 @,@ 500 m ( 44 @,@ 300 ft ) , though this was later extended to 16 @,@ 800 m ( 55 @,@ 100 ft ) . The guns had a sustained rate of fire of 7 rounds per minute . The shells were 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 99 @.@ 8 lb ) , and were loaded with a 13 @.@ 7 kg ( 31 @.@ 2 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . The guns fired at a muzzle velocity of 835 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) . The guns were expected to fire around 1 @,@ 400 shells before they needed to be replaced . 
 The ships were also armed with eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) L / 45 Flak guns in single pedestal mounts . Four were arranged around the rear superfiring main battery turret and the other four around the forward conning tower . The Flak guns were emplaced in MPL C / 13 mountings , which allowed depression to − 10 degrees and elevation to 70 degrees . These guns fired 9 kg ( 19 @.@ 8 lb ) shells , and had an effective ceiling of 9 @,@ 150 m ( 30 @,@ 020 ft ) at 70 degrees . 
 As was standard for warships of the period , the Mackensens were equipped with submerged torpedo tubes . There were five 60 cm ( 24 in ) tubes : one in the bow , and two on each flank of the ship . The torpedoes were the H8 type , which were 9 m ( 30 ft ) long and carried a 210 kg ( 463 lb ) Hexanite warhead . The torpedoes had a range of 8 @,@ 000 m ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) when set at a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) ; at a reduced speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) , the range increased significantly to 15 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Mackensen @-@ class ships were protected with Krupp cemented steel armor , as was the standard for German warships of the period . Specific figures for the arrangement of the armor layout have not survived , but according to naval historian Erich Gröner " The outfit of Krupp armour was similar to that of the [ preceding ] Derfflinger class " . The figures listed here are those for the Derfflinger class . They had an armor belt of 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thickness in the central citadel of the ship , where the most important parts of the vessel were located . This included the ammunition magazines and the machinery spaces . The belt was reduced in less critical areas , to 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) forward and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) aft . The belt tapered down to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) at the bow , though the stern was not protected by armor at all . A 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) torpedo bulkhead ran the length of the hull , several meters behind the main belt . The main armored deck ranged in thickness from 30 mm in less important areas to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in the sections that covered the more critical areas of the ship . 
 The forward conning tower was protected with heavy armor : the sides were 300 mm thick and the roof was 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) . The rear conning tower was less well armored ; its sides were only 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , and the roof was covered with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plate . The main battery gun turrets were also heavily armored : the turret sides were 270 mm ( 11 in ) and the roofs were 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) . The 15 cm guns had 150 mm worth of armor plating in the casemates ; the guns themselves had 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) shields to protect their crews from shell splinters . 
 = = Construction and cancellation = = 
 Seven ships were originally planned in the class : Mackensen , Graf Spee , Prinz Eitel Friedrich , Ersatz A , and three other vessels . The last three ships were redesigned as the Ersatz Yorck class , leaving four ships to be built to the Mackensen design . The first two ships were ordered on 14 August 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I. Mackensen was funded through the 1914 budget , while funding for Graf Spee came from the war budget . Mackensen — ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Victoria Louise , as a replacement for the old protected cruiser Victoria Louise — was named after Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) August von Mackensen . The ship was laid down on 30 January 1915 at Blohm & Voss in Hamburg , under construction number 240 . She was launched on 21 April 1917 ; at the small launching ceremony , Generaloberst ( Colonel General ) Josias von Heeringen gave the speech and the ship was christened by Mackensen 's wife . Construction was halted about 15 months before she would have been completed . The British mistakenly believed the ship to have been completed , and so they included the ship on the list of vessels to be interned at Scapa Flow instead of the fleet flagship Baden . Mackensen was stricken from the German navy , according to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , on 17 November 1919 . She was sold for scrap and eventually broken up in 1922 at Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 Graf Spee was named for Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee , the commander of the German East Asia Squadron ; he was killed when his squadron was annihilated at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in 1914 . Graf Spee was laid down on 30 November 1915 in the Schichau yards in Danzig ( now Gdańsk , Poland ) , under the provisional name Ersatz Blücher , to replace the large armored cruiser Blücher that had been sunk at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 . She was launched on 15 September 1917 . At the launching ceremony , Großadmiral Prince Heinrich gave the speech and Spee 's widow Margarete christened the ship . Construction stopped about 12 months away from completion ; Graf Spee was the furthest along of all four ships when work was halted . She too was struck on 17 November 1919 ; on 28 October 1921 the unfinished hull was sold for 4 @.@ 4 million Marks and broken up in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 Prinz Eitel Friedrich , ordered as Ersatz Freya ( a replacement for SMS Freya ) was named for one of Kaiser Wilhelm II 's sons , Eitel Friedrich . She was laid down on 1 May 1915 at Blohm & Voss under construction number 241 . She was 21 months away from completion when she was launched to clear the slip on 13 March 1920 and was broken up at Hamburg in 1921 . At the launching ceremony , dockyard workers named the ship Noske , after Reichswehr Minister Gustav Noske . Ersatz A , which might have been named Fürst Bismarck for the famous German chancellor Otto von Bismarck , was laid down on 3 November 1915 at the Wilhelmshaven Imperial Shipyard under construction number 25 . She was about 26 months from completion when work ended . She was never launched ; instead , the vessel was broken up on the slip in 1922 . 
 Experience at the Battle of Jutland led the RMA to conclude that ships with 38 cm guns , heavier armor , and a higher top speed were necessary . The Mackensen design was used as the basis for the Ersatz @-@ Yorck class , which incorporated the larger guns and more armor for the main battery turrets and barbettes . More powerful engines were unavailable to compensate for the extra weight , so the designers were forced to accept a reduced speed . Nevertheless , like the Mackensens , the three ships ordered under the Ersatz @-@ Yorck design were never completed . In response , the British ordered the four Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers , though the British designed the class under the mistaken impression that the Mackensen class would be armed with 38 @.@ 6 cm ( 15 @.@ 2 in ) guns and would be capable of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . Three of the four Admiral @-@ class ships were cancelled ; only HMS Hood was completed after the end of the war . 
 The primary reason construction halted on the four ships was the shifting of construction materials and manpower from capital ships to U @-@ boats in the last two years of the war . The RMA filed a report dated 1 February 1918 stating that capital ship construction had ground to a halt primarily for this reason . 
 = HMS Vanguard ( 23 ) = 
 HMS Vanguard was a British fast battleship built during World War II and commissioned after the war . She was the only ship of her class and was the biggest , fastest and last of the Royal Navy 's battleships and the final battleship to be launched in the world . Work on the ship 's design commenced before the war because the Royal Navy anticipated being outnumbered by the combined German and Japanese battleships in the early 1940s . The British had enough 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) guns and turrets in storage to allow one ship of a modified Lion @-@ class battleship design to be completed faster than the ships of that class that had already been laid down . Work on Vanguard was started and stopped several times during the war and even after construction had begun , her design was revised several times to reflect war experience . These stoppages and changes prevented her from being completed during the war . 
 Vanguard 's first task after completing her sea trial at the end of 1946 was , early the next year , to convey King George VI and his family on the first Royal Tour of South Africa by a reigning monarch . While refitting after her return , she was selected for another Royal Tour of Australia and New Zealand in 1948 . This was cancelled due to King George 's declining health and Vanguard briefly became flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet in early 1949 . After her return home in mid @-@ 1949 , she became flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron . Throughout her career , the battleship usually served as the flagship of any unit to which she was assigned . During the early 1950s , Vanguard was involved in a number of training exercises with NATO forces . In 1953 she participated in Queen Elizabeth II 's Coronation Review . While she was refitting in 1955 , the Admiralty announced that the ship was going to be put into reserve upon completion of the work . Vanguard was sold for scrap and was broken up beginning in 1960 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 By early 1939 it was clear that the first two Lion @-@ class battleships could not be delivered before 1943 at the earliest and that further battleship construction would be necessary to match the German and Japanese battleships already under construction . The main constraint on the construction of any new battleships was the limited available capacity and the time required to build large @-@ calibre guns and their gun turrets . Using four existing twin 15 @-@ inch mountings offered the possibility of bypassing this bottleneck and allowed the construction of a single fast battleship more quickly than building more Lion @-@ class ships . The turrets were originally built for the battlecruisers Courageous and Glorious during World War I and were removed during the conversions of these ships to aircraft carriers in the 1920s . To save time , the Lion design was modified to accommodate the four turrets , and preliminary design work began in July 1939 . The square or transom stern was retained as it was estimated to improve speed at full power by .33 knots ( 0 @.@ 61 km / h ; 0 @.@ 38 mph ) . This made Vanguard the only British battleship built with a transom stern as the Lions were never finished . 
 Design work was suspended on 11 September after the start of World War II , but resumed in February 1940 after the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill , expressed an interest in the ship . The design was modified to increase protection against shell splinters on the unprotected sides of the ship 's hull , the armour of the secondary armament was increased to resist 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) semi @-@ armour @-@ piercing bombs , and the splinter belt 's thickness fore and aft of the main armour belt was reduced by 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) in compensation . A small conning tower was added aft , and four Unrotated Projectile mounts were added to supplement the six octuple @-@ barrel 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft mounts already planned . 
 More pressing commitments forced the preliminary design work to be suspended again in June and , when it resumed in October , the design was modified again in light of recent war experience . Greater fuel capacity was added and the armour protection improved , but these changes deepened the design 's draught so that it exceeded the 34 @-@ foot ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) limit of the Suez Canal . The thickness of the main belt was reduced by 1 inch ( 25 mm ) to save weight , but the primary method chosen to reduce the draught was to increase the beam by 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) . This exceeded the width of the docks at Rosyth and Plymouth , which severely limited the number of docks that could handle the ship , but these changes were approved by the Board of Admiralty on 17 April 1941 . The ship had already been ordered on 14 March under the 1940 Emergency War Programme , although the drawings were not turned over to John Brown & Company until ten days later . 
 Vanguard 's design was revised again , while the ship was under construction in 1942 , to reflect lessons learned from the loss of the King George V @-@ class battleship Prince of Wales and operations with the other battleships . The space between the inboard and outboard propeller shafts was increased from 33 @.@ 5 to 51 @.@ 5 feet ( 10 @.@ 2 to 15 @.@ 7 m ) to prevent a single torpedo from wrecking both shafts , and watertight access trunks were added to all spaces below the deep waterline to prevent progressive flooding through open watertight doors and hatches as happened to Prince of Wales . This change and the relocation of some of the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 133 mm ) ammunition handling rooms from the lower deck to the middle deck seriously delayed the ship 's completion . The design requirement that the guns of ' A ' turret be capable of firing straight ahead at 0 ° of elevation was sacrificed to allow her freeboard forward to be increased , and her bow was reshaped to make it less prone to shipping water and throwing sea spray in head seas . The ship 's fuel supply was increased from 4 @,@ 400 long tons ( 4 @,@ 500 t ) to 4 @,@ 850 long tons ( 4 @,@ 930 t ) to prevent the fuel shortage problems suffered by King George V and Rodney during their pursuit of the German battleship Bismarck . The Unrotated Projectile mounts were deleted from the design , and the light anti @-@ aircraft armament was increased to a total of 76 two @-@ pounders in one quadruple and nine octuple mounts and 24 Oerlikon 20 mm cannon were also added in 12 twin mounts . Space for these was made available by removing the two floatplanes , the catapult , and their associated facilities . 
 A proposal was made in 1942 to convert Vanguard to an aircraft carrier . The Director of Naval Construction stated that doing so along the lines of the Audacious class would present no major difficulties , but would require six months to redesign the ship . The proposal was formally rejected on 17 July . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Vanguard had an overall length of 814 feet 4 inches ( 248 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 107 feet 6 inches ( 32 @.@ 8 m ) , and a draught of 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) at deep load . She displaced 44 @,@ 500 long tons ( 45 @,@ 200 t ) at standard load and 51 @,@ 420 long tons ( 52 @,@ 250 t ) at deep load . The ship was significantly larger than her predecessors of the class , almost 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) longer , and displaced about 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 t ) more than the older ships at deep load . Vanguard was overweight by some 2 @,@ 200 long tons ( 2 @,@ 200 t ) , which magnified the difference . The ship had a complete double bottom 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep , and she was divided into 27 main compartments by watertight bulkheads . 
 The King George V @-@ class ships had been built with almost no sheer to the main deck forwards to allow ' A ' turret to fire straight forward at zero elevation , resulting in a poor sea boat that took a lot of water over the bow . Vanguard 's bow was redesigned as a result of experience with the King George Vs , and a large amount of sheer and flare was applied to the bow . The ship was well regarded as seaworthy , able to keep an even keel in rough seas . At full load , Vanguard had a metacentric height of 8 @.@ 2 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 As a fleet flagship , her complement was 115 officers and 1 @,@ 860 men in 1947 . Air conditioning was provided for many of the ship 's control spaces , and asbestos insulation was provided on exposed areas of the ship 's sides , decks and bulkheads . Steam heating was provided for her armament , instruments , look @-@ out positions and other equipment to make Vanguard suitable for operations in the Arctic . An Action Information Centre was fitted below the main armour deck with facilities to track aircraft and ships around Vanguard . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 To save design time , the four @-@ shaft unit machinery from the Lion @-@ class battleship was duplicated with alternating boiler and engine rooms . Vanguard had four sets of single @-@ reduction geared Parsons steam turbines housed in separate engine rooms . Each set consisted of one high @-@ pressure and one low @-@ pressure turbine , driving a propeller that was 14 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter . The turbines were powered by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers in four boiler rooms at a working pressure of 350 psi ( 2 @,@ 413 kPa ; 25 kgf / cm2 ) and temperature of 700 ° F ( 371 ° C ) . The engines were designed to produce a total of 130 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 97 @,@ 000 kW ) and a speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , but achieved more than 136 @,@ 000 shp ( 101 @,@ 000 kW ) during the ship 's sea trials in July 1946 , when she reached a speed of 31 @.@ 57 knots ( 58 @.@ 47 km / h ; 36 @.@ 33 mph ) . After trials , the three @-@ bladed propellers on the inboard shafts were replaced by five @-@ bladed propellers in an unsuccessful attempt to reduce vibrations of the inboard propeller shafts . 
 Vanguard was designed to carry 4 @,@ 850 long tons of fuel oil and 427 long tons ( 434 t ) of diesel fuel . With a clean bottom , she could steam at a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) for 8 @,@ 250 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 280 km ; 9 @,@ 490 mi ) . The ship had four 480 @-@ kilowatt ( 640 hp ) turbogenerators and four 450 @-@ kilowatt ( 600 hp ) diesel generators that supplied the common ring main at 220 volts . Their total output of 3 @,@ 720 kilowatts ( 4 @,@ 990 hp ) was the largest of any British battleship . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of eight 42 @-@ calibre BL 15 @-@ inch Mk I guns in four twin hydraulically powered gun turrets designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' and ' Y ' from bow to stern . When the turrets were modernised their maximum elevation was increased to + 30 ° , although the guns were loaded at + 5 ° . They fired 1 @,@ 938 @-@ pound ( 879 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 458 ft / s ( 749 m / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 33 @,@ 550 yards ( 30 @,@ 680 m ) . These guns were also capable of firing the same projectiles while using <unk> which gave a maximum range of 37 @,@ 870 yards ( 34 @,@ 630 m ) . Their rate of fire was two rounds per minute . Vanguard carried 100 shells per gun . 
 The 15 @-@ inch turrets had been designed when the customary practice was to place the magazine above the shell room , and it was not cost @-@ effective to modify the ammunition hoists to accommodate the opposite arrangement adopted after the Battle of Jutland demonstrated the dangers of exposing the magazines to long @-@ range gunfire . The ship was provided with a powder @-@ handling room above the shell room to mimic the arrangement that turret 's hoists were designed to handle , and another set of hoists moved the propellant charges from the magazines to the powder @-@ handling room . The charges were stowed in cases to reduce their exposure to fire . 
 The secondary armament consisted of sixteen 50 @-@ calibre QF 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch Mk I * dual purpose guns in eight twin gun mounts . They had a maximum depression of − 5 ° and a maximum elevation of 70 ° . They fired an 80 @-@ pound ( 36 kg ) high @-@ explosive shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 672 ft / s ( 814 m / s ) . The improved 5 @.@ 25 turrets on Vanguard were claimed to be fully automatic , with a power @-@ rammed breech and automatic tracking and elevation under radar control enabling a rate of fire was about 18 rounds per minute . At maximum elevation , the guns had a maximum range of 24 @,@ 070 yards ( 22 @,@ 010 m ) . 391 rounds were provided for each gun . 
 Short @-@ range air defence was provided by 73 Bofors 40 mm AA guns in a variety of mountings . Vanguard had ten sextuple @-@ barrel power @-@ operated mounts concentrated in the superstructure and stern , a twin @-@ barrel mount on ' B ' turret , and 11 power @-@ operated single mounts on the upper deck and rear superstructure . All mounts could depress to − 10 ° and elevate to a maximum of + 90 ° . The 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) gun fired a 1 @.@ 97 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 89 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 890 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) to a distance of 10 @,@ 750 yards ( 9 @,@ 830 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 120 rounds per minute . Space was not available to stow the standard allowance of 1564 rounds per gun , and Vanguard only carried 1269 rounds per gun . Two of the single guns on the quarterdeck were removed in 1949 and five others during a major refit in 1954 . All of her multiple Bofors mounts were removed at this same time . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 Vanguard was unique among British battleships in having remote power control ( RPC ) for her main , secondary and tertiary guns along with the Admiralty Fire Control Table Mk X for surface fire control of the main armament . There were two director control towers ( DCT ) for the 15 @-@ inch guns , each carrying a " double cheese " Type 274 fire @-@ control radar for range finding and spotting the fall of shot . Each DCT could control all four turrets while ' B ' turret could control ' A ' and ' X ' turrets . ' X ' turret could only control ' Y ' turret . There were four American Mark 37 DCTs for the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch guns , each carrying the twin domes of Type 275 gunnery radar . Lastly , each Mark VI sextuple 40 mm Bofors mounting was provided with a separate <unk> ( " close range blind fire " ) director fitted with a Type 262 radar , although the ship never mounted her complete outfit of those directors . The <unk> Mk II 40 mm Bofors mounting carried its own Type 262 on the mounting itself . Other radar sets carried were Type 960 air and surface search , Type 293 target indication and Type 277 height finding . 
 When the 15 @-@ inch gun turrets were modernised , their existing 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinders were replaced by 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) ones in all turrets except for ' A ' and they were fitted for RPC in azimuth only . The turrets were also provided with de @-@ <unk> equipment and insulation to improve their habitability . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The ship 's armour scheme was based on that of the King George V class with a thinner waterline belt and additional splinter protection . Originally the belt armour was equal to that of the older ships , but it had to be reduced to offset weight increases when the design was modified to reflect wartime experience . The waterline 460 @-@ foot ( 140 @.@ 2 m ) main belt was composed of Krupp cemented armour ( KCA ) 13 inches ( 330 mm ) thick , but increased to 14 inches ( 356 mm ) abreast the magazines . It was 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) high and tapered to a thickness of 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) at the bottom edge of the belt . Fore and aft of the 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) transverse bulkheads that closed off the central citadel , the belt continued almost to the ends of the ship . Forward it tapered to a thickness of 2 inches ( 51 mm ) and a height of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) and aft to the same thickness , but a height of 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) . At the aft end of the steering gear compartment was a 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) transverse bulkhead . After the Battle of the Denmark Strait in 1941 , 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) non @-@ cemented armour bulkheads were added on the sides of the magazines , to protect them from splinters from any hits from plunging shells , that might have penetrated the ship 's side beneath her belt . 
 When the gun turrets from the World War I @-@ era battlecruisers were modernised , their KCA faceplates were replaced by new ones 13 inches thick , and their roofs were replaced by 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) non @-@ cemented armour plates . Their sides remained 7 – 9 inches ( 180 – 230 mm ) in thickness . The barbettes for the 15 @-@ inch guns were 13 inches thick on the sides , but tapered to 11 – 12 inches ( 279 – 305 mm ) closer to the centreline of the ship . The side and roof armour of the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch turrets was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick . Their ammunition hoists were protected by armour 2 – 6 inches ( 51 – 152 mm ) thick . 
 Intended to resist the impact of a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) armour @-@ piercing bomb dropped from a height of 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) , Vanguard 's deck protection was identical to that of the King George V class . It consisted of six @-@ inch non @-@ cemented armour over the magazines that reduced to 5 inches ( 127 mm ) over the machinery spaces . The armour continued forward and aft of the citadel at the lower @-@ deck level . Forward it tapered in steps from five inches down to 2 @.@ 5 inches near the bow . Aft , it protected the steering gear and propeller shafts with 4 @.@ 5 inches of armour before tapering to a thickness of 2 @.@ 5 inches near the stern . Unlike the Germans , French and Americans , the British no longer believed that heavy armour for the conning tower served any real purpose given that the chance of hitting it was very small ; Vanguard 's conning tower was therefore protected with 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour on the face and 2 @.@ 5 inches on the sides and rear . The secondary conning tower aft had 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of armour on its sides . 
 Vanguard 's underwater protection was enhanced when she was redesigned in 1942 to reflect the lessons learned when Prince of Wales was sunk by Japanese torpedo bombers . It still consisted of a three @-@ layer system of voids and liquid @-@ filled compartments meant to absorb the energy of an underwater explosion . It was bounded on the inside by the 1 @.@ 75 – 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 44 – 38 mm ) torpedo bulkhead . Her enlarged oil tanks reduced the empty spaces that could flood and cause the ship to list and greater provision was made to pump these spaces out . The longitudinal bulkheads of the side protection system were raised one deck higher to further subdivide the spaces behind the waterline armour belt . The side protection system had a maximum depth of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) , but this decreased significantly as the ship narrowed at its ends . Over the length of the citadel , this system was found to be proof against 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) of TNT during full @-@ scale trials . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Vanguard was laid down on 2 October 1941 by John Brown and Company of Clydebank , Scotland , with the yard number of 567 . After the Japanese invasion of Malaya in December , the ship was given an A1 priority in the hope of finishing her by the end of 1944 and construction of the light cruiser HMS Bellerophon , as well as some merchant shipping , was halted to expedite the ship 's completion . This was unsuccessful , however , due to a shortage of skilled labour . As a result , it was not until 30 November 1944 that the ship was launched . Princess Elizabeth presided over this ceremony , the first ship she ever launched , and was presented with a diamond rose brooch to commemorate the event . 
 Captain William Gladstone Agnew assumed command on 15 October 1945 . The end of hostilities following Japan 's surrender reduced the need for new warships , and consequently the ship was not commissioned until 12 May 1946 . By this time , a total of £ 11 @,@ 530 @,@ 503 , including £ 3 @,@ 186 @,@ 868 for the modernisation of the main armament , had been spent on producing Vanguard . 
 After commissioning , the ship spent several months conducting sea trials and training until August , when she began the necessary modifications to serve as a royal yacht for the forthcoming royal tour of South Africa . The Admiral 's suite was reworked into accommodations for the Royal Family and their staff while the anti @-@ aircraft mount on top of ' B ' turret was replaced by a saluting platform . Agnew was promoted to rear @-@ admiral with effect from 8 January 1947 . The alterations were complete by December , and Vanguard made a shakedown cruise into the Central Atlantic and made a port visit to Gibraltar on the return voyage . Initially escorted by the destroyers Orwell , Obedient , Offa , <unk> , and Rotherham , the ship rendezvoused with the Home Fleet on 1 February 1947 to receive a 21 @-@ gun salute led by the battleships Nelson and Duke of York , and the aircraft carrier Implacable . Later that morning , a Sikorsky R @-@ 4 helicopter landed aboard to pick up mail and photographic film . 
 Vanguard arrived in Cape Town on 17 February , escorted by the South African frigates Good Hope , Transvaal and Natal on the last leg of her voyage . While the Royal Family toured the country on the first visit by a reigning monarch to South Africa , the ship exercised with ships of the South African and Royal Navies stationed there and made port visits to a number of South African cities . She sailed for home on 22 April and made brief visits to Saint Helena and Ascension Island en route . Vanguard arrived in Portsmouth on 11 May , and Captain F. R. Parham relieved the newly promoted Agnew on 29 May . In July , the ship began an overhaul in Devonport , which lasted until August 1948 . While she was refitting , Vanguard was tasked to carry the Royal Family on a tour of Australia and New Zealand , planned for January 1949 . On 31 August , she began a shakedown cruise to the Mediterranean and returned to Devonport on 12 November . Around this time , Vanguard was considered , along with a number of other large warships , for conversion to carry anti @-@ aircraft missiles , but nothing further was done along these lines . 
 George VI was now too ill for travel , and the Royal Tour was indefinitely postponed later that month . Vanguard became the flagship of Admiral Sir Arthur Power , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet , on 1 March 1949 , and the ship made port visits to Algeria , France , Italy , Cyprus , Libya , Lebanon , Greece and Egypt before she arrived back at Devonport on 21 July . The newly promoted Rear Admiral Parham was relieved by Captain G. V. Gladstone a week later . The ship then became the flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron under Rear Admiral Edward Evans @-@ Lombe on 12 November . While returning from a brief training sortie to Gibraltar , Vanguard went to the aid of a small French merchantman whose cargo had shifted in a severe storm on 13 February 1950 . The merchantman , SS <unk> , was taken under tow and the cargo was redistributed . Once the storm had abated , <unk> was able to resume her voyage under her own power . Vanguard reached Weymouth Bay the following day . Later , in March , she fired the salute to Vincent Auriol , the President of France , during his state visit to Great Britain . 
 On 13 September 1950 Admiral Sir Philip Vian hoisted his flag as Commander in Chief , Home Fleet , on Vanguard and the ship joined the rest of Home Fleet on exercises with the Royal Canadian Navy and the Mediterranean Fleet . On 19 December , Vian transferred his flag to Indomitable . Nearly two months later , on 10 February 1951 , the aircraft carrier collided with Vanguard as the carrier docked at Gibraltar . The hole in the battleship 's stern was not serious , and Vian re @-@ hoisted his flag in Vanguard shortly afterwards . After manoeuvres with Indomitable , during which her aircraft " sank " the battleship , the ship made port visits in Genoa and Villefranche @-@ sur @-@ Mer before returning for a brief refit in Devonport on 14 March . After completing her refit in May , she became flagship of the Home Fleet Training Squadron under Rear Admiral R. M. Dick at the Isle of Portland . Four months later the admiral transferred his flag to the carrier Indefatigable as Vanguard began another refit in preparation to again become the flagship of Home Fleet . 
 Buckingham Palace announced in November that King George VI was planning to take a short cruise for his health aboard Vanguard , which meant that her Admiral 's suite again had to be modified to accommodate him and his staff . Captain John Litchfield assumed command on 21 December while the ship was still refitting , but the King died on 6 February 1952 before he could make his cruise . A detachment from the ship participated in his funeral procession before she departed for her post @-@ refit shakedown cruise on 22 February . After exercising with Implacable , Indomitable and the fast minelayer Apollo , Vanguard returned home on 29 March . She became flagship of Home Fleet again on 13 May when Admiral Sir George Creasy hoisted his flag . Due to manning and weight problems , Vanguard operated with many of her turrets unmanned and with ammunition carried for only two of the 15 @-@ inch turrets and only starshell ammunition for the 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch guns . She participated in exercises with the Dutch and American navies , before returning to Portsmouth for the holidays . Litchfield was relieved by Captain R. A. Ewing on 19 January 1953 ; the ship departed the next day for a brief refit at Gibraltar . After its completion on 2 March , the ship trained with several of the Royal Navy 's carriers before arriving back at Portsmouth on 25 March . Vanguard participated in Queen Elizabeth 's Coronation Fleet Review at Spithead on 15 June 1953 . The following September , she participated in NATO 's Exercise Mariner in the Denmark Strait . 
 Admiral Sir Michael Denny replaced Creasy as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Home Fleet , on 5 January 1954 and Vanguard participated in Exercise <unk> A with Dutch and French ships in March . During the rest of the year she participated in anti @-@ submarine and anti @-@ aircraft exercises as well as making port visits to Oslo and Kristiansand in Norway and Helsingborg in Sweden . She was inspected on 11 July by King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden before returning home later that month . Denny struck his flag on 15 September , and Vanguard sailed to Devonport for a £ 220 @,@ 000 refit 10 days later . The February 1955 Defence Estimates had intended her as the Home Fleet flagship with a role as a Sverdlov @-@ class cruiser killer , but after the appointment of Earl Mountbatten in April 1955 and with Antony Eden replacing Churchill as prime minister , the government decided instead to maintain two extra cruisers in the fleet , and Vanguard was placed in reserve when it was completed its 1955 refit ; she subsequently became the flagship of the Reserve Fleet when Vice Admiral Richard Onslow hoisted his flag on 28 November . While moored in Fareham Creek , during her time in the reserve fleet , waterline shots of Vanguard in Portsmouth Harbour were filmed for the title sequence of the 1957 comedy film Carry on Admiral . Just before decommissioning , scenes for the 1960 film Sink the Bismarck ! were filmed aboard , with Vanguard being used to depict interiors of the bridges , Admiral 's Quarters and gun turrets for Hood , Bismarck and King George V. 
 On 9 October 1959 the Admiralty announced that Vanguard would be scrapped , as she was considered obsolete and too expensive to maintain . She was decommissioned on 7 June 1960 and sold to the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain for £ 560 @,@ 000 . On 4 August 1960 , when the ship was scheduled to be towed from Portsmouth to the breaker 's yard at Faslane , Scotland , the whole of the Southsea sea front was packed with people who came to see her off . As Vanguard was being towed towards the harbour entrance , she slewed across the harbour and ran aground near the Still & West pub . She was pulled off by five tugboats an hour later , and made her final exit from Portsmouth . Five days later she arrived at Faslane , and by mid @-@ 1962 the demolition process was complete ; she was the last British battleship to be scrapped . 
 As a part of the scrapping process , sections of 150 @-@ millimetre @-@ thick ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) steel plate were recovered from Vanguard and used for the shielding of the whole body monitor at the <unk> Research Laboratory ( now <unk> ) at <unk> , Gosport in Hampshire , England . 
 = William Edington = 
 William Edington ( died 6 or 7 October 1366 ) was an English bishop and administrator . He served as bishop of Winchester from 1346 until his death , Keeper of the wardrobe from 1341 to 1344 , treasurer from 1344 to 1356 , and finally as chancellor from 1356 until he retired from royal administration in 1363 . Edington ’ s reforms of the administration — in particular of royal finances — had wide @-@ ranging consequences , and contributed to the English military efficiency in the early stages of the Hundred Years ' War . As bishop of Winchester he was responsible for starting an extensive rebuilding of Winchester Cathedral , and for founding Edington Priory , the church of which still stands today . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 Edington 's parents were Roger and <unk> of Edington near Westbury , Wiltshire . Though it has been claimed that he was educated at Oxford , there seems to be no support for this . His first patron , however , was the Oxford chancellor Gilbert Middleton , who was also a royal counsellor . When Middleton died in 1331 , Edington entered the service of Middleton ’ s friend , Adam Orleton , bishop of Winchester . Through Orleton , Edington ’ s abilities were brought to the attention of King Edward III , and in 1341 the king named him keeper of the wardrobe . The position was an important one ; the wardrobe functioned as the treasury while the king was on campaign , and Edward strongly resisted any attempts to limit this royal prerogative . 
 The king must have been impressed by Edington ’ s performance , because in 1344 he made him treasurer of the realm , a position he held for the exceptionally long period of twelve years . This was a job fraught with problems , as the nation was in serious financial difficulties by the mid @-@ 1340s . The treasury was in great debt from the heavy demands of the early stages of the Hundred Years ' War . By then reneging on his debts , the king had lost public confidence , and struggled to obtain new loans . Edington saw the need to bring all royal expenditure under the oversight of the exchequer . This did not entail controlling the king ’ s use of his resources — a move Edward would have resented greatly — but simply attempting to budget all revenues and expenses . By the early 1360s this was largely achieved ; a testimony to the capabilities and energy of Edington as an administrator . In 1356 he was named chancellor , a post he held until his retirement from the national scene in 1363 , possibly for health reasons . 
 = = <unk> career = = 
 Edington also held ecclesiastical benefices . After his education at Oxford he held a succession of <unk> in Northamptonshire : first at Cottingham , then at Dallington , and finally from 1322 at Middleton Cheney . 
 In 1335 Orleton collated Edington to the rectory of Cheriton , Hampshire , and from 1335 to 1346 he was master of the Hospital of St Cross in Winchester . Also the king was eager to reward his capable servant ; in 1341 he was given the prebend of Leighton Manor ( Lincoln ) , by 1344 he also held that of Netheravon ( Salisbury ) , and by 1345 that of <unk> ( Hereford ) . This level of pluralism was not unusual at the time . His greatest preferment , however , came with his papal appointment – on the king ’ s request – to the see of Winchester in 1345 . This was the richest see in England , considered second only to the archbishopric of Milan . 
 The monks of Winchester had already elected one of their own number , but this was over @-@ ruled , and Edington was consecrated in 1346 . As a bishop he was necessarily much absent , even with the relatively short distance between Westminster and Winchester . He was not entirely detached from his episcopal duties , however : he used the see as a source for extensive nepotism , yet he also initiated wide @-@ ranging building works on the nave of the cathedral . Meanwhile , in 1351 , he founded an Augustinian priory at his birthplace of Edington , in order to have prayers said for himself , his parents and his brother . Although most of the priory has been demolished , the church still stands , as a good example of the transition between the decorated and perpendicular style of church @-@ building . 
 In May 1366 , as a final sign of royal gratitude , King Edward had Edington elected archbishop of Canterbury . Edington , however , declined on the grounds of failing health . Five months later , on 6 or 7 October 1366 , he died at Bishop 's Waltham . He is buried in Winchester Cathedral , where his effigy can be seen in the chantry chapel he himself had built in the nave . 
 = New Zealand national rugby union team = 
 The New Zealand national rugby union team , commonly called the All Blacks , represent New Zealand in men 's rugby union , which is regarded as the country 's national sport . The side has won the last two Rugby World Cups , in 2011 and 2015 , as well as the inaugural tournament in 1987 . They have a 76 % winning record in test match rugby , and are the only international side with a winning record against every opponent ; and since their international debut in 1903 five nations have defeated New Zealand in test matches . Since the introduction of the World Rugby Rankings in 2003 , New Zealand has held the number one ranking longer than all other teams combined . The All Blacks statistically speaking are the best side to have played the game . 
 New Zealand competes with Argentina , Australia and South Africa in The Rugby Championship . The All Blacks have won the trophy thirteen times in the competition 's nineteen @-@ year history . They also hold the Bledisloe Cup , which is contested annually with Australia , and the Freedom Cup , contested annually with South Africa . New Zealand have achieved a Grand Slam ( defeating England , Wales , Scotland , and Ireland in one tour ) four times – 1978 , 2005 , 2008 and 2010 . 
 They have also been named the World Rugby Team of the Year seven times since 2005 . Four All Blacks have won the World Rugby Player of the Year award – Richie McCaw , Dan Carter , Kieran Read , and Brodie <unk> . Fifteen former All Blacks have been inducted into the International Rugby Hall of Fame . 
 The team 's first match was in 1884 , and their first international match in 1903 against Australia in Sydney . The following year they hosted their first ever home test , a match against a British Isles side in Wellington . This was followed by a tour of Europe and North America in 1905 where the team suffered their first test defeat – to Wales in Cardiff . 
 New Zealand 's early uniforms consisted of a black jersey with a silver fern and white knickerbockers . By the 1905 tour , they were wearing all black , except for the silver fern , and their name " All Blacks " dates from this time . The team perform a haka – a Māori challenge or posture dance – before each match . The haka performed has traditionally been Te Rauparaha 's Ka Mate , although since 2005 Kapa o Pango is sometimes performed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Introduction of rugby to New Zealand = = = 
 Rugby union – almost universally referred to as rugby in New Zealand – was introduced to New Zealand by Charles Monro in 1870 ; Monro discovered the sport while completing his studies at Christ 's College , Finchley , England . The first recorded game in New Zealand took place in May 1870 in Nelson between the Nelson club and Nelson College . The first provincial union , the Canterbury Rugby Football Union , was formed in 1879 , and in 1882 New Zealand 's first internationals were played when New South Wales ( NSW ) toured the country . NSW did not face a New Zealand representative team but played seven provincial sides – the tourists won four games and lost three . Two years later the first New Zealand team to travel overseas toured New South Wales ; where New Zealand won all eight of their games . 
 A privately organised British team , which later became the British and Irish Lions , toured New Zealand in 1888 . No test matches were played , and the side only played provincial sides . The British players were drawn mainly from Northern England , but there were representatives from Wales and Scotland . 
 = = = International competition begins = = = 
 In 1892 , following the canvassing of provincial administrators by Ernest <unk> , the New Zealand Rugby Football Union ( NZRFU ) was formed by the majority of New Zealand 's provincial unions , but did not include Canterbury , Otago or Southland . The first officially sanctioned New Zealand side toured New South Wales in 1893 , where the Thomas Ellison captained team won nine of their ten matches . The following year New Zealand played its first home " international " game , losing 8 – 6 to New South Wales . The team 's first true test match occurred against Australia on 15 August 1903 at the Sydney Cricket Ground in front of over 30 @,@ 000 spectators , and resulted in a 22 – 3 victory . 
 A representative New Zealand team first toured the British Isles in 1905 . The side is now known as the Originals , as the All Blacks name emerged during this tour when , according to team member Billy Wallace , a London newspaper reported that the New Zealanders played as if they were " all backs " . Wallace claimed that because of a typographical error , subsequent references were to " All Blacks " . This account is most likely a myth – because of their black playing strip , the side was probably referred to as the Blacks before they left New Zealand . Even though the name All Blacks most likely existed before the trip , the tour did popularise it . 
 The Originals played 35 matches on tour , and their only loss was a 3 – 0 defeat to Wales in Cardiff . The match has entered into the folklore of both countries because of a controversy over whether All Black Bob Deans scored a try which would have earned his team a 3 – 3 draw . In contrast to the success of the Originals on the field , the team did antagonise some in the Home Nations ' rugby establishment ; both administrators and the press complained that the All Blacks did not play the game within the amateur and gentlemanly spirit promoted by the International Rugby Football Board . These complaint continued to dog New Zealand teams until the 1930s . 
 The success of the Originals had uncomfortable consequences for the amateur NZRFU . In 1907 , a party of professional players was assembled to tour the British Isles and play rugby league – a professional offshoot of rugby union that was played by clubs that split from England 's Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) due to disagreements over financial compensation for players . When the All Golds , as the team came to be known , returned they established rugby league in New Zealand , and a large number of players switched to the professional code . English and Welsh authorities were alarmed by the threat of professionalism to rugby in New Zealand , and in 1908 an Anglo @-@ Welsh side undertook a tour to New Zealand to help promote the amateur values under which they believed sport should be played . The tourists were defeated 2 – 0 in the three @-@ test series by New Zealand , but the Anglo @-@ Welsh did manage to draw the second test 3 – 3 . 
 = = = Development of a legacy = = = 
 International rugby was suspended during the First World War , but a New Zealand Services team did compete in inter @-@ services competition known as the King 's Cup . After their departure from Europe the side toured South Africa before their return to New Zealand , and that tour paved the way for a South African team to tour New Zealand in 1921 . The Springboks – as the South African team is known – played New Zealand in a test series that ended all square . New Zealand conducted a return tour to South Africa in 1928 , and the test series was again drawn ; both teams winning two tests each . 
 The 1924 All Black tourists to the British Isles and France were dubbed the Invincibles because they won every game . However , the team was deprived of a potential Grand Slam when Scotland refused to play them because they were upset the tour was organised through the RFU rather than the IRFB . The first British Isles side since 1908 toured New Zealand in 1930 . Although the Lions won the first test , the home side regrouped and went on to win the series 3 – 1 . New Zealand toured the British Isles again in 1935 – 36 , losing only three games – including two tests – during a 30 @-@ match tour . In one of these losses , Prince Obolensky famously scored two tries to help England to a 13 – 0 win ; their first over New Zealand . 
 In 1937 , South Africa toured New Zealand and decisively won the test series despite losing the first test ; this 1937 South African team has been described as the best team ever to leave New Zealand . It was not until 1949 that New Zealand next played the Springboks when they toured South Africa with Fred Allen as captain . Although each test against South Africa was very close , New Zealand lost the series 4 – 0 . As part of the tour , a contingent of 26 All Blacks travelled to Rhodesia for two non @-@ test exhibition matches . The Rhodesia side beat the All Blacks 10 – 8 in Bulawayo , and then drew 3 – 3 in the follow up match in Salisbury . 
 At the same time as an All Black team was touring South Africa , Australia were touring New Zealand . The two tours coincided because Māori players were not able to go to South Africa at the time , meaning the Australians , played against a New Zealand team made up of the best Māori and the reserve non @-@ Māori players , while the South Africans encountered the best <unk> ( non @-@ Māori ) players . On the afternoon of 3 September New Zealand , captained by Johnny Smith , were beaten 11 – 6 by Australia in Wellington . New Zealand then lost their second test 16 – 9 , which gave Australia a Bledisloe Cup series win in New Zealand for the first time . 1949 was an annus horribilis for the All Blacks as they lost all six of their test matches , and the experience of playing two test series simultaneously has not been repeated . 
 The two consecutive series losses to South Africa made their 1956 tour of New Zealand highly anticipated . New Zealand were captained by Bob Duff and coached by Bob Stuart , and their 3 – 1 series win was their first over the Springboks and the Springboks ' first series loss that century . During the series , New Zealand introduced Don Clarke , and brought prop Kevin Skinner out of retirement to help secure the win . Skinner , a former New Zealand boxing champion , had retired from international rugby , but was convinced to return for the third and fourth tests . One reason for Skinner 's selection was to " sort out " the South African props , while Clarke become known as " The Boot " for his goal kicking . 
 New Zealand 's 3 – 1 series win over the Lions in 1959 proved to be the start of a dominant period in All Black rugby . This was followed by the 1963 – 64 tour to Britain and Ireland , led by Wilson <unk> , in which New Zealand were deprived of a Grand Slam by a scoreless draw with Scotland . The only loss on this tour was to Newport RFC , who won 3 – 0 at Rodney Parade , Newport on 30 October 1963 . The 1967 side won three tests against the home nations , but was unable to play Ireland because of a foot @-@ and @-@ mouth scare . This tour formed part of New Zealand 's longest winning streak , between 1965 and 1970 , of 17 test victories . This was also the longest test winning streak by any nation at the time ; it would be equalled by the Springboks in 1998 , and surpassed by Lithuania in 2010 . Although the 1966 Lions were defeated 0 – 4 in their New Zealand tour , there was a reversal of fortune five years later when the 1971 Lions , under the captaincy of Welshman John Dawes , beat New Zealand in a test series , which remains the Lions ' only series victory in New Zealand . 
 The 1972 – 3 tourists narrowly missed a Grand Slam with a draw against Ireland . The tour was notable for the sending home of prop Keith Murdoch , who was alleged to have been involved in a brawl in a Cardiff hotel while celebrating the defeat of Wales . 
 In 1978 , Graham <unk> captained New Zealand to their first Grand Slam , including a 13 – 12 victory over Wales . That game generated controversy after New Zealand won as the result of a late penalty . Lock Andy Haden had dived out of a line @-@ out in an attempt to earn a penalty , but referee Roger <unk> insisted the penalty was against Welsh lock Geoff Wheel for jumping off the shoulder of Frank Oliver . New Zealand 's only loss on the tour was the famous 12 – 0 defeat by Irish province Munster at Thomond Park . Later a play which focused on the loss was written by John Breen , called Alone it Stands . 
 = = = Controversial tours = = = 
 The 1976 All Blacks tour of apartheid South Africa generated much controversy , and led to the boycott of the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal by 33 African nations after the IOC refused to ban the team . New Zealand again failed to win the test series in South Africa : they did not do so until 1996 , after the fall of apartheid . The 1976 Tour contributed to the Gleneagles Agreement being adopted by the Commonwealth Heads of State in 1977 . 
 The 1981 South African tour to New Zealand sparked protests against South Africa 's apartheid policy the likes of which had not been seen in New Zealand since the 1951 waterfront dispute . The NZRU had invited the Springboks to tour as the Muldoon government refused to involve politics in sport . Although New Zealand won the test series , two of the tour 's provincial games were cancelled and the whole tour was marred by violence and protest . The third and final test match of the tour is sometimes known as the Flour Bomb test , as an anti @-@ apartheid activist in a Cessna light aircraft dropped leaflets , flares , a parachute @-@ supported banner reading " Biko " and flour bombs into Auckland 's Eden Park throughout the match , felling a New Zealand player . During the tour the country experienced unrest , and the tour had a significant impact on New Zealand society . 
 The 1985 All Blacks tour to South Africa was cancelled after legal action on the grounds that it would breach the NZRU 's constitution . In 1986 , a rebel tour to South Africa took place that had not been authorised by the NZRU and the team , named the Cavaliers , included many All Blacks . Those that participated in the tour received a ban for two tests from the NZRU when they returned to New Zealand . Allegations that players received payment for the tour were never proved . 
 = = = Early World Cups = = = 
 New Zealand hosted and won the inaugural World Cup in 1987 beating France 29 – 9 in the final at Eden Park , Auckland . New Zealand conceded only 52 points and scored 43 tries in six games en route to the title , beating Italy , Fiji , Argentina , Scotland , Wales and France . 
 By the 1991 World Cup New Zealand were an ageing side , co @-@ coached by Alex Wyllie and John Hart . After beating hosts England in the tournament opener , they struggled during pool matches against the United States and Italy , and won their quarter @-@ final against Canada . They were then knocked out by eventual winners Australia 16 – 6 in their semi @-@ final at Lansdowne Road . In the wake of the tournament , there were many retirements , including coach Wyllie , who had enjoyed an 86 % win rate during 29 tests in charge . 
 Laurie Mains replaced Wyllie in 1992 , and was given the job of preparing the side for the 1995 event in South Africa . New Zealand were again one of the favourites to take the championship . Their status as favourites was enhanced when a young Jonah Lomu scored four tries against England in the 45 – 29 semi @-@ final win . They managed to take hosts South Africa to extra time in the final , before losing 15 @-@ 12 to Joel Stransky 's drop goal . 
 = = = Professionalism = = = 
 The professional era in rugby union began in 1995 , spurred by creation of the SANZAR group ( a combination of South Africa , New Zealand and Australia ) which was formed with the purpose of selling broadcast rights for two new competitions , the domestic Super 12 competition and the Tri @-@ Nations . The first Tri @-@ Nations was contested in 1996 , with New Zealand winning all four of their tests to take the trophy . After a 1996 Tri @-@ Nations match hosted by South Africa , won 29 – 18 by New Zealand , preceded a separate three @-@ match test series between the two sides . Under new coach John Hart and the captaincy of Sean Fitzpatrick , New Zealand won a test series in South Africa for the first time . Fitzpatrick rated the series win higher than the 1987 World Cup victory in which he had participated . 
 The next three seasons saw mixed results for New Zealand , who won all their Tri @-@ Nations tests in 1997 before losing the title for the first time in 1998 . In 1998 New Zealand lost all five tests in the Tri @-@ Nations and Bledisloe Cup series ( two to South Africa and three to Australia ) , the first time they had lost four tests in succession since 1949 . The following year they suffered their worst test loss , 28 – 7 to Australia in Sydney . At the 1999 World Cup later that year , the All Blacks dominated their pool , handing England a 30 – 16 defeat at Twickenham . They advanced past Scotland 30 – 18 in the quarter @-@ finals to play France at Twickenham . After New Zealand finished the first half 17 – 10 ahead , France then produced a famous half of rugby to which New Zealand had no answer , winning 43 – 31 . Hart subsequently resigned as coach and was replaced by co @-@ coaches Wayne Smith and Tony Gilbert . 
 Under Smith and Gilbert , New Zealand came second in the 2000 and 2001 Tri @-@ Nations , and in neither season did the side reclaim the Bledisloe Cup – which had been lost in 1998 . Both coaches were replaced by John Mitchell on 3 October 2001 , and he went on to coach New Zealand to victory in both the 2002 and 2003 Tri @-@ Nations , as well as regaining the Bledisloe Cup in 2003 . The All Blacks entered the 2003 World Cup as one of the favourites and dominated their pool , running up wins against Italy , Canada and Tonga , before winning one of the most competitive matches of the tournament against Wales . They defeated South Africa in their quarter @-@ final , a team they had never beaten at the World Cup , 29 – 9 , but lost to Australia 22 – 10 in the semi @-@ final in Sydney . Afterwards , Mitchell had to reapply as coach , but the NZRU instead appointed Graham Henry . 
 = = = Henry era = = = 
 Henry 's tenure began with a double victory over 2003 Rugby World Cup winners England in 2004 . The two games had an aggregate score of 72 – 15 , and England were kept try @-@ less . Despite the winning start to Henry 's tenure , the Tri @-@ Nations was a mixed success with two wins and two losses . The competition was the closest ever , bonus points decided the outcome , and New Zealand finishing last . The 2004 season finished with three wins in Europe , including a record 45 – 6 victory over France . 
 In 2005 New Zealand whitewashed the touring British and Irish Lions during their three @-@ match test series , won the Tri @-@ Nations , and achieved a second Grand Slam over the Home Nations for the first time since 1978 . They went on to sweep the major IRB ( now World Rugby ) awards in which they were named : Team of the Year , Henry was named Coach of the Year , and first five @-@ eighth Dan Carter was Player of the Year . New Zealand were nominated for the Laureus World Sports Award for Team of the Year in 2006 for their 2005 performance . The following year they again took the Tri @-@ Nations Series after winning their first five matches , three against Australia and two against South Africa . They lost their final match of the series against South Africa . They completed their end of year tour unbeaten , with record away wins over France , England and Wales . New Zealand were named 2006 IRB Team of the Year and were nominated for the Laureus World Sports Award for the second time , while flanker Richie McCaw was named IRB Player of the Year for the first time . 
 The 2007 season started off with two mid @-@ year tests against France . New Zealand won the tests 42 – 11 at Eden Park and 61 – 10 at Westpac Stadium . A third game , against Canada , resulted in a 64 – 13 win , although the game was more competitive than the scoreline indicated . New Zealand 's first Tri @-@ Nations game of 2007 was against the Springboks in Durban , South Africa . New Zealand scored two tries in the final ten minutes of the game to win 26 – 21 . The following week against the Wallabies at the Melbourne Cricket Ground the Wallabies upset New Zealand to win 20 – 15 , New Zealand 's first loss to Australia since 2004 . The All Blacks won their following home games to successfully defend the Tri @-@ Nations Series for 2007 . New Zealand entered the 2007 Rugby World Cup as favourites , and topped their pool , beating Scotland , Italy , Romania and Portugal by at least 40 points . However , they then suffered a defeat by hosts France in the quarter @-@ finals in Cardiff . Following the loss to France coach Graham Henry 's job was reappointed amid vocal debate and comment , despite then Crusaders coach Robbie Deans being a strong contender . 
 The 2008 season started with three mid @-@ year tests , the first against Ireland at Westpac Stadium , Wellington . The final two games were against England , the first at Eden Park and the second at AMI Stadium in Christchurch . New Zealand played their first Tri @-@ Nations game against South Africa at Westpac Stadium in Wellington winning 19 – 8 but a week later at Carisbrook in Dunedin they lost to South Africa 28 – 30 , ending a 30 @-@ match winning streak at home , their previous loss in New Zealand being against England in 2003 . New Zealand played their next Tri @-@ Nations match on 26 July against Australia at Stadium Australia in Sydney , losing 34 – 19 but a week later against Australia at Eden Park in New Zealand won 39 – 10 . The greatest victory for New Zealand in the 2008 season was beating South Africa 19 – 0 in Cape Town at Newlands Stadium . New Zealand played their final match on 13 September against Australia at Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane winning 28 – 24 and retaining the Bledisloe Cup and the Tri @-@ Nations . 
 The All Blacks opened the 2009 season with a 22 – 27 loss to France at Carisbrook , but defeated them 14 – 10 in Wellington a week later . On points difference , France won the Dave Gallaher Cup for the first time . A week later the All Blacks defeated Italy 27 – 6 in Christchurch . They finished second in the Tri @-@ Nations Series , behind South Africa who lost only one game , and ended the series with a 33 – 6 win over Australia in Wellington . 
 In 2010 the All Blacks won the Tri @-@ Nations series for the tenth time after three successive victories against South Africa , also retaining the Bledisloe Cup after consecutive victories against Australia . During 2010 New Zealand were undefeated for 15 test matches . Despite losing the 2011 Tri @-@ Nations after a loss to Australia in Brisbane , but still entered the 2011 Rugby World Cup as one of the favourites . The All Blacks went through their pool matches undefeated , and after defeating Argentina , and then Australia , faced France in the final . The final was played at Eden Park , and New Zealand scored one try and a penalty to narrowly win 8 – 7 . Henry stepped down as coach following the World Cup , and was replaced as head coach by his assistant Steve Hansen . 
 = = = Hansen era = = = 
 The Tri @-@ Nations was expanded to include Argentina in 2012 , and subsequently renamed The Rugby Championship . The All Blacks went undefeated in the inaugural tournament , and went through the year unbeaten until their last match of the year , where they lost to England at Twickenham . In 2013 New Zealand hosted France in a three @-@ match series – their first meeting since the 2011 World Cup final . They won all three tests , before going unbeaten in the 2013 Rugby Championship . In November 2013 , New Zealand became the first rugby nation in the professional era to achieve a 100 % record in a calendar year . 
 The team entered the 2015 Rugby World Cup and again went undefeated in their pool matches . They defeated France in the Quarter @-@ Final , South Africa in the Semi @-@ Final and Australia in the Final to become the first nation to retain their World Champion title and the first to win the Rugby World Cup three times . 
 = = Jersey = = 
 The current New Zealand jersey is entirely black ( currently referred to as the ' blackest ' jersey ever created ) except the Adidas logo , the NZRU silver fern on the front and the AIG logo in the lower center ( all of which are darkened from previously ) . The 1884 New Zealand tour to Australia was the first overseas New Zealand rugby tour , and featured clothing very different from today 's jersey . Back then , the team donned a dark blue jersey , with gold fern on the left of the jumper . In 1893 the NZRU stipulated at its annual general meeting that the uniform would be black jersey with a silver fern and white knickerbockers . However historic photographs suggest white shorts may have been used instead during these early years . Sometime between 1897 and 1901 there was a change ; by 1901 the team met NSW in a black jersey , a canvas top with no collar , and a silver fern . 
 In 2006 , New Zealand wore an embroidered remembrance poppy on their jersey sleeve when playing France during the end @-@ of @-@ year tour . The poppy honours the soldiers who died in the battlefields of Europe . Captain Richie McCaw said " We want to honour the overseas service of New Zealanders . It is an important part of our history as a country and a team . " 
 During the 2011 Rugby World Cup the All Blacks had an embroidered William Webb Ellis cup on the sleeve of their jerseys with the year ' 1987 ' underneath . This was to signify which year the team had won the tournament . Each of the four teams who had won the competition had the same detailing on their jerseys . 
 Adidas is paying the NZRFU $ 200 million over nine years , expecting New Zealand to win around 75 % of their matches . Nike also looked at sponsoring New Zealand in 1996 , but went with Tiger Woods instead . 
 The change kit has traditionally been white with black shorts . After a few years playing with a change kit of grey shirt and black shorts , the NZRU announced a return to the traditional white jersey and black shorts in May 2009 . For the 30 July 2011 Springboks match in Wellington , the All Black jersey introduced a white collar in homage to that sported by the 1987 World Cup @-@ winning team . 
 In 2012 , the NZRU took the controversial step of allowing American insurance and financial services company , AIG , to promote themselves on the centre @-@ front of the All Black jersey . In return , the NZRU would receive direct financial sponsorship that was not revealed ; the deal was estimated to be worth approximately $ 80 million over five years . 
 Adidas have been the All Black 's kit suppliers since 1999 , taking over from Canterbury . 
 = = Haka = = 
 The All Blacks perform a haka ( Māori challenge ) before each international match . The haka has been closely associated with New Zealand rugby ever since a tour of Australia and the United Kingdom by the 1888 – 89 New Zealand Native football team , though the New Zealand team that toured New South Wales in 1884 may also have performed a haka . The New Zealand native team that toured Britain in 1888 and 1889 used Ake Ake Kia Kaha , and the 1903 team in Australia used a mocking haka , <unk> <unk> , <unk> ! . The 1905 All Blacks began the tradition of using Ka Mate – a haka composed in the 19th century by Ngāti Toa leader Te Rauparaha . The 1924 All Blacks used a specially composed haka Ko Niu <unk> , but later All Blacks reverted to Ka Mate . 
 In August 2005 , before the Tri @-@ Nations test match between New Zealand and South Africa at Carisbrook stadium in Dunedin , New Zealand performed a new haka , Kapa o Pango , specially composed by Derek <unk> and intended to reflect the Polynesian @-@ influenced multicultural make @-@ up of contemporary New Zealand . Kapa o Pango was to be performed on special occasions and was not intended to replace Ka Mate . Kapa o Pango concludes with what has been interpreted as a " throat slitting " gesture that led to accusations that Kapa o Pango encourages violence , and sends the wrong message to All Blacks fans . However , according to <unk> , the gesture represents " drawing vital energy into the heart and lungs " . 
 In November 2006 , at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff , New Zealand performed the haka in the dressing room prior to the match – instead of on the field immediately before kick @-@ off – after a disagreement with the Welsh Rugby Union , which had wanted Wales to sing their national anthem after the haka . In 2008 , New Zealand played Munster at Thomond Park . Before the match , Munster 's four New Zealanders challenged their opponents by performing a haka before the All Blacks started theirs . On the same tour , Wales responded by silently refusing to move after New Zealand 's haka , and the two teams simply stared at each other until the referee forced them to start the game . 
 = = Record = = 
 = = = Overall = = = 
 New Zealand have only ever been beaten by five test nations , and they are the only international team to have a winning record against every nation they have played . They have won 416 of their 541 test matches – 76 @.@ 89 % ( see table ) , and have lost at home only 37 times . Since World Rankings were introduced by World Rugby in October 2003 , New Zealand have occupied the number one ranking the majority of the time . In the decade from 2000 to 2009 , New Zealand won 100 tests ( 82 % winning percentage ) . As of the 2016 mid @-@ year rugby union internationals , the All Blacks have won a record 41 consecutive tests at home . 
 New Zealand 's longest winning streak is 17 test victories , achieved between 1965 and 1970 and again between 2013 and 2014 ; the second winning streak included every test played in 2013 . Their longest unbeaten streak is 23 tests ( from 1987 to 1990 ) with one game being drawn . 
 Their all @-@ time points record for tests stands at 14 @,@ 483 points for and 7 @,@ 033 against ( updated 25 June 2016 ) . Many national teams ' heaviest defeat occurred against New Zealand – the national teams of France , Ireland , Argentina , Fiji , Samoa , Tonga , Japan , and Portugal have all suffered their greatest defeats at the hands of New Zealand . The All Blacks ' largest test win was 145 – 17 against Japan in 1995 , while their heaviest loss was a 28 – 7 loss to Australia in 1999 . 
 Below is summary of New Zealand test results , updated 25 June 2016 : 
 = = = World Cup = = = 
 New Zealand have won the World Cup three times – ( the only team to have done so ) the 1987 inaugural competition held in New Zealand and Australia , the 2011 tournament also hosted in New Zealand – again defeating France and most recently , defeating Australia in England in 2015 ( making them the first and only team to win back to back World Cups ) . In 1991 , they lost their semi @-@ final to Australia before winning the playoff for third . In 1995 , they reached the final , before losing in extra time to hosts South Africa . They finished in fourth place in 1999 , after losing their semi @-@ final and then the third @-@ place playoff game . In 2003 , New Zealand were knocked out by hosts Australia in their semi @-@ final , before finishing third . The 2007 World Cup saw their worst tournament , being knocked out in the quarterfinals by the host nation France ; until this they were the only team to have reached the semifinals of every tournament . As a result of the poor performance in the 2007 World Cup the NZRU commissioned a 47 @-@ page report to detail the causes of the failure . The All Blacks have never lost a World Cup pool match , and have finished top of their pool in all seven tournaments . 
 New Zealand holds several World Cup records : most World Cup Matches ( 48 ) , most points in one match ( 145 versus Japan in 1995 ) , most cumulative points over all World Cups ( 2 @,@ 248 ) , most tries overall ( 306 ) , most conversions ( 222 ) and also the record for the most points scored in the first half of a knockout game at the Rugby World Cup ( 29 ) ( against France 2015 ) along with the largest knockout margin ( 49 ) in the same match . Several individual players also hold World Cup records ; Jonah Lomu for most World Cup tries ( 15 over two World Cups ) ( Currently tied with South Africa 's Bryan Habana ) , Marc Ellis with most tries in a match ( 6 versus Japan in 1995 ) , Grant Fox with most points in one tournament ( 126 in 1987 ) , and Simon Culhane with most points in a single game ( 45 versus Japan in 1995 ) . 
 = = = Tri Nations and The Rugby Championship = = = 
 New Zealand 's only annual tournament is a competition involving the Southern Hemisphere 's top national teams . From 1996 through 2011 , they competed in the Tri Nations against Australia and South Africa . In 2012 , Argentina joined the competition which was renamed The Rugby Championship . New Zealand 's record of eleven tournament wins ( the most recent in 2014 ) and 50 match wins is well ahead of the other teams ' records . The Bledisloe Cup is also contested between New Zealand and Australia , and the Freedom Cup between New Zealand and South Africa , as part of the Tri Nations and The Rugby Championship . 
 Updated : 8 August <unk> : <unk> 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 New Zealand 's 32 @-@ man squad for the 2016 June international test series against Wales . Tom Franklin and TJ <unk> are also included as temporary injury cover for Sam Whitelock and <unk> Kerr @-@ Barlow . 
 On 31 May 2016 , George Moala was called up to the squad as an injury replacement for Charlie <unk> . 
 All squad members play rugby in New Zealand . 
 Note : Caps correct 25 June 2016 
 = Herm = 
 Herm ( <unk> : <unk> ) is one of the Channel Islands and part of the Parish of St Peter Port in the Bailiwick of Guernsey . It is located in the English Channel , north @-@ west of France and south of England . It is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long and under 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) wide ; orientated north @-@ south , with several stretches of sand along its northern coast . The much larger island of Guernsey lies to the west and Jersey to the south @-@ east , and the smaller island of Jethou is just off the south @-@ west coast . 
 Herm was first discovered in the Mesolithic period , and the first settlers arrived in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages . Many tombs from that period remain today , the majority in the north of the island . The island was annexed to the Duchy of Normandy in 933 , but returned to the English Crown with the division of Normandy in 1204 . It was occupied by Germany in the Second World War and the scene of Operation Huckaback , but was largely bypassed . Herm is currently managed by Herm Island Ltd , formed by Starboard Settlement , who acquired Herm in 2008 , following fears during the sale of the island that the ' identity ' of the island was at threat . 
 Herm 's harbour is on its west coast . There are several buildings of note in the vicinity including the White House , St Tugual 's Chapel , Fisherman 's Cottage , " The Mermaid " pub and restaurant , and a small primary school with about eight children . During a busy summer season , up to 100 @,@ 000 tourists visit the island , arriving by one of the catamaran ferries operated by the Trident Charter Company . Cars are banned from the island , as are bicycles ; quad bikes and tractors used for staff and luggage transport respectively are allowed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient history to Middle Ages = = = 
 Herm was first found in the Mesolithic period ( between 10 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 B.C ) , when hunters were in search of food . In the Neolithic and Bronze ages , settlers arrived ; the remains of chamber tombs have been found on the island , and may be seen today ; specifically on the Common , and the Petit and Grand Monceau ; it has been suggested that the northern end of the island , i.e. the Common , was set apart for burials . After a three @-@ year project by the University of Durham , supported by specialists from the University of Cambridge , the University of Oxford , and the Guernsey museum , they stated that the " density of tombs suggests that the northern end of Herm may have been a place set apart for funerary activity " . 
 The first records of Herm 's inhabitants in historic times are from the 6th century , when the island became a centre of monastic activity ; the followers of Saint Tugual ( also called <unk> ) arrived , establishing Saint Tugual 's Chapel . In 709 , a storm washed away the strip of land which connected the island with Jethou . 
 An important moment in Herm 's political history was in 933 , when the Channel Islands were annexed to the Duchy of Normandy , they remained so until the division of Normandy in 1204 , when they became a Crown Dependency . In 1111 Brother Claude Panton was a hermit in " Erm " and in 1117 the then hermit , Brother Francis Franche Montague is recorded as living on " Erm " . After the annexation , Herm gradually lost its monastic inhabitants , and between 1570 and 1737 the governors of Guernsey used it as a hunting ground ; visiting to shoot , hunt , and fish . 
 = = = 19th century to the Second World War = = = 
 In 1810 , an inn was founded ; and during the Industrial Revolution , roads , paths , a harbour , accommodation , a forge , blacksmiths , a brewery , a bakery and a prison were built to cater for the largest number of inhabitants since prehistoric times . Most were quarrymen working in new granite quarries . Several quarries can still be seen at present , such as on the Common . When the Prince and Princess Blücher leased the island from the British government during the First World War , he introduced a colony of Red @-@ necked wallabies to the island , around 60 @-@ 70 in number . They increased up to the First World War , after which they decreased in numbers , and the remaining few were re @-@ captured and put in enclosures . 
 The German occupation of the Channel Islands during the Second World War essentially by @-@ passed Herm . The island was claimed on 20 July 1940 by the Third Reich , ; a few weeks after the arrival of German troops in Guernsey and Jersey , German soldiers landed on the island to shoot a propaganda film , The Invasion of the Isle of Wight . Herm 's sandy beaches were soon used for practising landings from barges , in preparation for the invasion of England , but otherwise the island saw little of the Germans beyond officers making trips to shoot rabbits . Herm had only a little German construction during the war ; a flak battery was placed on the island for a few weeks , and mines were placed in an area . Occasionally German soldiers would travel to Herm to cut wood for fuel . In April 1945 a German officer , Oberst von <unk> was exiled to Herm for not displaying sufficient loyalty to the Führer . 
 = = = = Operation Huckaback = = = = 
 Operation Huckaback was a British Second World War military operation that was originally designed to be a raid on Herm , Jethou and <unk> , but instead became only a raid on Herm undertaken on the night of 27 February 1943 , following an earlier attempt that had been aborted . Ten men of the Small Scale Raiding Force and No. 4 Commando under Captain Patrick Anthony Porteous VC landed 200 yards to the north @-@ west of Selle Rocque on a shingle beach and made several unsuccessful attempts to climb the cliff in front of them . Porteous finally managed to climb up the bed of a stream and pulled the others up with a rope . They later reported that they had found no sign of any Islanders or Germans ( who were supposed to be billeted near the harbour ) . They had failed to make contact with the few civilians on the island whose duties included looking after the sheep . 
 = = = Since 1945 = = = 
 In 1949 , the States of Guernsey bought Herm from the Crown because of the " unspoilt island idyll that could be enjoyed by locals and tourists alike " . One of the island 's most influential tenants was Major Peter Wood , who looked after the island from 1949 to 1980 with his wife . The island was run down when he arrived , with the manor hidden in undergrowth , the windows and roofs of the houses having been blown off by a sea mine drifting into the harbour shortly after their arrival , but they created a school , and restored St Tugual 's Chapel . Major Wood 's daughter Pennie Wood Heyworth and her husband Adrian succeeded them ; Major Wood died in 1998 . Their early efforts are recorded in Herm , Our Island Home , written by Major Wood 's wife Jenny Wood . 
 On 17 May 2008 , the BBC reported that the tenants had put the remaining 40 years of their lease up for sale , with an asking price of £ 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Within four days , there were over 50 potential buyers , which led to fears from residents that the island 's identity would be lost if it was bought by the wrong owner . In September 2008 it was announced that Starboard Settlement , a trust , had acquired the remainder of the lease for considerably less than the asking price . The trust formed a company based in Guernsey , Herm Island Ltd , to manage the island for the trustees . 
 In 2013 , negotiations for a 21 @-@ year extension to the lease broke down , with the tenant offering £ 440 @,@ 000 and the owner requesting £ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 plus improvements to infrastructure . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Herm is only 1 ½ miles long and less than half a mile wide . It is oriented so that its greatest length runs north – south . In the northern part of the island are the Le Petit Monceau and Le Grande Monceau hills . To the north of this is a common , leading to <unk> Beach on the northern coast , with Oyster Point in the northwestern corner and La Pointe du <unk> or Alderney Point at the northeastern corner . To the east of the common is Shell Beach and to the west is The Bear 's Beach , leading down to the harbour . Half of the coastline of the northern part of the island is surrounded by sandy beaches ; the southern half is rocky . Much of Herm 's bedrock is granite . In 2008 , Adrian Heyworth , who was at the time the island 's tenant , said that two or three metres of sand were being lost annually at Alderney Point . 
 Off the northwestern coast of Herm is the islet of Le Plat <unk> , and beyond that <unk> , which like Herm belongs to Guernsey . In Belvoir Bay on the eastern side of the island are the islets of <unk> , situated off Frenchman 's Point which is to the northeast of the manor village , and <unk> . To the south of this off the southeastern coast is Puffin Bay , which contains the islet of <unk> near the coast and the islet of Selle Rocque further out to the south . The far southwestern point of the island is Point <unk> , and Bishop 's Cove is just to the north of this . North of the cove and south along the beach from the harbour and White House are the <unk> Steps , with a quarry and cottage of the same name in the vicinity . The <unk> and <unk> reefs are offshore here . <unk> , along known as Rat 's Island , lies about 250 metres ( 820 ft ) off the western coast between Fisherman 's Beach and The Bear 's Beach , to the north of the harbour , linked by a low causeway from the beach . 
 The isle of Jethou is around three @-@ quarters of a mile to the southwest beyond Point <unk> . It is possible that in AD 709 a storm washed away the strip of land that connected Jethou to Herm . About 215 metres ( 705 ft ) off the northern coast of Jethou is the islet of <unk> , which measures about 212 metres ( 696 ft ) by 168 metres ( 551 ft ) , with an area of less than three hectares . To the west , between Herm and Guernsey , lies the channel Little Roussel ( Petit <unk> ) ; between Herm and Sark , to the east , lies the Big Roussel ( Grand <unk> ) . <unk> Tower , a Victorian @-@ era fortification , is in the Little Roussel between Herm and St Peter Port . The tower was created by Thomas Charles de Putron ( 1806 – 1869 ) using granite from Herm between 1854 and 1856 . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Herm is part of the St Peter Port parish of Guernsey but is not part of any canton . It belongs to the Electoral District of Saint Peter Port South . It is rented out to various <unk> and , unlike the largely autonomous islands of Sark and Alderney within the Bailiwick , Herm is administered entirely by the States of Guernsey . 
 Cars and bicycles are banned from Herm , in order to keep " peace and tranquility " . However , Herm does allow quad bikes and tractors for staff and luggage transport respectively . 
 = = Economy and services = = 
 Tourism is Herm 's main source of income . During a busy summer season , up to 100 @,@ 000 tourists visit the island , arriving by one of the Travel Trident catamaran ferries operated by the Trident Charter Company . Money is also made from vegetable growing , livestock and the occasional issue of stamps . The residents in Herm are workers on the island and their families . 
 There are three volunteer Special Constables resident on the island , trained and supervised by the States of Guernsey Police Service . On Bank Holidays they are augmented by a visiting full @-@ time Constable from Guernsey . Crime rates on the island are low . 
 There are no medical facilities on Herm and no resident doctor . A small team of first <unk> and community first responders is maintained amongst the resident population , and receives regular training from the Guernsey Ambulance and Rescue Service , a private company operating on a charitable basis under the umbrella of the Venerable Order of Saint John . Medical evacuation to hospital in Guernsey , where necessary , is achieved by means of the ambulance launch ' Flying Christine III ' operated by the Guernsey Ambulance and Rescue Service . 
 A voluntary fire service operates on the island . Herm Fire Brigade operates a tractor @-@ hauled fire tender with a hose @-@ reel , a pump , a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ litre water tank , and basic fire @-@ fighting equipment which they use while waiting for assistance from the Guernsey Fire Brigade , who also provide the Herm volunteers with training and support . 
 = = Notable landmarks = = 
 The nondenominational St Tugual 's Chapel dates to the 11th century , but it is believed that there was a place of worship on Herm as far back as the 6th century , although it hasn 't been confirmed whether the chapel was founded by St Tugual himself or his followers at a later date . The current building is Norman and appears to have been a monastery during medieval times . Of particular note is its stained glass windows featuring Noah 's Ark and Guernsey cows and Jesus talking to the fisherman at Herm harbour . In 2010 and 2011 , the chapel was closed for restoration work . 
 Other buildings on the island include the White House hotel , " The Mermaid " pub and restaurant , and 20 self @-@ catering cottages . The most notable cottages are Fisherman 's Cottage , north of the harbour , and Manor Cottage . There is an obelisk on The Common , in the north of the island . The White House has no clocks , televisions , or phones , which is described as " part of its charm " , and has a customer return rate of 70 % ( i.e. each year , 70 % of customers have been before ) . Herm has no consecrated religious buildings or resident professional clergy , but visiting clergy conducts non @-@ denominational weekly services during the summer months , and monthly services , led by local lay people , are held during the winter . 
 Sculptor Antony Gormley had a sculpture installed on Herm in 2010 , originally planned to be removed after one year , but it received such a positive reception that it was kept for two years , and removed in 2012 . The statue was number XI ( 11 ) of the Another Time series . 
 = = Education and culture = = 
 A number of French / Norman placenames remain , from the period when the island was in the jurisdiction of the Duchy of Normandy . The Herm Island map , published by the tenant of Herm , states that main place names , including the island name itself , have unclear origins , although there is an unofficial Anglicisation of names ; for example , La Pointe du <unk> was changed to " Alderney Point " . The primary present language on Herm is English . 
 Herm has one primary school , with around eight pupils ; they are taught by a teacher who travels from Guernsey daily . Children over nine are schooled in Guernsey , usually as boarders . 
 Herm has won Britain in Bloom categories several times : in 2002 , 2008 , and 2012 , Herm won the Britain in Bloom Gold Award . The author , Compton Mackenzie , who was the island tenant 1920 @-@ 23 , represented it in Fairy Gold , albeit in a fictional representation . 
 The northern part of the island was recognised in 2016 as an area of international environmental importance under the Ramsar Convention . 
 = Turnin Me On = 
 " Turnin Me On " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Keri Hilson , taken from her debut album , In a Perfect World .... The song features American rapper Lil Wayne who co @-@ wrote the song alongside Hilson and Zachary Anson Wallace . Production credits are shared between Danja and Polow da Don , who also co @-@ wrote the song . Following the minimal chart success of Hilson 's worldwide lead single " Energy " in the United States , international markets received " Return the Favor " , while " Turnin Me On " was released as the third single in the US . 
 After experimenting with more pop @-@ oriented music in her previous mentioned songs , Hilson opted for a more urban , hip @-@ hop flavored sound for the song , due her to wanting to keep to her roots . While noting her less than stellar vocals on the track , critics praised Hilson 's sassiness and attitude on the track and complimented Lil Wayne 's verse , which has been called the best surprise rap since Lisa " Left Eye " Lopes on TLC 's " Waterfalls . " The song 's accompanying music video features intricate Aaliyah and " Soldier " -esque choreography , dance scenes such as the Bird Walk , and Hilson being flaunted by men . The scenes are intercut with mirror scenes with younger kids . 
 The song was a commercial success in the United States , reaching number fifteen on the Billboard Hot 100 , whilst reaching two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Turnin Me On " received two nominations at the 2009 BET Awards , and a " Song of the Year " nomination at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards . A leaked remix of the song caused controversy , with rumors that Hilson was taking shots at fellow female R & B singers Beyoncé Knowles and Ciara , however Hilson has fervently denied the rumors that it was a diss . Hilson performed the song as a part of a medley at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards and BET Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 2008 , Rap @-@ Up originally reported the song as " Turn Off " , while Hilson was playing it at Interscope @-@ Geffen @-@ A & M Records ' second annual " Creme of the Crop " post @-@ BET Awards dinner on June 25 , 2008 . Then an unmastered version of " Turn Off " was leaked online in September 2008 . After selecting the predominantly pop @-@ sounding " Energy " and " Return the Favor " , Hilson selected " Turnin Me On " as In a Perfect World ... ' s third single . When asked in an interview with That Grape Juice if choosing the song was a conscious effort , since the song had a different sound than the previous singles , Hilson responded , 
 " Absolutely ! I mean , there ’ s another side of me . I ’ m from Decatur , Georgia and that is a predominantly black neighbourhood with a lot of lower @-@ class and some middle @-@ class neighbourhoods . I guess that is the song that probably properly describes the type of girl I am , in relation to where I ’ m from . So yeah , it was definitely a conscious effort to make sure that I stay close to home on some records . " 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 The song is a futuristic @-@ esque R & B , synth @-@ driven , bass @-@ heavy urban song , featuring " bouncy " horn samples . Written in the key of C minor the song is in a " moderate R & B groove " . It is set in common time and Hilson 's vocals span from the low note of G3 to the high note of C5 " " Turnin Me On " is lyrically about physical attraction and composed in a hard @-@ edged tone . " MTV Buzzworthy described the song " as one @-@ part Rihanna ' Umbrella ' and two parts Beyoncé ' Ring the Alarm ' " 
 Naming it a standout track from In a Perfect World ... Andy Kellman of Allmusic called the song a " coquettish trunk rattler . " Barry Walters of Spin complimented Hilson 's " sassiness " on the song which she " wore well . " MTV Buzzworthy called the Wayne 's verse " the best surprise rap since Lisa ' Left Eye ' Lopes ' verse in TLC 's ' Waterfalls . ' " J.K. Glei of Cincinnati Metromix called the track " playful " and said the track was easily the album 's standout , commenting that Lil Wayne 's cameo " steals the show . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine commended the song , calling it " tight . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said called the song " slinky " and said , " the busyness coheres , with Ms. Hilson neatly gliding among the song ’ s many layers . And she may need the crutch ; she is a careful , slight singer . " Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times called the song " impeccably arranged . " After watching the video , a writer for BET Sound Off said after it seemed Hilson and her label were losing faith , that " out of nowhere , Keri got her ish together " , and said , " I ’ m sure she ’ ll regain the steam she lost during her first two singles . " Rap @-@ Up called " Turnin Me On " a standout track from In a Perfect World .... The song received several accolades , as it was nominated for " Viewers ' Choice " and " Best Collaboration " at the 2009 BET Awards . Additionally it was nominated for " Song of the Year " at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the issue date of January 3 , 2010 , " Turnin Me On " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number ninety . In its sixth week on the chart , it reached number thirty @-@ five , giving Hilson her second top forty hit at a solo or featured artist . It later reached number fifteen , where it spent two weeks , becoming Hilson 's biggest hit until the top five hit , " Knock You Down . " Overall , the song had a twenty @-@ two week stint on the Hot 100 . Additionally it charted at twenty @-@ eight on the now defunct Pop 100 , and twenty @-@ five on the Pop Songs chart , reaching the peak after seven weeks . On the week of February 28 , 2009 in its eighteenth week on the chart , it peaked at two on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It debuted at number eighty in Canada , where it peaked , spending a total of four weeks on the Canadian Hot 100 . The song peaked and debuted at twenty @-@ nine on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It fell to thirty @-@ three the following week , and falling off the next week , completing a two @-@ week stint on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the single was directed by Erik White and shot in Atlanta , Georgia . It premiered on November 19 , 2008 , two weeks before the single was released for airplay or download . It was featured on E ! News on December 15 , 2008 . Rich Boy , Polow da Don , and Leah LaBelle make cameos in the clip . While it was reported that T.I. would appear in the video , a doppelgänger does instead . The video is set almost entirely behind white and black backdrops , besides one club scene . <unk> choreography such as the Bird Walk , which according to MTV Buzzworthy is Aaliyah @-@ style choreography , while being flaunted by shirtless , muscular men and donning " on " and " off " finger rings . BET Sound Off noted that some of the choreography was similar to Destiny 's Child 's " Soldier . " As Hilson continues to be flaunted and performs additional choreography , which includes <unk> @-@ like moves , the scenes are interspersed with younger kids re @-@ enacting the same scenes . Hilson appears alongside a speaker and a group of men dancing before the video cuts to Wayne . In this scene the rapper delivers his verse alongside Hilson in front of a black backdrop and on a couch . Near the end the younger girls and boys are shown performing Hilson and her dancers ' moves , as the latter also continue to be flaunted by men . The video ends with Hilson being turned off by men at a club , with women in the club wearing " off " earrings like on Hilson 's fingers . 
 MTV Buzzworthy said , " give it up for her sleek biker chick @-@ meets @-@ Park @-@ Slope wardrobe and feel free to ogle / drool over the parade of shirtless dudes who look like they jumped off the cover of Abs Weekly magazine . " The review also complimented " rapper / pants @-@ dropper <unk> Lil Wayne " who helped " push her chest @-@ <unk> ' vid into must @-@ see territory . " Although commenting it a " Soldier " knock @-@ off , BET Sound Off blog said , " the visual is pretty entertaining . " Tracey Ford of AOL Boombox said , " the diva makes it perfectly clear how easy it is to turn a woman on and off . " The video ranked at number two on BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In promoting her album , Hilson performed the song on February 2 , 2009 on 106 & Park . Hilson performed the song on March 17 , 2009 on Dogg After Dark . Lil Wayne joined her to perform the song with " Energy " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! " Turnin Me On " was performed by Hilson at BET 's Spring Bling 2009 , and at BET 's Rip the Runway 2009 . She performed the song as part of medleys at the 2009 BET Awards as well as the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 The official remix of the song features new verses from Hilson & Lil Wayne and an additional verse & intro by R & B singer T @-@ Pain . It was leaked on March 3 , 2009 . The leaked version of the official remix also features background vocals by Polow da Don , which was removed on the final version . The final version of the remix can be found Atlanta DJ Greg Street 's mixtape , " <unk> Worldwide " . 
 Several remixes for the song were released . Busta Rhymes is featured on one remix , to which BET Sound Off preferred to the original version , commenting , " Not that I don ’ t appreciate Keri and Weezy ’ s version because it ’ s actually a snazzy lil ditty , but Busta ’ s ambiance over Polow ’ s sound scape gives me a different vibe , that ' stand on your desk and mean mug everyone in your office who tells you to turn down your music ' vibe . " In January 2010 , a remix featuring T.I. was released . A MSTRKRFT remix of the original version was released on iTunes . 
 = = = Diss controversy = = = 
 On March 3 , 2009 , a remix version of the song , entitled " Turnin ' Me Off " , featuring a new verses from Hilson , Lil Wayne , and an additional by T @-@ Pain surfaced online . In the remix , Hilson takes jabs at two unnamed female entertainers . Referred to as " the remix heard round the industry " , media rumored that Hilson was taking shots at Beyoncé Knowles and Ciara , in lines like " You can dance , she can sing but need to move it to the left .. " , possibly referencing Ciara 's acclaimed dancing ability , and Beyoncé 's hit " Irreplaceable . " The lyrics also point at other possible shots taken toward the artists such as Hilson stating one needs to " go sit down and have babies " and points out several songs written for the other . A BET columnist wrote , " critics couldn 't fathom the purpose or reasoning behind the malicious gesture " , while a writer for BET Sound Off noted that if Hilson or her management intended to engage in this , that it would be " career suicide . " 
 However in an interview with Hard Knock TV , Hilson denied the claims that the remix was directed at dissing Knowles or Ciara . According to Hilson , Polow da Don gave her the idea to do a " fiery " record . Although she said she was not retracting anything in the song , calling her response a " blanket statement " she said she was not going to feel some sort of way about how other people interpret , and that blatantly dissing anyone was not the energy behind the record . Hilson commented she wanted to address the haters , and all the media speculation about the remarks was something they did not intend to accomplish with the song . She also addressed that the release of the song was not an intentional leak , stating most remixes are meant to be done when a record is hot , and although admitting that while " Turnin Me On " was not " a number one record " , the remix was done three months prior . 
 While calling into <unk> during their interview with Ciara and Polow da Don , Hilson said , 
 " I just want to tell Ciara it ’ s not about you . People are just reading way too far into it . People take things and make it what they want it to be . It wasn ’ t taking shots at nobody . " [ sic ] I just want to let Atlanta know and Ciara know that this is a true leak . I did , and I don 't know if Polow said this on the radio , but I did fight this coming out . I didn 't want this coming out because we played it for people when I did it and that 's what people said it was about ; they started throwing out names . We were like ' No , it 's not about that ' and we tried to let them know what it was really about . But the fact that people brought back names , it was like ok , that wasn 't the reaction we need , so I told Polow , ' let 's not do this and he agreed " . 
 Ciara happened to call in during the time period and said she was happy of where Hilson was at in her career , to which Hilson responded the same , saying how proud she was , and " watching her from ground zero . " Hilson went on to state she was not jealous of anyone 's career , noting how all female R & B artists are the same , pointing out that " Keyshia ’ s on my album . I ’ ve worked with Ciara many times . I ’ m a fan of Beyoncé ’ s . " When asked exactly who the song is about , Hilson said the targets knew who they were , responding , " It ’ s anybody that ever tried to take me down and didn ’ t want to see me succeed . I ’ m not gonna call their names because I feel I ’ ve addressed it . " She further clarified , commenting " I will say this , my journey has been 12 years long and there have been many people , specifically girls , and it really just isn 't one person , it 's been a lot of people . " 
 Rumors circulated once again when Ciara released a viral video " Basic Instinct ( U Got Me ) " to kick off promotion for her album of the same name . Ciara addressed claims that remarks in the song were referring to Hilson in an interview with Rap @-@ Up , stating that the song was dedicated to her haters , gave her a chance to express herself , and was about trusting her first instinct on everything . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Keri Hilson , Dwayne Carter , Jamal Jones , Zachary Anson Wallace 
 Production - Polow da Don , Danja ( additional ) 
 Vocal arrangement and production - Keri Hilson 
 Recording - Tony <unk> , Marcella Araica , <unk> Schweitzer 
 Mixing - Marcella Araica 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 1999 – 2000 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1999 – 2000 South @-@ West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone season was the first on record in which two storms – Leon – Eline and Hudah – struck Mozambique at tropical cyclone intensity , or with maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The most notable storm of the season was Eline , which was the longest @-@ lasting storm on record in the basin . It lasted for 29 days while traversing the southern Indian Ocean , making the strongest landfall in decades along eastern Madagascar in late February . The storm was the first in a series of three storms that struck the country in early 2000 , along with Gloria in March and Hudah in April . Collectively , the three storms killed at least 316 people . The season started on November 1 , 1999 , and ended for most of the basin on April 30 , 2000 ; for Mauritius and the Seychelles , the season continued until May 15 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the basin ; 
 Despite the destructive nature of the season , it began later than usual . Cyclone Astride originated toward the end of December , bringing rainfall and gusty winds to northern Madagascar while in the region . In January , cyclones Babiola and Connie both formed east of Madagascar and took southerly tracks . Connie passed near Réunion island , producing 1 @,@ 752 mm ( 69 @.@ 0 in ) of rainfall in the mountainous peaks and killing two people . Eline , the longest lasting storm of the season , struck Mozambique while the country was experiencing its worst flooding in 50 years , collectively causing around 700 deaths and about $ 500 million in damage . The storm also killed 12 people in Zimbabwe and 21 in South Africa . Just two weeks after Eline struck Madagascar , Tropical Storm Gloria affected the same general region , bringing additional deaths and damage . Cyclone Hudah in April was the strongest storm of the season , reaching peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . It caused three deaths in Mozambique , although its effects were worse in Madagascar , where there were 111 deaths . The final storm of the season was Tropical Storm Innocente , which dissipated on April 24 . In addition to the named storms , there were four unnamed tropical disturbances or storms , as well as one subtropical cyclone that formed in the southern Mozambique Channel . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin during the season . The agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , which utilized the continuous satellite imagery in the basin since May 1998 . Wind estimates were sustained over 10 minutes , to be converted to 1 ‑ minute winds by dividing by 0 @.@ 88 , as compared to a divisor of 0 @.@ 80 in previous years . Warnings on tropical cyclones in the region were from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center – a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force – also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the region . Beginning this season , the MFR changed their method for labeling tropical disturbances , classifying them sequentially by number . In previous years , the agency labeled disturbances by letter and number of the subsequent unnamed storm . 
 The season began later than usual , the third consecutive one to do so . There were no indications of tropical cyclogenesis before the middle of December , putting the season among the latest 20 % since 1967 in terms of seasons ' first storms . On December 26 , the MFR utilized the QuikSCAT satellite for the first time in the basin to assess a storm 's intensity . During the season , 14 tropical disturbances formed , which is near average , and they tended to last longer than normal . Eleven of these disturbances became tropical depressions , of which nine attained gale force winds and were named . In addition , four storms reached tropical cyclone intensity , or 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The 9 named storms and 4 tropical cyclones is also the basin average for each category in a given year . There were 61 days in which a storm was active , greater than the median of 48 and more than double than the previous season . In general , storms formed south of 10 ° S , with the exception of the first storm Astride , and most storms generally tracked east to west due to a strong ridge east of Madagascar . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Astride = = = 
 On December 23 , a circulation with accompanying convection became evident about 400 km ( 250 mi ) southeast of Diego Garcia , becoming a tropical disturbance . While moving to the south , the thunderstorms organized more , aided by low wind shear , good outflow , warm waters , and its position beneath an anticyclone . Curving west @-@ southwestward due to a ridge to the south , the system intensified into a tropical depression and later Tropical Storm Astride on December 25 . That day , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 03S . The storm developed a large area of convection , prompting the MFR to upgrade it to a severe tropical storm on December 26 , estimating 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . On December 27 , the JTWC upgraded Astride to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane due to the appearance of an eye feature , estimating 1 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Later that day , the storm weakened unexpectedly , perhaps related to wind shear from a trough to the south . The convection deteriorated markedly , and the weakening storm turned more to the west @-@ northwest on December 29 due to a weaker ridge . Convection reorganized slightly , although it was dislocated from the center . Early on December 30 , the storm passed about 70 km ( 45 mi ) northeast of Tromelin Island . Curving back to the west , Astride struck northeastern Madagascar between Vohemar and Antsiranana on December 31 as a minimal tropical storm . It emerged into the Mozambique Channel as a tropical depression , and despite forecasts to the contrary , it reintensified into a tropical storm before passing near Mayotte on January 2 . Early the next day , Astride weakened back to tropical depression status before moving ashore eastern Mozambique near Pemba , dissipating soon after . 
 On Tromelin , Astride brought strong winds , including 10 ‑ minute sustained winds of 101 km / h ( 63 mph ) and gusts to 127 km / h ( 79 mph ) . No damage was reported in Madagascar during the storm 's passage there . When Astride passed just south of Mayotte , it brought gusts to 76 km / h ( 47 mph ) , strong enough to knock over some banana trees and to destroy a stone house . The storm also dropped 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall over 24 hours , including 41 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in one hour . Heavy rainfall accompanied Astride 's final landfall , penetrating as far inland as Malawi . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Babiola = = = 
 Toward the beginning of January , the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) remained active across much of the basin , with low pressure and widespread thunderstorms . One such area persisted southeast of Diego Garcia and organized sufficiently to be classified as a tropical disturbance on January 3 . That day , the JTWC issued the first of three tropical cyclone formation alerts , noting the increase in convection . The system moved to the northeast along the southeastern edge of a ridge near the equator , but turned back to the southwest on January 5 . That day , convection increased over the center , after having previously been dislocated due to wind shear . Late on January 5 , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 02S , and on the next day , the MFR upgraded the system to Tropical Storm Babiola . The storm accelerated to the southwest and continued to intensity . An irregular eye formed on January 8 , prompting the MFR to upgrade Babiola to tropical cyclone status . The outflow and the eye became more pronounced after further strengthening , and the cyclone attained peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) on January 9 . The JTWC , by contrast , estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . 
 Around the time of peak intensity , Babiola began turning more to the south due to an approaching trough . Late on January 9 , the cyclone passed about 400 km ( 250 mi ) east of Rodrigues . Increased shear weakened the eyewall and convection , and Babiola weakened below cyclone status on January 11 . Early the next day , the JTWC discontinued advisories as the storm was beginning to become extratropical . The MFR followed suit later on January 12 , although the agency continued to track Babiola . The storm shifted south @-@ southwestward on January 13 before resuming its southeast trajectory , influenced by a ridge to the south . On January 14 , the remnants of Babiola passed just west of Île Amsterdam , where gusts reached 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) . Later that day , the storm merged with the trough that had originally turned it to the southeast . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Connie = = = 
 An area of thunderstorms formed on January 22 east of the northern tip of Madagascar , organizing into a tropical disturbance three days later . By late on January 25 , the MFR upgraded the system to Tropical Storm Connie , and on the same day the JTWC initiated advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 08S . With favorable conditions , Connie gradually organized while initially stationary , later beginning a steady southeast motion on January 26 . The JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane on January 27 , around the same time that the MFR upgraded Connie to tropical cyclone status . The storm 's eye became well @-@ defined as the winds increased , and the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) on January 28 ; on the same day , the JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . Increased shear weakened the storm as it curved southwestward , and late on January 29 Connie passed about 130 km ( 80 mi ) northwest of Réunion . The storm turned to the southeast again and became extratropical on February 1 , dissipating the next day . 
 While passing northwest of Mauritius , the outer fringes of Connie brought heavy rains peaking at 647 mm ( 25 @.@ 5 in ) over the span of six days , or equivalent to a month 's worth of precipitation . These rains helped relieve extreme drought conditions . The storm also produced gusts of 134 km / h ( 83 mph ) , and one person died after falling off his roof . The storm also brought heavy rainfall to Réunion , totaling 1 @,@ 752 mm ( 69 @.@ 0 in ) , of which 1 @,@ 296 mm ( 51 @.@ 0 in ) occurred in over 24 hours . Wind gusts there reached 155 km / h ( 95 mph ) in <unk> France . Many roads across the island were damaged , and about 40 @,@ 000 people lost power , while more than 100 homes were destroyed . Two persons were killed , and 600 people were left homeless . Although the agriculture sector suffered the most significant damages , overall damage was minor . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Damienne = = = 
 The same monsoon trough that spawned Connie also produced an area of convection southeast of Diego Garcia on January 28 . The circulation slowly organized , and the MFR classified it as a tropical disturbance on January 30 . A nearby trough steered the system southeastward initially and later to the southwest . On January 31 , the system became a tropical depression , and later Moderate Tropical Storm Damienne the next day , reaching peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Also on February 1 , the JTWC initiated warnings on Tropical Cyclone 10S , which estimated 1 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Increased wind shear removed the convection on February 2 , causing marked weakening , and prompting the JTWC to discontinue advisories that day . This was despite forecasts of strengthening to near tropical cyclone status . As a weak tropical disturbance , Damienne turned to a rapid westward motion , passing north of Rodrigues and Tromelin . The circulation dissipated on February 7 off the northeast coast of Madagascar . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Leon – Eline = = = 
 On February 1 , a low @-@ pressure area formed within the monsoon trough to the south of Indonesia , which would eventually become Tropical Cyclone Leon in the Australian basin , as well as Tropical Cyclone 11S according to JTWC . The storm tracked westward across much of the Indian Ocean , fluctuating in strength due to changes in the atmosphere . After crossing 90 ° E , the MFR began tracking the system as Tropical Storm Eline on February 8 . The storm continued westward across the Indian Ocean and intensified greatly as it approached the east coast of Madagascar . Late on February 17 , Eline made landfall near Mahanoro with 10 ‑ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , making it the strongest storm to hit the country in several decades . The storm rapidly weakened over land , but restrengthened in the Mozambique Channel to reach peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . On February 22 , Eline made landfall about 80 km ( 50 mi ) south of Beira , Mozambique near peak intensity and quickly weakened over land . The well @-@ defined circulation moved across southern African , finally dissipating over eastern Namibia on February 29 . Throughout its duration , Leon – Eline lasted 29 days , a record longevity for a storm in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . The track was over 11 @,@ 000 km ( 6 @,@ 800 mi ) , or about 25 % of the Earth 's circumference . 
 Eline struck while Madagascar was in the midst of a cholera epidemic that had killed over 1 @,@ 000 people . The storm directly killed at least 64 people in Madagascar , although Tropical Storm Gloria struck shortly thereafter , compounding upon the damage and making it difficult to discern the individual damage totals . Damage from Eline was estimated at US $ 9 million . Collectively the two storms killed 205 people in the country , destroyed about half of the rice harvest , and left 10 @,@ 000 homeless . In the region around Vatomandry , where Eline made landfall , 65 % of houses were damaged , 90 % of crops were lost , and 75 % of health facilities were wrecked . 
 Before Eline struck Mozambique , the worst floods since 1951 had affected the nation since January , killing about 150 people . The additional rainfall and flooding from Eline created the country 's worst natural disaster in a century . The combined effects destroyed over 250 @,@ 000 ha ( 620 @,@ 000 acres ) of crop fields and killed 40 @,@ 000 cattle . Eline 's passage disrupted ongoing relief efforts , with the port in Beira blocked for two weeks due to five sunken ships . High levels along the Limpopo River isolated the town of Xai @-@ Xai , with water levels along the river reaching as high as 11 m ( 36 ft ) above normal in some areas , as well as 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) wide . A dam broke along the river , flooding the town of Chokwe in the middle of the night and trapping several unprepared residents . About 55 people drowned in Sofala Province after rescue helicopters arrived too late to save them . Around 20 @,@ 000 people in the capital city of Maputo lost their homes . In addition to the floods , strong winds blew away many roofs and some entire houses made of mud . The combined effects of the preceding floods and Eline left about 300 @,@ 000 people homeless , about 700 deaths , and damage estimated at $ 500 million ( 2000 USD ) . The cyclone and the floods disrupted much of the economic progress Mozambique had made in the 1990s since the end of its civil war . 
 Elsewhere in southern Africa , Eline brought strong winds and heavy rainfall when it crossed into eastern Zimbabwe , due to maintaining a well @-@ defined structure . Rivers overflowed their banks in the country , damaging crops and houses while leaving 15 @,@ 000 people homeless . The storm killed 12 people in the country . Flooding from the storm extended southward into Swaziland and South Africa . In the latter country , Eline dropped 503 mm ( 19 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall in Levubu over three days , causing the Limpopo River to reach its highest level in 15 years . Officials opened dams along the Limpopo River to prevent structural damage , which caused higher levels along the river to the east . At least 21 people died in the country , and about 80 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , forcing many people into churches and schools . Damage in Limpopo Province alone was estimated at $ 300 million ( USD ) . To the north , Eline dropped about 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall in southern Malawi , while gusty winds caused a power outage in Blantyre . Farther west , rainfall rates of 50 – 100 mm ( 2 – 4 in ) were also reported in Botswana . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Felicia = = = 
 While Eline was making landfall on Madagascar , another area of convection formed to its east on February 17 within the ITCZ . Its structure was similar to a monsoon depression , due to a large circulation with weak winds near the center . However , it was organized enough to be classified as a tropical disturbance on February 18 to the southeast of Diego Garcia . It moved southeastward with increasing convection , prompting the Mauritius Meteorological Service to name it Felicia while still as a tropical depression on February 20 . The convection however remained disorganized , and there were several small circulations within the broad gyre . After turning to the southwest due to a nearby trough , Felicia 's circulation became more compact , as evidenced by a QuikSCAT pass . Outflow increased as wind shear decreased , and Felicia became a moderate tropical storm on February 21 . On the same day , the JTWC initiated advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 12S . 
 Late on February 22 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , while the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . This was based on a 100 km ( 60 mi ) wide eye feature that had developed in the storm 's center . Around the time of peak intensity , Felicia passed about 500 km ( 310 mi ) southeast of Rodrigues . The interaction of the trough and a ridge to the east increased wind shear , causing the storm to weaken . On February 24 , the storm became extratropical while still maintaining a well @-@ defined circulation . It slowed and looped back to the northwest due to a ridge to the south , gradually becoming less defined and dissipating on February 26 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Gloria = = = 
 On February 27 , a circulation formed within the monsoon trough between Diego Garcia and St. Brandon , displaced due to wind shear , but organized enough for the MFR to track it as Tropical Disturbance 8 . The shear gradually decreased , allowing the thunderstorms to organize as it moved westward . On February 28 , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 15S , and on February 29 the MFR upgraded it to tropical depression status . The depression turned west @-@ northwestward before rounding a ridge and turning to the southwest . The thunderstorms organized into a central dense overcast on March 1 , prompting the MFR to upgrade it to Moderate Tropical Storm Gloria only 150 km ( 95 mi ) from the northeast coast of Madagascar . Gloria continued quickly to the southwest , gradually intensifying and developing an eye feature ; on that basis , the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) , or severe tropical storm status , by the time it made landfall 10 km ( 6 mi ) north of Sambava . Operationally , the JTWC upgraded Gloria to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , with 1 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , although the agency downgraded the storm to the same peak as the MFR . The structure initially remained well @-@ defined , although the circulation became difficult to locate as it progressed through the country . On March 4 , the system exited Madagascar into the Mozambique Channel with scattered thunderstorms slowly reforming . On the next day , the JTWC discontinued advisories , although the MFR continued monitoring the system , labeling it as a tropical disturbance on March 8 . Later that day , Gloria made landfall near Inhambane in southeastern Mozambique before turning to a southward drift , dissipating on March 10 . 
 As a developing disturbance , Gloria produced winds approaching gale @-@ force on St. Brandon . Similar conditions were reported on Tromelin . When Gloria struck Madagascar , it produced sustained winds of 72 km / h ( 45 mph ) at Antalaha , about 70 km ( 45 mi ) south of Sambava . The storm brought heavy rainfall , with Mananjary reporting a two ‑ day total of 427 mm ( 16 @.@ 8 in ) . The rains from Gloria occurred less than two weeks after Cyclone Leon – Eline struck the country , bringing additional flooding , landslides , and damage . In Sambava , near where Gloria moved ashore , the storm killed 18 people , destroyed hundreds of homes , and damaged a road connecting the area to the capital of Madagascar , Antananarivo . Farther inland , the cyclone killed 40 people at Andapa . Overall , Gloria killed at least 66 people , although the exact toll was initially unknown due to disrupted communications . Before Gloria emerged into the Mozambique Channel , various news outlets noted the potential for the storm to affect storm @-@ ravaged Mozambique . However , minimal rainfall accompanied Gloria 's final landfall . The rains were enough to delay flights for a day , which were transporting relief aid following Eline 's devastating landfall in Mozambique . 
 = = = Very Intense Tropical Cyclone Hudah = = = 
 A tropical low formed in the Australian basin on March 24 , moving westward due to a strong subtropical ridge to the south . Despite having intensified enough , the Bureau of Meteorology did not name the system , and on March 25 the system crossed into the South @-@ West Indian Ocean , whereupon it was named Hudah . An eye formed , and the storm intensified into a tropical cyclone on March 27 well to the southeast of Diego Garcia . The structure fluctuated due to dry air , although Hudah was able to intensify steadily on March 31 after conditions became more favorable . The next day , the MFR upgraded it to a very intense tropical cyclone , estimating peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) . By contrast , the JTWC estimated 1 ‑ minute winds of 235 km / h ( 145 mph ) . Cyclone Hudah maintained peak winds until making landfall just southeast of Antalaha , Madagascar on April 2 . It weakened greatly over land , but like Eline it re @-@ intensified over the Mozambique Channel . It re @-@ attained tropical cyclone status on April 5 and reached 10 ‑ minute winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) by the time it made landfall on Mozambique near Pebane , Mozambique on April 8 . It dissipated by the next day . 
 While in the vicinity , Hudah brought moderate winds to Rodrigues , St. Brandon , and Tromelin . The cyclone affected the same parts of Madagascar that were previously impacted by Eline and Gloria . Waves reached at least 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height along the coast . The storm was considered the worst to affect the Antalaha region in 20 years , where 90 % of homes were destroyed . It was estimated that the storm left at least 100 @,@ 000 people homeless in Madagascar , and there were 111 deaths . In Mozambique , damage was much less than expected , and the storm affected areas farther north in the country than where Eline struck . Heavy rainfall occurred along the coast , but was insufficient to cause river flooding . Strong winds damaged roofs and downed trees , mostly around Pebane , and the storm killed three people . 
 = = = Subtropical Depression 13 = = = 
 On April 6 , a cold front exited the southeast coast of Africa into the Mozambique Channel , producing a small circulation on the next day southeast of Mozambique . On April 7 , the system organized into Subtropical Depression 13 and gradually separated from the dissipating cold front . A ridge to the south steered the depression northward as the system became better defined . However , persistent wind shear initially prevented convection from organizing over the center . On April 9 , the depression turned northwestward toward Mozambique as thunderstorms increased , aided by a decrease in wind shear through a shift in the jet stream . The center came very close to the Mozambique coast near Inhambane . Due to the small radius of maximum winds , the coastline was spared from strong gusts , although the system dropped 93 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 69 in ) of rainfall in Inhambane over 48 hours . 
 The storm turned toward the east on April 11 away from land . Convection organized thereafter into an eye feature , but was weaker than thunderstorms in typical tropical cyclones , resulting in its subtropical classification . The MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) on April 12 , noting that the system should have been named , but also that its " structure has had no recent analogue in [ the basin ] . " Meanwhile , the JTWC issued three tropical cyclone formation alerts , but never issued advisories . An increase in wind shear deteriorated the eye feature and the convection , promptly causing weakening . On April 15 , the circulation dissipated off the southwest coast of Madagascar . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Innocente = = = 
 The final storm of the year had its origins in the Australian basin . An area of convection persisted on April 8 to the southwest of Indonesia , developing a distinct center two days later while moving to the west . However , the thunderstorms were unable to organize due to wind shear . On April 11 , the MFR estimated that the system became a tropical disturbance , although since it was east of 90 ° E the agency did not issue advisories at that time . On the next day , the system crossed into the basin and was classified as Tropical Disturbance 14 . Over the next few days , the convection waxed and waned , with the strongest winds in the northern periphery . On April 14 , the JTWC began tracking the system as Tropical Cyclone 26S . The disturbance maintained a general west @-@ southwest trajectory , influenced by a ridge to the south . After slowing down and encountering a more favorable environment , the system intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Innocente on April 17 , reaching peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Operationally , the MFR upgraded Innocente to storm status a day earlier , only to downgrade and re @-@ upgrade ; it was maintained as a depression during this time . The return of wind shear again caused weakening , beginning on April 18 . A weak circulation persisted for several days , turning to the northwest with brief increases in thunderstorms . On April 24 , Innocente dissipated , although the circulation drew moisture from the south to produce heavy rainfall on Mauritius , peaking at around 400 mm ( 8 in ) . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 Throughout the latter half of January , thunderstorms persisted in the Mozambique Channel . On January 12 , the MFR classified an area of convection as Tropical Disturbance 3 , although the agency ceased issuing advisories on the next day . Convection persisted , with an associated exposed circulation as of January 22 . Two days later , the MFR issued one bulletin on the system before dropping advisories . The JTWC tracked the system as an area of potential development until January 26 , when the thunderstorms weakened . The disturbance brought heavy rainfall to southwestern Madagascar , which followed a prolonged drought . In Morombe , rainfall over 36 hours accumulated to the average yearly total . This caused flooding and damage to crops and preceded devastating flooding that affected the nation over the subsequent months . 
 Toward the end of February , the ITCZ produced a large area of convection in the eastern portion of the basin which would spawn two disturbances . On February 29 , Tropical Disturbance 9 formed within the system well to the southeast of Diego Garcia . The convection organized slightly despite easterly wind shear , which left the circulation exposed . On March 1 , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 17S , estimating winds of tropical storm force the next day . The MFR , by contrast , classified it as a tropical depression while moving generally southwestward . The convection weakened on March 3 due to the wind shear , and the circulation steered more to the west @-@ northwest . After nearly dissipating on March 5 , the thunderstorms reorganized , possibly due to influence from the monsoon . It turned back to the east , possibly due to interaction with the approaching Cyclone Norman in the Australian basin . Convection soon after diminished over the depression , and the system dissipated on March 11 near 90 ° E. 
 On March 1 , Tropical Disturbance 10 formed within the same system that spawned the previous depression , only farther to the west . It also encountered wind shear , preventing much intensification . The system remained nearly stationary and failed to organize more . The MFR issued its last advisory on March 3 . The MFR also issued bulletins on Norman as Tropical Disturbance 11 , which briefly entered the basin on March 10 before dissipating . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 A tropical disturbance is named when it reaches moderate tropical storm strength . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status west of 55 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Madagascar assigns the appropriate name to the storm . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status between 55 ° E and 90 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Mauritius assigns the appropriate name to the storm . A new annual list is used every year so no names are retired . 
 = Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia = 
 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia ( HHT ) , also known as Osler – Weber – Rendu disease and Osler – Weber – Rendu syndrome , is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder that leads to abnormal blood vessel formation in the skin , mucous membranes , and often in organs such as the lungs , liver , and brain . 
 It may lead to nosebleeds , acute and chronic digestive tract bleeding , and various problems due to the involvement of other organs . Treatment focuses on reducing bleeding from blood vessel lesions , and sometimes surgery or other targeted interventions to remove arteriovenous malformations in organs . Chronic bleeding often requires iron supplements and sometimes blood transfusions . HHT is transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion , and occurs in one in 5 @,@ 000 people . 
 The disease carries the names of Sir William Osler , Henri Jules Louis Marie Rendu , and Frederick Parkes Weber , who described it in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Telangiectasias = = = 
 <unk> ( small vascular malformations ) may occur in the skin and mucosal linings of the nose and gastrointestinal tract . The most common problem is nosebleeds ( epistaxis ) , which happen frequently from childhood and affect about 90 – 95 % of people with HHT . Lesions on the skin and in the mouth bleed less often but may be considered cosmetically displeasing ; they affect about 80 % . The skin lesions characteristically occur on the lips , the nose and the fingers , and on the skin of the face in sun @-@ exposed areas . They appear suddenly , with the number increasing over time . 
 About 20 % are affected by symptomatic digestive tract lesions , although a higher percentage have lesions that do not cause symptoms . These lesions may bleed intermittently , which is rarely significant enough to be noticed ( in the form of bloody vomiting or black stool ) , but can eventually lead to depletion of iron in the body , resulting in iron @-@ deficiency anemia . 
 = = = Arteriovenous malformation = = = 
 Arteriovenous malformation ( AVM , larger vascular malformations ) occur in larger organs , predominantly the lungs ( 50 % ) , liver ( 30 – 70 % ) and the brain ( 10 % ) , with a very small proportion ( < 1 % ) having AVMs in the spinal cord . 
 Vascular malformations in the lungs may cause a number of problems . The lungs normally " filter out " bacteria and blood clots from the bloodstream ; AVMs bypass the capillary network of the lungs and allow these to migrate to the brain , where bacteria may cause a brain abscess and blood clots may lead to stroke . HHT is the most common cause of lung AVMs : out of all people found to have lung AVMs , 70 – 80 % are due to HHT . Bleeding from lung AVMs is relatively unusual , but may cause hemoptysis ( coughing up blood ) or hemothorax ( blood accumulating in the chest cavity ) . Large vascular malformations in the lung allow oxygen @-@ depleted blood from the right ventricle to bypass the alveoli , meaning that this blood does not have an opportunity to absorb fresh oxygen . This may lead to breathlessness . Large AVMs may lead to <unk> , difficulty in breathing that is more marked when sitting up compared to lying down ; this probably reflects changes in blood flow associated with positioning . Very large AVMs cause a marked inability to absorb oxygen , which may be noted by cyanosis ( bluish discoloration of the lips and skin ) , clubbing of the fingernails ( often encountered in chronically low oxygen levels ) , and a humming noise over the affected part of the lung detectable by stethoscope . 
 The symptoms produced by AVMs in the liver depend on the type of abnormal connection that they form between blood vessels . If the connection is between arteries and veins , a large amount of blood bypasses the body 's organs , for which the heart compensates by increasing the cardiac output . Eventually congestive cardiac failure develops ( " high @-@ output cardiac failure " ) , with breathlessness and leg swelling among other problems . If the AVM creates a connection between the portal vein and the blood vessels of the liver , the result may be portal hypertension ( increased portal vein pressure ) , in which collateral blood vessels form in the esophagus ( esophageal varices ) , which may bleed violently ; furthermore , the increased pressure may give rise to fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity ( ascites ) . If the flow in the AVM is in the other direction , portal venous blood flows directly into the veins rather than running through the liver ; this may lead to hepatic encephalopathy ( confusion due to portal waste products irritating the brain ) . Rarely , the bile ducts are deprived of blood , leading to severe cholangitis ( inflammation of the bile ducts ) . Liver AVMs are detectable in over 70 % of people with HHT , but only 10 % experience problems as a result . 
 In the brain , AVMs occasionally exert pressure , leading to headaches . They may also increase the risk of seizures , as would any abnormal tissue in the brain . Finally , hemorrhage from an AVM may lead to intracerebral hemorrhage ( bleeding into the brain ) , which causes any of the symptoms of stroke such as weakness in part of the body or difficulty speaking . If the bleeding occurs into the subarachnoid space ( subarachnoid hemorrhage ) , there is usually a severe , sudden headache and decreased level of consciousness and often weakness in part of the body . 
 = = = Other problems = = = 
 A very small proportion ( those affected by SMAD4 ( MADH4 ) mutations , see below ) have multiple benign polyps in the large intestine , which may bleed or transform into colorectal cancer . A similarly small proportion experiences pulmonary hypertension , a state in which the pressure in the lung arteries is increased , exerting pressure on the right side of the heart and causing peripheral edema ( swelling of the legs ) , fainting and attacks of chest pain . It has been observed that the risk of thrombosis ( particularly venous thrombosis , in the form of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism ) may be increased . There is a suspicion that those with HHT may have a mild immunodeficiency and are therefore at a slightly increased risk from infections . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 HHT is a genetic disorder by definition . It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner , which means that an affected person carries one abnormal gene with a 50 % chance of passing this gene to offspring . Those with HHT symptoms that have no relatives with the disease may have a new mutation . It seems that carrying two abnormal copies of the gene is not compatible with life , and hence no homozygotes have been described . 
 Five genetic types of HHT are recognized . Of these , three have been linked to particular genes , while the two remaining have currently only been associated with a particular locus . More than 80 % of all cases of HHT are due to mutations in either ENG or ACVRL1 . A total of over 600 different mutations is known . There is likely to be a predominance of either type in particular populations , but the data are conflicting . MADH4 mutations , which cause colonic polyposis in addition to HHT , comprise about 2 % of disease @-@ causing mutations . Apart from MADH4 , it is not clear whether mutations in ENG and ACVRL1 lead to particular symptoms , although some reports suggest that ENG mutations are more likely to cause lung problems while ACVRL1 mutations may cause more liver problems , and pulmonary hypertension may be a particular problem in people with ACVRL1 mutations . People with exactly the same mutations may have different nature and severity of symptoms , suggesting that additional genes or other risk factors may determine the rate at which lesions develop ; these have not yet been identified . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Telangiectasias and arteriovenous malformations in HHT are thought to arise because of changes in angiogenesis , the development of blood vessels out of existing ones . The development of a new blood vessel requires the activation and migration of various types of cells , chiefly endothelium , smooth muscle and <unk> . The exact mechanism by which the HHT mutations influence this process is not yet clear , and it is likely that they disrupt a balance between pro- and <unk> signals in blood vessels . The wall of telangiectasias is unusually friable , which explains the tendency of these lesions to bleed . 
 All genes known so far to be linked to HHT code for proteins in the TGF @-@ β signaling pathway . This is a group of proteins that participates in signal transduction of hormones of the transforming growth factor beta superfamily ( the transforming growth factor beta , bone morphogenetic protein and growth differentiation factor classes ) , specifically <unk> / <unk> and <unk> . The hormones do not enter the cell but link to receptors on the cell membrane ; these then activate other proteins , eventually influencing cellular behavior in a number of ways such as cellular survival , proliferation ( increasing in number ) and differentiation ( becoming more specialized ) . For the hormone signal to be adequately transduced , a combination of proteins is needed : two each of two types of serine / threonine @-@ specific kinase type membrane receptors and <unk> . When bound to the hormone , the type II receptor proteins phosphorylate ( transfer phosphate ) onto type I receptor proteins ( of which <unk> @-@ 1 is one ) , which in turn phosphorylate a complex of SMAD proteins ( chiefly <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) . These bind to SMAD4 and migrate to the cell nucleus where they act as transcription factors and participate in the transcription of particular genes . In addition to the SMAD pathway , the membrane receptors also act on the MAPK pathway , which has additional actions on the behavior of cells . Both <unk> @-@ 1 and <unk> are expressed predominantly in endothelium , perhaps explaining why HHT @-@ causing mutations in these proteins lead predominantly to blood vessel problems . Both ENG and ACVRL1 mutations lead predominantly to <unk> of the related proteins , rather than <unk> of the proteins . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Diagnostic tests may be conducted for various reasons . Firstly , some tests are needed to confirm or refute the diagnosis . Secondly , some are needed to identify any potential complications . 
 = = = Telangiectasias = = = 
 The skin and oral cavity telangiectasias are visually identifiable on physical examination , and similarly the lesions in the nose may be seen on endoscopy of the nasopharynx or on laryngoscopy . The severity of nosebleeds may be quantified objectively using a grid @-@ like questionnaire in which the number of nosebleed episodes and their duration is recorded . 
 Digestive tract telangiectasias may be identified on <unk> ( endoscopy of the esophagus , stomach and first part of the small intestine ) . This procedure will typically only be undertaken if there is anemia that is more marked than expected by the severity of nosebleeds , or if there is evidence of severe bleeding ( vomiting blood , black stools ) . If the number of lesions seen on endoscopy is unexpectedly low , the remainder of the small intestine may be examined with capsule endoscopy , in which the patient swallows a capsule @-@ shaped device containing a miniature camera which transmits images of the digestive tract to a portable digital recorder . 
 = = = Arteriovenous malformations = = = 
 Identification of AVMs requires detailed medical imaging of the organs most commonly affected by these lesions . Not all AVMs cause symptoms or are at risk of doing so , and hence there is a degree of variation between specialists as to whether such investigations would be performed , and by which modality ; often , decisions on this issue are reached together with the patient . 
 Lung AVMs may be suspected because of the abnormal appearance of the lungs on a chest X @-@ ray , or hypoxia ( low oxygen levels ) on pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas determination . Bubble contrast echocardiography ( bubble echo ) may be used as a screening tool to identify abnormal connections between the lung arteries and veins . This involves the injection of agitated saline into a vein , followed by ultrasound @-@ based imaging of the heart . Normally , the lungs remove small air bubbles from the circulation , and they are therefore only seen in the right atrium and the right ventricle . If an AVM is present , bubbles appear in the left atrium and left ventricle , usually 3 – 10 cardiac cycles after the right side ; this is slower than in heart defects , in which there are direct connections between the right and left side of the heart . A larger number of bubbles is more likely to indicate the presence of an AVM . Bubble echo is not a perfect screening tool as it can miss smaller AVMs and does not identify the site of AVMs . Often contrast @-@ enhanced computed tomography ( CT angiography ) is used to identify lung lesions ; this modality has a sensitivity of over 90 % . It may be possible to omit contrast administration on modern CT scanners . <unk> is also used if there is a suspicion of pulmonary hypertension or high @-@ output cardiac failure due to large liver lesions , sometimes followed by cardiac catheterization to measure the pressures inside the various chambers of the heart . 
 Liver AVMs may be suspected because of abnormal liver function tests in the blood , because the symptoms of heart failure develop , or because of jaundice or other symptoms of liver dysfunction . The most reliable initial screening test is Doppler ultrasonography of the liver ; this has a very high sensitivity for identifying vascular lesions in the liver . If necessary , contrast @-@ enhanced CT may be used to further characterize AVMs . It is extremely common to find incidental nodules on liver scans , most commonly due to focal nodular hyperplasia ( FNH ) , as these are a hundredfold times more common in HHT compared to the general population . FNH is regarded as harmless . Generally , tumor markers and additional imaging modalities are used to differentiate between FNH and malignant tumors of the liver . Liver biopsy is discouraged in people with HHT as the risk of hemorrhage from liver AVMs may be significant . Liver scans may be useful if someone is suspected of HHT , but does not meet the criteria ( see below ) unless liver lesions can be demonstrated . 
 Brain AVMs may be detected on computed tomography angiography ( CTA or CT <unk> ) or magnetic resonance angiography ( MRA ) ; CTA is better in showing the vessels themselves , and MRA provides more detail about the relationship between an AVM and surrounding brain tissue . In general , MRI is recommended . Various types of vascular malformations may be encountered : AVMs , micro @-@ AVMs , telangiectasias and arteriovenous fistulas . If surgery , embolization , or other treatment is contemplated ( see below ) , cerebral angiography may be required to get sufficient detail of the vessels . This procedure carries a small risk of stroke ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) and is therefore limited to specific circumstances . Recent professional guidelines recommend that all children with suspected or definite HHT undergo a brain MRI early in life to identify AVMs that can cause major complications . Others suggest that screening for cerebral AVMs is probably unnecessary in those who are not experiencing any neurological symptoms , because most lesions discovered on screening scans would not require treatment , creating undesirable conundrums . 
 = = = Genetic testing = = = 
 Genetic tests are available for the ENG , ACVRL1 and MADH4 mutations . Testing is not always needed for diagnosis , because the symptoms are sufficient to distinguish the disease from other diagnoses . There are situations in which testing can be particularly useful . Firstly , children and young adults with a parent with definite HHT may have limited symptoms , yet be at risk from some of the complications mentioned above ; if the mutation is known in the affected parent , absence of this mutation in the child would prevent the need for screening tests . Furthermore , genetic testing may confirm the diagnosis in those with limited symptoms who otherwise would have been labeled " possible HHT " ( see below ) . 
 Genetic diagnosis in HHT is difficult , as mutations occur in numerous different locations in the linked genes , without particular mutations being highly frequent ( as opposed to , for instance , the <unk> mutation in cystic fibrosis ) . Sequence analysis of the involved genes is therefore the most useful approach ( sensitivity 75 % ) , followed by additional testing to detect large deletions and duplications ( additional 10 % ) . Not all mutations in these genes have been linked with disease . 
 Mutations in the MADH4 gene is usually associated with juvenile polyposis , and detection of such a mutation would indicate a need to screen the patient and affected relatives for polyps and tumors of the large intestine . 
 = = = Criteria = = = 
 The diagnosis can be made depending on the presence of four criteria , known as the " Curaçao criteria " . If three or four are met , a patient has " definite HHT " , while two gives " possible HHT " : 
 Spontaneous recurrent epistaxis 
 Multiple telangiectasias in typical locations ( see above ) 
 Proven visceral AVM ( lung , liver , brain , spine ) 
 First @-@ degree family member with HHT 
 Despite the designation " possible " , someone with a visceral AVM and a family history but no nosebleeds or telangiectasias is still extremely likely to have HHT , because these AVMs are very uncommon in the general population . At the same time , the same cannot be said of nosebleeds and sparse telangiectasias , both of which occur in people without HHT , in the absence of AVMs . Someone 's diagnostic status may change in the course of life , as young children may not yet exhibit all the symptoms ; at age 16 , thirteen percent are still indeterminate , while at age 60 the vast majority ( 99 % ) have a definite diagnostic classification . The children of established HHT patients may therefore be labeled as " possible HHT " , as 50 % may turn out to have HHT in the course of their life . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Treatment of HHT is symptomatic ( it deals with the symptoms rather than the disease itself ) , as there is no therapy that stops the development of telangiectasias and AVMs directly . Furthermore , some treatments are applied to prevent the development of common complications . Chronic nosebleeds and digestive tract bleeding can both lead to anemia ; if the bleeding itself cannot be completely stopped , the anemia requires treatment with iron supplements . Those who cannot tolerate iron tablets or solutions may require administration of intravenous iron sucrose , and blood transfusion if the anemia is causing severe symptoms that warrant rapid improvement of the blood count . 
 Most treatments used in HHT have been described in adults , and the experience in treating children is more limited . Women with HHT who get pregnant are at an increased risk of complications , and are observed closely , although the absolute risk is still low ( 1 % ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 An acute nosebleed may be managed with a variety of measures , such as packing of the nasal cavity with absorbent swabs or gels . Removal of the packs after the bleeding may lead to reopening of the fragile vessels , and therefore lubricated or <unk> packing is recommended . Some patients may wish to learn packing themselves to deal with nosebleeds without having to resort to medical help . 
 Frequent nosebleeds can be prevented in part by keeping the nostrils moist , and by applying saline solution , estrogen @-@ containing creams or tranexamic acid ; these have few side effects and may have a small degree of benefit . A number of additional modalities has been used to prevent recurrent bleeding if simple measures are unsuccessful . Medical therapies include oral tranexamic acid and estrogen ; the evidence for these is relatively limited , and estrogen is poorly tolerated by men and possibly carries risks of cancer and heart disease in women past the menopause . Nasal coagulation and cauterization may reduce the bleeding from telangiectasias , and is recommended before surgery is considered ; often , several sessions are needed . It may be possible to <unk> vascular lesions through interventional radiology ; this requires passing a catheter through a large artery and locating the maxillary artery under X @-@ ray guidance , followed by the injection into the vessel of particles that occlude the blood vessels . The benefit from the procedure tends to be short @-@ lived , and it may be most appropriate in episodes of severe bleeding . 
 If other interventions have failed , several operations have been reported to provide benefit . One is septal <unk> or Saunders ' procedure , in which skin is transplanted into the nostrils , and the other is Young 's procedure , in which the nostrils are sealed off completely . 
 = = = Skin and digestive tract = = = 
 The skin lesions of HHT can be disfiguring , and may respond to treatment with long @-@ pulsed Nd : YAG laser . Skin lesions in the fingertips may sometimes bleed and cause pain . Skin grafting is occasionally needed to treat this problem . 
 With regards to digestive tract lesions , mild bleeding and mild resultant anemia is treated with iron supplementation , and no specific treatment is administered . There is limited data on hormone treatment and tranexamic acid to reduce bleeding and anemia . Severe anemia or episodes of severe bleeding are treated with endoscopic argon plasma coagulation ( APC ) or laser treatment of any lesions identified ; this may reduce the need for supportive treatment . The expected benefits are not such that repeated attempts at treating lesions are advocated . Sudden , very severe bleeding is unusual — if encountered , alternative causes ( such as a peptic ulcer ) need to be considered — but embolization may be used in such instances . 
 = = = Lung AVMs = = = 
 Lung lesions , once identified , are usually treated to prevent episodes of bleeding and more importantly embolism to the brain . This is particularly done in lesions with a feeding blood vessel of 3 mm or larger , as these are the most likely to cause long @-@ term complications unless treated . The most effective current therapy is embolization with detachable metal coils . The procedure involves puncture of a large vein ( usually under a general anesthetic ) , followed by advancing of a catheter through the right ventricle and into the pulmonary artery , after which radiocontrast is injected to visualize the AVMs ( pulmonary angiography ) . Once the lesion has been identified , coils are deployed that obstruct the blood flow and allow the lesion to regress . In experienced hands , the procedure tends to be very effective and with limited side effects , but lesions may recur and further attempts may be required . CTA scans are repeated to monitor for recurrence . Surgical excision has now essentially been abandoned due to the success of <unk> . 
 Those with either definite pulmonary AVMs or an abnormal contrast echocardiogram with no clearly visible lesions are deemed to be at risk from brain emboli . They are therefore counselled to avoid scuba diving , during which small air bubbles may form in the <unk> that may migrate to the brain and cause stroke . Similarly , antimicrobial prophylaxis is advised during procedures in which bacteria may enter the bloodstream , such as dental work , and avoidance of air bubbles during intravenous therapy . 
 = = = Liver AVMs = = = 
 Given that liver AVMs generally cause high @-@ output cardiac failure , the emphasis is on treating this with diuretics to reduce the circulating blood volume , restriction of salt and fluid intake , and antiarrhythmic agents in case of irregular heart beat . This may be sufficient in treating the symptoms of swelling and breathlessness . If this treatment is not effective or leads to side effects or complications , the only remaining option is liver transplantation . This is reserved for those with severe symptoms , as it carries a mortality of about 10 % , but leads to good results if successful . The exact point at which liver <unk> is to be offered is not yet completely established . <unk> treatment has been attempted , but leads to severe complications in a proportion of patients and is discouraged . 
 Other liver @-@ related complications ( portal hypertension , esophageal varices , ascites , hepatic encephalopathy ) are treated with the same modalities as used in cirrhosis , although the use of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt treatment is discouraged due to the lack of documented benefit . 
 = = = Brain AVMs = = = 
 The decision to treat brain arteriovenous malformations depends on the symptoms that they cause ( such as seizures or headaches ) . The bleeding risk is predicted by previous episodes of hemorrhage , and whether on the CTA or MRA scan the AVM appears to be deep seated or have deep venous drainage . Size of the AVM and the presence of aneurysms appears to matter less . In HHT , some lesions ( high @-@ flow arteriovenous fistulae ) tend to cause more problems , and treatment is warranted . Other AVMs may regress over time without intervention . Various modalities are available , depending on the location of the AVM and its size : surgery , radiation @-@ based treatment and embolization . Sometimes , multiple modalities are used on the same lesion . 
 Surgery ( by craniotomy , open brain surgery ) may be offered based on the risks of treatment as determined by the <unk> – Martin scale ( grade I @-@ V ) ; this score is higher in larger lesions that are close to important brain structures and have deep venous drainage . High grade lesions ( IV and V ) have an unacceptably high risk and surgery is not typically offered in those cases . <unk> ( using targeted radiation therapy such as by a gamma knife ) may be used if the lesion is small but close to vital structures . Finally , embolization may be used on small lesions that have only a single feeding vessel . 
 = = = Experimental treatments = = = 
 Several anti @-@ angiogenesis drugs approved for other conditions , such as cancer , have been investigated in small clinical trials . The anti @-@ <unk> antibody bevacizumab , for instance , has been used off @-@ label in several studies . In the largest study conducted so far , bevacizumab infusion was associated with a decrease in cardiac output and reduced duration and number of episodes of epistaxis in treated HHT patients . Thalidomide , another anti @-@ angiogenesis drug , was also reported to have beneficial effects in HHT patients . Thalidomide treatment was found to induce vessel maturation in an experimental mouse model of HHT and to reduce the severity and frequency of nosebleeds in the majority of a small group of HHT patients . The blood hemoglobin levels of these treated patients rose as a result of reduced hemorrhage and enhanced blood vessel stabilization . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Population studies from numerous areas in the world have shown that HHT occurs at roughly the same rate in almost all populations : somewhere around 1 in 5000 . In some areas , it is much more common ; for instance , in the French region of Haut Jura the rate is 1 : <unk> - twice as common as in other populations . This has been attributed to a founder effect , in which a population descending from a small number of ancestors has a high rate of a particular genetic trait because one of these ancestors harbored this trait . In Haut Jura , this has been shown to be the result of a particular ACVRL1 mutation ( named <unk> or <unk> _ <unk> ) . The highest rate of HHT is 1 : 1331 , reported in Bonaire and Curaçao , two islands in the Caribbean belonging to the Netherlands Antilles . 
 Most people with HHT have a normal lifespan . The skin lesions and nosebleeds tend to develop during childhood . AVMs are probably present from birth , but don 't necessarily cause any symptoms . Frequent nosebleeds are the most common symptom and can significantly affect quality of life . 
 = = History = = 
 Several 19th century English physicians , starting with Henry <unk> Sutton ( 1836 – 1891 ) and followed by Benjamin Guy Babington ( 1794 – 1866 ) and John Wickham Legg ( 1843 – 1921 ) , described the most common features of HHT , particularly the recurrent nosebleeds and the hereditary nature of the disease . The French physician Henri Jules Louis Marie Rendu ( 1844 – 1902 ) observed the skin and mucosal lesions , and distinguished the condition from hemophilia . The Canadian @-@ born Sir William Osler ( 1849 – 1919 ) , then at Johns Hopkins Hospital and later at Oxford University , made further contributions with a 1901 report in which he described characteristic lesions in the digestive tract . The English physician Frederick Parkes Weber ( 1863 – 1962 ) reported further on the condition in 1907 with a series of cases . The term " hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia " was first used by the American physician Frederic M. Hanes ( 1883 – 1946 ) in a 1909 article on the condition . 
 The diagnosis of HHT remained a clinical one until the genetic defects that cause HHT were identified by a research group at Duke University Medical Center , in 1994 and 1996 respectively . In 2000 , the international scientific advisory committee of HHT Foundation International published the now widely used Curaçao criteria . In 2006 , a group of international experts met in Canada and formulated an evidence @-@ based guideline , sponsored by the HHT Foundation International . 
 = Gray 's Inn = 
 The Honourable Society of Gray 's Inn , commonly known as Gray 's Inn , is one of the four Inns of Court ( professional associations for barristers and judges ) in London . To be Called to the Bar and practise as a barrister in England and Wales , an individual must belong to one of these Inns . Located at the intersection of High Holborn and Gray 's Inn Road in Central London , the Inn is both a professional body and a provider of office accommodation ( chambers ) for many barristers . It is ruled by a governing council called " Pension " , made up of the Masters of the Bench ( or " Benchers " ) , and led by the Treasurer , who is elected to serve a three @-@ year term . The Inn is known for its gardens , or Walks , which have existed since at least 1597 . 
 Gray 's Inn does not claim a specific foundation date ; there is a tradition that none of the Inns of Court claims to be any older than the others . Law clerks and their apprentices have been established on the present site since at least 1370 , with records dating from 1391 . During the 15th and 16th centuries , the Inn grew steadily with great prestige , reaching its pinnacle during the reign of Elizabeth I. The Inn was home to many important barristers and politicians , most notably Francis Bacon , and counted Elizabeth herself as a patron . Thanks to the efforts of prominent members such as William Cecil and Gilbert Gerard , Gray 's Inn became the largest of the four by number , with over 200 barristers recorded as members . During this period , the Inn became noted for the masques and revels that it threw , and William Shakespeare is believed to have performed there at least once . 
 The Inn continued to prosper during the reign of James I ( 1603 – 1625 ) and the beginning of that of Charles I , when over 100 students per year were recorded as joining . The outbreak of the First English Civil War in 1642 during the reign of Charles I disrupted the systems of legal education and governance at the Inns of Court , shutting down all calls to the Bar and new admissions , and Gray 's Inn never fully recovered . Fortunes continued to decline after the English Restoration , which saw the end of the traditional method of legal education . Although now more prosperous , Gray 's Inn is today the smallest of the Inns of Court . 
 = = Role = = 
 Gray 's Inn and the other three Inns of Court remain the only bodies legally allowed to call a barrister to the Bar , allowing him or her to practise in England and Wales . Although the Inn was previously a disciplinary and teaching body , these functions are now shared between the four Inns , with the Bar Standards Board ( a division of the General Council of the Bar ) acting as a disciplinary body and the Inns of Court and Bar Educational Trust providing education . The Inn remains a collegiate self @-@ governing , unincorporated association of its members , providing within its precincts library , dining , residential and office accommodation ( chambers ) , along with a chapel . Members of the Bar from other Inns may use these facilities to some extent . 
 = = History = = 
 During the 12th and 13th centuries , law was taught in the City of London , primarily by the clergy . During the 13th century , two events happened that destroyed this form of legal education ; firstly , a decree by Henry III of England on 2 December 1234 that no institutes of legal education could exist in the City of London , and secondly a papal bull was issued in 1254 that prohibited the clergy from teaching the common law , rather than canon law . As a result , the existing system of legal education fell apart . The common lawyers migrated to the hamlet of Holborn , the nearest place to the law courts at Westminster Hall that was outside the City . 
 = = = Founding and early years = = = 
 The early records of all four Inns of Court have been lost , and it is not known precisely when each was founded . The records of Gray 's Inn itself are lost until 1569 , and the precise date of founding cannot therefore be verified . Lincoln 's Inn has the earliest surviving records . Gray 's Inn dates from at least 1370 , and takes its name from Baron Grey of Wilton , as the Inn was originally Wilton 's family home ( or inn ) , the Manor of <unk> . A lease was taken for various parts of the inn by practising lawyers as both residential and working accommodation , and their apprentices were housed with them . From this the tradition of dining in " commons " , probably by using the inn 's main hall , followed as the most convenient arrangement for the members . Outside records from 1437 show that Gray 's Inn was occupied by socii , or members of a society , at that date . 
 In 1456 Reginald de Gray , the owner of the Manor itself , sold the land to a group including Thomas Bryan . A few months later , the other members signed deeds of release , granting the property solely to Thomas Bryan . Bryan acted as either a feoffee or an owner representing the governing body of the Inn ( there are some records suggesting he may have been a Bencher at this point ) but in 1493 he transferred the ownership by charter to a group including Sir Robert Brudenell and Thomas <unk> , reverting the ownership of the Inn partially back to the Gray family . 
 In 1506 the Inn was sold by the Gray family to Hugh Denys and a group of his feoffees including Roger Lupton . This was not a purchase on behalf of the society and after a five @-@ year delay , it was transferred under the will of Denys in 1516 to the Carthusian House of Jesus of Bethlehem ( Sheen Priory ) , which remained the Society 's landlord until 1539 , when the Second Act of Dissolution led to the Dissolution of the Monasteries and passed ownership of the Inn to the Crown . 
 = = = Elizabethan golden age = = = 
 During the reign of Elizabeth I , Gray 's Inn rose in prominence , and that period is considered the " golden age " of the Inn , with Elizabeth serving as the Patron Lady . This can be traced to the actions of Nicholas Bacon , William Cecil and Gilbert Gerard , all prominent members of the Inn and confidantes of Elizabeth . Cecil and Bacon in particular took pains to find the most promising young men and get them to join the Inn . In 1574 it was the largest of all the Inns of Court by number , with 120 barristers , and by 1619 it had a membership of more than 200 barristers . 
 Gray 's Inn , as well as the other Inns of Court , became noted for the parties and festivals it hosted . Students performed masques and plays in court weddings , in front of Queen Elizabeth herself , and hosted regular festivals and banquets at Candlemas , All Hallows Eve and Easter . At Christmas the students ruled the Inn for the day , appointing a Lord of Misrule called the Prince of <unk> , and organising a masque entirely on their own , with the Benchers and other senior members away for the holiday . 
 The Gray 's Inn masque in 1588 with its centrepiece , The Misfortunes of Arthur by Thomas Hughes , is considered by A.W. Ward be the most impressive masque thrown at any of the Inns . William Shakespeare performed at the Inn at least once , as his patron , Lord Southampton , was a member . For the Christmas of 1594 , his play The Comedy of Errors was performed by the Lord Chamberlain 's Men before a riotous assembly of notables in such disorder that the affair became known as the Night of Errors and a mock trial was held to arraign the culprit . 
 Central to Gray 's was the system shared across the Inns of Court of progress towards a call to the Bar , which lasted approximately 12 to 14 years . A student would first study at either Oxford or Cambridge University , or at one of the Inns of Chancery , which were dedicated legal training institutions . If he studied at Oxford or Cambridge he would spend three years working towards a degree , and be admitted to one of the Inns of Court after graduation . If he studied at one of the Inns of Chancery he would do so for one year before seeking admission to the Inn of Court to which his Inn of Chancery was tied — in the case of Gray 's Inn , the attached Inns of Chancery were Staple Inn and Barnard 's Inn . 
 The student was then considered an " inner barrister " , and would study in private , take part in the moots and listen to the readings and other lectures . After serving from six to nine years as an " inner barrister , " the student was called to the Bar , assuming he had fulfilled the requirements of having argued twice at moots in one of the Inns of Chancery , twice in the Hall of his Inn of Court and twice in the Inn Library . The new " utter barrister " was then expected to supervise bolts ( " arguments " over a single point of law between students and barristers ) and moots at his Inn of Court , attend lectures at the Inns of Court and Chancery and teach students . After five years as an " utter " barrister he was allowed to practice in court — after 10 years he was made an Ancient . 
 The period saw the establishment of a regular system of legal education . In the early days of the Inn , the quality of legal education had been poor — readings were given infrequently , and the standards for call to the Bar were weak and varied . During the Elizabethan age readings were given regularly , moots took place daily and barristers who were called to the Bar were expected to play a part in teaching students , resulting in skilled and knowledgeable graduates from the Inn . 
 Many noted barristers , judges and politicians were members of the Inn during this period , including Gilbert Gerard , Master of the Rolls , Edmund Pelham , Lord Chief Justice of Ireland , and Francis Bacon , who served as Treasurer for eight years , supervising significant changes to the facilities of the Inn and the first proper construction of the gardens and walks for which the Inn is noted . 
 = = = Caroline period and the English Civil War = = = 
 At the start of the Caroline era , when Charles I came to the throne , the Inn continued to prosper . Over 100 students were admitted to the Inn each year , and except during the plague of 1636 the legal education of students continued . Masques continued to be held , including one in 1634 organised by all four Inns that cost £ 21 @,@ 000 — approximately £ 3 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms . Before 1685 the Inn counted as members five dukes , three marquises , twenty @-@ nine earls , five viscounts and thirty @-@ nine barons , and during that period " none can exhibit a more illustrious list of great men " . 
 Many academics , including William Holdsworth , a man considered to be one of the best legal academics in history , maintain that this period saw a decline in the standard of teaching at all the Inns . From 1640 onwards no readings were held , and barristers such as Sir Edward Coke remarked at the time that the quality of education at the Inns of Court had decreased . Holdsworth put this down to three things — the introduction of printed books , the disinclination of students to attend moots and readings and the disinclination of the Benchers and Readers to enforce attendance . 
 With the introduction of printing , written legal texts became more available , reducing the need for students to attend readings and lectures . However , this meant that the students denied themselves the opportunity to query what they had learnt or discuss it in greater detail . Eventually , students now had a way to learn without attending lectures , they began to excuse themselves from lectures , meetings and moots altogether ; in the early 17th century they developed a way of deputising other students to do their moots for them . The Benchers and Readers did little to arrest the decline of the practice of lecturers and readings , first because many probably believed ( as the students did ) that books were an adequate substitute , and secondly because many were keen to avoid the work of preparing a reading , which cut into their time as practising barristers . These problems were endemic to all the Inns , not just Gray 's Inn . 
 The outbreak of the First English Civil War led to a complete suspension of legal education , and from November 1642 until July 1644 no Pension meetings were held . Only 43 students were admitted during the four years of the war , and none were called to the Bar . Meetings of Pension resumed after the Battle of Marston Moor but the education system remained dormant . Although Readers were appointed , none read , and no moots were held . In 1646 , after the end of the war , there was an attempt to restore the old system of readings and moots , and in 1647 an order was made that students were required to moot at least once a day . This failed to work , with Readers refusing to read , and the old system of legal education completely died out . 
 The Caroline period saw a decline in prosperity for Gray 's Inn . Although there were many notable members of the Inn , both legal ( Sir Dudley Digges , Thomas Bedingfield and Francis Bacon , for example ) and non @-@ legal ( including William <unk> , the Archbishop of Canterbury ) , the list could not compare to that of the Elizabethan period . Following the English Restoration , admissions fell to an average of 57 a year . 
 = = = English Restoration to present = = = 
 The fortunes of Gray 's Inn continued to decline after the English Restoration , and by 1719 only 22 students were joining the Inn a year . This fall in numbers was partly because the landed gentry were no longer sending sons who had no intention of becoming barristers to study at the Inn . In 1615 , 13 students joined the Inn for every student called to the Bar , but by 1713 the ratio had become 2 @.@ 3 new members to every 1 call . 
 Over a 50 @-@ year period , the Civil War and high taxation under William III economically crippled many members of the gentry , meaning that they could not afford to allow their sons to study at the Inns . David Lemmings considers it to have been more serious than that , for two reasons ; firstly , Inner Temple and Middle Temple had actually shown an increase in membership following the Restoration , and secondly because Gray 's Inn had previously had far more " common " members than the other Inns . The decrease in the number of gentry at the Inn could therefore not completely explain the large drop in members . 
 Gray 's Inn was the venue for an early first @-@ class cricket match on Thursday , 2 July 1730 between London and Kent . Kent won the game by an unknown margin . The original source reports " a cricket @-@ match between the Kentish men and the Londoners for £ 50 , and won by the former " , giving the precise location as " a field near the lower end of Gray 's Inn Lane , London " . 
 In 1733 the requirements for a call to the Bar were significantly revised in a joint meeting between the Benchers of Inner Temple and Gray 's Inn , revisions accepted by Lincoln 's Inn and Middle Temple , although they were not represented . It is not recorded what these changes were , but after a further discussion in 1762 the Inns adopted a rule that any student with a Master of Arts or Bachelor of Laws degree from the universities of Oxford or Cambridge could be called to the Bar after three years as a student , and any other student could be called after five years . An attempt was made to increase the quality of legal education at Gray 's Inn ; in 1753 a barrister , Danby Pickering , was employed to lecture there , although this agreement ended in 1761 when he was called to the Bar . 
 The 18th century was not a particularly prosperous time for the Inn or its members , and few notable barristers were members during this period . Some noted members include Sir Thomas Clarke , the Master of the Rolls , Sir James Eyre , Chief Justice of the Common Pleas and Samuel Romilly , a noted law reformer . In 1780 the Inn was involved in the case of R v the Benchers of Gray 's Inn , a test of the role of the Inns of Court as the sole authority to call students to the Bar . The case was brought to the Court of King 's Bench by William Hart , a student at the Inn , who asked the court ( under Lord Mansfield ) to order the Inn to call him to the Bar . Mansfield ruled that the Inns of Court were indeed the only organisations able to call students to the Bar , and refused to order the Inns to call Hart . 
 During the 19th century , the Inns began to stagnate ; little had been changed since the 17th century in terms of legal education or practice , except that students were no longer bound to take the Anglican sacrament before their call to the Bar . In 1852 the Council of Legal Education was established by the Inns , and in 1872 a formal examination for the call to the Bar was introduced . Gray 's Inn itself suffered more than most ; as in the 18th century , the fortunes of its members declined , and many barristers who had been called to the Bar at the Inn transferred to others . 
 Gray 's Inn was the smallest of the Inns during the early 20th century , and was noted for its connection to the Northern Circuit . During the Second World War , the Inn was badly damaged during the Blitz in 1941 , with the Hall , the Chapel , the Library and many other buildings hit and almost destroyed . The rebuilding of much of the Inn took until 1960 by the architect Sir Edward Maufe . In 2008 Gray 's Inn became the first Inn to appoint " fellows " — elected businesspeople , legal academics and others — with the intent of giving them a wider perspective and education than the other Inns would offer . 
 = = Structure and governance = = 
 Gray 's Inn 's internal records date from 1569 , at which point there were four types of member ; those who had not yet been called to the Bar , Utter Barristers , Ancients and Readers . Utter Barristers were those who had been called to the Bar but were still studying , Ancients were those who were called to the Bar and were allowed to practise and Readers were those who had been called to the Bar , were allowed to practise and now played a part in educating law students at the Inns of Chancery and at Gray 's Inn itself . At the time Gray 's Inn was the odd one out amongst the Inns ; the others did not recognise Ancients as a degree of barrister and had Benchers roughly corresponding to the Readers used at Gray 's Inn ( although the positions were not identical ) . 
 The Inn is run by Pension , its ultimate governing body . The name is peculiar to Gray 's Inn — at Lincoln 's Inn the governing body is called the Council , and at the Inner and Middle Temples it is called the Parliament . The name was used for the governing bodies of three of the Inns of Chancery — Barnard 's Inn , Clement 's Inn and New Inn . In Gray 's Inn the Readers , when they existed , were required to attend Pension meetings , and other barristers were at one point welcome to , although only the Readers would be allowed to speak . Pension at Gray 's Inn is made up of the Masters of the Bench , and the Inn as a whole is headed by the Treasurer , a senior Bencher . The Treasurer has always been elected , and since 1744 the office has rotated between individuals , with a term of one year . 
 = = = Readers = = = 
 A Reader was a person literally elected to read — he would be elected to the Pension ( council ) of Gray 's Inn , and would take his place by giving a " reading " , or lecture , on a particular legal topic . Two readers would be elected annually by Pension to serve a one @-@ year term . Initially ( before the rise of the Benchers ) the Readers were the governing body of Gray 's Inn , and formed Pension . The earliest certain records of Readers are from the 16th century — although the Inn 's records only start at 1569 William Dugdale ( himself a member ) published a list in his <unk> <unk> dating from 1514 . S.E. Thorne published a list dating from 1430 , but this is entirely conjectural and not based on any official records , only reports of " readings " that took place at Gray 's Inn . By 1569 there had certainly been Readers for more than a century . 
 The English Civil War marked the end of legal education at the Inns , and the class of Readers went into decline . The last Readers were appointed in 1677 , and the position of the Readers as heads of the Inn and members of Pension was taken by the Benchers . 
 = = = Benchers = = = 
 A Bencher , <unk> or ( formally ) Master of the Bench , is a member of Pension , the governing body of the Honourable Society of Gray 's Inn . The term originally referred to one who sat on the benches in the main hall of the Inn which were used for dining and during moots , and the term originally had no significance . The position of Bencher developed during the 16th century when the Readers , for unknown reasons , decided that some barristers who were not Readers should be afforded the same rights and privileges as those who were , although without a voice in Pension . This was a rare practice and occurred a total of seven times within the 16th century , the first being Robert Flynt in 1549 . The next was Nicholas Bacon in 1550 , then Edward Stanhope in 1580 , who was afforded the privilege because , although a skilled attorney , an illness meant he could never fulfil the duties of a Reader . 
 The practice became more common during the 17th century — 11 people were made Benchers between 1600 and 1630 — and in 1614 one of the Benchers appointed was explicitly allowed to be a member of Pension . This became more common , creating a two @-@ rank system in which both Readers and Benchers were members of Pension . However far more Readers were appointed than Benchers — 50 between 1600 and 1630 — and it appeared that Readers would remain the higher rank despite this change . 
 The English Civil War marked the end of legal education at the Inns , although the government attempted to persuade Readers to continue by threatening them with fines . The class of Readers went into decline and Benchers were called as members of Pension instead . In 1679 there was the first mass @-@ call of Benchers ( 22 on one occasion , and 15 on another ) , with the Benchers paying a fine of 100 marks because they refused to read , and modern Benchers pay a " fine " in a continuation of this tradition . 
 Noted Benchers of Gray 's Inn include Lord Birkenhead and Francis Bacon . Honorary Benchers can also be appointed , although they have no role in Pension , such as Lord Denning , who was appointed in 1979 , and Winston Churchill . Today there are over 300 Benchers in Gray 's Inn , mostly senior barristers and members of the judiciary . 
 = = = Badge = = = 
 Gray 's Inn does not possess a coat of arms as such , but instead uses a badge , often displayed on a shield , blazoned either " Azure an Indian Griffin proper segreant " or , more currently , " Sable a griffin segreant or " , i.e. , a gold griffin on a black background . The Inn originally used a form of the coat of arms of the de Grey family , but this was changed at some time around 1600 to the griffin . There is no direct record of why this was done , but it seems likely that the new device was adapted from the arms of the Treasurer Richard Aungier ( d . 1597 ) , for two probable reasons : firstly , because he was a particularly important and prestigious member of the Inn , and secondly , because the griffin would have looked more impressive on occasions such as masques and revels than the plain geometric arms of the de Greys . 
 The motto around the badge , the date of adoption of which is unknown , is Integra Lex Aequi Custos <unk> <unk> Non <unk> <unk> Sed <unk> <unk> , or " Impartial justice , guardian of equity , mistress of the law , without fear or favour rules men 's causes <unk> " . 
 = = Buildings and gardens = = 
 The Inn is located at the intersection of High Holborn and Gray 's Inn Road . It started as a single manor house with a hall and chapel , although an additional wing had been added by the date of the " Woodcut " map of London , drawn probably in the early 1560s . Expansion continued over the following decades , and by 1586 the Pension had added another two wings around the central court . Around these were several sets of chambers erected by members of the Inn under a leasehold agreement whereby ownership of the buildings would revert to the Inn at the end of the lease . 
 As the Inn grew it became necessary ( for safety purposes ) to wall off the land owned by the Inn , which had previously been open to everyone . In 1591 the " back field " was walled off , but little more was done until 1608 , when under the supervision of Francis Bacon , the Treasurer , more construction work was undertaken , particularly in walling off and improving the gardens and walks . In 1629 it was ordered that an architect supervise any construction and ensure that the new buildings were architecturally similar to the old ones , and the strict enforcement of this rule during the 18th century is given as a reason for the uniformity of the buildings at Gray 's Inn . 
 During the late 17th century many buildings were demolished , either because of poor repair or to standardise and modernise the buildings at the Inn . Many more were built over the open land surrounding the Inn , although this was controversial at the time ; in November 1672 the Privy Council and Charles II himself were petitioned to order that nothing should be built on the open land , and a similar request was sent to the Lord Chancellor in May 1673 . From 1672 to 1674 additional buildings were constructed in the Red Lyon Fields by Nicholas Barebone , and members of the Inn attempted to sue him to prevent this . After the lawsuits failed members of the Inn were seen to fight with Barebones ' workmen , " wherein several were shrewdly hurt " . 
 In February 1679 a fire broke out on the west side of Coney Court , necessitating the rebuilding of the entire row . Another fire broke out in January 1684 in Coney Court , destroying several buildings including the Library . A third fire in 1687 destroyed a large part of Holborn Court , and when the buildings were rebuilt after these fires they were constructed of brick to be more resistant to fire than the wood and plaster previously used in construction . As a result , the domestic Tudor style architecture which had dominated much of the Inn was replaced with more modern styles . Records show that prior to the rebuilding in 1687 , the Inn had been " so <unk> " that the " ancients " were forced to work two to a chamber . More of the Inn was rebuilt during that period , and between 1669 and 1774 all of the Inn apart from parts of the Hall and Chapel had been rebuilt . 
 More buildings were constructed during the 18th and 19th centuries . In 1941 the Inn suffered under The Blitz , which damaged or destroyed much of the Inn , necessitating the repair of many buildings and the construction of more . Today many buildings are let as professional offices for barristers and solicitors with between 265 @,@ 000 square feet ( 24 @,@ 600 m2 ) and 275 @,@ 000 square feet ( 25 @,@ 500 m2 ) of office space available . There are also approximately 60 residential apartments , rented out to barristers who are members of the Inn . The Inn also contains the Inns of Court School of Law , a joint educational venture between all four Inns of Court where the vocational training for barristers and solicitors is undertaken . The current Inn layout consists of two squares — South Square and Gray 's Inn Square — with the remaining buildings arranged around the Walks . 
 = = = Hall = = = 
 The Hall was part of the original Manor of <unk> , although it was significantly rebuilt during the reign of Mary I , and again during the reign of Elizabeth , with the rebuilding being finished on 10 November 1559 . The rebuilt Hall measured 70 feet ( 21 m ) in length , 35 feet ( 11 m ) in width and 47 feet ( 14 m ) in height , and remains about the same size today . It has a hammerbeam roof and a raised dais at one end with a grand table on it , where the Benchers and other notables would originally have sat . 
 The hall also contains a large carved screen at one end covering the entrance to the Vestibule . Legend says that the screen was given to the Inn by Elizabeth I while she was the Inn 's patron , and is carved out of the wood of a Spanish galleon captured from the Spanish Armada . The Hall was lit with the aid of massive windows filled with the Coats of Arms of those members who became Treasurers . The Benchers ' table is also said to have been a gift from Elizabeth , and as a result the only public toast in the Inn until the late 19th century was " to the glorious , pious and immortal memory of Queen Elizabeth " . 
 The walls of the Hall are decorated with paintings of noted patrons or members of the Inn , including Nicholas Bacon and Elizabeth I. During the Second World War the Hall was one of those buildings badly damaged during the Blitz . The Treasurers ' Arms and paintings had been moved to a place of safety and were not damaged ; during the rebuilding after the War they were put back in the Hall , where they remain . The rebuilt hall was designed by Edward Maufe , and was formally opened in 1951 by the Duke of Gloucester . 
 = = = Chapel = = = 
 The Chapel existed in the original manor house used by the Inn , and dates from 1315 . In 1625 it was enlarged under the supervision of Eubule Thelwall , but by 1698 it was " very ruinous " , and had to be rebuilt . Little is known of the changes , except that the barrister 's chambers above the Chapel were removed . The building was again rebuilt in 1893 , and remained that way until its destruction during The Blitz in 1941 . The Chapel was finally rebuilt in 1960 , and the original stained glass windows ( which had been removed and taken to a safe location ) were restored . The rebuilt Chapel contains " simple furnishings " made of Canadian maple donated by the Canadian Bar Association . 
 The Inn has had a Chaplain since at least 1400 , where a court case is recorded as being brought by the " Chaplain of <unk> Inn " . During the 16th century the Inn began hiring full @-@ time preachers to staff the Chapel — the first , John <unk> , was appointed in 1576 . A radical Puritan in a time of religious conflict , <unk> held his post for only a short time before being replaced by a Thomas Crooke in 1580 . After Crooke 's death in 1598 Roger Fenton served as preacher , until his replacement by Richard <unk> , later Master of Catherine Hall , Cambridge , in 1616 . Gray 's Inn still employs a Preacher ; Michael Doe , former Bishop of Swindon and more recently General Secretary of the United Society for the Propagation of the Gospel , was appointed in 2011 . 
 = = = Walks = = = 
 The Walks are the gardens within Gray 's Inn , and have existed since at least 1597 , when records show that Francis Bacon was to be paid £ 7 for " planting of trees in the <unk> " . Prior to this the area ( known as Green Court ) was used as a place to dump waste and rubble , since at the time the Inn was open to any Londoner . In 1587 four Benchers were ordered by the Pension to " consider what charge a brick wall in the fields will draw unto And where the said wall shalbe fittest to be builded " , and work on such a wall was completed in 1598 , which helped keep out the citizens of London . 
 In 1599 additional trees were planted in the Walks , and stairs up to the Walks were also added . When Francis Bacon became treasurer in 1608 more improvements were made , since he no longer had to seek the approval of the Pension to make changes . In September 1608 a gate was installed on the southern wall , and various gardeners were employed to maintain the Walks . The gardens became commonly used as a place of relaxation , and James Howell wrote in 1621 that " I hold [ Gray 's Inn Walks ] to be the pleasantest place about London , and that there you have the choicest society " . 
 The Walks were well @-@ maintained during the reign of William III , although the Inn 's lack of prosperity made more improvements impossible . In 1711 the gardener was ordered not to admit " any women or children into the <unk> " , and in 1718 was given permission to physically remove those he found . At the end of the 18th century Charles Lamb said that the Walks were " the best gardens of any of the Inns of Court , their aspect being altogether reverend and law @-@ abiding " . In 1720 the old gate was replaced by " a pair of handsome iron gates with peers and other proper <unk> " . The 19th and 20th centuries saw few major changes , apart from the introduction of plane trees into the Walks . 
 = = = Library = = = 
 The Library of Gray 's Inn has existed since at least 1555 , when the first mention of it was made in the will of Robert Chaloner , who left some money to buy law books for the Library . The Library was neither a big collection nor a dedicated one ; in 1568 it was being housed in a single room in the chambers of Nicholas Bacon , a room that was also used for mooting and to store the deed chest . The collection grew larger over the years as individual Benchers such as Sir John Finch and Sir John Bankes left books or money to buy books in their wills , and the first Librarian was appointed in 1646 after members of the Inn had been found stealing books . 
 In 1669 books were bought by the Inn as an organisation for the first time , and a proper catalogue was drawn up to prevent theft . In 1684 a fire that broke out in Coney Court , where the Library was situated , and destroyed much of the collection . While some books were saved , most of the records prior to 1684 were lost . A " handsome room " was then built to house the Library . 
 The Library became more important during the 18th century ; prior to that it had been a small , little @-@ used collection of books . In 1725 it was proposed by the Pension that " a publick Library be sett up and kept open for ye use of ye society " , and that more books be purchased . The first order of new books was on 27 June 1729 and consisted of " a collection of Lord Bacon 's works " . In 1750 the Under @-@ Steward of the Inn made a new catalogue of the books , and in 1789 the Library was moved to a new room between the Hall and the Chapel . In 1840 another two rooms were erected in which to store books , and in 1883 a new Library was constructed with space to store approximately 11 @,@ 000 books . This was rapidly found to be inadequate , and in 1929 a new Library , known as the Holker Library after the benefactor , Sir John Holker , was opened . The library , although impressive looking , was not particularly useful ; Francis Cowper wrote that : 
 Though impressive to look at , the new building was something less than a success as a library . The air of spaciousness was produced at the expense of shelf room , and though in the octagon [ at the north end ] the decorative effect of row upon row of books soaring upwards towards the cornice was considerable , the loftiest were totally inaccessible save to those who could scale the longest and <unk> ladders . Further , the appointments were of such surpassing mag @-@ <unk> that no ink @-@ pots were allowed in the room for fear of accidents . 
 The building did not last very long — damage to the Inn during the Blitz completely destroyed the Library and a large part of its collection , although the rare manuscripts , which had been moved elsewhere , survived . After the destruction of much of the Inn 's collection , George VI donated replacements for many lost texts . A prefabricated building in the Walks was used to hold the surviving books while a new Library was constructed , and the new building ( designed by Sir Edward Maufe ) was opened in 1958 . It is similar in size to the old Holker Library , but is more workmanlike and designed to allow for easy access to the books . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 Having existed for over 600 years , Gray 's Inn has a long list of notable members and honorary members . Even as the smallest of the Inns of Court it has had members who have been particularly noted lawyers and judges , such as Francis Bacon , The 1st Earl of Birkenhead , Baron <unk> , Lord Bingham of Cornhill , Lord Hoffmann and others . Outside the Bar and judiciary of England and Wales , members have included the clergy ( including five Archbishops of Canterbury ) , industrialists like John Wynne , astronomers such as John Lee , media figures , like Huw Thomas , and members of the Bar and judiciary of other nations , such as Sir Ti @-@ liang Yang ( former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Hong Kong ) , B. R. Ambedkar ( principal architect of the Constitution of India ) and former presidents of Cyprus Spyros <unk> , <unk> Papadopoulos , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = Nier ( video game ) = 
 Nier ( romanized as NieR in the Japanese version ) is an action role @-@ playing video game developed by Cavia and published by Square Enix . It was released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in Australia , Europe , Japan and North America in April 2010 . In Japan , the game was released as Nier Gestalt ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) for the Xbox 360 , while an alternate version entitled Nier Replicant ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) was released for PlayStation 3 with a younger main character . A version that combined elements from both releases was in development for PlayStation Vita , but was cancelled in March 2011 due to Dragon Quest X taking precedence . 
 The game is a spin @-@ off from the Drakengard series , and follows the fifth ending of the first game , the events of which have left the planet Earth in a state of decay . Set over one thousand years after this , the game puts the player in control of the titular protagonist Nier , as he attempts to find a cure for an illness , known as the Black Scrawl , to which his daughter Yonah has succumbed . Partnering with a talking book known as Grimoire Weiss , he journeys with two other characters , Kainé and Emil , as he attempts to find a remedy and understand the nature of the creatures known as Shades that stalk the world . The gameplay borrows elements from various video game genres , occasionally switching between them and the main RPG @-@ based gameplay . 
 The game was developed to appeal both to older players and to players outside Japan , where the developer was based . The music was composed by Keiichi Okabe , head of Monaca , a music composition studio , and has sparked the release of several albums . Nier was released to mixed reception ; reviewers praised the story , characters and soundtrack and were mixed in their opinions of how well the disparate gameplay elements were connected . Criticism was given for the execution of some gameplay elements , particularly the side quests , and was especially pronounced for the graphics , which were regarded as substandard . A sequel titled Nier : Automata is currently being developed by Square Enix and PlatinumGames for the PlayStation 4 , featuring many returning staff . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players take control of Nier — a middle @-@ aged man in Nier and Nier Gestalt and a teenaged boy in Nier Replicant — though the character can be renamed by the player . The player directly controls Nier through a third @-@ person perspective to interact with people , objects , and enemies throughout the game . The player can also turn the camera around the characters , which allows for a 360 ° view of the surroundings . The three @-@ dimensional world is divided into areas separated by loading screens , and the player can move freely throughout these areas by walking , running , jumping , and climbing ladders . In specific rooms and buildings , the camera swings to the side and Nier is restricted to moving as in a two @-@ dimensional platforming environment , while during certain battles the camera pulls up to simulate a top @-@ down shoot ' em up or other video game genres . 
 While traveling the player is frequently attacked by monsters , which include shadowy figures called Shades , large animals , and robots . Defeating these enemies gives the player experience points that can increase Nier 's power , and money that can be used to purchase items . Nier can attack these creatures with either a one- or two @-@ handed sword , or a spear . These weapons can be customized to have greater damage and abilities using materials that can be purchased , dropped from monsters , or scavenged around the world . Multiple different varieties of each weapon type can be acquired . The player can also use magic spells , which require enough energy from a constantly regenerating amount to cast . These spells include projectiles and large shadowy fists , among others ; new spells are acquired in the first half of the game by completing specific battles . In addition to the main plotline , Nier includes numerous side @-@ quests , which give the player experience points and money , as well as fishing and farming segments . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game opens with a prologue during the summer of 2049 in a snowstorm . In a modern , broken @-@ down grocery store , Nier fends off attacks from ethereal monsters to protect his sick young daughter , Yonah . After defeating the monsters , he checks on Yonah , who has begun to cough badly . The game then cuts to 1 @,@ 312 years later , where the player sees what appears to be the same two characters , now living in a village built upon the ruins of an old town . The low @-@ technology village is one of several , and is surrounded by more modern ruins such as the remnants of train tracks and industrial machinery . The areas between towns are filled with monsters known as Shades that attack travelers . 
 As Yonah 's illness , the Black Scrawl , is terminal , Nier sets out to look for a cure . As he does , Nier finds a talking book , Grimoire Weiss , which suggests that the two team up to use Weiss ' magic and to find a cure for Yonah 's disease . In their search , they encounter Kainé , a hot @-@ tempered and foul @-@ mouthed swordswoman ; and Emil , a blindfolded boy whose eyes <unk> anyone they see . After journeying for a time , the village is attacked by a giant shade ; the battle culminates in Yonah being carried away by a master Shade that suddenly appears — the Shadowlord — who carries his own book , Grimoire Noir . 
 The game then jumps five years forward . Nier and the others are trying to find the parts to a key that they believe will help them locate the Shadowlord and Grimoire Noir . After defeating five Shades and assembling the key , the team go to defeat the Shadowlord . There , Devola and <unk> , characters who have been guiding Nier on his quest , appear to try to stop them . They explain that over 1300 years prior , humanity faced extinction due to an incurable disease . In an attempt to survive , they separated their souls from their bodies using Grimoire Noir and Weiss . They created clones resistant to the disease , Replicants , and intended to recombine the souls , or <unk> , with the Replicant bodies once it had died out ; Devola and <unk> were androids set to oversee the project . Over time , the Replicants had begun to form their own identities ; while the <unk> , or Shades , had grown aggressive to them . 
 Nier defeats the pair , with Emil sacrificing himself to ensure his friends ' progress . The remaining group then defeats the Shadowlord , and discovers that he is the Gestalt form of the Nier from the prologue . Driven to protect his Yonah , he was the first Gestalt and has combined her with the Replicant Yonah . The original Yonah , however , tells the Gestalt Nier that she can hear the new Yonah inside her , and that she loves the Replicant Nier and deserves the body just as much . She vacates the body , and Nier and Yonah are reunited . 
 If the player plays the game again , they start just after the five @-@ year skip . They learn about Kainé 's past , including that she is intersex , which along with the death of her parents resulted in her ostracism as a child , and that she is partially possessed by a Shade . The player gains the ability to understand what the shades are saying , including the one possessing Kainé , though in @-@ game Nier , Weiss , and Emil are still unable to . Additional cutscenes are also shown , giving the motivations and backstory behind the Shade bosses that are fought and showing them as sentient people trying to defend their friends against Nier . The ending to the second playthrough shows that Emil survives his sacrifice , and that Gestalt Nier and Yonah are reunited in the afterlife . A third playthrough presents the player with a choice in the ending to save Kainé , who is seen to be dying in agony ; Nier can either kill her to end her suffering , or sacrifice his life for her . The latter choice not only erases all memory of him from the other characters ' minds , shown in a final cutscene , but also deletes all of the player 's saved progress , as if the game had never been played . Moreover , if the player wants to start a new game , they will be unable to enter the same name chosen for the previous playthrough for the Nier character . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept that would become Nier was first proposed following the release of Drakengard 2 and the reveal of seventh generation consoles . The original concept was for a third entry in the Drakengard series . It was intended to be for PlayStation 3 due to the lessening importance of the PlayStation 2 , which Drakengard 2 had been made for . However , as the project evolved , the original ideas were reworked and the game eventually became a spin @-@ off from the main series . Despite this , the game 's director Taro Yoko continues to think of it as the third Drakengard game . Including concept planning , the total development time lasted three years , with two years spent actually developing the game . It was initially a small @-@ scale project , but during planning it grew into a full @-@ fledged role @-@ playing game . Development was handled by Cavia with help from Square Enix , who had previously provided development support for the Drakengard games . Square Enix had minimal input on Yoko 's vision for the game 's atmosphere and story , allowing him high creative control . 
 Nier is intended to be set 1000 years after the events of Drakengard 's fifth ending . In this scenario , the game 's protagonists Caim and Angelus travel across a dimensional boundary to fight a monstrous beast . After winning the battle and killing the monster , they are shot down by a fighter jet and killed ; the remnants of their bodies cause the Black Scrawl . According to Yoko , after the dark story of Drakengard , Yoko focused on more positive themes of friendship and combined effort . Much of the game was inspired by the September 11 attacks and the War on Terror . Yoko took from it the idea of a terrible event where both sides believed they were doing the right thing , and wanted to show the player multiple perspectives of the same events . The term " Replicant " was coined by Yoko from the 1982 science fiction movie Blade Runner , although Yoko did not cite a particular source for Nier 's name , passing it off as a codename that persisted through development . 
 The game 's characters were designed by Kimihiko Fujisaka , who had previously worked on the main Drakengard series . Two character designs for the protagonist were created for Nier . The developers believed that the Japanese audience would respond more strongly to a younger protagonist , while non @-@ Japanese audiences would prefer an adult Nier character . Other than changing Nier 's appearance and modifying a few lines of dialogue to fit with Nier being a father rather than a brother to Yonah , the developers made no changes between the two versions ; while it was initially believed that the older Nier was the character 's original design , an interview with Yoko clarified that the young Nier was the original vision . Many characters underwent changes during development , and some needed to be cut : there were originally thirteen Grimoires , with all but three being cut : those that remained were Weiss , Noir and Rubrum . Emil 's character was derived from a female character named <unk> , while Kainé was originally a far more feminine type who hid her violent nature . Yonah 's original Japanese name was derived from the Biblical name Jonah : this could not be take verbatim into its localized form due to the name being associated with a man , so the name was changed to " Yonah " . Kainé 's character was made intersexual , since the team felt it fitted in with many other aspects of her gritty backstory . Kainé 's status as an intersexual caused some commotion in western territories , which is something the team did not actively intend . Yoko attributed the original suggestion to female staff members working on the game . 
 The combat and action elements of Nier were inspired by the God of War series of games , which both Taro and Saito enjoyed . While the games had not been as popular in Japan as in North America , the two felt that the idea of having boss fights with different combat styles than the regular battles was an idea that would appeal to players in both regions . The changing styles , as well as the occasional changes in camera angle and movement , were meant to " accentuate [ the ] gap between real , modern scenery and the fantasy world " as a tie @-@ in to the game 's story . The game was meant to appeal to older players ; it was intended as an action @-@ RPG for an older market than Square Enix 's action @-@ RPG series Kingdom Hearts . This influenced the decision to have a main character in his 30s , as well as more blood and swearing than typical in a Square Enix RPG . The fusion of different gameplay styles was included as a homage to earlier gameplay styles and genres . 
 Nier was originally intended to be exclusive to the Xbox 360 , but after deciding to also develop the game for PlayStation 3 , the developers decided to further divide the Japanese release of the game . Nier Gestalt would be released for the Xbox 360 , featuring the adult Nier ( as in the international release for both platforms ) , while Nier Replicant , for the PlayStation 3 , would feature the young Nier . The localizations for the game — in English , French , and German — were produced during development so that all of the versions could be released at the same time , and so that Cavia and Square Enix could solicit feedback from North America and Europe on the game so that it would appeal to players outside Japan . Nier was officially unveiled in June 2009 at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 for both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , to be developed by Cavia and published by Square Enix . It was directed by Yoko , and produced by Yosuke Saito of Square Enix . Due to its high violence , the game was given a CERO D rating in Japan . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack to Nier was composed by a collaboration of the studio <unk> , directed by Keiichi Okabe and including Kakeru Ishihama and Keigo Hoashi , and Takafumi Nishimura from Cavia . Okabe served as the lead composer and as the director for the project as a whole . Okabe was brought onto the project when the concept for the game was first being devised , and worked intermittently on the soundtrack for the next three years until its release . The music for the game was generally composed entirely separately from the development of the game . The music was designed for different motifs to appear in various arrangements throughout the soundtrack , and also to convey a sense of sadness even during the " thrilling " tracks . Okabe was allowed a great deal of freedom regarding what the music was to sound like ; game director Yoko Taro 's main request was that he use a lot of vocal works . 
 The soundtrack to Nier is largely composed of melancholy acoustic pieces which heavily feature vocals by vocalist Emi Evans ( Emiko Rebecca Evans ) , a singer from England living in Tokyo . She is the singer for the band <unk> , and had previously worked on video games such as Etrian Odyssey . In addition to singing , Evans was asked to write her own lyrics in futuristic languages . The composers gave her preliminary version of songs and the style they wished the language to be in , such as Gaelic or French , and she invented the words . Evans wrote songs in versions of Gaelic , Portuguese , Spanish , Italian , French , English and Japanese , where she tried to imagine what they would sound like after 1000 years of drifting . 
 Square Enix released a soundtrack album of music from the game , titled Nier Gestalt & Replicant Original Soundtrack , on April 21 , 2010 . The soundtrack album reached number 24 on the Japanese Oricon music charts , and remained on the charts for 11 weeks . As preorder bonuses for Nier Gestalt and Nier Replicant , two mini @-@ albums , Nier Gestalt Mini Album and Nier Replicant Mini Album , were included . An album of arranged music , NieR Gestalt & Replicant 15 Nightmares & Arrange Tracks , was published by Square Enix on December 8 , 2010 . The arranged album reached number 59 on the Oricon music charts , a position it held for a week . Another album , NieR Tribute Album <unk> , was released on September 14 , 2011 , and an album of piano arrangements , Piano Collections Nier Gestalt & Replicant , was published on March 21 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Japan , Nier Gestalt sold over 12 @,@ 500 copies in Japan the week of its release , while Replicant sold over 60 @,@ 000 and was the top @-@ selling video game in Japan that week . Replicant sold over 121 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of May 2010 , and ended the year with over 134 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 Nier received mixed reviews . Reviewers criticized the graphics , with Ryan Clements of IGN saying that " one of Nier 's greatest flaws is its visuals , " while GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd bemoaned the " flavorless visuals " and " lifeless environments " . Dustin Quillen of 1UP.com said that the game " looks downright primitive " , while Adriaan den Ouden of RPGamer , who awarded the game a higher score than most , said that " the environments are bland and poorly rendered " . The music and voice acting , however , were praised ; Clements said that " both are quite excellent " , den Ouden called the soundtrack " absolutely fantastic " , Chris Schilling of Eurogamer said that the music was full of " memorable themes " , and one of the four reviewers for the Japanese Weekly Famitsu termed it " a cut above " . 
 Reviewers were divided in their opinion on the effectiveness of the multiple styles of gameplay presented . Seth Schiesel of The New York Times said that while " there are plenty of games that surpass it in each area , " that Nier pulled all of the styles together into a " coherent , compelling whole " instead of feeling " disjointed " ; he especially praised a section of the game that is presented entirely through text . Patrick Kolan of IGN Australia , however , said that while the different styles were " interesting " and one of the game 's biggest strengths , they suffered from poor execution and cohesion and left the game " with split @-@ personality disorder " . Clements said that " the developers ' ideas sometimes outshine the actual implementation " , while highlighting the gameplay elements as part of what made the game fun . Adriaan den Ouden called out the variety as the best part of the game , likening it to a buffet table , while also acknowledging that none of the sections were " amazing " on their own and could easily be looked upon poorly . 
 The regular combat was reviewed as solid , if not exceptional , and the sidequests were seen as repetitive , with Quillen saying that " the side quests in Nier are about as numerous as they are totally mindless , " VanOrd calling them " a series of monotonous events , often connected only by long stretches of nothing , " and a Famitsu reviewer saying that they " didn 't see much purpose " to them . Clements said that the combat had " a fair amount of satisfaction " , though players should " not expect anything too extraordinary " , and Kolan termed the combat as " moderately deep " . Critics gave a generally positive review to the plot and characters ; VanOrd liked most of the characters but thought Nier was bland and the story " soggy " , while Schiesel called the story " provocative " and " profound " , saying that it " succeeds at fostering an emotional investment in its characters and in its world " . Quillen said that the plot " takes some fascinating and truly original turns " and that Nier has " a supporting cast of genuinely interesting folks , " and Schilling said that the story made the game " difficult to dislike " . The Famitsu reviewer that viewed the game the most favorably said that he was " blown away " by the multiple endings , and that " nothing like it 's been done in gaming " . 
 In 2015 , Jeffrey Matulef of Eurogamer characterized Nier as " the rare game that gets better with age " . Despite " poor sales and tepid reviews " , he wrote , the game had acquired a cult following , which he attributed to its " sense of wonder " due to its cryptic storytelling , mashup assortment of game mechanics and melancholy mood . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On May 11 , 2010 , Square Enix released a piece of downloadable content for the game , titled " The World of Recycled Vessel " . The small expansion features a series of fifteen battles with the incarnation of Nier other than the one in the specific version of the game . Nier enters the battles in a dream world accessed through a diary in his house . The expansion offers new costumes and weapons for the game . Square Enix executive producer Yosuke Saito later commented that " a number of things " related to Nier were in progress , and that an announcement could be due in 2011 . The only announcement ended up not being for a new Nier video game , but instead for a live evening concert for Nier 's music titled " Nier Night ~ Evening of Madness " which took place on October 28 , 2011 . 
 Nier was the last game that Cavia made ; the company was absorbed into its parent company , AQ Interactive , in July 2010 . In March 2011 , there were plans made between Yoko and Takuya Iwasaki , one of the original producers for Drakengard , to develop a port of Nier for the PlayStation Vita at Iwasaki 's company Orca . The port would have incorporated material from both versions of the game . When Orca was chosen to help develop Dragon Quest X , the project was shelved . A number of key staff from Nier 's development , including director Yoko and Okabe , would later reunite to work on a new entry in the Drakengard series from which Nier was spun off . A sequel titled Nier : Automata is being developed by Square Enix and PlatinumGames for the PlayStation 4 for a 2016 release . Yoko , Saito and Okabe returned to their previous roles . Other staff members include producer Atsushi Inaba and artist Akihiko Yoshida . 
 = Tulsa , Oklahoma = 
 Tulsa / <unk> / is the second @-@ largest city in the state of Oklahoma and 47th @-@ most populous city in the United States . As of July 2015 , the population was 403 @,@ 505 , an increase of 11 @,@ 599 over that reported in the 2010 Census . It is the principal municipality of the Tulsa Metropolitan Area , a region with 981 @,@ 005 residents in the MSA and 1 @,@ 151 @,@ 172 in the CSA . The city serves as the county seat of Tulsa County , the most densely populated county in Oklahoma , with urban development extending into Osage , Rogers , and Wagoner counties . 
 Tulsa was settled between 1828 and 1836 by the <unk> Band of Creek Native American tribe . For most of the 20th century , the city held the nickname " Oil Capital of the World " and played a major role as one of the most important hubs for the American oil industry . 
 Once heavily dependent on the oil industry , economic downturn and subsequent diversification efforts created an economic base in the energy , finance , aviation , telecommunications and technology sectors . The Tulsa Port of Catoosa , at the head of the McClellan @-@ Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System , is the most inland river port in the U.S. with access to international waterways . Two institutions of higher education within the city have sports teams at the NCAA Division I level , Oral Roberts University and the University of Tulsa . 
 It is situated on the Arkansas River at the foothills of the Ozark Mountains in northeast Oklahoma , a region of the state known as " Green Country " . Considered the cultural and arts center of Oklahoma , Tulsa houses two world @-@ renowned art museums , full @-@ time professional opera and ballet companies , and one of the nation 's largest concentrations of art deco architecture . The city has been called one of America 's most livable large cities by Partners for Livable Communities , Forbes , and <unk> America . FDi Magazine in 2009 ranked the city no . 8 in the U.S. for cities of the future . In 2012 , Tulsa was ranked among the top 50 best cities in the United States by BusinessWeek . People from Tulsa are called " Tulsans " . 
 = = History = = 
 The area where Tulsa now exists was considered Indian Territory when it was first formally settled by the <unk> and Creek tribes in 1836 . They established a home under the Creek Council Oak Tree at the present day intersection of Cheyenne Avenue and 18th Street , and named their new settlement <unk> , meaning " old town " in the Creek language , which later became " Tulsa " . The area around Tulsa was also settled by members of the other so @-@ called " Five Civilized Tribes " who had relocated to Oklahoma from the Southern United States ; most of modern Tulsa is located in the Creek Nation , with parts located in the Cherokee Nation and Osage Nation . 
 Although Oklahoma was not yet a state during the Civil War , the Tulsa area did see its share of fighting . Battle of <unk> @-@ <unk> took place on the north side of Tulsa and a number of battles and skirmishes took place in nearby counties . 
 = = = Incorporation and " Oil Capital " Prosperity = = = 
 On January 18 , 1898 , Tulsa was officially incorporated and elected its first mayor , Edward Calkins . 
 Tulsa was a small town near the banks of the Arkansas River in 1901 when its first oil well , named Sue Bland No. 1 , was established . Much of the oil was discovered on land whose mineral rights were owned by members of the Osage Nation under a system of headrights . By 1905 , the discovery of the large Glenn Pool ( located approximately 15 miles south of downtown Tulsa and site of the present @-@ day town of <unk> ) prompted a rush of entrepreneurs to the area 's growing number of oil fields ; Tulsa 's population swelled to over 140 @,@ 000 between 1901 and 1930 . By 1909 , seven years after the discovery of oil in the area , Tulsa 's population had sprouted to 180 @,@ 000 . Unlike the early settlers of Northeastern Oklahoma , who most frequently migrated from the South and Texas , many of these new oil @-@ driven settlers came to Tulsa from the commercial centers of the East Coast and lower Midwest . This migration distinguished the city 's demographics from neighboring communities ( Tulsa has larger and more prominent Catholic and Jewish populations than most Oklahoma cities ) and is reflected in the designs of early Tulsa 's upscale neighborhoods . 
 Known as the " Oil Capital of the World " for most of the 20th century , the city 's success in the energy industry prompted construction booms in the popular Art Deco style of the time . Profits from the oil industry continued through the Great Depression , helping the city 's economy fare better than most in the United States during the 1930s . 
 In the early 20th century , Tulsa was home to the " Black Wall Street " , one of the most prosperous black communities in the United States at the time . Located in the Greenwood neighborhood , it was the site of the Tulsa Race Riot , one of the nation 's worst acts of racial violence and civil disorder , with whites attacking blacks . Sixteen hours of rioting on May 31 and June 1 , 1921 , was only ended when National Guardsmen were brought in by the Governor . An official report later claimed that 23 black and 16 white citizens were killed , but other estimates suggest as many as 300 people died , most of them black . Over 800 people were admitted to local hospitals with injuries , and an estimated 10 @,@ 000 people were left homeless as 35 city blocks , composed of 1 @,@ 256 residences , were destroyed by fire . Property damage was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 8 million . Efforts to obtain reparations for survivors of the violence have been unsuccessful but the city and state re @-@ examined the events in the early 21st century , acknowledging the terrible actions that had taken place . 
 In 1925 , Tulsa businessman Cyrus Avery , known as the " Father of Route 66 , " began his campaign to create a road linking Chicago to Los Angeles by establishing the U.S. Highway 66 Association in Tulsa , earning the city the nickname the " Birthplace of Route 66 " . Once completed , U.S. Route 66 took an important role in Tulsa 's development as the city served as a popular rest stop for travelers , who were greeted by Route 66 icons such as the Meadow Gold Sign and the Blue Whale of Catoosa . During this period , Bob Wills and his group , The Texas Playboys , began their long performing stint at a small ballroom in downtown Tulsa . In 1935 , Cain 's Ballroom became the base for the group , which is largely credited for creating Western Swing music . The venue continued to attract famous musicians through its history , and is still in operation today . 
 For the remainder of the mid @-@ 20th century , the city had a master plan to construct parks , churches , museums , rose gardens , improved infrastructure , and increased national advertising . The <unk> Dam , built during this era to accommodate the city 's water needs , was considered one of the largest public works projects of the era . In the 1950s , Time magazine dubbed Tulsa as " America 's Most Beautiful City . " 
 A national recession greatly affected the city 's economy in 1982 , as areas of Texas and Oklahoma heavily dependent on oil suffered the freefall in gas prices due to a glut , and a mass exodus of oil industries . Tulsa , heavily dependent on the oil industry , was one of the hardest hit cities by the fall of oil prices . By 1992 , the state 's economy had fully recovered , but leaders worked to expand into sectors unrelated to oil and energy . 
 = = = Tulsa in the Twenty @-@ first Century = = = 
 In 2003 , the " Vision 2025 " program was approved by voters , to enhance and revitalize Tulsa 's infrastructure and tourism industry . The keystone project of the initiative , the BOK Center , was designed to be a home for the city 's minor league hockey and arena football teams , as well as a venue for major concerts and conventions . The multi @-@ purpose arena , designed by famed architect Cesar Pelli , broke ground in 2005 and was opened on August 30 , 2008 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Tulsa is located in the northeastern corner of Oklahoma , 99 miles ( 159 km ) northeast of Oklahoma City ; situated between the edge of the Great Plains and the foot of the Ozarks in a generally forested region of rolling hills . The city touches the eastern extent of the Cross Timbers , an ecoregion of forest and prairie transitioning from the drier plains of the west to the wetter forests of the east . With a wetter climate than points westward , Tulsa serves as a gateway to " Green Country " , a popular and official designation for northeast Oklahoma that stems from the region 's green vegetation and relatively large number of hills and lakes compared to central and western areas of Oklahoma , which lie largely in the drier Great Plains region of the Central United States . Located near the western edge of the U.S. Interior Highlands , northeastern Oklahoma is the most topographically diverse part of the state , containing seven of Oklahoma 's 11 eco @-@ regions and more than half of its state parks . The region encompasses 30 lakes or reservoirs and borders the neighboring states of Kansas , Missouri , and Arkansas . The geographic coordinates of the city of Tulsa are 36 ° 7 ′ 53 ″ N 95 ° 56 ′ 14 ″ W ( 36 @.@ <unk> , − 95 @.@ <unk> ) , with an elevation of 700 feet ( 210 m ) above sea level . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 The city developed on both sides of the prominent Arkansas River , which flows in a wide , sandy @-@ bottomed channel . Its flow through the Tulsa area is controlled by upstream flood control reservoirs , but its width and depth can vary widely throughout the year , such as during periods of high rainfall or severe drought . A low @-@ water dam maintains a full channel at all times in the area adjacent to downtown Tulsa . This portion of the river is known as Zink Lake . 
 Heavily wooded and with abundant parks and water areas , the city has several prominent hills , such as " Shadow Mountain " and " Turkey Mountain " , which create varied terrain , especially in its southern portions . While its central and northern sections are generally flat to gently undulating , the Osage Hills extension into the northwestern part of the city further varies the landscape . Holmes Peak , north of the city , is the tallest point in the Tulsa Metro area at 1360 ft ( 415 m ) According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 186 @.@ 8 square miles ( 484 km2 ) , of which 182 @.@ 6 square miles ( 473 km2 ) of it is land and 4 @.@ 2 square miles ( 11 km2 ) of it ( 2 @.@ 24 % ) is water . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 = = = = Architecture = = = = 
 A building boom in the early 20th century gave Tulsa one of the largest concentrations of art deco architecture in the United States . Most commonly in the zigzag and streamline styles , the city 's art deco is dotted throughout its older neighborhoods , primarily in downtown and midtown . A collection of large art deco structures such as the Mid @-@ Continent Tower , the Boston Avenue Methodist Church , and the <unk> , have attracted events promoting preservation and architectural interest . In 2001 , Tulsa served as the host city for the International Art Deco Congress , a semiannual event designed to promote art deco architecture internationally . 
 In addition , the city 's early prosperity funded the construction of a number of elegant Craftsman , Georgian , storybook , Tudor , Greek Revival , Italianate , Spanish revival , and colonial revival homes ( many of which can be found in Tulsa 's uptown and Midtown neighborhoods ) . 
 Building booms in later half of the twentieth century gave the city a larger base of contemporary architectural styles , including a number of buildings by famed architect Bruce Goff , who lived in Tulsa . South , East and Midtown <unk> are also home to a number of ranch and Mid @-@ Century Modern homes that reflect Tulsa 's prosperous post @-@ war period . 
 The BOK Tower , built during this period , is the 2nd tallest building in Oklahoma and the surrounding states of Missouri , New Mexico , Arkansas , and Kansas . Tulsa also has the third- , and fourth @-@ tallest buildings in the state , including the <unk> Tower , which is located in South Tulsa across from Oral Roberts University , far from downtown . One of the area 's unique architectural complexes , Oral Roberts University , is built in a Post @-@ Modern Futuristic style , incorporating bright gold structures with sharp , jetting edges and clear geometric shapes . The BOK Center , Tulsa 's new arena , incorporates many of the city 's most prominent themes , including Native American , art deco , and contemporary architectural styles . Intended to be an architectural icon , the building was designed by César Pelli , the architect of the Petronas Towers in Malaysia . 
 = = = = Neighborhoods = = = = 
 Downtown Tulsa is an area of approximately 1 @.@ 4 square miles ( 3 @.@ 6 km2 ) surrounded by an inner @-@ dispersal loop created by Interstate 244 , Highway 64 , and Highway 75 . The area serves as Tulsa 's financial and business district , and is the focus of a large initiative to draw tourism , which includes plans to capitalize on the area 's historic architecture . Much of Tulsa 's convention space is located in downtown , such as the Tulsa Performing Arts Center , the Tulsa Convention Center , and the BOK Center . Prominent downtown sub @-@ districts include the Blue Dome District , the Brady Arts district , the " Oil Capital Historic District " , the Greenwood Historical District , Owen Park Historical Neighborhood , and the site of ONEOK Field , a baseball stadium for the Tulsa Drillers opened in 2010 . 
 The city 's historical residential core lies in an area known as Midtown , containing upscale neighborhoods built in the early 20th century with architecture ranging from art deco to Greek Revival . The University of Tulsa , the Swan Lake neighborhood , Philbrook Museum , and the upscale shopping districts of Utica Square , Cherry Street , and Brookside are located in this region . A large portion of the city 's southern half has developed since the 1970s , containing low density housing and retail developments . This region , marked by secluded homes and suburban neighborhoods , contains one of the state 's largest shopping malls , Woodland Hills Mall , as well as Southern Hills Country Club , and Oral Roberts University . East of Highway 169 and north of 61st street , a diverse racial makeup marks the eastern portions of the city , with large Asian and Mexican communities and much of the city 's manufacturing industry . 
 Areas of Tulsa west of the Arkansas River are called West Tulsa , and are marked by large parks , wilderness reserves , and large oil refineries . The northern tier of the city is home to OSU @-@ Tulsa , Gilcrease Museum , Tulsa International Airport , the Tulsa Zoo , the Tulsa Air and Space Museum , and the nation 's third @-@ largest municipal park , Mohawk Park . 
 = = = = = Walkability = = = = = 
 A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Tulsa 32nd most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Tulsa has a temperate climate of the humid subtropical variety ( Köppen Cfa ) with a yearly average temperature of 60 @.@ 8 ° F ( 16 @.@ 0 ° C ) and an average precipitation of 41 @.@ 0 inches ( 1 @,@ 040 mm ) . As is typical of temperate zones , weather patterns vary by season with occasional extremes in temperature and rainfall . 
 Primarily in the spring and early summer months , the city is subjected to severe thunderstorms containing large hail , damaging winds , and , occasionally , tornadoes , providing the area with a disproportionate share of its annual rainfall . Severe weather is not limited to this season , however . For instance , on December 5 , 1975 , and on December 24 , 1982 , Tulsa experienced tornadoes . Due to its potential for major flooding events , the city has developed one of the most extensive flood control systems in the nation . A comprehensive flood management plan was developed in 1984 following a severe flood caused by a stalled weather front that dropped 15 in ( 380 mm ) of rain overnight , killing 14 , injuring 288 , and destroying 7 @,@ 000 buildings totaling $ 180 million in damage . In the early 1990s and again in 2000 , the Federal Emergency Management Agency honored Tulsa as leading the nation in flood plain management . 
 On average , May is the wettest month , averaging 5 @.@ 9 inches of rainfall . Triple @-@ digit temperatures ( ≥ 38 ° C ) are observed on average 11 days per year , sometimes exceeding 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) from July to early September , usually accompanied by high humidity brought in by southerly winds ; The highest recorded temperature recorded was 115 ° F ( 46 ° C ) on August 10 , 1936 . Lack of air circulation due to heat and humidity during the summer months leads to higher concentrations of ozone , prompting the city to release " Ozone Alerts " , encouraging all parties to do their part in complying with the Clean Air Act and United States Environmental Protection Agency standards . The autumn season is usually short , consisting of pleasant , sunny days followed by cool nights . Winter temperatures , while generally mild , dip below 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) on 3 nights , and occasionally below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) , the most recent such occurrence being a − 2 ° F ( − 19 ° C ) reading on January 6 , 2014 . Seasonal snowfall averages 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 24 @.@ 4 cm ) , and , as of 2016 , only three winters on record have officially recorded a trace or no snow , the most recent being 1910 – 11 . The lowest recorded temperature was − 16 ° F ( − 27 ° C ) on January 22 , 1930 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2010 Census , Tulsa had a population of 391 @,@ 906 and the racial and ethnic composition was as follows : 
 White American : 62 @.@ 6 % ( 57 @.@ 9 % Non @-@ Hispanic Whites , down from 85 @.@ 7 % in 1970 ) 
 African American : 15 @.@ 6 % 
 Hispanic or Latino ( of any race ) : 14 @.@ 1 % ( 11 @.@ 5 % Mexican , 0 @.@ 4 % Puerto Rican , 0 @.@ 3 % Guatemalan , 0 @.@ 2 % Spanish , 0 @.@ 2 % Honduran , 0 @.@ 2 % Salvadoran ) 
 Some other race : 8 @.@ 0 % 
 Two or more races : 5 @.@ 9 % 
 Native American : 5 @.@ 3 % 
 Asian American : 2 @.@ 3 % ( 0 @.@ 5 % Indian , 0 @.@ 4 % Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 3 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 2 % Hmong , 0 @.@ 2 % Korean , 0 @.@ 2 % Burmese ) 
 Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander : 0 @.@ 1 % 
 As of the 2010 census , there were 391 @,@ 906 people , 163 @,@ 975 households , and 95 @,@ 246 families residing in the city , with a population density of 1 @,@ 991 @.@ 9 inhabitants per square mile ( 769 @.@ 1 / km2 ) . There were 185 @,@ 127 housing units at an average density of 982 @.@ 3 per square mile ( 379 @.@ 2 / km2 ) . Of 163 @,@ 975 households , 27 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 38 @.@ 2 % were married couples living together , 14 @.@ 6 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 41 @.@ 9 % were non @-@ families . Of all households , 34 @.@ 5 % are made up of only one person , and 10 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 34 people and the average family size was 3 @.@ 04 . 
 In the city proper , the age distribution was 24 @.@ 8 % of the population under the age of 18 , 10 @.@ 9 % from 18 to 24 , 29 @.@ 9 % from 25 to 44 , 21 @.@ 5 % from 45 to 64 , and 12 @.@ 9 % who were 65 years of age or older , while the median age was 34 years . For every 100 females there were 93 @.@ 5 males , while for every 100 females over the age of 17 there were 90 @.@ 4 males . In 2011 , the median income for a household in the city was $ 40 @,@ 268 and the median income for a family was $ 51 @,@ 977 . The per capita income for the city was $ 26 @,@ 727 . About 19 @.@ 4 % of the population were below the poverty line . Of the city 's population over the age of 25 , 29 @.@ 8 % holds a bachelor 's degree or higher , and 86 @.@ 5 % have a high school diploma or equivalent . 
 = = = Metropolitan area = = = 
