 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ida ( Uding ) = = = 
 Initially a tropical disturbance between Kosrae and Enewetak on November 6 , the system moved south of west until November 9 , when the system began tracking north of west . The system organized into a tropical depression on November 10 , then tropical storm on November 11 , while moving towards the Philippines . Six days after Herbert , Ida crossed the central portion of the archipelago between November 12 and 13 . Interaction with the islands weakened the system back into a tropical depression before emerging into the South China sea . Strengthening back into a tropical storm on November 14 , Ida transcribed an anticyclonic , or clockwise , loop , weakening back into a tropical depression on November 16 while moving to the south due to strong southwest winds aloft . The depression moved south @-@ southwest before dissipating on November 19 . Two died when a cargo ship sank near Dongsha . 
 = = = Typhoon Joe ( Weling ) = = = 
 The initial tropical disturbance formed on November 12 south of Guam . Moving west @-@ northwest , the system organized into a tropical depression in the Philippine Sea on November 17 , and then a tropical storm on November 20 . Joe recurved just east of the Philippines due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge , strengthening into a typhoon on November 20 . East of Taiwan , Joe weakened back into a tropical storm due to strong southwest winds aloft on November 23 and then a tropical depression on November 24 . Turning southeast , the remaining low level circulation continued weakening , dissipating on November 25 . 
 = = = November Tropical Depression = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the southern South China sea on November 24 , dissipating the following day without making landfall on any neighbouring land mass . This depression was acknowledged by the Hong Kong Royal Observatory in their year end summary . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Kim ( Yaning ) = = = 
 The initial tropical disturbance formed south of Majuro on November 27 . The small system developed quickly , becoming a tropical depression later that day , a tropical storm on November 28 , and a typhoon on November 29 . Kim turned northwest later the day due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge , before a strengthening high pressure system to its north forced a more westerly track by December 2 , with Kim becoming a super typhoon soon afterward . The cyclone moved just north of Saipan , knocking out all electricity and water . Damage on the island totalled US $ 15 million ( 1986 dollars ) . Retaining super typhoon intensity into December 3 , the system weakened and turned northwest on December 4 due to another weakness in the subtropical ridge . The high pressure system to its north restrengthened , turning Kim back to the west on December 5 . On December 8 , Kim made a cyclonic , or counter clockwise , loop due to a strong surface high building to its north , which was completed on December 11 . During the loop , Kim weakened back into a tropical storm , with tropical depression status regained by December 12 as Kim moved northwest . The system recurved east of Taiwan , dissipating by December 14 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Lex = = = 
 The initial tropical disturbance formed on November 30 in the wake of Kim near the International Dateline . The system moved west @-@ northwest , developing into a tropical depression and tropical storm on December 4 . Lex remained a tropical storm for one day , before weakening back into a tropical disturbance on December 5 due to vertical wind shear caused by Typhoon Kim and an upper trough nearby from the northwest . The depression passed between Guam and Saipan on December 7 . Lex recurved south of Iwo Jima on December 8 before becoming an extratropical cyclone on December 9 . 
 = = = Typhoon Marge ( Aning ) = = = 
 A long tracked system , the initial tropical disturbance which led to Marge was noted near the International Dateline on December 10 . Moving north of due west the disturbance was slow to organize , becoming a tropical depression on December 14 southwest of Enewetak . The system strengthened into a tropical storm on December 15 , and a typhoon by December 17 . Early on December 20 , Marge peaked in intensity before turning south of due west due to a strong surface high to its north . On December 21 , Marge moved into the southern Philippines which accelerated its weakening trend . On December 22 , Marge regained tropical storm status and soon after moving into the South China sea , the cyclone weakened into a tropical depression late on December 23 . The depression moved westward for another day before dissipating on December 24 . Marge 's circulation aided the global journey of the Rutan Voyager aircraft , which went on to circle the Earth on one tank of fuel . 
 = = = Typhoon Norris ( Bidang ) = = = 
 The initial tropical disturbance formed near the International Dateline on December 17 , and initially moved west @-@ northwest . The system slowly organized , becoming a tropical depression December 21 , and then a tropical storm on December 23 as it turned more to the west due to a strengthening ridge of high pressure to its north . The cyclone steadily strengthened over the next four days , initially hampered by strong east winds aloft . As the storm moved south of Guam , wind gusts to 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) were recorded on the island . Norris became a typhoon on December 27 . Over the next day and half , intensification continued . On December 28 , a strong surface high pressure system turned Norris to the southwest , and led to slow weakening . The cyclone regained tropical storm strength on December 30 while turning more to the west . Norris crossed the southern Philippines on December 31 and January 1 , weakening into a tropical depression as it emerged into the South China sea . Strong southeast winds aloft prevented redevelopment of the depression . Norris ' remnant circulation turned northwest and dissipated on January 2 well to the south of Hong Kong . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 During the season 26 named tropical cyclones developed in the Western Pacific and were named by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , when it was determined that they had become tropical storms . These names were contributed to a revised list which started on 1979 . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration uses its own naming scheme for tropical cyclones in their area of responsibility . PAGASA assigns names to tropical depressions that form within their area of responsibility and any tropical cyclone that might move into their area of responsibility . Should the list of names for a given year prove to be insufficient , names are taken from an auxiliary list , the first 6 of which are published each year before the season starts . Names not retired from this list will be used again in the 1990 season . This is the same list used for the 1982 season . PAGASA uses its own naming scheme that starts in the Filipino alphabet , with names of Filipino female names ending with " ng " ( A , B , K , D , etc . ) . Names that were not assigned / going to use are marked in gray . 
 = Cyclone Kesiny = 
 Tropical Cyclone Kesiny was the first recorded tropical cyclone – the equivalent of a minimal hurricane – to make landfall in the month of May 2002 in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . The final named storm of the busy 2001 – 02 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season , Kesiny formed on May 2 from a trough near the equator . Its formation was the result of an increase in the Madden – Julian oscillation , which also contributed to a twin storm in the north Indian Ocean that hit Oman , and another set of storms in northeast and southeast Indian Ocean . Kesiny initially moved to the southeast , but later turned to the southwest due to a strengthening ridge . On May 6 , it intensified into a tropical cyclone , but later weakened and was not expected to re @-@ strengthen . However , Kesiny developed an eye and re @-@ intensified into a tropical cyclone on May 9 , reaching peak winds of 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) before striking Madagascar about 60 km ( 37 mi ) southeast of Antsiranana . It weakened while crossing the country , and after turning to the south it struck the country again before dissipating on May 11 . 
 Across Madagascar , Cyclone Kesiny dropped heavy rainfall , reaching 891 mm ( 35 @.@ 1 in ) in three days at Toamasina , the second largest city in the country . The rains caused mudslides and flooding in the eastern portion of the country , wrecking the rice and maize crops and leaving 5 @,@ 000 people homeless . At least 33 bridges were destroyed , and many roads were damaged . A total of 33 people were killed , and 1 @,@ 200 people were injured . The cyclone struck in the midst of a political crisis , in which the top two candidates of the Malagasy presidential election in 2001 declared themselves the winner ; the incumbent , who lost , declared Toamasina as the capital city , and the political instability disrupted relief efforts . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late April 2002 , an area of convection , or thunderstorms , persisted to the west @-@ southwest of Diego Garcia in the south @-@ central Indian Ocean , associated with a trough near the equator . The system had a broad circulation , and initially moved slowly to the east @-@ southeast . It developed due to an increase in the Madden – Julian oscillation ( MJO ) , which moved eastward across the Indian Ocean . The same system spawned a disturbance in the northern Indian Ocean that later struck Oman as a tropical cyclone . Such simultaneous systems in opposite hemispheres occasionally occur in the spring or autumn ; in May 2002 , the powerful MJO pulse produced two such sets of storms , later producing a set in the eastern Indian Ocean that became a deep depression that struck Myanmar and Tropical Storm Errol to the southwest of Indonesia . On April 30 , Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) classified the system as a zone of disturbed weather . It slowly organized , prompting the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a tropical cyclone formation alert late on May 2 , around the time that MFR classified it as Tropical Disturbance 14 . The thunderstorms became more concentrated around an increasingly well @-@ defined center , and with minimal wind shear , the system strengthened into Tropical Depression 14 on May 3 . That day , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 23S . 
 Developing rainbands and a central dense overcast , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Kesiny early on May 4 . Gradual intensification continued , although initially the convection remained dislocated to the west of the center . The circulation later moved beneath the thunderstorms , and a strengthening ridge turned Kesiny toward the west @-@ southwest . Late on May 5 , a ragged eye began forming within the convection , which was indicative of a strengthening storm . That day , MFR upgraded Kesiny to a severe tropical storm . Early on May 6 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , with maximum 1 minute sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Around that time the outflow became pronounced to the north and south , although a decrease in outflow caused Kesiny to weaken . By May 7 , the circulation was exposed from the convection , and little re @-@ intensification was expected . By that time , the storm was located about 650 km ( 400 mi ) east of the northern tip of Madagascar . 
 Despite predictions for no further intensification , Kesiny redeveloped convection late on May 8 that organized into a central dense overcast . By early on May 9 , another eye had developed , and the storm quickly intensified into a tropical cyclone , according to MFR . This occurred despite little change in atmospheric conditions , although outflow had improved . Later on May 9 , Kesiny struck northeastern Madagascar about 60 km ( 37 mi ) southeast of Antsiranana , with peak winds of 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) . This made it the first known tropical cyclone on record to make landfall in the month in the basin . While crossing northern Madagascar , the eye quickly dissipated , and the winds decreased . Although re @-@ intensification was expected over the Mozambique Channel , Kesiny remained weak while turning toward the south . On May 10 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression , and subsequently it made a second landfall about 75 km ( 47 mi ) northeast of Mahajanga . Kesiny dissipated on May 11 while inland . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 While moving through Madagascar , the cyclone produced strong winds , with gusts up to 181 km / h ( 112 mph ) reported . Kesiny dropped heavy rainfall , particularly to the southeast of the center in the outer rainbands . In Toamasina , the second largest city in the country , 484 mm ( 19 @.@ 1 in ) of precipitation fell in 24 hours , and 891 mm ( 35 @.@ 1 in ) fell in three days . In northern Madagascar , rainfall totals were around 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , although they occurred outside the typical rainy season . The three @-@ day total of 136 mm ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) in Antsiranana was eight times the average May precipitation , and occurred at the start of harvesting for rice and maize . As a result , over 50 % of each of the crops were destroyed by Kesiny , amounting to thousands of hectares of destroyed crop fields . The rains caused 63 landslides in the area around Toamasina , destroying 16 bridges . The rains caused widespread flooding and mudslides , including in Toamasina . Flooding contaminated water wells , and many areas lost power for at least five days . In Nosy Be , an island offshore northwestern Madagascar , Kesiny capsized a few boats , and killed two people after a house collapsed . About 165 @,@ 000 residents in Toamasina lost both power and water . In Fenoarivo Atsinanana , seven people died , and the cyclone damaged or destroyed 17 bridges . Throughout the country , Kesiny killed at least 33 people , many of whom due to drownings , and 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Overall , about 500 @,@ 000 people were directly affected , and 1 @,@ 200 people were injured . 
 Cyclone Kesiny struck Madagascar during a period of political strife after the Malagasy presidential election in 2001 . In the election , incumbent president Didier Ratsiraka lost to Marc Ravalomanana , but rejected the results ; after the election , Ratsiraka declared the city of Toamasina as the new capital of the country . The political crisis caused difficulties after the storm in distributing food , and Ratsiraka 's operational center in the city was damaged . During the storm , Toamasina experienced severe flooding , forcing hundreds of residents to evacuate their homes . Emergency volunteers provided water and food to the affected residents . Workers from the World Health Organization and Médecins Sans Frontières ( Doctors Without Borders ) provided medical assistance to residents in Toamasina during the storm . Damaged roads contributed to economic contraction , after trucks were unable to use roads and bridges in the eastern portion of the country . By October , the political crisis had ended , and the government repaired most of the damaged infrastructure . The cost of repairing the roads and bridges was about $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( 2002 USD ) , which was paid by a $ 50 million credit from the World Bank Group . Due to poor harvest related to the storm in some areas , the World Food Programme provided 18 @,@ 000 tonnes of food to 394 @,@ 250 residents , beginning in November 2002 at the request of the Malagasy government . After the storm , the government of Norway donated <unk> million ( 2002 Norwegian krone , 172 @,@ 000 USD ) for storm relief , and the government of Switzerland provided about $ 33 @,@ 000 ( USD ) . 
 = William Stacy = 
 William Stacy ( February 15 , 1734 – August 1802 ) was an officer of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , and a pioneer to the Ohio Country . Published histories describe Colonel William Stacy 's involvement in a variety of events during the war , such as rallying the militia on a village common in Massachusetts , participating in the Siege of Boston , being captured by Loyalists and American Indians at the Cherry Valley massacre , narrowly escaping a death by burning at the stake , General George Washington 's efforts to obtain Stacy 's release from captivity , and Washington 's gift of a gold snuff box to Stacy at the end of the war . 
 During Col. William Stacy 's post @-@ war life , he was a pioneer , helping to establish Marietta , Ohio as the first permanent American settlement of the new United States in the Northwest Territory . He was active in the Marietta pioneer community , and served as foreman of the first Grand Jury in the Northwest Territory , an event establishing the rule of law in the territory . At the age of 56 , he ice skated thirty miles up a frozen river , warning two of his sons of a possible Indian attack , which occurred several days later as the Big Bottom massacre and marked the beginning of the Northwest Indian War . 
 William Stacy 's surname has also been spelled as Stacey , <unk> , and Stacie ; the correct spelling is Stacy . He is often referred to as Colonel Stacy , an abbreviation of his last rank of lieutenant colonel . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Stacy was born in Gloucester , Massachusetts in 1734 and died in Marietta , Ohio in 1802 . Slightly different years of birth and death have been reported . Stacy grew up in Gloucester on the coast of Massachusetts and worked as a shoemaker , a trade learned from his father ; he may also have worked in the seafaring business . William Stacy married Sarah Day in 1754 . Subsequently , during 1757 , they moved away from the coast to New Salem in western Massachusetts , and raised a large family . Stacy took up farming and continued his work as a shoemaker . He also became a commercial banker , loaning money at interest before there were any banks in the area . His customers were from New Salem and other towns in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . By the time of his early middle age , William Stacy was living a comfortable life ; he was successful and widely known . During 1775 , at the age of 41 , William Stacy 's life changed with the onset of friction between the Thirteen Colonies and the British Empire . 
 = = Opening days of the Revolutionary War = = 
 William Stacy was an active revolutionary from the beginning of the American Revolutionary War . By one account , he entered service on April 19 , 1775 , the day of the Battles of Lexington and Concord , and the opening day of the war . Another account has William Stacy rallying the militia at his home village of New Salem , in the western portion of the colony , on April 20 , 1775 upon receiving the news of Lexington and Concord . A memorial plaque was dedicated to Colonel Stacy in 1956 on the village common of New Salem . The story reflected on the plaque has been handed down for generations beginning with an early history in 1841 , and was included in the publication of the New Salem Sesquicentennial Committee in 1904 . The inscription on the plaque reads : 
 The New Salem Bicentennial Commission and town historian later speculated that this event might have occurred earlier , at the time of the Powder Alarm during 1774 . The Powder Alarm was a precursor to the events at Lexington and Concord . 
 = = Battle of Bunker Hill = = 
 As the war began , William Stacy served as major in Colonel Benjamin Woodbridge 's regiment of Minutemen , which was organized into Woodbridge 's ( 25th ) Regiment . During the Siege of Boston , Woodbridge 's regiment was based at Cambridge , Massachusetts , near Boston , and participated in the Battle of Bunker Hill , the first large @-@ scale battle of the war . An orderly book shows that on June 13 , 1775 , several days before the battle , Major Stacy was officer of the night guard , while Colonel William Prescott , who would be the primary leader of patriot forces during the battle , was officer of the day . Stacy was recommended for commission on June 16 , the day before the battle . On June 17 , 1775 , Woodbridge 's regiment of 300 soldiers arrived at Bunker Hill and took up positions immediately prior to the battle , and parts of the regiment engaged . A portion of Woodbridge 's regiment joined Colonel Prescott 's regiment at the redoubt and breastwork on the hill , and a company from Woodbridge 's regiment deployed on the right flank . 
 The defenders on the right flank fought valiantly from behind what cover they could find . The men at the redoubt and breastwork fought until they had no more bullets , finally fighting with the butts of their guns , rocks , and their bare hands . Woodbridge 's regiment " was not commissioned , and there are few details of it , or of its officers , in the accounts of the battle . " Stacy 's disposition is unknown . He later signed an affidavit regarding the guns of a fellow patriot who was killed in action at Bunker Hill . Sergeant Benjamin Haskell ( <unk> ) , also of New Salem and also a co @-@ signer of that same affidavit , was reportedly in the center of the action near General Joseph Warren when Warren was killed during the battle . The New Salem Sesquicentennial Committee paid homage to Stacy , Haskell , and others of that village , proclaiming : 
 And in those days of darkness and disaster , which , as they come to all nations , will surely again come to us , he will tell us of another Jeremiah Meacham , of more Jeremiah <unk> , of another Benjamin Haskell , of another William Stacy ... 
 = = Cherry Valley massacre , and prisoner of war = = 
 Stacy served as lieutenant colonel in Colonel Ichabod Alden 's 7th Massachusetts Regiment during 1777 and 1778 . The regiment was sent to Cherry Valley , New York to protect the local population from Loyalists and American Indians . The Loyalists were organized as Butler 's Rangers , a Loyalist militia in the British Army , led by Colonel John Butler and his son , Captain Walter Butler . The Loyalists operated together with American Indians , including some who were under the leadership of Joseph Brant , a Mohawk leader also known as <unk> . 
 While serving with Colonel Alden at Cherry Valley during October 1778 , William Stacy was transferred to the 4th Massachusetts Regiment , though remaining with Colonel Alden . During that time period , Lieutenant William McKendry , a quartermaster in Colonel Alden 's regiment , kept a journal with firsthand accounts of the actions at Cherry Valley . One of his lighter notes concerning Colonel Stacy was a journal entry for October 6 , 1778 : " Col. Stacy and Capt. Ballard had a horse race . Col. Stacy won the bet . " However , one month later , Cherry Valley suffered war . 
 In November 11 , 1778 a mixed force of Loyalists , British soldiers , Mohawk and Seneca under the command of Walter Butler descended on Cherry Valley . Colonel Alden had been warned of their approach , but had dismissed the warnings . He and his command staff , including Stacy , were stationed in a house some 400 yards ( 370 m ) from the fort . McKendry described the attack in his journal : " Immediately came on 442 Indians from the Five Nations , 200 Tories under the command of one Col. Butler and Capt. Brant ; attacked headquarters ; killed Col. Alden ; took Col. Stacy prisoner ; attacked Fort Alden ; after three hours retreated without success of taking the fort . " McKendry identified the fatalities of the massacre as Colonel Alden , thirteen other soldiers , and thirty civilian inhabitants . 
 It became known as the Cherry Valley massacre and was noted as one of the most horrific frontier massacres of the Revolution . Three months later , in his journal entry for February 12 , 1779 , McKendry describes receiving a report from an Indian of William Stacy in captivity ; Stacy was apparently concerned to reassure his fellow soldiers : " the last he knew of Col. Stacy he was well and in good spirits , and told him not to mind it for it was only the fortune of war . " 
 Several accounts indicate that during the Cherry Valley massacre or thereafter , Colonel Stacy was stripped naked and tied to a stake , and was about to be tortured and killed , as was the ritual for enemy warriors , but was spared by Joseph Brant . William Stacy was a Freemason ; Joseph Brant was an educated American Indian , and had also become a Freemason . It is reported that Stacy made an appeal as one Freemason to another , thus saving his life . Colonel Stacy was subsequently taken to Fort Niagara , the Loyalist base in New York and held prisoner under Colonel Butler during the summer of 1779 . At Fort Niagara , Molly Brant , the sister of Joseph Brant , was hostile toward Stacy , and wanted Colonel Butler to return custody of Stacy to the Indians . She proclaimed dreams of her and the Indians using Stacy 's head in an Indian football game . Colonel Butler placated Molly Brant with rum and protected his prisoner . Subsequently , from late @-@ 1779 through mid @-@ 1782 , Colonel Stacy was held prisoner at Fort Chambly near Montreal . 
 As a ranking prisoner @-@ of @-@ war , Colonel Stacy was the subject of high @-@ level correspondence and actions of General George Washington and other leaders of the Continental Army . During April 1780 , General Lafayette , who fought with the Americans during the Revolution , hand @-@ carried a letter from General William Heath to General Washington , describing a reported Loyalist and British strategy concerning Stacy . The strategy was to continue holding Colonel Stacy as a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war , and to use Stacy in a prisoner exchange , should Colonel Butler or another ranking Loyalist officer , Sir John Johnson , be captured by the Continental Army . During September 1780 , General Washington attempted to arrange a prisoner exchange for Colonel Stacy , but was unsuccessful . On November 1 , 1781 , the General Assembly of Massachusetts passed a Resolve urging Governor John Hancock to encourage General Heath to pursue a prisoner exchange for Stacy . 
 Colonel Stacy was not released from captivity until the end of the war , during August 1782 . General Washington reportedly gave Stacy a gold snuff box as a personal memento after the war . William Stacy 's nephew , Nathaniel Stacy , writes that his first memory of childhood was the return of Col. William Stacy to New Salem after the war . 
 = = Marietta and the Ohio Country = = 
 During early 1788 , at about 54 years of age , William Stacy joined with other Revolutionary War officers as a pioneer to the Ohio Country , and was involved in establishing Marietta , Ohio at the confluence of the Ohio and Muskingum rivers as the first permanent American settlement in the Northwest Territory . Colonel Stacy joined this venture as a shareholder in the Ohio Company of Associates , which was formed and led by Gen. Rufus Putnam and Gen. Benjamin Tupper . General Lafayette visited Marietta years later and described these pioneers and former officers : " They were the bravest of brave . Better men never lived . " George Washington commented " I know many of the settlers personally , and there never were men better calculated to promote the welfare of such a community . " Marietta is located in the county of Ohio bearing Washington 's name . 
 During the settlement of the Ohio Country , two of Colonel Stacy 's sons were with a small group of pioneers attempting to establish a settlement on some good potential farmland known as Big Bottom , upriver from Marietta on the Muskingum River . Colonel Stacy ice skated 30 miles ( 48 km ) up the frozen river in late December 1790 and warned his sons about the danger of a possible Indian attack . His concerns were realized several days later on January 2 , 1791 with the occurrence of the Big Bottom massacre , and the beginning of the Northwest Indian War . Twelve people were killed in the attack , including Stacy 's son John . His son Philemon was taken captive and died later . 
 William Stacy was a prominent and active member of the pioneer settlement of Marietta . He superintended the construction of a stockade known as <unk> Point to protect the settlers from Indians , he was an officer in the militia , and he was an officer on the first board of police . Additionally , he served as an officer of the township of Marietta , and he owned one of two hand mills in the settlement . William Stacy was a member of the Society of the Cincinnati and an original member of the American Union Lodge No. 1 ( Freemasons ) at Marietta ; the name of this lodge was reportedly suggested by Benjamin Franklin , and the seal engraved by Paul Revere . Stacy was honored with the position of foreman of the first Grand Jury in the Northwest Territory . This was an important event , as this court was the first establishment of civil and criminal law in the pioneer country . 
 William Stacy lost his wife Sarah to smallpox during March 1790 after 36 years of marriage . He subsequently married Hannah Sheffield during July of that year . " A man highly esteemed for his many excellent qualities , and honored for his services and sufferings in the cause of freedom , " William Stacy died in Marietta in 1802 at 68 years of age . He was buried in Marietta at Mound Cemetery , the site of an ancient American Indian burial mound . Colonel Stacy has good company in his final resting place ; Mound Cemetery reportedly contains the largest number of Revolutionary War officers buried in one location . A new memorial marker was dedicated to William Stacy in 1928 in Mound Cemetery . 
 = Donkey Kong Country Returns = 
 Donkey Kong Country Returns is a 2010 side @-@ scrolling platformer video game developed by Retro Studios and published by Nintendo for the Wii console . The game was released in North America on November 21 , 2010 , in Australia on December 2 , 2010 , in Europe on December 3 , 2010 , and in Japan on December 9 , 2010 . A stereoscopic port of the game , titled Donkey Kong Country Returns 3D , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in Europe and North America on May 24 , 2013 , in Australia on May 25 , 2013 , and in Japan on June 13 , 2013 . 
 The game 's story focuses on a group of evil creatures called Tikis known as the Tiki Tak Tribe that arrive on Donkey Kong Island , and hypnotize the island 's animals to steal Donkey Kong 's bananas . This forces him to retrieve the hoard with the help of his nephew Diddy Kong . Donkey Kong Country Returns is the series ' first traditional home console installment since Donkey Kong Jungle Beat ( 2005 ) , and also the first Donkey Kong Country entry not to involve video game developer Rare during its development . The game received generally positive reviews , receiving an average score of 87 % on GameRankings and Metacritic , and selling 4 @.@ 96 million copies worldwide by the end of March 2011 . 
 A sequel , Donkey Kong Country : Tropical Freeze , was released for the Wii U in February 2014 . It received positive reviews from critics with Metacritic giving it an 83 / 100 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players take control of the series 's protagonist Donkey Kong , as well as his friend Diddy Kong in certain situations , with many traditional elements of the Donkey Kong Country series returning , including mine cart levels , the ability to swing between vines and collect bananas , and the golden " KONG " puzzle pieces . New gameplay elements include levels in which the characters and foreground environments appear as silhouettes , spawning several new gameplay mechanics . In single @-@ player mode , players can only play as Donkey Kong , although Diddy Kong rides on Donkey Kong 's back , and Donkey Kong can use Diddy 's jetpack to jump further . Multiplayer mode enables a second player to control Diddy Kong . If a player 's character dies in two @-@ player mode , it can be brought back by using the other character to hit a " DK Barrel " that floats into view , a mechanic similar to the one used in New Super Mario Bros. Wii . To avoid problems arising from differences in the players ' skills , Diddy can hop on Donkey 's back to take on a more passive role , while his jetpack can be used to make his partner 's jumps easier . Both Donkey and Diddy can pound the ground to defeat enemies and unveil secret items . 
 The game has two control schemes , with the standard system using the Wii Remote in conjunction with the Nunchuk , while a more classical approach requires that the Wii Remote be held sideways . Both methods use motion controls for the " Ground Pound " move . In addition to common series elements like secrets and unlockables , there is also an optional time attack mode . Two animal buddies , Rambi and Squawks , appear and assist Donkey Kong at certain points in the game . The game also utilises the " Super Guide " feature that previously appeared in New Super Mario Bros. Wii and Super Mario Galaxy 2 . If the player loses eight lives in a single level , he or she is given the option to allow a white @-@ colored Donkey Kong named Super Kong to take over and complete the level for them . However , Super Kong will not look for collectible items , nor will he show the player where they are . He also keeps anything he happens to collect , so the player is not rewarded for these items . 
 After beating Tiki Tong , an additional stage called " The Golden Temple " is unlocked . In order to play the stage , the player has to find objects called " Rare orbs " hidden in each world 's temple . Upon competing the Golden Temple , a new mode is unlocked known as the Mirror Mode . In this mode , the stages are flipped , Donkey Kong only has one unit of health , he cannot use items bought from Cranky Kong , and he cannot get any help from Diddy Kong . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game 's story revolves around creatures known as Tikis , which are new to the series . The different types of Tikis fill the role of the antagonists in the story , replacing the Kremlings from Donkey Kong Country . Cranky Kong , who owns shops throughout the island , is the only Kong family member that appears in addition to Donkey and Diddy . The story begins when a group of evil Tikis known as the Tiki Tak Tribe arrive on Donkey Kong Island after being awoken by a volcanic explosion , and play music to hypnotize the animals on the island to steal Donkey Kong 's bananas . Since Donkey Kong is resistant to the Tiki 's music , he works with Diddy Kong to retrieve his hoard of bananas from the Tikis . Throughout the game , the pair travels through eight worlds to recover their stolen bananas : the Jungle , the Beach , the Ruins , the Cave , the Forest , the Cliff , the Factory , and the Volcano . In each world , they must defeat a Tiki Tak Tribe leader : <unk> , the <unk> Triplets , Gong , Banjo , <unk> , Xylophone , Accordion ( who hypnotize other animals in the jungle to fight them ) , and Tiki Tong — the Tiki Tak Tribe 's king . After Tiki Tong is defeated , the Kongs are launched into space where they punch down on the Moon which crushes Tiki Tong 's base and sends bananas flying everywhere . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development on Donkey Kong Country Returns started in April 2008 , soon after key personnel of Retro Studios had left the company . At that time , Shigeru Miyamoto wanted to create a new Donkey Kong game and , at his request , producer Kensuke Tanabe recommended Michael Kelbaugh , the CEO of Retro Studios , who had previously worked on the Donkey Kong Country series while he was employed at Nintendo of America . Satoru Iwata frequently referred to this turn of events as " fate " in his meetings with Retro Studios , which is why Kelbaugh suggested the homophonous project codename F8 for the game . 
 Similar to New Super Mario Bros. , the game was developed with the intention to invoke nostalgic feelings in players with its art style and sound , while trying to provide them with new gameplay experiences . Retro tried to make the game " accessible to all players " , but with a " kind of difficulty that made players want to try it again " . The game employs fully polygonal 3D graphics with levels containing three times the amount of textures and polygons that Retro 's Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption offered in a single room . Though Miyamoto initially opposed the idea , simultaneous two @-@ player gameplay was eventually implemented , contrary to the tag @-@ team system of the original series . Tanabe said a partial inspiration for the feature was to make Returns " stand out " compared to the New Play Control ! re @-@ release of Donkey Kong Jungle Beat . Over the course of six months , two @-@ thirds of the game 's tools and engine had to be rewritten by the programmers , the animation and collision systems being subject to the most changes , and while experiments were conducted with underwater levels , they were ultimately omitted as they felt too slow and unfitting to the overall gameplay . Two levels in the game , " Tidal Terror " and " <unk> Run " , proved to be the most difficult levels to design and program , each requiring several months of development time . In Returns , Retro tried to use the same camera engine used for the Morph Ball in Metroid Prime , but found it unable to handle the quick and complex movements of the characters , particularly after the implementation of two @-@ player gameplay . 
 Development accelerated in early 2010 , and the project was " beginning to cohere as a game " around the time of E3 . Donkey Kong Country Returns was officially announced at Nintendo 's press conference held on June 15 , with four playable levels available on the show floor . Although the game was set for release later that year , the team still had 70 levels to create or refine . Around the end of development , Tanabe had lower back pain and needed to take a week off . During that time , assistant producer Risa Tabata took over his duties , and Tanabe decided to keep her in charge for the rest of production . The music , which was inspired by David Wise and Eveline Fischer 's score for the Super NES games in the series , was co @-@ written by Kenji Yamamoto , who had worked on the Prime trilogy . Yamamoto wrote songs to fit the mood of certain levels , and some songs were rewritten if their matching levels were heavily redesigned . Takashi <unk> voiced both Donkey Kong and Cranky Kong , while Katsumi Suzuki voiced Diddy Kong . 
 In the January 2015 Nintendo Direct , it was announced that the Wii version of Donkey Kong Country Returns and other Wii games would be released for download on Wii U via Nintendo eShop . Donkey Kong Country Returns was made available on the Nintendo eShop on January 21 , 2015 in Japan , January 22 , 2015 in Europe , and January 23 , 2015 in Australia and New Zealand . On March 31 , 2016 , the digital re @-@ release of Donkey Kong Country Returns was made available for North American Wii U users exclusively as a My Nintendo reward . 
 = = = Donkey Kong Country Returns 3D = = = 
 On February 14 , 2013 , Nintendo announced in its Nintendo Direct conference that a port for the Nintendo 3DS , titled Donkey Kong Country Returns 3D , was in development and was released on May 24 , 2013 . The port was developed from the ground up and features stereoscopic 3D graphics . Development efforts of the Nintendo 3DS re @-@ release is courtesy of Monster Games . The 3DS version includes two modes , " Original Mode " which plays the same as the original Wii version , and " New Mode " which introduces a handful of new items to make the game easier , including extra health . The 3DS version also contains an extra world with new levels not present in the original Wii version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Donkey Kong Country Returns received critical acclaim . It has an aggregated score of 87 % on both GameRankings and Metacritic . For its awards for games released in 2010 , IGN gave Returns awards for " Best Retro Design " and " Most Challenging " , then selected the game as the 5th best on the console . Game Informer named it Game of the Month for December 2010 , with reviewer Dan Ryckert hailing it as " one of the best platformers [ they 'd ] ever played " . The publication later picked it as the " Best Platformer " and " Best Wii Exclusive " of 2010 . 
 IGN 's Craig Harris awarded the game an Editor 's Choice award , stating , " This is an incredibly challenging , old @-@ school throwback that might not set the genre afire with innovation , but in my book , it 's better than the awesome game that inspired it . [ ... ] Rare should be proud that its design is in the right hands . Or just insanely jealous . Either works . " Video game talk show Good Game 's two presenters gave the game a 9 and 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , praising how true the music kept to the style of the original tracks , and that it managed to keep from becoming too complex while still avoiding being over @-@ simplified , saying " If you 're a fan of the old Donkeys , or you just want a great platforming experience , this is worth at least as much as Kong 's golden banana hoard . " X @-@ Play praised the similarity of Returns to previous games in the series , the game 's replay value , and its graphics , but the review criticized the motion controls " that force you to react quickly at bad times , a button press would suffice " and the co @-@ op game play , saying , " If your partner has a penchant for dying , look forward to some short games as he or she will most likely drain the number of lives you both share . " GamesRadar complimented the title for its standout levels and fan service , while criticizing it for levels that are " frustrating , unclear and often misleading way that is unlike any prior Donkey Kong adventure " , and motion controls that make them " question the controls in a platformer " . GameTrailers praised the game 's gameplay and the diversity of the levels , while Giant Bomb claimed , " Retro recaptures most of Donkey Kong 's venerated platforming roots in this fine Wii sequel . " 
 = = Sales = = 
 The game debuted third on the Japanese video game charts , with 163 @,@ 310 units sold , and it has sold 638 @,@ 305 copies in Japan as of January 2 , 2011 . In North America , the game debuted at sixth place on the charts , with 430 @,@ 470 units sold . By the end of March 2011 , the game had sold 4 @.@ 96 million copies worldwide . On September 12 , 2013 Nintendo announced that the 3DS version has sold 268 @,@ 000 units in the United States . As of December 31 , 2013 , it has worldwide sales of 1 @.@ 43 million . 
 Both versions of this game , along with its sequel , were added to the Nintendo Selects label on March 11 , 2016 in North America . 
 = 2009 Giro d 'Italia , Stage 12 to Stage 21 = 
 Stage 12 of the 2009 Giro d 'Italia took place on 21 May ; the race concluded with Stage 21 on 31 May . The second half of the Giro began with a long and challenging individual time trial in Cinque Terre . It was in this time trial that Denis Menchov took the overall lead in the race . This was followed by a flat stage , after which most of the sprinters in the Giro withdrew from the race , as they did not figure to be in contention in the hilly and mountainous stages to follow . 
 The sixteenth stage was considered to be one of two queen stages , most difficult stages , of this Giro , as it contained many high mountain climbs and the Giro 's most difficult summit stage finish . After the second rest day came an unusual stage , one that was very short in terms of sheer distance but on par with previous mountain stages in terms of difficulty . These stages were won by Carlos Sastre and Franco Pellizotti , respectively , who fought for the third step on the Giro 's podium behind Menchov and previous race leader Danilo Di Luca . Though Sastre went on to win another stage , to Mount Vesuvius , it was Pellizotti who finished the Giro third overall . 
 The Giro concluded , as it had in 2008 , with another individual time trial , this time in the city of Rome . Despite a dramatic and much @-@ replayed crash in the stage 's final kilometer , Menchov preserved his overall lead through this stage and thus , the conclusion of the Giro , winning his third career Grand Tour . 
 = = Stage 12 = = 
 21 May 2009 — Sestri Levante to <unk> , 60 @.@ 6 km ( 37 @.@ 7 mi ) ( individual time trial ) 
 The first individual time trial ( ITT ) of the 2009 Giro was a difficult one , long with quite a lot of climbing . There were two categorized climbs on the course , a quick , intense descent between them and no flat stretches at all . Lance Armstrong , who rode the Giro for the first time in 2009 , described the ITT as " wicked hard " . Reigning Olympic time trial champion Fabian Cancellara called it " crazy " and laughed when asked if he would be a contender for victory . Cancellara was in fact the only rider who was still in the race to this point who did not attempt the time trial , instead abandoning the Giro . 
 Many riders used normal road race bikes for this stage , as the course is highly atypical for a time trial , with roads that were not flat and straight . Most of those riders altered their road race bikes with the aerodynamic handlebars of a time trial bike , but some , including race leader Danilo Di Luca , did not . The climbs in the stage increased the overall chances for strong climbers who are relatively weak time trialists , such as Damiano Cunego and Gilberto Simoni . 
 Acqua & Sapone rider Dario <unk> set the early time to beat . After a while , Yuriy <unk> bested his time . Several different riders in succession then posted successively ( but , in the first few cases , marginally ) better times than the best time that had come before them . Alessandro Bertolini , David Millar , Marco Pinotti , Giovanni Visconti , Bradley Wiggins , and Stefano Garzelli were all briefly the stage leader after they crossed the finish line . Bertolini in particular was stage leader for about three minutes , as Millar started just behind him and barely beat his time . 
 The fourth- and second @-@ to @-@ last riders to leave the starthouse , Levi Leipheimer and Denis Menchov , put up the best rides of the day , with Menchov between 30 seconds and a minute better than Leipheimer at the three intermediate time checks , and 20 seconds better at the line for the stage win . Menchov 's ride propelled him into the pink jersey , while Leipheimer narrowly missed taking enough time out of Di Luca to move past him in the general classification . Di Luca finished sixth on the stage . 
 A surprising rider to lose considerable time was three @-@ time former world time trial champion Michael Rogers , who was almost three minutes off Menchov 's winning time and slipped from third to sixth in the general classification . Reigning Tour de France champion Carlos Sastre was also unimpressive , 2 ' 18 " behind Menchov , but took advantage of Rogers ' bigger misstep to move up to fifth overall . 
 = = Stage 13 = = 
 22 May 2009 — Lido di Camaiore to Florence , 176 km ( 109 mi ) 
 The riders got some respite in this short , flat stage . There were a few short hills in the first 60 km ( 37 mi ) of the stage and one small categorized climb , but after the 60 kilometer mark the course did not so much as undulate , and a sprint finish was the result . 
 Three riders broke free of the peloton after 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) — Mikhail Ignatiev , Leonardo Scarselli , and Björn Schröder . Their maximum advantage was 5 ' 20 " , but the peloton had no trouble catching them . Ignatiev and Scarselli were absorbed with 32 km ( 20 mi ) left to race , while Schröder fought on alone , being caught at around 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) to go . Despite being seven riders deep in the bunch with under 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to go , Mark Cavendish was able to get a successful leadout from Edvald Boasson Hagen and Mark Renshaw to pick up his third stage win of the Giro . The leadout was so fast that only 21 riders had the same time as the stage winner — another 89 , including each of the top ten in the General classification ( GC ) , were eight seconds back . Cavendish actually missed the start of the stage , after becoming stuck in the race village due to his habit of lining up on the start of the race at the last minute to avoid press . He was picked up by a Rabobank team car , which was also running late , and brought back to the field by them . He went on to win the stage . 
 = = Stage 14 = = 
 23 May 2009 — Campi <unk> to Bologna , 172 km ( 107 mi ) 
 This was a hilly stage , with four categorized climbs on the course and a finish on a short ( but categorized ) climb as well . Pre @-@ race analysis of the stage expected relentless attacks beginning from the first climb of the day , after 24 km ( 15 mi ) . 
 Fourteen riders representing twelve teams broke away after 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) . They stayed clear as a group through the four climbs on course before they started to splinter . Danilo Di Luca 's LPR team drove the peloton most of the day , because the finish figured to favor Di Luca more than race leader Denis Menchov or the man in third , Levi Leipheimer . However , one team pulling at the front of the peloton proved to be no match for a 14 @-@ man breakaway working cohesively , and by the time the peloton reached the descent of the fourth climb , the last before the summit finish , it was clear the breakaway would not be caught . The breakaway was still twelve strong as it began the last climb of the day . Andriy Hryvko was the first to attack for the stage win , but he was caught well before the summit , and wound up finishing in the pink jersey group a minute behind the stage winner . The decisive attack came from Simon Gerrans , who no one could match , giving the Cervélo rider the stage win . Leipheimer and Ivan Basso were both dropped from the pink jersey group just before the summit of the climb and the end of the stage , losing three potentially valuable seconds to the other highly placed riders in the GC . Michael Rogers was a further three seconds back of Leipheimer and Basso , causing him to drop from sixth to seventh in the GC . 
 = = Stage 15 = = 
 24 May 2009 — Forlì to Faenza , 161 km ( 100 mi ) 
 The peloton faced four categorized climbs in this stage , though none were considered difficult enough to be truly selective . Also on the profile were three uncategorized hills that simply were not as steep . With a 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) flat section at the end of the stage , a breakaway finish was likely . 
 The day began with 16 riders from 14 teams breaking away , after about 18 km ( 11 mi ) . They attained a maximum advantage of about six minutes , and race leader Denis Menchov 's Rabobank team seemed content to let them go , since no real GC threat was posed : José <unk> was the best placed man in the break , ten minutes back of Menchov . For a while , it seemed that the stage would progress this way to its conclusion , with the breakaway up ahead and the peloton not really chasing very hard . 
 Things changed when Ivan Basso 's team came forward on the third climb of the day to set a much faster pace in the peloton , and Basso himself attacked and came free , with only Stefano Garzelli holding his wheel . They caught some members of the morning breakaway , as that group also splintered , but were eventually themselves caught . Danilo Di Luca launched an attack on the fourth climb of the day , and for a time he and Menchov were clear of the other GC contenders , but they were also caught — the top seven in the GC were unchanged after this stage . 
 After the 16 @-@ man leading group began splintering , only two were left out front — Leonardo Bertagnolli and Serge Pauwels . For unclear reasons , Pauwels sat up ( abandoned the breakaway attempt ) in the final kilometers of the stage and left Bertagnolli to take the stage win uncontested . Pauwels joined two behind him who were chasing , as several riders who had been in the pink jersey group but were not overall threats had been allowed to attack on the way into the finish . The pink jersey group finished 1 ' 56 " behind the stage winner , with another 13 riders about 7 minutes back , and the majority of the field between 18 and 26 minutes back , after the peloton had been one cohesive group for close to two @-@ thirds of the stage . 
 = = Stage 16 = = 
 25 May 2009 — Pergola to Monte Petrano , 237 km ( 147 mi ) 
 This stage was extremely climbing @-@ intensive , with three categorized high mountains , including a mountaintop finish with a very difficult gradient at Monte Petrano , and a smaller climb about a third of the way into the stage . It also had five short uncategorized hills . Following the alterations to Stage 10 , this was also called the queen stage of the Giro . 
 A large early breakaway began the stage , for the third day in a row . This breakaway numbered 20 , which after the first category one climb was whittled down to three , as some riders dropped because of the pace and others , from the teams of race leader Denis Menchov and other contenders , were called back by their sporting directors to stay with their team leaders . The three left out front were Yaroslav Popovych , Damiano Cunego , and Gabriele Bosisio . Eventually , Popovych shed his last remaining breakaway mates and for a time appeared poised for the stage win . The pink jersey group absorbed every member of the morning 's breakaway except Popovych and Cunego by the time they began the Monte Petrano climb . Levi Leipheimer , who had previously stated that this was the day he might attack to move up the general classification , was dropped on Monte Petrano and despite the efforts of Lance Armstrong and Janez Brajkovič to pace him back into the pink jersey group , Leipheimer wound up finishing nearly three minutes behind the stage winner , falling from third to sixth in the general classification and effectively eliminating any designs he may have had on the pink jersey . Armstrong had been near the leaders on the climb , but dropped back to help Leipheimer , who would later say that Armstrong saved him " minutes and minutes " by shepherding him to the finish . 
 Danilo Di Luca tried to attack from the pink jersey group a few times at the foot of the climb , but Menchov answered each time . When Ivan Basso and Carlos Sastre attacked , Menchov and Di Luca let them go , seeming fixed solely on one another . Sastre 's attack proved to be the crucial one , as he seemed quite fresh for having been climbing for over seven hours , staying clear of the pink jersey and blowing past Popovych to claim the stage win . With the time gained on the road as well as bonus seconds at the line , Sastre moved up to third in the overall classification . Menchov outsprinted Di Luca to the finish line , gaining one second on the road and four bonus seconds to slightly pad his lead over Di Luca . Thomas Lövkvist , who had been in the white jersey as best young rider , was dropped very early on in this stage and finished 24 minutes behind the stage winner . He wound up dropping all the way to fifth in the youth classification , with Quick Step rider Kevin Seeldraeyers , 15th overall , assuming the white jersey . 
 The weather was also a major factor on the day , with the temperature topping out at over 35 ° C ( 95 ° F ) . It caused riders all throughout the race to lose contact with various groups . 
 = = Stage 17 = = 
 27 May 2009 — Chieti to Blockhaus , 83 km ( 52 mi ) 
 After the second rest day , the peloton faced the Giro 's shortest stage . It was originally scheduled to include the highest point in the 2009 Giro , but the route was changed from the published maps due to the amount of snow at the top of the Blockhaus mountain pass , with 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) of climbing replaced by an equivalent addition to the flat section at the beginning of the stage . The first 44 km ( 27 mi ) of this course were almost perfectly flat , followed by a slight increase in gradient for the next 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) , followed by an exceptionally steep final 23 km ( 14 mi ) . 
 Thomas Voeckler started the day 's breakaway after about 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . Nine riders followed him , and their maximum advantage was just under three minutes , with the chase beginning in earnest very early on this stage due to its short length . Many of the riders in the break were unable to maintain the pace set by Voeckler at the foot of the Blockhaus for very long , as only Voeckler , Félix Cárdenas , and Giuseppe Palumbo were left out front as the climb began . The subsequent attacks from the pink jersey group absorbed the three of them . When Sylwester Szmyd attacked from the pink jersey group as the climb began , Franco Pellizotti followed him and was able to get clear , as Szmyd paced him to sizable gap over the pink jersey group before hitting the wall . Lance Armstrong tried to follow , but could not reach Pellizotti , as Pellizotti decided not to wait for Armstrong and chose to race the climb like a time trial . His strong , steady climb was good for the stage win . Armstrong finished the stage in the third group on the road , along with Levi Leipheimer and Carlos Sastre . 
 Sastre 's team had been the one setting the pace in the peloton just before the climb , but fell off when Philip Deignan spun out and tumbled off the road into a ditch . Deignan 's bike was damaged and he sustained numerous visible scrapes and bruises , but he managed to continue and finish the stage with the last gruppetto . Sastre himself seemed to be off the form he had had before the rest day , and by virtue of Pellizotti 's stage win and two @-@ minute gap over the reigning Tour de France champion , he fell from third to fifth in the overall classification with Pellizotti moving up to third . 
 A quartet of riders made the climb in second position on the road behind Pellizotti : race leader Denis Menchov , Danilo Di Luca , Ivan Basso , and Stefano Garzelli . Di Luca rode with a very high cadence in an attempt to separate himself from Menchov , but was unable to until the sprint for the finish line . By virtue of the time bonuses gained for third place as well as the gap on the road , Di Luca closed his deficit to Menchov to under 30 seconds . 
 = = Stage 18 = = 
 28 May 2009 — Sulmona to Benevento , 182 km ( 113 mi ) 
 The field faced a climb after just 20 km ( 12 mi ) in this stage , but following a long and technical descent , the course was gently undulating without any other categorized climbs . Due to the absence of climbs , the stage was expected to favor the Giro 's remaining sprinters , but it wound up being contested by a breakaway . 
 The stage began with the largest successful breakaway of the Giro , 25 riders representing 18 teams . The only teams that missed the break were Milram , Ag2r , Fuji – Servetto , and the team of the race leader , Rabobank . They worked together as a cohesive unit for much of the stage , gaining a maximum six @-@ minute advantage over the peloton . Seven of the 25 broke free with 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) left to race , and they contested a final sprint for the stage win . The first rider to try to take the win was Dries Devenyns , but he was quickly overtaken by Félix Cárdenas , who was in turn passed by Danny Pate . Pate , however , had the breakaway 's most experienced rider , Michele Scarponi , in his slipstream , and it was Scarponi who timed his sprint just right to take the stage win . The high @-@ placed riders in the general classification all finished with the peloton , 3 ' 57 " behind the stage winner , so there was no change to the top ten overall . 
 It was after this stage , on the eve of the Mount Vesuvius stage , that Danilo Di Luca gave his second positive test for continuous erythropoiesis receptor activator ( CERA ) . 
 = = Stage 19 = = 
 29 May 2009 - Avellino to Mount Vesuvius , 164 km ( 102 mi ) 
 The first 151 km ( 94 mi ) of this stage saw rough undulation , with many uncategorized hills , including one at almost 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in elevation . The final 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) saw a steep climb up to the famous Mount Vesuvius at 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . 
 The breakaway on this stage comprised only two riders , both representing ProTour teams that were without a stage victory in this year 's Giro — Mauro <unk> of Quick Step and Yuriy <unk> of Ag2r – La Mondiale . Their maximum advantage over the peloton was just over seven minutes , but the pink jersey group of overall contenders and their teammates had no trouble catching them , as they did in the little town just before the Mount Vesuvius climb . 
 Liquigas tried the same tactic they had employed on the Blockhaus , when Franco Pellizotti took the stage win , as Valerio Agnoli was the first to attack and get clear of the pink jersey group . He was joined soon after not by one of his team leaders , Pellizotti or Ivan Basso , but by Lampre – NGC rider Paolo Tiralongo , as the overall contenders did not respond . These two wound up being absorbed by the subsequent attack from Carlos José Ochoa , who drew Basso and Stefano Garzelli with him , as they took an appreciable lead on the pink jersey group . Carlos Sastre attacked solo from the pink jersey group next and quickly passed all other riders on the road , and stayed out front to claim his second stage win of this Giro . 
 Much as they had in previous stages , race leader Denis Menchov and the man in second place Danilo Di Luca stayed right with one another all through the climb , as Di Luca tried repeatedly to shed Menchov with attacks , but was unable to . Pellizotti , who had also been holding their wheels , took the opportunity with the two of them taking energy out of each other , to come clear and move into third position on the road . Basso , who was up the road , dutifully sat up and waited for his better @-@ placed teammate and paced him to a small gap over Menchov and Di Luca before cracking . It was enough to ensure Pellizotti second on the stage , to keep him third in the overall classification . Di Luca managed to outsprint Menchov to the line and claim 8 bonus seconds to narrow his deficit to 18 seconds , but with only a flat stage and an individual time trial remaining the superior time trialist Menchov had the advantage . 
 = = Stage 20 = = 
 30 May 2009 — Naples to Anagni , 203 km ( 126 mi ) 
 This stage was flat , with only a climb to short elevation near the end . A preview predicted a sprint finish , but a late attack decided the stage . 
 Danilo Di Luca made it clear that he was aiming for the time bonuses available in this stage , both at the finish line and the intermediate sprint . As such , his team worked to bring the morning 's breakaway back well before the end of the stage . Just as he had in the mountains , race leader Denis Menchov stayed right with Di Luca , and the two of them contested the intermediate sprint , with Di Luca 's team trying to give him a successful leadout . They mistimed it , however , and Menchov was able to come around Di Luca and beat him to the line ( Di Luca 's teammate and accomplished sprinter Alessandro Petacchi managed to beat Menchov in the sprint to limit Di Luca 's losses ) . Both Menchov and Di Luca got time bonuses , but Menchov got 4 for second in the sprint and Di Luca 2 for third , padding Menchov 's lead in the overall classification . 
 The pace in the peloton was more lax after the intermediate sprint , and two riders came clear to form another breakaway . They were caught just before the first lap of the 18 km ( 11 mi ) finishing circuit in Anagni . Another four riders tried to break away for the stage win , but they were caught during the second and final lap . With just over 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to go , Silence – Lotto rider Philippe Gilbert attacked and got a gap , staying away for the stage win . Thomas Voeckler tried to follow , but could not reach Gilbert 's slipstream , finishing 2 seconds behind him . The peloton finished 7 seconds back . 
 = = Stage 21 = = 
 31 May 2009 — Rome , 14 @.@ 4 km ( 8 @.@ 9 mi ) ( individual time trial ) 
 The 2009 Giro ended , as it had the previous year , with an individual time trial . The course was flat , though the road did twist in several places . 
 The winning time was set early on in the stage , by Cervélo TestTeam rider and reigning Lithuanian national time trial champion <unk> Konovalovas . Konovalovas , the 79th man to leave the starthouse , was one of the last riders to take the course before it started to rain . Garmin 's Bradley Wiggins started his ride not long after , and though he had the best time at the second and third intermediate time checks , he was slowed by the rain he encountered on the last part of the course as well as a stopped Bbox Bouygues Telecom team car attending to Matthieu <unk> , who had crashed . 
 The rainfall lightened almost as soon as it began , but the top riders in the general classification still faced a course made more difficult by the rain . Most of them rode conservatively , to keep their positions intact rather than aim for the stage win , but Danilo Di Luca did not . Di Luca attacked the course , riding with a high cadence from the outset . He had the best time at the first intermediate time check , but he lost energy and faded away as the course went on , finishing 45 seconds slower than the stage winner . 
 Giro champion Denis Menchov was the last man to take the course . The rain started again as he and Di Luca were the last ones on course . He was on pace to win the stage , but he dramatically crashed in the final kilometer , with his bike skidding well out in front of him on the wet cobbles . Support staff from his team car gave him a very quick bike change and he was back up in moments , finishing 24 seconds back on the stage to preserve his overall victory in the Giro . 
 = Sloatsburg ( Metro @-@ North station ) = 
 The Sloatsburg Metro @-@ North station serves the residents of Sloatsburg , New York , via Port Jervis Line commuter trains to New York City via Hoboken , 35 @.@ 4 miles ( 57 @.@ 0 km ) away , and Secaucus Junction . The estimated travel time to Hoboken Terminal is about 50 minutes on express trains . It is located just south of a grade crossing and consists of short concrete platforms , and a shelter . There is limited parking available nearby . 
 Construction of the Sloatsburg station dates back to the 1830s , when the station was built along the Erie Railroad . The station served the line heading to Port Jervis northward , along with a stagecoach to Greenwood Lake three times a day . The station was populated by fishermen on their way to the lake , but has been the site of several accidents . These calamities include a derailed milk train in 1843 and a fatal accident between the train line and several mules and their owner in 1855 . The station became part of Metro @-@ North in 1983 , when the service was created . The station was listed under a revitalization plan in 2005 to help serve its commuters . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Sloatsburg Metro @-@ North station is located at the intersection of Municipal Plaza and Mills Street in the village of Sloatsburg , at 41 @.@ 1565 ° N , <unk> ° W. It is accessible from the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 87 ) at Interchange 15A , and drivers have to follow the nearby New York State Route 17 to Municipal Plaza , where the station is visible . There are connections to other places , via the Transport of Rockland Route 93 and Short Line Bus Routes 17M and <unk> . However , these are not accessible at the station , but at the nearby State Route 17 ( also known as Orange Turnpike ) . There is also one taxicab service to Sloatsburg called Sammy 's Cab . 
 = = History = = 
 The Erie Railroad was constructed through Sloatsburg from 1836 to 1841 , helping with the prosperity of the village , along with its population . The station was also near the <unk> one , but it never served of great importance . The Sloatsburg station building was built in 1868 as a two @-@ story brick facade with a tin roof . The style of the building , according to the railroad 's 1920 engineering report , is a Type 6A style , with dimensions of 17 ' x 29 @.@ 5 ' x 19 ' . The station was equipped to host as a base for XG Radio from the Suffern Tower ( SF ) in Suffern . The Sloatsburg station served well for the nearby Greenwood Lake , with a stagecoach leaving the station three times day . The stagecoach was mainly inhabited by fishermen on their way to Greenwood Lake . 
 The station has been the site of several major accidents involving locomotives . In 1843 , the Sloatsburg station was the site of a large accident by train full of milk bottles . On December 31 , 1855 , the railroad 's Cincinnati Express was thrown off the tracks near the Sloatsburg station , when it tried to avoid a countrymen and his four mules , who were crossing the tracks . Three of the mules were killed and mutilated by the train , while the fourth died soon after . There was no damage to the cars or injuries to the passengers . In the early days of August 1856 , a girl by the name of <unk> was injured by an oncoming train near the station after carelessly walking onto the tracks . The parents , who were in a poor state financially , was given $ 45 ( 1856 USD ) in return for their troubles from the Board of Directors in nearby Goshen . On February 21 , 1858 , a train heading southbound experienced an accident when a brakeman , John Freeland , fell off the train and was run over . Freeland 's legs were severed in the incident , and one arm was broken . They hurried Freeland southbound on a nearby train , but died by the time the train reached Paterson , New Jersey towards the hospital . 
 The station is also close to the original entrance gate to Sloatsburg 's <unk> Farm . The house in the nearby mountainside was built around 1900 as an estate for Nicholas T. Brown , a local alderman from Paterson , New Jersey . This estate and farm gave a panoramic view of the countryside around Sloatsburg . The house was demolished during the construction of the New York State Thruway in 1956 . The steel bridge over the Ramapo River and the wooden bridge over Sloat 's <unk> were removed as they had become hazardous . Today , all that remains are the stone pillar entranceway , and a walking trail to the nearby Sloat 's Dam . The gateposts are listed on the National Register of Historic Places along with the remaining mill and dam structures since they used the same stonework . 
 In 2005 , the Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced plans to renovate the train station . This , along the village 's plans to revitalize the entire village of Sloatsburg , was thought to give the bland train station a more traditional look . This would include adding a roof to protect commuters and visitors from the elements , such as rain or snow , handicap @-@ accessible ramps for wheelchairs , better lighting , more seats for people to wait , and a heated shelter . ( A shelter exists , but is not heated ) . The village also wants to use a $ 50 @,@ 000 grant from the state to construct a large municipal parking lot near the station . This would get more people to use the station , as because with the lack of facilities , the station is under @-@ used . The preliminary design was made by Jeff Livingston , an architect on the Sloatsburg Revitalization Committee . 
 = = Station layout , structure , and services = = 
 The station 's layout is of a large extent a piece of the village itself . Unlike most train stations , where the parking lot is near the station itself , Sloatsburg 's lot is near the locally @-@ named Hardware store on Mills Street . This parking lot has 80 parking spaces , most of which is to handle commuters . There are no meters for use of the parking lot , but riding is only free on weekends . The station has one ticket machine for travelers to use . It accepts debit cards , cash , and credit cards . The station is operated by the village of Sloatsburg instead of Metro @-@ North . There is a shelter and one platform for commuters to use . 
 The station is on average an hour and 24 minutes from Port Jervis , and 1 hours and 3 minutes from New York City . The Sloatsburg station , along with other nearby stations ( Tuxedo , Harriman , or Suffern ) on the Port Jervis lines also serve numerous hiking trails in Harriman State Park and Bear Mountain State Park . 
 = Vyacheslav Molotov = 
 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov ( / <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> / ; Russian : <unk> ́ в <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ; 9 March [ O.S. 25 February ] 1890 – 8 November 1986 ) was a Soviet politician and diplomat , an Old Bolshevik , and a leading figure in the Soviet government from the 1920s , when he rose to power as a protégé of Joseph Stalin . Molotov served as Chairman of the Council of People 's Commissars ( Premier ) from 1930 to 1941 , and as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1939 to 1949 and from 1953 to 1956 . He served as First Deputy Premier from 1942 to 1957 , when he was dismissed from the Presidium of the Central Committee by Nikita Khrushchev . Molotov retired in 1961 after several years of obscurity . 
 Molotov was the principal Soviet signatory of the Nazi – Soviet non @-@ aggression pact of 1939 ( also known as the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact ) , whose most important provisions were added in the form of a secret protocol that stipulated an invasion of Poland and partition of its territory between Germany and the Soviet Union . This effectively marked the beginning of World War II and made the Soviet Union an unofficial ally of Nazi Germany in the period from 1939 until the German invasion in 1941 . During this period , Molotov knew of the Katyn massacre committed by the Soviet authorities . Following the end of World War II ( Great Patriotic War ) , Molotov was involved in negotiations with the Western allies , in which he became noted for his diplomatic skills . He kept his place as a leading Soviet diplomat and politician until 1949 . In March of that year , after losing Stalin 's favour , he lost the foreign affairs ministry leadership to Andrei Vyshinsky . Molotov 's relationship with Stalin deteriorated further , with Stalin complaining about Molotov 's mistakes in a speech to the 19th Party Congress . However , after Stalin 's death in 1953 , Molotov was staunchly opposed to Khrushchev 's de @-@ Stalinisation policy . Molotov defended the policies and legacy of Stalin until his death in 1986 , and harshly criticised Stalin 's successors , especially Khrushchev . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career ( 1890 – 1930 ) = = = 
 Molotov was born Vyacheslav Mikhailovich <unk> ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ) in the village of <unk> ( now <unk> in Kirov Oblast ) , the son of a shop clerk . Contrary to a commonly repeated error , he was not related to the composer Alexander Scriabin . Throughout his teen years , he was described as " shy " and " quiet " , always assisting his father with his business . He was educated at a secondary school in Kazan , and joined the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party ( RSDLP ) in 1906 , soon gravitating toward that organisation 's radical Bolshevik faction , headed by V. I. Lenin . 
 <unk> took the pseudonym " Molotov , " derived from the Russian word <unk> <unk> ( hammer ) for his political work owing to the name 's vaguely " industrial " ring . He was arrested in 1909 and spent two years in exile in Vologda . In 1911 he enrolled at St Petersburg Polytechnic . Molotov joined the editorial staff of a new underground Bolshevik newspaper called Pravda , meeting Joseph Stalin for the first time in association with the project . This first association between the two future Soviet leaders proved to be brief , however , and did not result in an immediate close political association . 
 Molotov worked as a so @-@ called " professional revolutionary " for the next several years , writing for the party press and attempting to better organize the underground party . He moved from St. Petersburg to Moscow in 1914 at the time of the outbreak of World War I. It was in Moscow the following year that Molotov was again arrested for his party activity , this time being deported to Irkutsk in eastern Siberia . In 1916 he escaped from his Siberian exile and returned to the capital city , now called Petrograd by the Tsarist regime , which thought the name St. Petersburg sounded excessively German . 
 Molotov became a member of the Bolshevik Party 's committee in Petrograd in 1916 . When the February Revolution occurred in 1917 , he was one of the few Bolsheviks of any standing in the capital . Under his direction Pravda took to the " left " to oppose the Provisional Government formed after the revolution . When Joseph Stalin returned to the capital , he reversed Molotov 's line ; but when the party leader Lenin arrived , he overruled Stalin . Despite this , Molotov became a protégé of and close adherent to Stalin , an alliance to which he owed his later prominence . Molotov became a member of the Military Revolutionary Committee which planned the October Revolution , which effectively brought the Bolsheviks to power . 
 In 1918 , Molotov was sent to Ukraine to take part in the civil war then breaking out . Since he was not a military man , he took no part in the fighting . In 1920 , he became secretary to the Central Committee of the Ukrainian Bolshevik Party . Lenin recalled him to Moscow in 1921 , elevating him to full membership of the Central Committee and Orgburo , and putting him in charge of the party secretariat . He was voted in as a non @-@ voting member of the Politburo in 1921 , and held the office of Responsible Secretary and also married Soviet politician Polina <unk> . His Responsible Secretaryship was criticised both by Lenin and Leon Trotsky , with Lenin noting his " shameful bureaucratism " and stupid behaviour . On the advice of Molotov and Nikolai Bukharin the Central Committee decided to reduce Lenin 's work hours . In 1922 , Stalin became general secretary of the Bolshevik Party with Molotov as the de facto Second Secretary . As a young follower Molotov admired Stalin , but was open in criticism of him . Under Stalin 's patronage , Molotov became a member of the Politburo in 1926 . 
 During the power struggles which followed Lenin 's death in 1924 , Molotov remained a loyal supporter of Stalin against his various rivals : first Leon Trotsky , later Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev and finally Nikolai Bukharin . Molotov became a leading figure in the " Stalinist centre " of the party , which also included Kliment Voroshilov and Sergo Ordzhonikidze . Trotsky and his supporters underestimated Molotov , as did many others . Trotsky called him " mediocrity personified " , whilst Molotov himself pedantically corrected comrades referring to him as ' Stone Arse ' by saying that Lenin had actually dubbed him ' Iron Arse ' . However , this outward dullness concealed a sharp mind and great administrative talent . He operated mainly behind the scenes and cultivated an image of a colourless bureaucrat – for example , he was the only Bolshevik leader who always wore a suit and tie . In 1928 Molotov replaced Nikolai <unk> as First Secretary of the Moscow Communist Party and held that position until 15 August 1929 . In a lengthy address to the Central Committee in 1929 , Molotov told the members that the Soviet government would initiate a compulsory collectivisation campaign to solve the agrarian backwardness of Soviet agriculture . 
 = = = Premiership ( 1930 – 1941 ) = = = 
 During the Central Committee plenum of 19 December 1930 , Alexey Rykov , the Chairman of the Council of People 's Commissars ( the equivalent of a Western head of government ) was succeeded by Molotov . In this post , Molotov oversaw the Stalin regime 's collectivisation of agriculture . He followed Stalin 's line by using a combination of force and propaganda to crush peasant resistance to collectivisation , including the deportation of millions of kulaks ( peasants with property ) to labour camps . An enormous number of the deportees died from exposure and overwork . He signed the Law of <unk> and personally led the Extraordinary Commission for Grain Delivery in Ukraine , which seized a reported 4 @.@ 2 million tonnes of grain from the peasants during a widespread manmade famine ( known in Ukraine as Holodomor ) . Contemporary historians estimate that between seven and eleven million people died , either of starvation or in labour camps , in the process of farm collectivization . Molotov also oversaw the implementation of the First Five @-@ Year Plan for rapid industrialisation . 
 Sergei Kirov , head of the Party organisation in Leningrad , was killed in 1934 ; some believed his death was ordered by Stalin . Kirov 's death triggered a second crisis , the Great Purge . In 1938 , out of the 28 People 's Commissars in Molotov 's Government , 20 were executed on the orders of Molotov and Stalin . The purges were carried out by Stalin 's successive police chiefs , Nikolai <unk> was the chief organiser and Kliment Voroshilov , Lazar Kaganovich and Molotov were intimately involved in the processes . Stalin frequently required Molotov and other Politburo members to sign the death warrants of prominent purge victims , and Molotov always did so without question . There is no record of Molotov attempting to moderate the course of the purges or even to save individuals , as some other Soviet officials did . During the Great Purge , he personally approved 372 documented execution lists , more than any other Soviet official , including Stalin . It is known that Molotov was one of few with whom Stalin openly discussed the purges . Although Molotov and Stalin signed a public decree in 1938 that disassociated them from the ongoing Great Purge , in private , and even after Stalin 's death , Molotov supported the Great Purge and the executions carried out by his government . 
 Despite the great human cost , the Soviet Union under Molotov 's nominal premiership made great strides in the adoption and widespread implementation of agrarian and industrial technology . In a document written by Molotov he noted how cannibalism and starvation were still serious problems even in 1937 in the Soviet Union . Andrey Vyshinsky , the Procurator General , even told Molotov personally of incidents involving mothers eating their newly born children . The rise of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany precipitated the development of a modern armaments industry on the orders of the Soviet government . Ultimately , it was this arms industry , along with American Lend @-@ Lease aid , which helped the Soviet Union to prevail in World War II ( Great Patriotic War ) . Set against this , the purges of the Red Army leadership , in which Molotov participated , weakened the Soviet Union 's defence capacity and contributed to the military disasters of 1941 and 1942 , which were mostly caused by <unk> for war . The purges also led to the dismantling of privatised agriculture and its replacement by collectivised agriculture . This left a legacy of chronic agricultural inefficiencies and under @-@ production which the Soviet regime never fully rectified . 
 Molotov was reported to be a vegetarian and teetotaler by American journalist John Gunther in 1938 . However , Milovan Djilas claimed that Molotov " drank more than Stalin " and did not note his vegetarianism despite attending several banquets with him . 
 = = = Minister of Foreign Affairs ( 1939 – 1949 ) = = = 
 In 1939 , following the 1938 Munich Agreement and Hitler 's subsequent invasion of Czechoslovakia , Stalin believed that Britain and France would not be reliable allies against German expansion so instead sought to conciliate Nazi Germany . In May 1939 Maxim Litvinov , the People 's Commissar for Foreign Affairs , was dismissed ; Molotov was appointed to succeed him . Molotov was succeeded in his post as Premier by Stalin . 
 At first , Hitler rebuffed Soviet diplomatic hints that Stalin desired a treaty ; but in early August 1939 , Hitler authorised Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop to begin serious negotiations . A trade agreement was concluded on 18 August ; and on 22 August , Ribbentrop flew to Moscow to conclude a formal non @-@ aggression treaty . Although the treaty is known as the Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact , it was Stalin and Hitler , and not Molotov and Ribbentrop , who decided the content of the treaty . The most important part of the agreement was the secret protocol , which provided for the partition of Poland , Finland , and the Baltic States between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union and for the Soviet annexation of Bessarabia ( then part of Romania , now Moldova ) . This protocol gave Hitler the green light for his invasion of Poland , which began on 1 September . On 5 March 1940 Lavrentiy Beria gave Molotov , along with Anastas Mikoyan , Kliment Voroshilov and Stalin , a note ordering the execution of 25 @,@ 700 Polish officers and anti @-@ Soviets , in what has become known as the Katyn massacre . 
 Under the terms of the Pact , Hitler was , in effect , given authorisation to occupy two @-@ thirds of Western Poland , as well as Lithuania . Molotov was given a free hand in relation to Finland . In the Soviet @-@ Finnish War that ensued , a combination of fierce Finnish resistance and Soviet mismanagement resulted in Finland losing parts of its territory , but not its independence . The Pact was later amended to allocate Lithuania to the Soviet sphere in exchange for a more favourable border in Poland . These annexations led to horrific suffering and loss of life in the countries occupied and partitioned by the two dictatorships . 
 In November 1940 Stalin sent Molotov to Berlin to meet Ribbentrop and Adolf Hitler . In January 1941 , the British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden visited Turkey in an attempt to get the Turks to enter the war on the Allies ' side . Though the purpose of Eden 's visit was anti @-@ German rather than anti @-@ Soviet , Molotov assumed otherwise , and in a series of conversations with the Italian Ambassador Augusto Rosso , Molotov claimed that the Soviet Union would soon be faced with an Anglo @-@ Turkish invasion of the Crimea . The British historian D.C. Watt argued that on the basis of Molotov 's statements to Rosso , it would appear that in early 1941 , Stalin and Molotov viewed Britain rather than Germany as the principal threat . 
 The Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact governed Soviet @-@ German relations until June 1941 when Hitler , having occupied France and neutralised Britain , turned east and attacked the Soviet Union . Molotov was responsible for telling the Soviet people of the attack , when he instead of Stalin announced the war . His speech , broadcast by radio on 22 June , characterised the Soviet Union in a role similar to that articulated for Britain by Winston Churchill in his early wartime speeches . The State Defence Committee was established soon after Molotov 's speech ; Stalin was elected chairman and Molotov was elected deputy chairman . Following the German invasion , Molotov conducted urgent negotiations with Britain and , later , the United States for wartime alliances . He took a secret flight to Glasgow , Scotland , where he was greeted by Eden . This risky flight , in a high altitude Tupolev TB @-@ 7 bomber , flew over German occupied Denmark and the North Sea . From there he took a train to London to discuss with the British government the possibility of opening a second front against Germany . After signing the Anglo @-@ Soviet Treaty of 1942 on 26 May Molotov left for Washington , D.C. , United States . Molotov met with Franklin D. Roosevelt , the President of the United States , and ratified a Lend @-@ Lease Treaty between the USSR and the US . Both the British and the United States government , albeit vaguely , promised to open up a second front against Germany . On his flight back to the USSR his plane was attacked by German fighters , and then later by Soviet fighters . 
 When Beria told Stalin about the Manhattan Project and its importance Stalin handpicked Molotov to be the man in charge of the Soviet atomic bomb project . However , under Molotov 's leadership the bomb , and the project itself , developed very slowly and Molotov was replaced by Beria in 1944 on the advice of Igor Kurchatov . When Harry S. Truman , the American president , told Stalin that the Americans had created a bomb never seen before , Stalin relayed the conversation to Molotov and told him to speed up development . On Stalin 's orders the Soviet government substantially increased investment in the project . 
 In a collaboration with Kliment Voroshilov , Molotov contributed both musically and lyrically to the 1944 version of the Soviet national anthem . Molotov asked the writers to include a line or two about peace . Molotov 's and Voroshilov 's role in the making of the new Soviet anthem was , in the words of historian Simon Sebag @-@ Montefiore , acting as music judges for Stalin . 
 Molotov accompanied Stalin to the Teheran Conference in 1943 , the Yalta Conference in 1945 and , following the defeat of Germany , the Potsdam Conference . He represented the Soviet Union at the San Francisco Conference , which created the United Nations . Even during the period of wartime alliance , Molotov was known as a tough negotiator and a determined defender of Soviet interests . Molotov lost his position of First Deputy Chairman on March 19 , 1946 , after the Council of People 's Commissars was reformed as Council of Ministers . From 1945 to 1947 Molotov took part in all four conferences of foreign ministers of the victorious states in World War II . In general , he was distinguished by an uncooperative attitude towards the Western powers . Molotov , at the direction of the Soviet government , condemned the Marshall Plan as imperialistic and claimed it was dividing Europe into two camps , one capitalist and the other communist . In response , the Soviet Union , along with the other Eastern Bloc nations , initiated what is known as the Molotov Plan . The plan created several bilateral relations between the states of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union ; and later evolved into the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( <unk> ) . 
 In the postwar period , Molotov 's power began to decline . A clear sign of Molotov 's precarious position was his inability to prevent the arrest in December 1948 for " treason " of his Jewish wife , Polina <unk> , whom Stalin had long distrusted . Molotov never stopped loving his wife , and it is said that he ordered his maids to make dinner for two every evening to remind him that , in his own words , " she suffered because of me " . According to a close collaborator of Molotov , Vladimir <unk> , at the beginning of 1949 the Israel minister plenipotentiary , Golda Meir , visited the Soviet Union ; she met privately with Polina , who had been her schoolmate in St. Petersburg . Immediately afterward , Polina was arrested and accused of ties with Zionist organisations ; she was kept one year in the Lubyanka , after which she was exiled for three years in an obscure Russian city . Molotov had no communication with her , save for the scant news that Beria , whom he loathed , told him . She was freed immediately after the death of Stalin . According to <unk> , Molotov said of her : " She 's not only beautiful and intelligent , the only woman minister in Soviet Union ; she 's also a real Bolshevik , a real Soviet person . " In 1949 , Molotov was replaced as Foreign Minister by Andrey Vyshinsky , although retaining his position as First Deputy Premier and membership of the Politburo . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career ( 1949 – 1976 ) = = = 
 At the 19th Party Congress in 1952 , Molotov was elected to the replacement for the Politburo , the Presidium , but was not listed among the members of the newly established secret body known as the Bureau of the Presidium ; indicating that he had fallen out of Stalin 's favour . At the 19th Congress , Molotov and Anastas Mikoyan were said by Stalin to have committed grave mistakes , including the publication of a wartime speech by Winston Churchill favourable to the Soviet Union 's wartime efforts . Both Molotov and Mikoyan were falling out of favour rapidly , with Stalin telling Beria , Khrushchev , Malenkov and Nikolai Bulganin that he did not want to see Molotov and Mikoyan around anymore . At his 73rd birthday , Stalin treated both with disgust . In his speech to the 20th Party Congress Khrushchev told the delegates that Stalin had plans for " finishing off " Molotov and Mikoyan in the aftermath of the 19th Congress . 
 Following Stalin 's death , a realignment of the leadership strengthened Molotov 's position . Georgy Malenkov , Stalin 's successor in the post of Premier , reappointed Molotov as Minister of Foreign Affairs on 5 March 1953 . Although Molotov was seen as a likely successor to Stalin in the immediate aftermath of his death , he never sought to become leader of the Soviet Union . A Troika was established immediately after Stalin 's death , consisting of Malenkov , Beria , and Molotov , but ended when Malenkov and Molotov deceived Beria . Molotov supported the removal and later the execution of Beria on the orders of Khrushchev . The new Party Secretary , Khrushchev , soon emerged as the new leader of the Soviet Union . He presided over a gradual domestic liberalisation and a thaw in foreign policy , shown by the reconciliation with Josip Broz Tito 's government in Yugoslavia , which Stalin had expelled from the communist movement . Molotov , an old @-@ guard Stalinist , seemed increasingly out of place in this new environment , but he represented the Soviet Union at the Geneva Conference of 1955 . 
 The events which led to Molotov 's downfall began in February 1956 when Khrushchev launched an unexpected denunciation of Stalin at the 20th Congress of the Communist Party . Khrushchev attacked Stalin both over the purges of the 1930s and the defeats of the early years of World War II , which he blamed on Stalin 's overly trusting attitude towards Hitler and the purges of the Red Army . Since Molotov was the most senior of Stalin 's collaborators still alive and had played a leading role in the purges , it became obvious that Khrushchev 's examination of the past would probably result in Molotov 's fall from power . Consequently , he became the leader of an old guard which tried to overthrow Khrushchev . 
 In June 1956 , Molotov was removed as Foreign Minister , and in June 1957 , was expelled from the Presidium ( Politburo ) following a failed attempt to remove Khrushchev as First Secretary . Although Molotov 's faction initially won a vote in the Presidium , 7 – 4 , to remove Khrushchev , the latter refused to resign unless a Central Committee plenum decided so . In the plenum , which lasted from 22 – 29 June , Molotov and his faction were defeated . Eventually , he was banished as ambassador to the Mongolian People 's Republic . Molotov and his associates were denounced as " the Anti @-@ Party Group " but , notably , were not subject to the physical repressions that marked the Stalin years . In 1960 , he was appointed Soviet representative to the International Atomic Energy Agency , which was seen as a partial rehabilitation . However , after the 22nd Party Congress in 1961 , during which Khrushchev carried out his de @-@ Stalinisation campaign , including the removal of Stalin 's body from Lenin 's Mausoleum , Molotov ( along with Lazar Kaganovich ) was removed from all positions and expelled from the Communist Party . In 1962 , all of Molotov 's party documents and files were erased by the authorities . 
 In retirement , Molotov remained totally unrepentant about his role during Stalin 's rule . He suffered a heart attack in January 1962 . After the Sino @-@ Soviet split , it was reported that he agreed with the criticisms made by Mao Zedong of the supposed " revisionism " of Khrushchev 's policies . According to Roy Medvedev , Stalin 's daughter Svetlana recalled Molotov 's wife telling her : " Your father was a genius . There 's no revolutionary spirit around nowadays , just opportunism everywhere " and " China 's our only hope . Only they have kept alive the revolutionary spirit " . 
 = = = Rehabilitation , death , beliefs and legacy = = = 
 The first signs of a rehabilitation were seen during Leonid Brezhnev 's rule , when information about him was again allowed to be included in Soviet encyclopaedias . His connection , support and work in the Anti @-@ Party Group was mentioned in encyclopaedias published in 1973 and 1974 , but eventually disappeared altogether by the mid @-@ to @-@ late @-@ 1970s . Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko further rehabilitated Molotov ; in 1984 Molotov was even allowed to seek membership in the Communist Party . A collection of interviews with Molotov from 1985 was published in 1994 by Felix Chuev as Molotov Remembers : Inside Kremlin Politics . Molotov died , during the rule of Mikhail Gorbachev , on 8 November 1986 . He was 96 years old at the time of his death , and was buried at the Novodevichy Cemetery , Moscow . 
 Molotov , like Stalin , was pathologically mistrustful of others , and because of it , much crucial information disappeared . As Molotov once said " One should listen to them , but it is necessary to check up on them . The intelligence officer can lead you to a very dangerous position ... There are many provocateurs here , there , and everywhere . " Molotov continued to claim , in a series of published interviews , that there never was a secret territorial deal between Stalin and Hitler during the Nazi @-@ Soviet Pact . Like Stalin , he never recognised the Cold War as an international event . He saw the Cold War as , more or less , the everyday conflict between communism and capitalism . He divided the capitalist countries into two groups , the " smart and dangerous imperialists " and the " fools " . Before his retirement , Molotov proposed establishing a socialist confederation with the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) ; Molotov believed socialist states were part of a bigger , supranational entity . In retirement , Molotov criticised Nikita Khrushchev for being a " right @-@ wing deviationist " . 
 The Molotov cocktail is a term coined by the Finns during the Winter War , as a generic name used for a variety of improvised incendiary weapons . During the Winter War , the Soviet air force made extensive use of incendiaries and cluster bombs against Finnish troops and fortifications . When Molotov claimed in radio broadcasts that they were not bombing , but rather delivering food to the starving Finns , the Finns started to call the air bombs Molotov bread baskets . Soon they responded by attacking advancing tanks with " Molotov cocktails , " which were " a drink to go with the food . " According to Montefiore , the Molotov cocktail was one part of Molotov 's " cult of personality that the vain Premier surely did not appreciate . " 
 Winston Churchill in his wartime memoirs lists many meetings with Molotov . Acknowledging him as a " man of outstanding ability and cold @-@ blooded ruthlessness , " Churchill concluded : " In the conduct of foreign affairs , Mazarin , Talleyrand , Metternich , would welcome him to their company , if there be another world to which Bolsheviks allow themselves to go . " 
 At the end of 1989 , two years before the final collapse of the Soviet Union , the Congress of People 's Deputies of the Soviet Union and Mikhail Gorbachev 's government formally denounced the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , acknowledging that the bloody annexation of the Baltic States and the partition of Poland had been illegal . 
 In January 2010 a Ukrainian Court of Appeal accused Molotov and other Soviet officials of organizing a man @-@ made famine in Ukraine in 1932 – 33 ( known as Holodomor ) . But the same Court then quashed criminal proceedings against them , because of their deaths . 
 = = Decorations and awards = = 
 Hero of Socialist Labour 
 Four Orders of Lenin ( including 1945 ) 
 Order of the October Revolution 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour 
 Order of the Badge of Honour 
 Medal " For the Defence of Moscow " 
 Medal " For the Victory over Germany in the Great Patriotic War 1941 – 1945 " 
 Medal " For Valiant Labour in the Great Patriotic War 1941 – 1945 " 
 Medal " In Commemoration of the 800th Anniversary of Moscow " 
 = Herbie Hewett = 
 Herbert <unk> " Herbie " Hewett ( 25 May 1864 – 4 March 1921 ) was an English amateur cricketer who played for Somerset , captaining the county from 1889 to 1893 , as well as Oxford University and the Marylebone Cricket Club . A battling left @-@ handed opening batsman , Hewett could post a large score in a short time against even the best bowlers . Capable of hitting the ball powerfully , he combined an excellent eye with an unorthodox style to be regarded at his peak as one of England 's finest batsmen . 
 Hewett was educated at Harrow School , won a Blue at Oxford in 1886 and played for Somerset from 1884 . As an inconsistent middle @-@ order batsman he made little impact during this period . Even so , he was appointed captain of Somerset in 1889 . Over the next two years , his leadership and performances as an opening batsman were instrumental in the county regaining first @-@ class status and admission to the County Championship in 1891 . He remained Somerset captain for a further three seasons , usually opening the batting with Lionel Palairet . In 1892 , they shared a partnership of 346 for the first wicket , of which Hewett scored 201 . The stand remains the county 's highest first @-@ wicket partnership . In that season , Hewett made 1 @,@ 405 runs at an average of more than 35 , and was named as one of the " Five Batsmen of the Year " by Wisden . England did not play any Test matches at home in 1892 , or else Hewett would probably have won a Test cap ; instead his highest accolade was being selected to play for the Gentlemen against the Players at Lord 's in 1894 . A disagreement over whether play should take place on a sodden pitch in the match against the Australians in 1893 led to Hewett 's departure from Somerset at the end of that season . 
 He played first @-@ class cricket for three more years , during which time he scored centuries against both Oxford and Cambridge Universities , appearing for a variety of amateur and representative sides . Having been selected to captain an " England XI " at Scarborough in 1895 , Hewett was involved in another incident caused by a wet pitch . Feeling insulted by shouts of derision from the crowd , he left the match at lunch @-@ time on the first day . He made only one further first @-@ class appearance : playing for the Marylebone Cricket Club against Oxford University in 1896 . Hewett practised as a barrister , having been called to the Bar at the Inner Temple . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Herbert <unk> Hewett was born at Norton Court in Norton Fitzwarren , near Taunton on 25 May 1864 , the only son of William Henry and Frances M Hewett . Although he was the couple 's only son , they had at least four daughters ; in 1871 two older sisters , Emily Louisa and Helen G are listed in the census , along with one younger sister , <unk> Ethel . By 1891 , Mary W is also listed as a younger sister , although by this date both older sisters are no longer registered at the address nor their father William Henry . He was initially educated at Hillside , Godalming where he was captain of the cricket and rugby teams . On leaving Hillside in 1879 he went to Harrow School . In 1881 he had a trial for the school cricket eleven mainly on the strength of his bowling , having taken all ten wickets for 22 runs in a house match . Hewett was part of the school 's cricket first eleven in 1882 and 1883 , and appeared in the annual contest against Eton College in both years , but did little on either occasion , his highest score being six , made in the first @-@ innings in 1882 . In all matches for Harrow he had a batting average of just 7 @.@ 4 in 1883 and 9 @.@ 5 in 1884 while his bowling average in 1884 was 32 @.@ 10 . Hewett also appeared in the school association football eleven in 1883 . On completion of his studies at Harrow , he attended Trinity College , Oxford . In his reminiscences , W. G. Grace suggests that Hewett " first won some little renown in Public School and ' Varsity cricket , but it was not until he joined Somersetshire that he forced himself to a prominent place in County Cricket . " 
 = = Oxford and Somerset ( 1884 – 1888 ) = = 
 After appearing in The Freshman 's Match in 1884 , during which he scored zero and eight and took two wickets , Hewett made little impact in his first season at Oxford and was not selected for the University eleven . His debut in first @-@ class cricket came later that season for Somerset County Cricket Club at Tunbridge Wells , when he was 20 years old . Against Kent in late August , he scored 14 and 0 batting as part of the middle order , and claimed his only two wickets in first @-@ class cricket . He made one other appearance in 1884 , against Lancashire . 
 In 1885 Hewett played in a trial match at Oxford without success . He did , however , play in four of Somerset 's six first @-@ class matches that summer . In his first game of the season for Somerset , in mid @-@ July , Hewett scored his maiden half @-@ century ; he remained 50 not out in the second @-@ innings of a five @-@ wicket victory over Hampshire . He passed 50 for Somerset on two more occasions during 1885 , and finished the season with 247 runs at a batting average of 35 @.@ 28 , one of seven seasons in which his average was in excess of 30 . 
 He started the 1886 season well , scoring 151 for his college and 164 not out for <unk> against <unk> . An 1893 write @-@ up in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack said : " early in the season of 1886 [ Hewett ] showed signs of the brilliant hitting which has since made him famous " . Although he top @-@ scored in the Seniors Match , he was not selected for the eleven until the university 's third game . He made scores of 49 and 77 in successive matches for Oxford University against Lancashire and gained his Blue , scoring 0 and 7 in the University Match against Cambridge . He finished the season fourth in the Oxford University batting averages with his 160 runs being scored at 22 @.@ 85 , and was described in James Lillywhite 's Cricketers ' Annual as being : " Sometimes a most dashing left @-@ handed hitter , but not at all dependable ; hard @-@ working field . " 
 Poor results in 1885 saw Somerset lose their first @-@ class status for the following seasons . Somerset played just six matches in 1886 of which Hewett played two , top @-@ scoring with 69 against Devon . An injury to his hand prevented him from playing all but one match for the university in his final year at Oxford , 1887 , when " he would have had a good chance of retaining his place in the University eleven " , according to Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , although he was fit enough to score a century with a broomstick in a college match . During 1887 , in a second @-@ class match for Somerset against Warwickshire , Hewett scored 98 to help Somerset to an innings victory , scoring the first 92 runs in less than an hour , an unusually high rate of scoring . 
 The next year , 1888 , he scored successive half @-@ centuries for Somerset early in the season against Warwickshire and Staffordshire before making his debut for the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . Facing Oxford University , Hewett made zero and eight for the London club . The same summer , Hewett was selected to play for an England XI against the touring Australians , and in a ten wicket win for the tourists , he scored 12 and 1 . Between 1884 and 1888 Hewett had limited success at the first @-@ class level , establishing a reputation as a useful , if erratic , hard @-@ hitting middle @-@ order batsman . He played a lot of club cricket , being a regular for Harrow Wanderers , and scoring 201 not out for Senior Common Room against Christ Church in 1888 . 
 = = Captaining Somerset = = 
 = = = Second @-@ class county = = = 
 Hewett 's appearances for Somerset in 1889 were more successful . Having previously appeared in the middle @-@ order , Hewett switched to opening the innings at the start of the season , and took on the captaincy . He scored three half @-@ centuries in the season : two against Warwickshire , and one against Staffordshire . He comfortably headed the Somerset batting with an average of 38 in matches against the other second @-@ class counties . In his history of Somerset cricket , Sunshine , Sixes and Cider , David Foot describes Hewett 's selection policy as captain as being one that was more dependent on the cricketing ability of the player than " of [ the player 's ] social charm and ability to drink into the early hours " — unlike some of his predecessors . 
 In 1890 , his side were unbeaten against county opposition , winning the " Second @-@ class County Championship " . In an early season first @-@ class appearance for A. J. Webbe 's XI , Hewett scored his maiden first @-@ class century , reaching 114 against Cambridge University . Later in May , for the MCC against Oxford University , he scored 71 . Hewett top @-@ scored with 65 in the second @-@ innings of Somerset 's opening county match of 1890 , and two matches later scored 64 during a first @-@ wicket partnership of 115 with Lionel Palairet against Leicestershire . A string of lower scores followed for just under a month before Somerset hosted Staffordshire at Taunton . Having dismissed the visitors for 43 , Hewett remained 203 not out when he declared the Somerset innings closed , scored in four hours , " a remarkable display of powerful and well @-@ timed hitting " . He did not pass 100 again that season , but came close during the Scarborough Festival , being bowled for 99 in the second @-@ innings for the Gentlemen of England . Hewett led Somerset 's batting averages in 1890 , during which the club won twelve and tied one of their thirteen matches against county opposition . Due to this record the county were admitted to the County Championship for 1891 after a unanimous vote , regaining their first @-@ class status . 
 While Red Lillywhite assessed him as " a dangerous left @-@ hand bat , very free , but somewhat uncertain ; good point " , after the 1889 season , a year later he was described as " one of the very best left @-@ hand bats in England , hitting hard all round ; excellent point . Captain in 1889 – 1890 , which post he filled with wonderful judgement . " At the end of the 1890 season he was presented with a handsome silver flask by members of Somerset County Cricket Club . 
 = = = County Championship cricket = = = 
 Hewett led his side in their first County Championship match starting on 18 May 1891 . Although the club had played first @-@ class cricket a few years earlier , the championship had only been formed the previous season . Their debut in the competition was interrupted by rain and finished a draw ; Hewett top @-@ scored in Somerset 's only innings with 31 . Somerset 's next match was against reigning county champions Surrey . Lionel Palairet , Bill Roe and Sammy Woods were all missing for various reasons , leaving Hewett with a depleted side and only two real bowlers ; Ted Tyler and George Nichols . Surrey reached 449 , and then bowled Somerset out twice , for 37 in each innings . When Surrey travelled to Taunton later that season , most likely expecting an easy win to secure a second consecutive championship , Hewett top @-@ scored for his team with 55 in the first @-@ innings as Somerset reached 194 . Woods , Nichols and Tyler then secured a 40 run first @-@ innings lead for the home side who added another 331 runs in their second @-@ innings , Hewett contributing 42 . The same trio of Somerset bowlers proceeded to bowl the champions out for a second time , the final wicket falling two minutes from the close of play , and their team recorded a 130 @-@ run victory . Hewett had a quiet season with the bat , in addition to his 55 against Surrey he passed 50 on only one other occasion ; against Middlesex two weeks later . He totalled 514 runs during the season at an average of 19 @.@ 76 ; his lowest average when playing eight or more innings in a season . 
 = = Touring North America = = 
 Following the close of the 1891 County Championship , Hewett was part of Lord Hawke 's party which toured North America , playing six matches in the United States of America and two in Canada . Sammy Woods wrote that Hewett , along with Charles Wreford @-@ Brown and George Ricketts , became very seasick on the journey there . The first two matches were first @-@ class fixtures against the Gentlemen of Philadelphia . Hewett scored 30 and 49 in the first , an eight wicket loss which Woods blamed on taking place too soon after their arrival , claiming the team " had hardly found our land @-@ legs . " The first match had yielded an aggregate of 861 runs , the second contained only 352 , of which Hewett scored 10 and 29 . His captain , Lord Hawke , was the only other batsman to reach double figures in both innings as the touring side won by four wickets . None of the remaining fixtures on the tour had first @-@ class status , and not all were eleven @-@ a @-@ side contests . Hewett scored 113 against the sixteen man All New York on Staten Island , a match in which he was standing in as captain due to Lord Hawke being ill . Woods rated Hewett , along with Lord Hawke and Brown , as the best batsmen on the tour . 
 = = Batsman of the Year = = 
 Hewett 's first three matches of the 1892 season were for representative sides against the universities . He reached double figures in each of his six innings , and scored a half @-@ century for the Gentlemen of England against Cambridge . On returning to Somerset , he did not score a half @-@ century until his third match , making 54 against Oxford University . He passed 50 on twelve occasions during the season , the most during any season of his career . In late August , playing Yorkshire , Hewett scored 201 out of a partnership of 346 , establishing a record for the first wicket in first @-@ class cricket , surpassing W.G. Grace and Bransby Cooper 's 1869 total of 283 . Although their record has since been beaten in first @-@ class cricket , it remains Somerset 's record partnership for the first wicket . Their partnership was described as " Pure grace at one end , sheer force at the other " , in H.S. Altham and E. W. Swanton 's A History of Cricket . At the time , The Daily Telegraph reported that the pair remained together for three and half hours , during which Hewett scored 30 fours . 
 Hewett finished the season with 1 @,@ 047 runs for Somerset , making him the only batsman in England to score 1 @,@ 000 runs in county matches . In total he scored 1 @,@ 407 first @-@ class runs , the most by any batsman , and was third in the amateur batting averages . He was named as one of the Five Batsmen of the Year by the Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack in 1893 , in which it was claimed that " had it been necessary last August [ 1892 ] to put a representative England eleven into the field , Hewett would undoubtedly have been given a place . " Under Hewett 's captaincy , Somerset won eight , drew three and lost five matches in 1892 , finishing third in the County Championship , which would remain their highest position for over 100 years , until the county were runners @-@ up in the competition in 2001 . The Times praised the county 's achievements during the year , and reserved special praise for Hewett ; " Somerset 's many brilliant feats , and the fine play of Messrs. Hewett and Palairet in particular , were a marked feature of this year 's cricket . " After the close of the County Championship , Hewett appeared in three representative matches , captaining the West to victory over the East , and appearing under the captaincy of W.G. Grace for both the South and the Gentlemen v Players . 
 = = Departure from Somerset = = 
 Hewett began the 1893 season in good form , reaching his half @-@ century in each of his first three matches for the county , including a total of 94 against Oxford University in late May . Hewett missed most of the match against Kent shortly after , returning to Taunton due to the death of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , during which time George Wood replaced him as a substitute . In July 1893 , the touring Australians played Somerset at Taunton for the first time since 1882 , when both the ground and the county team were barely established . After the success of the 1892 season , and because talented , Australian @-@ born Sammy Woods was playing for Somerset , the match was eagerly anticipated . Thousands arrived in Taunton for the match , but after overnight torrential rain , the umpires inspected the pitch at 11 : 00 and abandoned play for the day . In his history of the county club , Roebuck suggest that they may have been put under pressure by the Australians or by Hewett himself . The Somerset fans and members were angry at the decision , but the Australians packed picnic baskets and after exchanging strong words with the locals , departed for the Quantock Hills . Hewett , along with Woods and Vernon Hill , arranged to play golf in Minehead . The crowd continued to show their dismay at the decision , and eventually the Somerset officials asked the umpires to take another look at the ground . Woods supported this decision in his reminiscences , claiming that " the decision not to play was premature . " At 14 : 00 , after their second inspection , the umpires retracted their previous decision and announced that play could start . Hewett reacted angrily , and argued unsuccessfully against the decision with the Somerset committee . The Australian players were recalled from their picnic , and play began at 16 : 00 , although neither team particularly wanted to play . Roebuck recorded that " Hewett , in particular , was in high dudgeon and ... he threw away his wicket for 12 runs , having been dropped once . " David Foot offered a more tempered opinion , saying simply that Hewett 's " mind wasn 't on the game . " No play was possible on the second day , and on the third , Australia won the match by six wickets . Hewett felt let down by the Somerset committee , who he felt had undermined his authority , prompting him to say that " if a captain can 't lead at Taunton , this is no place for him . " Although friends thought he was overreacting , he declared that he would resign from the captaincy and the club at the end of the season . Both Foot and Roebuck suggested that Hewett reacted in an over @-@ sensitive and extreme manner , but that his lack of self @-@ control may have limited his long @-@ term captaincy prospects . 
 In his five further games for Somerset before the end of the season Hewett hit two centuries . He reached 120 runs against Nottinghamshire and against Gloucestershire , on his final appearance for the county , he scored 112 runs in just under two hours ; according to James Lillywhite 's Cricketers ' Annual , it " was a splendid display " . He scored 1 @,@ 092 runs in total during 1893 , of which his 669 for Somerset in the championship were scored at an average of 31 @.@ 85 , topping the county 's batting charts . During his five seasons of first @-@ class cricket for Somerset , he played 51 matches and scored 2 @,@ 592 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 85 . 
 = = Later cricket career and life = = 
 After leaving Somerset , Hewett did not continue in county cricket at all , opting to play first @-@ class cricket only for amateur and representative sides . At the tail @-@ end of the 1893 season , he played three times for the South , scoring two half @-@ centuries . In July 1894 , Hewett made the second of his two appearances for the Gentlemen against the Players . Unlike his first appearance , made at Hastings , the match was played at Lord 's Cricket Ground , which was generally considered to be the more prestigious Gentlemen v Players fixture of the season , being the more representative . These matches were keenly contested during the 1890s , and were considered to be second in prestige only to gaining a Test cap . Batting at number three , Hewett scored 12 runs out of the Gentlemen 's total of 254 , before Stanley Jackson and Hewett 's former Somerset colleague , Sammy Woods , bowled the Players out for 108 and 107 . He appeared 11 times in 1894 , scoring 579 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 05 , higher than the previous season . Woods described Hewett as being " in splendid form " when he played , and lamented that he was no longer playing for Somerset . He scored his only century of the season for A. J. Webbe 's XI , reaching 110 after opening the innings against Oxford University . He continued his form with the bat into 1895 , twice scoring centuries for the Gentlemen against the universities , making 109 against Cambridge , and 102 against Oxford . During this season Hewett appeared in his first match for the amateur side I Zingari , who had strong links with both Harrow School and Somerset president Sir Spencer Ponsonby @-@ Fane . 
 Hewett played all three matches of the 1895 Scarborough Festival ; he opened the innings for the MCC against Yorkshire , and then captained the South in their loss against the North . In the third match , Hewett was named captain of an England XI , a compliment for the former Somerset captain . However , rain meant that the start was delayed . Unlike a couple of years earlier , Hewett was happy to ignore the puddles in the field and start the match at the scheduled time . The umpires disagreed with him , and the crowd , wanting cricket , blamed Hewett for the delay and lack of sport . When he belatedly led his side onto the field , the spectators threw insults at him until the Yorkshire captain , Lord Hawke , shouted " Keep quiet or I 'll think about calling the game off " . Hewett did not bother with such threats , and left the field , got changed and departed from the ground , taking no further part in the game . Fred Spofforth replaced him in the match which the England side went on to win by nine wickets . 
 During the English winter of 1895 – 96 , Hewett once again toured with Lord Hawke , travelling to South Africa . Arriving too late to take part in the first match of the tour , he then played the next four matches , but was summoned back to England by important business . The tour included three matches against a South African national team which were deemed to be Tests , but by this stage of the tour Hewett had left South Africa , and he thus completed his cricket career without any Test appearances . He played his final first @-@ class match in 1896 , scoring 86 for the MCC against Oxford University . In this match , for unknown reasons , he appeared as " Mr. H Herbert " . 
 " When Mr ' Herbert ' came in to bat ... many of the spectators in the free seats did not recognise him , but after he had sampled an over or two , an old gentleman , who had shown some knowledge of the game , hit the nail on the head when he remarked : I don 't remember to have seen this Mr ' <unk> ' before but he 's ' class ' . " 
 He continued to play cricket for the Harrow Wanderers , MCC and I Zingari until 1901 . At the time of the 1901 Census , Hewett was living in Westminster . He was listed as head of the household , the only other resident being a servant . 
 Hewett practised as a barrister , having trained at the Inner Temple , where he passed at least one exam in 1890 . During the First World War , he served in the Territorial Force Reserve as an Assistant Provost Marshal , an appointment which he held from 7 September 1915 until 24 May 1918 . He died in Hove , Sussex on 4 March 1921 , and his funeral was held in Norton Fitzwarren four days later . His obituary in The Times describes only Hewett 's cricket career , and does not give any details about his later life . It does not mention a spouse or any children . The notice of his funeral in the same paper says : " The whole village [ of Norton Fitzwarren ] was in mourning and among those present at the graveside were Mr H. E. Murray Anderdon , president , and Mr S. M. J. Woods , secretary of the Somerset Cricket Club . " 
 = = Personality and style = = 
 When Hewett was named as one of the Five Batsmen of the Year by Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack in 1893 , the publication described him as " the finest left @-@ handed batsman in England " . He played in an unorthodox but attractive fashion , which prompted W.G. Grace to praise " his dashing and fearless hitting " , while remarking that he had an awkward style . In Somerset , Cider and Sixes , David Foot described that he was " possessed of an eagle eye , considerable meat and the ability to make his forcing shots attractive . " In Peter Roebuck 's From Sammy to Jimmy , he offered a similar portrait of Hewett 's batting style , adding that " he saw it as his task to conquer " . Hewett 's batting received praise in H. S. Altham and E. W. Swanton 's A History of Cricket , where he is described as a " singularly determined and venomous " batsman who " hit the ball in unexpected and demoralizing directions . " He frequently scored his runs rapidly , as described by the Reverend R.S. Holmes , who wrote of his batting against Nottinghamshire ; " the Captain scored at his usual rate – three out of four runs notched , represent his pace . Against Surrey he got 61 out of 81 , this time 60 out of the same total . That 's the kind of example every captain should set – a run a minute , or thereabouts . " In summary of the 1892 season The Cricket Annual notes that " the Somerset player , in fact , had established the reputation of being the most punishing batsman and rapid scorer of the day , and on last season 's form no representative eleven could be considered complete without him . " Sammy Woods claimed that Hewett disliked fielding , but offered the view that he was good at point . Woods also related how Hewett would chew on a toothpick , which he always had in his mouth when fielding , when his team was losing . 
 As evidenced by the manner in which Hewett left Somerset and walked off during the Scarborough Festival of 1895 , he possessed a short fuse . Team @-@ mate Frederic John Poynton characterised his captain as a player who suffered " from a deep , difficult nature , which once upset , took long to recover " . He was a strong leader who was both respected and feared by his colleagues . In 1885 , Somerset County Cricket Club had failed to field eleven players for some of their first @-@ class contests , and in most of their other matches were a poor side . Hewett took on the county captaincy in 1889 , and in his second year led his side unbeaten against fellow county opposition to win the ' Second @-@ class County Championship ' , and gain re @-@ admission to the first @-@ class game . Hewett 's batting and captaincy were aided by the emergence of Woods and Palairet , both of whom were named as Wisden Cricketers of the Year between 1889 and 1893 . In 1891 , Somerset finished joint fifth among the nine first @-@ class counties , while the subsequent year they rose to third . Hewett 's final season at Somerset was the county 's least successful under his captaincy , winning just four of their sixteen matches to finish in eighth . 
 = Corbin Sharun = 
 Corbin Sharun ( born September 6 , 1988 ) is a professional Canadian football defensive back and special teams specialist who is currently a free agent . He was drafted by the Edmonton Eskimos in 2010 , where he played for five seasons . He played college football for the St. Francis Xavier University X @-@ Men and junior football for the Edmonton Wildcats . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Sharun was born in Edmonton , Alberta . He played high school football at Strathcona Composite High School as a quarterback , winning three consecutive city championships with the Strathcona Lords . He continued as a quarterback for the X @-@ Men at St. Francis Xavier University from 2006 to 2007 . In his freshman year , Sharun started three games before serving as a backup for the majority of his remaining time there . After discovering his father had colon cancer in early 2008 , Sharun joined the Edmonton Wildcats of the Canadian Junior Football League and switched to the safety position . The Edmonton Sun reported that he took on a defensive role to increase his likelihood of playing professionally . While with the championship @-@ winning Wildcats in 2009 , Sharun was named an All @-@ Canadian . He accumulated 25 tackles , five interceptions ( including one returned for a touchdown ) , and a fumble recovery in his final year with the Wildcats . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Edmonton Eskimos = = = 
 Sharun was selected by the Edmonton Eskimos in the sixth round of the 2010 CFL Draft before that year 's season with the 43rd overall pick . The Eskimos signed Sharun to a three @-@ year contract with an option for a fourth year on May 4 , 2010 . 
 Sharun participated in training camp with the Eskimos in 2010 and practiced with the first team as a safety , but was moved to the practice squad when the team was reduced to 46 players . The Eskimos went on to transfer Sharun between the active and practice rosters several times throughout the year . He made his CFL debut on July 11 , 2010 against the Montreal Alouettes , and later recorded his first special teams tackle on August 6 against the Toronto Argonauts . In a game against the Saskatchewan Roughriders on August 28 , Sharun blocked a punt to set up the Eskimos ' only touchdown along the way to scoring 17 unanswered points to win 17 – 14 . In his rookie season , Sharun recorded 16 special teams tackles while playing in 15 regular season games , along with one defensive tackle . 
 Sharun played in all 18 games throughout the regular season of 2011 . <unk> his role as a special teams player , Sharun made 25 special teams tackles in the regular season , tying the team 's single @-@ season record previously held solely by Bruce Dickinson . His franchise record was later broken by Deon Lacey in 2014 . He recorded the second highest total of special teams tackles in the CFL , leading the West division in that category . Playing against the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats on July 9 , 2011 , Sharun recorded a career @-@ high four tackles . He made one special teams tackle during the playoffs . The Eskimos finished the season with a winning record of 11 – 7 and finished second in the West division . The Calgary Stampeders lost the West Finals to the BC Lions , eventual Grey Cup champions . Sharun was active in both playoff games . 
 Sharun played in 13 regular season games and registered 13 special teams tackles during the 2012 season . He was placed on the six @-@ game injured list in October . In a September 7 game against the Stampeders , Sharun caught an unlikely pass from third @-@ string quarterback and holder Matt Nichols following a failed field goal snap and ran 35 yards for both players ' first career touchdown . 
 In the 2013 CFL , Sharun played in 11 games and recorded 14 special teams tackles , including three total tackles in the September 6 game against the Stampeders . He began the season on the practice roster after being cut when the Eskimos reduced their roster to 46 players , but returned to the active roster on July 12 . 
 Sharun achieved nine special teams tackles over 13 games during the 2014 season . He also played in two playoff matches , recording an additional tackle . Sharun was placed on the injured list several times during the 2014 season , including a transfer to the six @-@ game injured list in September . Following the 2014 season , Sharun was signed to a contract extension by the Eskimos but was released prior to the start of the regular season in 2015 . 
 = = = Calgary Stampeders = = = 
 The Calgary Stampeders signed Sharun to their practice roster on July 28 , 2015 , where he remained for most of the season . He was activated for the West Final following an injury to Karl McCartney . In a loss at the West Final , Sharun made three special @-@ teams tackles against his former team , the Eskimos . On June 19 , 2016 , Sharun was released by the Stampeders . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = Arab – Khazar wars = 
 The Arab – Khazar wars were a series of conflicts fought between the armies of the Khazar Khaganate and the Umayyad Caliphate ( as well as its Abbasid successor ) and their respective vassals . Historians usually distinguish two major periods of conflict , the First ( <unk> . 642 – 652 ) and Second ( ca . 722 – 737 ) Arab – Khazar Wars , but the Arab – Khazar military confrontation involved several sporadic raids and isolated clashes as well , over a period from the middle of the 7th century to the end of the 8th century . 
 The Arab – Khazar wars were a result of the attempts of the Umayyad Caliphate to secure control of Transcaucasia and the North Caucasus , where the Khazars were already established . The first Arab invasion , in the 640s and early 650s , ended with the defeat of an Arab force led by Abd ar @-@ Rahman ibn Rabiah outside the Khazar town of Balanjar . Hostilities broke out again with the Caliphate in the <unk> , with raids back and forth across the Caucasus . Led by the distinguished generals al @-@ Jarrah ibn Abdallah and Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik , the Arabs were able to capture Derbent and even the southern Khazar capital of Balanjar , but this had little impact on the nomadic Khazars , who remained able to launch devastating raids deep into Transcaucasia . In one such raid in 730 , the Khazars inflicted a major defeat on the Umayyad forces at the Battle of Ardabil , killing al @-@ Jarrah , but were in turn defeated the next year and pushed back north . Maslama then recovered Derbent , which became a major Arab military outpost and colony , before being replaced by Marwan ibn Muhammad ( the future caliph Marwan II ) in 732 . A period of relatively localized warfare followed until 737 , when Marwan led north a massive expedition that reached the Khazar capital Atil on the Volga . After securing some form of submission by the khagan , the Arabs withdrew . 
 The 737 campaign marked the end of large @-@ scale warfare between the two powers , establishing Derbent as the northernmost Muslim outpost and securing Muslim dominance over Transcaucasia . At the same time , the long wars weakened the Umayyad army and contributed to the eventual fall of the dynasty a few years later . Relations between the Muslims of the Caucasus and the Khazars remained largely peaceful thereafter , apart from two Khazar raids in the 760s and in 799 , resulting from failed efforts to secure a marriage alliance between the Arab governors or local princes of the Caucasus and the Khazar khagan . Occasional warfare continued in the region between the Khazars and the local Muslim principalities of the Caucasus until the collapse of the Khazar state in the late 10th century , but the great wars of the 8th century were never repeated . 
 = = Background and strategic motives = = 
 The Arab – Khazar wars were part of a long series of military conflicts between the nomadic peoples of the Pontic @-@ Caspian steppe and the more settled regions south of the Caucasus range , dating back to Antiquity . The two great passes over the Caucasus , the Darial Pass ( " Alan Gates " ) in the centre and the Pass of Derbent ( " Caspian Gates " ) had been used as invasion routes since Classical times , and their defence against the destructive raids of the steppe peoples came to be regarded as one of the chief duties of imperial regimes to the south . Thus the <unk> of the Sassanid Empire , from <unk> I ( r . 457 – 484 ) to Khosrau I ( r . 531 – 579 ) , built a long line of fortifications from the Caucasus to the Caspian Sea . Derbent itself , which would feature prominently in the Arab – Khazar conflict , was built by the Persians in the early 6th century as a strategic choke @-@ point and gateway ( its name in Persian , Dar @-@ band , means " Knot of the Gates " ) between the north and south . This is reflected in the popular belief among Middle Eastern cultures that Alexander the Great had with divine assistance barred the Caucasus against the hordes of " Gog and Magog " , commonly regarded as an echo of the invasions by the Scythians and the Huns . Eventually , the Khazars would take their place , and early medieval writers came to identify the Khazars with Gog and Magog . 
 Since the nascent Caliphate regarded itself as the heir of the Sassanid ( and to a lesser extent , Byzantine ) tradition and " civilizational consciousness " , the Arab caliphs also adopted the notion that , in the words of the historian Gerald Mako , it was their duty " to protect the settled , i.e. the civilized world from the northern barbarian " . To this imperative was added the Muslim concept of division of the world into the " House of Islam " ( Dar al @-@ Islam ) and the " House of War " ( Dar al @-@ Harb ) , to which the pagan Turkic nomads were consigned . The two armies consequently represented two different military philosophies . While the Umayyad armies disposed of a sizeable cavalry contingent , both light and heavy , their mainstay was the infantry , to the extent that in battle the Arab cavalry was often limited to skirmishing during the initial phases , before dismounting and fighting on foot . The Khazars on the other hand , although they had adopted elements of the civilizations of the south and possessed towns , remained a largely tribal and semi @-@ nomadic power . Like their Central Asian counterparts , they practiced a highly mobile form of warfare , relying on their highly skilled and hardy cavalry . As the historian Khalid Yahya Blankinship writes , " the Khazars were to prove difficult opponents for the Muslims , perhaps partly because their state was not highly organized and thus did not have a center whose fall would bring about a sudden collapse and rapid surrender " . The eastern Caucasus range became the main theatre of the Arab – Khazar conflict , with the Arab armies aiming to gain control of Derbent ( known in Arabic as Bab al @-@ Abwab , " Gate of Gates " ) and the Khazar cities of Balanjar and Samandar , whose location has yet to be established with certainty by modern researchers . Both of the latter are referred to as Khazar capitals by different Arab writers , and may have functioned as winter and summer capitals respectively . It was only later , under the impact of the Arab attacks , that the Khazars moved their capital further north , to Atil on the mouths of the Volga . 
 To an extent , the Arab – Khazar wars were also linked to the struggle of the Caliphate against the Byzantine Empire along the eastern fringes of Asia Minor , a theatre of war which adjoined the Caucasus . The Byzantine emperors pursued close relations with the Khazars , which amounted to a virtual alliance for most of the period in question , including such exceptional acts as the marriage of emperor Justinian II ( r . 685 – 695 ; 705 – 711 ) to a Khazar princess in 705 . The possibility of the Khazars linking up with the Byzantines through Armenia was a grave threat to the Caliphate , especially given its proximity to the Umayyad metropolitan province of Syria . This did not materialize , and Armenia was left largely quiet , with the Umayyads granting it wide @-@ ranging autonomy and the Byzantines likewise refraining from active campaigning there . Indeed , given the common threat posed by the Khazar raids , the Umayyads found the Armenians ( and the neighbouring Georgians ) willing allies against the Khazars . Although some <unk> , notably Dimitri Obolensky , suggested that the Arab – Khazar wars were motivated by a Muslim desire to outflank the Byzantine defences from the north , this idea is not borne out by the limited nature of the conflict before until the 720s . It is more probable that the Byzantines encouraged the Khazars to attack the Caliphate to relieve the mounting pressure on their own eastern frontier in the early 8th century , as indeed they profited considerably from the diversion of the Muslim armies northwards in the 720s and 730s , resulting in another marriage alliance , between the future emperor Constantine V ( r . 741 – 775 ) and the Khazar princess <unk> in 733 . 
 The issue of control over the northern branch of the Silk Road by the Caliphate has been suggested as a further motive for the conflict , but G. Mako disputes this claim by pointing out that warfare declined at precisely the period of the greatest expansion of traffic along the Silk Road , i.e. after the middle of the 8th century . 
 = = First conflicts : the First Arab – Khazar War and aftermath = = 
 The Khazars themselves first campaigned in the Caucasus during the Byzantine – Sassanid War of 602 – 628 , as a subject of the Western Turkic Khaganate . The Turks sacked Derbent and joined the Byzantines in their siege of Tiflis . Their contribution proved decisive for the eventual Byzantine victory in the war . For a few years afterwards , until ca . 632 , the Khazars exercised some control over Caucasian Iberia ( approximately modern Georgia ) , Caucasian Albania ( modern Azerbaijan ) and Adharbayjan ( modern Iranian Azerbaijan ) . 
 The Khazars and the Arabs came into conflict as a result of the first phase of Muslim expansion : by 640 , the Arabs had reached Armenia , and in 642 , they launched their first raid across the Caucasus under Abd ar @-@ Rahman ibn Rabiah . In 645 / 646 , the Arabs defeated a Byzantine army in Armenia , reinforced with Khazar and Alan contingents . It was followed by an attempt in 651 / 652 to advance onto the Khazar capital , Balanjar , but the Arabs were heavily defeated in a battle before the city , resulting in the death of Abd ar @-@ Rahman 's brother Salman and 4 @,@ 000 Muslim troops . Three years later , the Khazars repelled a retaliatory campaign under Habib ibn Maslama . 
 Due to the outbreak of the First Muslim Civil War and the Arab priorities on other fronts , the Muslims refrained from repeating an attack on the Khazars until the early 8th century . The Khazars , on their part , only launched a few raids into the Transcaucasian principalities that were loosely under Muslim dominion : in 661 / 662 , they launched a raid into Albania but were defeated by the local prince ; in 683 or 685 ( also a time of civil war in the Muslim world ) , a large @-@ scale raid across Transcaucasia was more successful , capturing much booty and many prisoners . 
 = = Climax : the Second Arab – Khazar War = = 
 Relations between the two powers remained relatively quiet until the early years of the 8th century , by which time the stage for a new round of conflict was set : by this time , Byzantine political authority had been marginalized in the Caucasus , and the Caliphate tightened its grip on Armenia after the suppression of a large @-@ scale rebellion in 705 . With Armenia annexed into the Caliphate , the Arabs and the Khazars faced each other for control of the Caucasus . Only the western parts of Transcaucasia , comprising modern Georgia , remained free from direct control by either of the two rival powers . War broke out in 713 / 714 , when the Umayyad general Maslama , a son of the Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 685 – 705 ) , conquered Derbent . Maslama then drove deeper into Khazar territory , trying , without success , to subdue the Huns living north of the Caucasus ( who were Khazar vassals ) . The Khazars opposed him under the general Alp ' , but also launched raids to the south into Albania in response . In 717 , the Khazars raided in force into Adharbayjan , but they were driven back by the Arabs under Hatin ibn al @-@ Nu 'man . 
 = = = Escalation of the conflict = = = 
 In 721 / 722 , the main phase of the war began . In the winter of this year , 30 @,@ 000 Khazars launched an invasion of Armenia and inflicted a crushing defeat on the mostly Syrian army of the local governor Mi <unk> ibn Saffar al @-@ Bahrani at Marj al @-@ <unk> in February / March 722 . In response , Caliph Yazid II ( r . 720 – 724 ) sent one of his most celebrated generals , al @-@ Jarrah ibn Abdallah , with 25 @,@ 000 Syrian troops north . Al @-@ Jarrah was swiftly successful in driving the Khazars back across the Caucasus , recovered Derbent and even advanced on Balanjar . The Khazars tried to defend their capital by ringing the citadel with a laager of wagons , but the Arabs broke it apart and stormed the city on 21 August 722 or 723 . Most of Balanjar 's inhabitants were killed or enslaved , but a few managed to flee north . Despite their success , however , the Arabs had not yet defeated the main Khazar army , which like all nomad forces was not dependent on cities for supplies . The continuing threat of the Khazar army forced the Arabs to abandon any attempt to capture Samandar as well , and to retreat to Warthan south of the Caucasus . The sources are obscure on al @-@ Jarrah 's activity in 723 , but he seems to have led another campaign north ( which may indeed be the Balanjar campaign ) . In response , the Khazars raided south of the Caucasus , but in February 724 , al @-@ Jarrah inflicted a crushing defeat on them in a battle between the rivers Cyrus and Araxes that lasted for several days . Al @-@ Jarrah followed up his success by capturing Tiflis and bringing Caucasian Iberia and the lands of the Alans under Muslim suzerainty , becoming the first Muslim commander to campaign through the Darial Pass in the process . This secured the Muslims ' own flank against a possible Khazar attack through the Darial , while conversely it gave the Muslim army a second invasion route into Khazar territory . 
 In 725 , the new Caliph , Hisham ibn Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 724 – 743 ) replaced al @-@ Jarrah with his own brother Maslama , who already held the post of governor of the Jazira . For the time being , Maslama remained in the Jazira and was more concerned with operations against the Byzantines . In his stead , he sent al @-@ Harith ibn Amr al @-@ Ta 'i to the Caucasus front . In 725 , al @-@ Harith was engaged in consolidating Muslim authority in Albania , campaigning along the Cyrus against the regions of al @-@ Lakz and <unk> . He was probably also preoccupied with supervising that year 's census . In the next year , however , Barjik , one of the Khazar khagan 's sons , launched a major invasion of Albania and Adharbayjan . The Khazars even laid siege to Warthan , during which they employed mangonels . The use of such advanced siege machines shows , according to <unk> Blankinship , that the Khazars were " a militarily sophisticated nation , not a mere disorganized pack of barbarians " . Al @-@ Harith was able to defeat them on the banks of the Araxes and drive them back north of the river , but the Arabs ' position was clearly precarious . 
 This prompted Maslama to take over personally the direction of the Khazar front in 727 , where now he was faced , for the first time , by the khagan himself , as both sides escalated the conflict . Maslama , probably reinforced with more Syrian and Jaziran troops , took the offensive . He recovered the Darial Pass , apparently lost in the period since al @-@ Jarrah 's expedition in 724 , and pushed on into Khazar territory , campaigning there until the onset of winter forced him to return to Adharbayjan . What he achieved in this expedition is unclear , but in the next year , when he repeated his invasion , it ended in what <unk> Blankinship calls a " near disaster " . Arab sources report that the Arab troops fought for thirty or even forty days in the mud , under continuous rainfall , before scoring a victory against the khagan on 17 September 728 . How great that victory was , however , is open to question , because on his return Maslama was ambushed by the Khazars , whereupon the Arabs simply abandoned their baggage train and fled headlong through the Darial Pass to safety . In the aftermath of this campaign , Maslama was replaced yet again by al @-@ Jarrah al @-@ Hakami . For all his energy , Maslama 's campaigning failed to produce the desired results : by 729 , the Arabs had lost control of northeastern Transcaucasia and been thrust once more into the defensive , with al @-@ Jarrah again having to defend Azerbaijan against a Khazar invasion . 
 = = = Ardabil and the Arab reaction = = = 
 In 730 , al @-@ Jarrah returned to the offensive through Tiflis and the Darial Pass . Arab sources report that he reached as far as the Khazar capital , al @-@ Bayda , on the Volga , but modern historians such as Blankinship consider this improbable . The Khazars launched a counterstroke under a certain <unk> , which forced al @-@ Jarrah to retreat south of the Caucasus once again to defend Albania . It is unclear whether the Khazars came through the Darial Pass or the Caspian Gates , but they managed to move around al @-@ Jarrah 's army at Bardha 'a and lay siege to Ardabil . The city was the capital of Adharbayjan , and the mass of the Muslim settlers and their families , some 30 @,@ 000 in total , lived within its walls . When al @-@ Jarrah learned of this , he led his army in a rapid march south and engaged the Khazars outside the city walls . There , after a three @-@ day battle on 7 – 9 December 730 , al @-@ Jarrah 's army of 25 @,@ 000 was all but annihilated by the Khazars under Barjik . Al @-@ Jarrah also fell and command passed to his brother al @-@ Hajjaj , who was unable to prevent the sacking of Ardabil . The 10th @-@ century historian Agapius of Hierapolis reports that the Khazars took as many as 40 @,@ 000 prisoners from the city , al @-@ Jarrah 's army , and the surrounding countryside . The Khazars raided the province at will , sacking <unk> and attacking other settlements , with some detachments reaching as far as Mosul in the northern Jazira , adjacent to the Umayyad metropolitan province of Syria . 
 The defeat at Ardabil was a major shock to the Muslims , who for the first time faced an enemy penetrating so deep within the borders of the Caliphate , and Caliph Hisham appointed the veteran military leader Sa 'id ibn Amr al @-@ Harashi to take command against the Khazars . Although the forces he could muster immediately ( including refugees from Ardabil who had to be paid ten gold dinars to be persuaded to fight ) were small , Sa 'id managed to recover Akhlat on Lake Van . From there he moved northeast to Bardha 'a and south again to relieve the siege of Warthan . Near <unk> Sa 'id came upon a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Khazar army , which he defeated , killing most of the Khazars , and rescuing the prisoners they had with them . The surviving Khazars fled north , with Sa 'id in pursuit . Despite this success , Sa 'id was relieved of his command in early 731 and even imprisoned for a while as a result of the jealousy of Maslama , whom Hisham re @-@ appointed as governor of Armenia and Adharbayjan . Maslama came to the Caucasus with many Jaziran troops and took to the offensive . He restored the provinces of Albania to Muslim allegiance through exemplary punishment of those who resisted his advance , and reached Derbent , where he found a Khazar garrison . Bypassing the fortress , Maslama advanced north , following the retreating Khazars . Although the details of this campaign in the sources may be confused with that of 728 , it appears that he took <unk> , Balanjar , and Samandar before being forced to retreat again after a confrontation with the khagan himself , in which Barjik was reportedly killed and the khagan wounded . The Khazars shadowed Maslama 's march south and attacked him near Derbent , but the Arab army dug a trench and defeated them . Taking advantage of his victory , Maslama evicted the Khazars from Derbent by poisoning their water supply and re @-@ founded the city as a military colony , garrisoning it with 24 @,@ 000 mostly Syrian troops . After that he returned with the rest of his army ( mostly the favoured Jaziran and <unk> contingents ) south of the Caucasus for the winter , while the Khazars re @-@ occupied their abandoned towns . Despite the capture of Derbent , Maslama 's record was apparently unsatisfactory for Hisham , who replaced his brother in March 732 with Marwan ibn Muhammad , who would later reign as the last Umayyad caliph in 744 – 750 . 
 In the summer of 732 , Marwan led 40 @,@ 000 men north into Khazar lands . The accounts of this campaign are confused : Ibn A 'tham records that he reached Balanjar and returned to Derbent with much captured livestock , but the campaign is described in terms strongly reminiscent of Maslama 's expeditions in 728 and 731 , and its veracity is open to doubt . Ibn Khayyat on the other hand reports that Marwan led a far more limited campaign on the country immediately to the north of Derbent and then retired there to spend the winter . Marwan was more active in the south , where he raised Ashot III Bagratuni to the position of presiding prince of Armenia , effectively granting the country broad autonomy in exchange for the service of its soldiers alongside the Caliphate 's armies . This unique concession points , according to Blankinship , to the worsening manpower crisis faced by the Caliphate . At about the same time , the Khazars and Byzantines strengthened their ties and formalized their alliance against their common enemy with the marriage of Constantine V to the Khazar princess <unk> . 
 = = = Final phase of the war = = = 
 After Marwan 's 732 expedition , a period of quiet set in . Marwan was replaced as governor of Armenia and Adharbayjan in spring 733 by Sa 'id al @-@ Harashi , but he undertook no campaigns at all until 735 , when he lost his sight and resigned . Marwan was then re @-@ appointed to the post , but he too was unable to launch anything but local expeditions until 737 : three fortresses near the Darial Pass and the ruler of a North Caucasian principality , Tuman Shah , were captured in 735 , while another local prince , <unk> , was defeated and killed in 736 . Blankinship attributes this inactivity to the exhaustion of the Arab armies and draws a parallel with the contemporaneous quiet phase in Transoxiana in 732 – 734 , where the Arabs had also suffered a series of costly defeats at the hands of Turkic nomads . In addition , Agapius and Michael the Syrian record that the Arabs and the Khazars concluded peace , information which Muslim sources ignore or downplay to a tactical ruse by Marwan designed to gain time for his preparations . 
 The Arabs prepared a massive strike for 737 , however , intended to end the war for good . Marwan apparently went to Damascus in person to persuade Hisham to back this project and was successful : an army 120 @,@ 000 strong was assembled , comprising regular forces of Syria and the Jazira , as well as volunteers for the jihad , Armenian troops under Ashot Bagratuni , and even armed camp followers and servants . The number is clearly an exaggeration , but whatever the real size of Marwan 's army , it was a huge force and certainly the largest ever sent against the Khazars . Marwan first secured his rear by subduing the Armenian factions who were hostile to the Arabs and their client Ashot . He then pushed into Iberia , driving its <unk> ruler to seek refuge in the fortress of <unk> on the Black Sea coast , in the Byzantine protectorate of Abkhazia . Marwan laid siege to <unk> itself , but he was forced to retire due to the outbreak of dysentery among his troops . 
 Marwan now launched a two @-@ pronged offensive against the Khazars : 30 @,@ 000 men under the governor of Derbent , <unk> ibn Zafir al @-@ Sulami , advanced north along the coast of the Caspian Sea , while Marwan himself with the bulk of his forces crossed the Darial Pass . The two armies met at Samandar , and from there Marwan pushed on , reaching , according to some Arab sources , the Khazar capital of Atil ( al @-@ Bayda ' ) on the Volga . Most Arab sources contain few details on the campaign , but Ibn A 'tham reports that Marwan attacked the Slavs living in the region and took 40 @,@ 000 captives . As the Khazars avoided battle , he then sent a detachment of 40 @,@ 000 troops across the Volga under al @-@ Kawthar ibn al @-@ Aswad al- ' <unk> , which surprised the Khazars in a swamp . In the ensuing battle , the Arabs killed 10 @,@ 000 Khazars , including the tarkhan , and took 7 @,@ 000 captive . Thereupon the Khazar khagan himself is said to have requested peace and to have converted to Islam and recognized the Caliph 's authority . Marwan also took with him large numbers of Slav and Khazar captives , whom he resettled in the eastern Caucasus : some 20 @,@ 000 Slavs were settled at Kakheti , according to al @-@ Baladhuri , while the Khazars were resettled at al @-@ Lakz . The Slavs killed their Arab governor and fled north , but Marwan rode after them and killed them . 
 Marwan 's 737 expedition was the climax of the Arab – Khazar wars , but its actual results were meagre . Although the Arab campaigns after Ardabil may indeed have discouraged the Khazars from further warfare , any recognition of Islam or of Arab supremacy by the khagan was evidently conditional upon the presence of Arab troops deep in Khazar territory , and such presence could not be sustained for long . Furthermore , the credibility of the conversion of the khagan to Islam is disputed : al @-@ Baladhuri 's account , which probably reflects closer the original sources , suggests that it was not the khagan but a minor lord who converted to Islam and was placed in charge of the Khazars at al @-@ Lakz . The conversion of the khagan is also apparently contradicted by the fact that c . 740 the Khazar court embraced Judaism as its official faith , a decision which clearly owed a great deal to the determination of the Khazars to avoid assimilation by and emphasize their independence from the Christian Byzantine and the Muslim Arab empires . 
 Whatever the true impact of Marwan 's campaigns , warfare between the Khazars and the Arabs ceased for more than two decades after 737 . Arab military activity in the Caucasus continued until 741 , with Marwan launching repeated expeditions against the various princes of the northern Caucasus , most notably Tuman Shah . Nevertheless , these campaigns , according to Blankinship , seem to have been closer to raids , designed to seize plunder and extract tribute to pay for the upkeep of the Arab army , rather than attempts at permanent conquest . Despite the Umayyad success at establishing a more or less stable frontier anchored at Derbent , Blankinship is also critical of the long @-@ term results of the Second Arab – Khazar War : Arab control was in reality limited to the lowlands and coast , and the land itself was too poor to recompense the expenses sustained during the wars . Furthermore , the need to maintain the large garrison at Derbent further depleted the already overstretched Syro @-@ Jaziran army , the main pillar of the Umayyad regime . Eventually , this weakening of the Syrian army would be the major factor in the fall of the Umayyad dynasty during the Muslim civil wars of the 740s and the Abbasid Revolution that followed them . 
 = = Later conflicts = = 
 The Khazars resumed their raids on Muslim territory after the Abbasid succession , reaching deep into Transcaucasia . Nevertheless , although by the 9th century the Khazars had re @-@ consolidated their control over Dagestan almost to the gates of Derbent itself , they never seriously attempted to challenge Muslim control of the southern Caucasus . 
 The first conflict between the Khazars and the Abbasids resulted from a diplomatic manoeuvre by the Caliph al @-@ Mansur ( r . 754 – 775 ) . Attempting to strengthen the Caliphate 's ties with the Khazars , in c . 760 he ordered his governor of Armenia , Yazid al @-@ Sulami , to marry a daughter of the khagan <unk> . The marriage indeed took place amidst much celebration , but she died in childbirth two years later , along with her infant child . The khagan suspected the Muslims of poisoning his daughter , and launched devastating raids south of the Caucasus in 762 – 764 : under the leadership of a Khwarezmian tarkhan named Ras , the Khazars devastated Albania , Armenia , and Iberia , where they captured Tiflis . Yazid himself managed to escape capture , but the Khazars returned north with thousands of captives and much booty . A few years later , however , in 780 , when the deposed Iberian ruler <unk> tried to induce the Khazars to campaign against the Abbasids and restore him to his throne , the khagan refused . This was probably the result of a brief period of anti @-@ Byzantine orientation in Khazar foreign policy , resulting from disputes between the two powers in the Crimea . During the same period , the Khazars helped Leon II of Abkhazia throw off Byzantine overlordship . 
 Peace reigned in the Caucasus between Arabs and Khazars until 799 , when the last major Khazar attack into Transcaucasia took place . Chroniclers again attribute this attack to a failed marriage alliance . According to Georgian sources , the khagan desired to marry the beautiful <unk> , daughter of Prince Archil of Kakheti ( r . 736 – 786 ) , and he sent his general <unk> to invade Iberia and capture her . Most of the central region of K 'art <unk> was occupied , and Prince <unk> ( r . 786 – 807 ) was taken off into captivity for a few years , but rather than be taken off captive , <unk> committed suicide and the furious khagan had <unk> executed . Arab chroniclers , on the other hand , attribute this to the plans of the Abbasid governor al @-@ Fadl ibn Yahya ( one of the famous Barmakids ) to marry one of the khagan 's daughters , who died on her journey south , while a different story is reported by al @-@ Tabari , whereby the Khazars were invited to attack by a local Arab magnate in retaliation against the execution of his father , the governor of Derbent , by the general Sa 'id ibn Salm . According to the Arab sources , the Khazars then raided as far as the Araxes , necessitating the dispatch of troops under Yazid ibn Mazyad , as the new governor of Transcaucasia , with more forces under <unk> ibn <unk> in reserve . 
 Arabs and Khazars continued to clash sporadically in the North Caucasus in the 9th and 10th centuries , but warfare was localized and of far lower intensity than the great wars of the 8th century . Thus the Ottoman historian Münejjim Bashi records a period of warfare lasting from ca . 901 until 912 , perhaps linked to the Caspian raids of the Rus ' at about the same time , whom the Khazars allowed to pass through their lands unhindered . The Khazar threat receded with the progressive collapse of Khazar power in the 10th century and defeats at the hands of the Rus ' and other Turkic nomads like the Oghuz Turks . The Khazar realm contracted to its core around the lower Volga , and became removed from reach of the Arab Muslim principalities of the Caucasus . Thus Ibn al @-@ Athir 's reports of a war between the Shaddadids of Ganja with the " Khazars " in 1030 probably refers to the Georgians instead . In the end , the last Khazars found refuge among their former enemies . Münejjim Bashi records that in 1064 , " the remnants of the Khazars , consisting of three thousand households , arrived in <unk> [ somewhere in Dagestan ] from the Khazar territory . They rebuilt it and settled in it " . 
 = Aqualung ( Jethro Tull album ) = 
 Aqualung is the fourth studio album by the rock band Jethro Tull . Released in 1971 , Aqualung , despite the band 's disagreement , is regarded as a concept album featuring a central theme of " the distinction between religion and God " . The album 's " dour musings on faith and religion " have marked it as " one of the most cerebral albums ever to reach millions of rock listeners " . Aqualung 's success marked a turning point in the band 's career , who went on to become a major radio and touring act . 
 Recorded at Island Records ' studio in London , it was their first album with John Evan as a full @-@ time member , their first with new bassist Jeffrey Hammond and last album featuring Clive Bunker on drums . Something of a departure from the band 's previous work , the album features more acoustic material than previous releases ; and — inspired by photographs of homeless people on the Thames Embankment taken by singer Ian Anderson 's wife Jennie — contains a number of recurring themes , addressing religion along with Anderson 's own personal experiences . 
 Aqualung has sold more than seven million units worldwide according to Anderson , and is thus Jethro Tull 's best selling album . The album was generally well @-@ received critically , and has been included on several music magazine " best of " lists . The album spawned two singles , " Hymn 43 " and " Locomotive Breath " . 
 = = Production = = 
 After an American tour in 1970 , bass player Glenn Cornick was fired from the band , and was replaced with Jeffrey Hammond , an old friend of Ian Anderson 's . Aqualung would be the first recording Hammond would do with the band . It would also mark the first time John Evan had recorded a full album with the band , as his only prior involvement was to overdub several keyboard parts on the previous album , Benefit . The album was one of the first to be recorded at the newly opened studios of Island Records in Basing Street , London . Led Zeppelin were recording their untitled fourth album at the same time . In an interview on the 25th anniversary edition of the album , Tull 's bandleader Ian Anderson said that trying to record in that studio was very difficult , because of its " horrible , cold , echoey " feel . There were two recording studios at the location ; Led Zeppelin worked in the smaller studio while Tull got the larger , which was the main body of a converted church . The <unk> were arranged by David Palmer , who had worked with the band since 1968 's This Was , and would later join as a keyboard player . Aqualung would be the last Jethro Tull album to include Clive Bunker as a band member , as he retired shortly after recording to start a family . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The songs on the album cover a variety of musical genres , with elements of folk , blues , psychedelia and hard rock . The " riff @-@ heavy " nature of tracks such as " Locomotive Breath " , " Hymn 43 " and " Wind Up " is regarded as a factor in the band 's increased success after the release of the album , with Jethro Tull becoming " a major arena act " and a " fixture on FM radio " according to AllMusic . In a stylistic departure from Jethro Tull 's earlier albums , many of Aqualung 's songs are primarily acoustic . " Cheap Day Return " , " Wond 'ring Aloud " and " Slipstream " are short , completely acoustic " bridges " , and " Mother Goose " is also mostly acoustic . Anderson claims his main inspirations for writing the album were Roy Harper and Bert Jansch . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Aqualung has widely been regarded as a concept album , featuring a central theme of " the distinction between religion and God " . The album 's " dour musings on faith and religion " have marked it as " one of the most cerebral albums ever to reach millions of rock listeners " . Academic discussions of the nature of concept albums have frequently listed Aqualung amongst their number . 
 The initial idea for the album was sparked by some photographs that Anderson 's wife Jennie took of homeless people on the Thames Embankment . The appearance of one man in particular caught the interest of the couple , who together wrote the title song " Aqualung " . The first side of the LP , titled Aqualung , contains several character sketches , including the eponymous character of the title track , and the schoolgirl prostitute Cross @-@ Eyed Mary , as well as two autobiographical tracks , including " Cheap Day Return " , written by Anderson after a visit to his critically ill father . 
 The second side , titled My God , contains three tracks — " My God , " " Hymn 43 " and " Wind @-@ Up " — that address religion in an introspective , and sometimes irreverent , manner . However , despite the names given to the album 's two sides and their related subject matter , Anderson has consistently maintained that Aqualung is not a " concept album " . A 2005 interview included on Aqualung Live gives Anderson 's thoughts on the matter : 
 I always said at the time that this is not a concept album ; this is just an album of varied songs of varied instrumentation and intensity in which three or four are the kind of keynote pieces for the album but it doesn 't make it a concept album . In my mind when it came to writing the next album , Thick as a Brick , was done very much in the sense of : ' <unk> , if they thought Aqualung was a concept album , Oh ! Okay , we 'll show you a concept album . ' And it was done as a kind of spoof , a send @-@ up , of the concept album genre . ... But Aqualung itself , in my mind was never a concept album . Just a bunch of songs . 
 Drummer Clive Bunker believes that the record 's perception as a concept album is a case of " Chinese whispers " , explaining " you play the record to a couple of Americans , tell them that there 's a lyrical theme loosely linking a few songs , and then notice the figure of the Aqualung character on the cover , and suddenly the word is out that Jethro Tull have done a concept album " . 
 The thematic elements Jethro Tull explored on the album — those of the effects of urbanisation on nature , and of the effects of social constructs such as religion on society — would be developed further on most of the band 's subsequent releases . Ian Anderson 's frustration over the album 's labelling as a concept album directly led to the creation of Thick as a Brick ( 1972 ) , intended to be a deliberately " over the top " concept album in response . 
 = = = Other songs = = = 
 " Lick Your Fingers Clean " was recorded for Aqualung , but was not included on the album . The song was drastically re @-@ worked as " Two Fingers " for Tull 's 1974 album , War Child . " Lick Your Fingers Clean " was eventually released in 1988 on the 20 Years of Jethro Tull collection . It was then released as a bonus track on the 1996 and 2011 reissues of Aqualung . 
 Another song , " Wond 'ring Again " was recorded in early sessions in 1970 and considered for release on the album before Anderson decided to drop it from the final track listing . It was subsequently released on the compilation album , Living in the Past , in 1972 . However , elements of the song — essentially its coda — were included on Aqualung as " Wond 'ring Aloud " . Glenn Cornick played bass on the song and says it is his favourite song he recorded with the band . Cornick also played bass on early studio recordings of " My God " and " a couple of other songs " , though he did not say which they were . 
 = = Album cover = = 
 The album 's original cover art by Burton Silverman features a watercolour portrait of a long @-@ haired , bearded man in shabby clothes . The idea for the cover came from a photograph Anderson 's wife took of a homeless man on Thames Embankment , and Anderson later felt it would have been better to have used the photograph rather than commission the painting . Ian Anderson recalls posing for a photograph for the painting , though Silverman claims it was a self @-@ portrait . The artwork was commissioned and purchased by Chrysalis Records head Terry Ellis . Artist Silverman claims the art was only licensed for use as an album cover , and not for merchandising ; and approached the band seeking remuneration for its further use . Silverman and Anderson have different accounts of level of enmity involved in this . The original artwork for both the front and back covers are now privately owned by an unknown family , apparently having been stolen from a London hotel room . 
 = = Release = = 
 In April 1971 , Aqualung peaked at number four on the UK Album Chart ; when the CD version was released in 1996 , it reached number 52 . It peaked at No. 7 on the Billboard Music Charts ' North American pop albums chart ; the single " Hymn 43 " hit No. 91 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The album would go on to sell over seven million copies , and is the band 's best @-@ selling album . Aqualung was one of only two Jethro Tull albums released in quadraphonic sound , the other being War Child ( 1974 ) . The quadraphonic version of " Wind Up " , which is in a slightly higher key , is included on the later CD reissue of the album as " Wind Up ( quad version ) " . 
 The single " Hymn 43 " was released on 14 August 1971 , and reached number 91 on the Billboard Hot 100 charts , spending two weeks in the chart . The song was the first single released by the band in the United States . It was later included in the video game Rock Band 2 as downloadable content ; which also featured the album 's title track . 
 The album was re @-@ released in a fortieth anniversary edition on 31 October 2011 . The release contains a new stereo and 5 @.@ 1 surround remix of the album by British musician and producer Steven Wilson , and comes in two different editions — a " collector 's edition " containing the album on LP and two CDs , as well as DVD and Blu @-@ ray discs and a hardback book ; and a " special edition " containing the two CDs and an abridged version of the book . Justifying the remix , Steven Wilson said : " Jethro Tull 's Aqualung is ... a masterpiece , but was sonically a very poor @-@ sounding record . So , some didn 't rate it as highly as they should have . What we did with Aqualung was really make that record gleam in a way it never gleamed before . I think a lot of people , including myself , have come around to thinking that the album Is a lot better than they even gave it credit for previously . So , there is certainly something very gratifying about being able to polish what was already a diamond and making it shine in a way it never has before " . Additionally , according to mastering engineer Steve Hoffman there were tape stretching problems with the original session mixdown master , implying that many editions of the album used <unk> copies as their source . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Aqualung received mixed to favourable reviews from contemporary music critics . Rolling Stone magazine 's Ben Gerson lauded its " fine musicianship " , calling it " serious and intelligent " , although he felt that the album 's seriousness " undermined " its quality . Sounds said that its " taste and variety " made it the band 's " finest " work . Aqualung was voted the 22nd best album of 1971 in The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Robert Christgau , the poll 's creator , was more critical of the album in a 1981 review , and described Anderson 's undeveloped cultural interests and negative views on religion and human behaviour as both boring and pretentious . 
 In retrospective reviews the album is generally lauded and viewed as a classic . AllMusic 's Bruce Eder called Aqualung " a bold statement " and " extremely profound " . In a review of the album 's 40th anniversary re @-@ release , Sean Murphy of PopMatters said that Aqualung " is , to be certain , a cornerstone of the then @-@ nascent prog @-@ rock canon , but it did — and does — exist wholly on its own terms as a great rock album , period " . Murphy also praised the additional material featured on the release , finding that the new content was " where a great album gets even better " . Steve Harris , the bass player for the heavy metal band Iron Maiden , has called Aqualung " a classic album " , lauding its " fantastic playing , fantastic songs , attitude [ and ] vibe " . Iron Maiden would go on to cover " Cross @-@ Eyed Mary " as the B @-@ side of their 1983 single " The Trooper " . 
 Aqualung has also been appraised highly in retrospective listings , compiled by music writers and magazines ( see Accolades ) . Even Martin Barre 's solo on the album 's title track was included in Guitarist magazine 's list of " The 20 Greatest Guitar Solos of All Time " at number 20 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = 1971 original release = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ian Anderson , except where noted . 
 Note that original North American Reprise Records pressings of Aqualung contained a slightly edited version of the title song , with its first three seconds ( i.e. , the first repetition of the song 's signature riff ) removed . These pressings correspondingly list the song 's length at 6 : 31 . 
 = = = 1996 CD release = = = 
 = = = 2011 40th anniversary release = = = 
 The 2011 edition was remixed by Steven Wilson and mastered by Peter Mew . The mastering received some criticism , so in April 2016 a new version was released - this time mastered by Wilson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jethro Tull 
 Ian Anderson – vocals , acoustic guitar , flute , producer 
 Clive Bunker – drums and percussion 
 Martin Barre – electric guitar , descant recorder 
 John Evan – piano , organ , mellotron 
 Jeffrey Hammond ( as " Jeffrey Hammond @-@ Hammond " ) – bass guitar , alto recorder and odd voices ( and backing vocals on " Mother Goose " ) 
 Glenn Cornick – bass guitar ( played with the band at rehearsals for the album in June 1970 , some of which may also have been recording sessions – especially in the early versions of " My God " and " <unk> Again / <unk> Aloud " – although he is not credited on the album ) 
 Additional personnel 
 John Burns – recording engineer 
 David Palmer – orchestral arrangements and conduction 
 Burton Silverman – album artwork 
 Terry Ellis - executive producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Vought F6U Pirate = 
 The Vought F6U Pirate was the Vought company 's first jet fighter , designed for US Navy during the mid @-@ 1940s . Although pioneering the use of turbojet power as the first naval fighter with an afterburner and composite material construction , the aircraft proved to be underpowered and was judged unsuitable for combat . None were ever issued to operational squadrons and they were relegated to development , training and test roles before they were withdrawn from service in 1950 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 A specification was issued by the U.S. Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics ( BuAer ) for a single @-@ seat , carrier @-@ based fighter powered by a Westinghouse <unk> ( later J34 ) axial turbojet on 5 September 1944 . Chance Vought was awarded a contract for three V @-@ 340 ( company designation ) prototypes on 29 December 1944 . 
 The XF6U was a small aircraft with tricycle landing gear and with straight wings and tail surfaces . The wings were short enough that they did not need to fold . In order to fit more aircraft into crowded hangars , the nose gear could be retracted and the aircraft 's weight would rest on a small wheel attached by the ground crew . This raised the tail up so that it could overlap the nose of the aircraft behind it , allowing more aircraft to fit into available hanger space . The turbojet engine was mounted in the rear of the fuselage and was fed by ducts in each wing root . 
 The most unusual feature of the aircraft was its use of " Metalite " for its skin . This was made of balsa that was sandwiched between two thin sheets of aluminum . " <unk> " was also used for the surfaces of the vertical stabilizer and rudder ; this was similar to Metalite , but used fiberglass instead of aluminum . Two fuel tanks were fitted in the center of the fuselage . The forward tank , ahead of the wing , contained 220 US gallons ( 830 l ; 180 imp gal ) and the rear tank , 150 US gallons ( 570 l ; 120 imp gal ) . These were supplemented by two jettisonable 140 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 530 l ; 120 imp gal ) tip tanks . The cockpit was well forward and was provided with a bubble canopy which gave the pilot good visibility . He was provided with a Mk 6 lead @-@ computing gyro gunsight . Underneath the cockpit were four 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) M3 autocannon . Their 600 rounds of ammunition were carried behind the pilot . The empty casings of the two upper guns were retained in the aircraft , while those from the two lower guns were ejected overboard . 
 After a company @-@ wide contest to name the aircraft , the initial prototype received the name Pirate and made its first flight on 2 October 1946 . Flight testing revealed severe aerodynamic problems , mostly caused by the airfoil section and thickness of the wing . The vertical stabilizer also had to be redesigned to smooth out the airflow at the intersection of the horizontal and vertical stabilizers . Other changes included the addition of dive brakes on the sides of the fuselage and the replacement of the Metalite panels near the engine 's exhaust with stainless steel ones . 
 The first XF6U @-@ 1 prototype was powered by a Westinghouse J34 @-@ WE @-@ 22 turbojet with 3 @,@ 000 lbf ( 13 @.@ 34 kN ) thrust , one third of the weight of the aircraft . To help improve the underpowered aircraft 's performance , the third prototype , which first flew on 10 November 1947 , was lengthened by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) to use a Westinghouse J34 @-@ WE @-@ 30 afterburning engine of 4 @,@ 224 lbf ( 18 @.@ 78 kN ) thrust , the first United States Navy fighter to have such a powerplant . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 In 1947 , before the flight testing of the prototypes was completed , 30 production aircraft were ordered . They incorporated an ejection seat and a redesigned vertical stabilizer as well as two auxiliary fins , one towards the tip on each side of the tailplane in an attempt to improve the directional stability of the aircraft . The fuselage was lengthened to fit additional equipment and the wing had fillets added at the rear junction with the fuselage . 
 During the production run , the Navy decided to move the Chance Vought factory from Stratford , Connecticut to a much larger facility in Dallas , Texas which had been vacant since the end of World War II ; this badly disrupted the production of the Pirate . The airframes were built in Stratford and trucked to Dallas where government @-@ furnished equipment , such as the engines and afterburners , were installed . The completed aircraft were then taxied around the new plant 's airfield , but the runway was deemed too short to handle jets . The aircraft had to be disassembled and trucked to an abandoned airfield at Ardmore , Oklahoma with a runway long enough for acceptance testing . 
 The first production F6U @-@ 1 performed its initial flight on 29 June 1949 , and 20 of the aircraft were provided to VX @-@ 3 , an operational evaluation squadron based at Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland . The judgment from the evaluation was that the Pirate was unacceptable for operational use . Naval aviators disparagingly called the F6U the " groundhog " . On 30 October 1950 , BuAer informed Vought of the Navy 's opinion of the Pirate in terms both bureaucratic and scathing : " The F6U @-@ 1 had proven so sub @-@ marginal in performance that combat utilization is not feasible . " 
 The aircraft ended up being used primarily to develop arresting gear and barriers , but were used operationally for a short time by at least one Texas @-@ based United States Naval Reserve squadron as they transitioned to jets . Between them , the 30 production aircraft had only a total of 945 hours of flight time , only 31 @.@ 5 hours each . Some aircraft flew only six hours which was enough for little more than their acceptance flight and the flight to their ultimate disposition . 
 = = Variants = = 
 XF6U @-@ 1 : Three prototypes , two with an Westinghouse J34 @-@ WE @-@ 22 turbojet engine ( BuNo <unk> , <unk> ) , one with an J34 @-@ WE @-@ 30 with afterburner ( BuNo <unk> ) . 
 F6U @-@ 1 : <unk> @-@ equipped production version , 30 built ( BuNo <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , 35 cancelled . 
 F6U @-@ 1P : Conversion of one F6U @-@ 1 ( BuNo <unk> ) for photo @-@ reconnaissance . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 United States Navy 
 VX @-@ 3 
 = = Survivors = = 
 Although the F6U had a very short operational career , one example remains intact ( <unk> , Vought production number 2 ) and has undergone restoration by the Vought Aircraft Heritage Foundation , at the Vought plant in Grand Prairie , Texas . As of 2012 , the aircraft is currently at the National Naval Aviation Museum in Pensacola Florida . 
 = = Specifications ( F6U @-@ 1 ) = = 
 Data from The Complete Book of Fighters 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 37 ft 7 in ( 11 @.@ 46 m ) 
 Wingspan : 32 ft 10 in ( 10 m ) 
 Height : 12 ft 11 in ( 3 @.@ 39 m ) 
 Wing area : 203 @.@ 4 ft ² ( 18 @.@ 9 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 7 @,@ 320 lb ( 3 @,@ 320 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 12 @,@ 900 lb ( 5 @,@ 850 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Westinghouse J34 @-@ WE @-@ 30A turbojet 
 Dry thrust : 3 @,@ 150 lbf ( 14 @.@ 0 kN ) 
 Thrust with afterburner : 4 @,@ 224 lbf ( 18 @.@ 78 kN ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 596 mph ( 517 kn , 959 km / h ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 170 mi ( 1 @,@ 020 nmi , 1 @,@ 880 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 46 @,@ 260 ft ( 14 @,@ 100 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 8 @,@ 060 ft / min ( 40 @.@ 95 m / s ) 
 Wing loading : 63 @.@ 4 lb / ft ² ( 304 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 327 
 Armament 
 Guns : 4 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) M3 cannon under the nose 
 = 2009 flu pandemic = 
 The 2009 flu pandemic or swine flu was an influenza pandemic , and the second of the two pandemics involving H1N1 influenza virus ( the first of them being the 1918 flu pandemic ) , albeit in a new version . First described in April 2009 , the virus appeared to be a new strain of H1N1 which resulted when a previous triple reassortment of bird , swine and human flu viruses further combined with a Eurasian pig flu virus , leading to the term " swine flu " . 
 Unlike most strains of influenza , H1N1 does not disproportionately infect adults older than 60 years ; this was an unusual and characteristic feature of the H1N1 pandemic . Even in the case of previously very healthy people , a small percentage will develop pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) . This manifests itself as increased breathing difficulty and typically occurs 3 – 6 days after initial onset of flu symptoms . The pneumonia caused by flu can be either direct viral pneumonia or a secondary bacterial pneumonia . In fact , a November 2009 New England Journal of Medicine article recommends that flu patients whose chest X @-@ ray indicates pneumonia receive both antivirals and antibiotics . In particular , it is a warning sign if a child ( and presumably an adult ) seems to be getting better and then relapses with high fever , as this relapse may be bacterial pneumonia . 
 = = History = = 
 Initially called an " outbreak " , widespread H1N1 infection was first recognized in the state of Veracruz , Mexico , with evidence that the virus had been present for months before it was officially called an " epidemic " . The Mexican government closed most of Mexico City 's public and private facilities in an attempt to contain the spread of the virus ; however , it continued to spread globally , and clinics in some areas were overwhelmed by infected people . In late April the World Health Organization ( WHO ) declared its first ever " public health emergency of international concern , " or <unk> , and in June the WHO and the U.S. CDC stopped counting cases and declared the outbreak a pandemic . 
 Despite being informally called " swine flu " , the H1N1 flu virus cannot be spread by eating pork or pork products ; similar to other influenza viruses , it is typically contracted by person to person transmission through respiratory droplets . Symptoms usually last 4 – 6 days . Antivirals ( oseltamivir or zanamivir ) were recommended for those with more severe symptoms or those in an at @-@ risk group . 
 The pandemic began to taper off in November 2009 , and by May 2010 , the number of cases was in steep decline . On 10 August 2010 , the Director @-@ General of the WHO , Margaret Chan , announced the end of the H1N1 pandemic , and announced that the H1N1 influenza event has moved into the post @-@ pandemic period . According to the latest WHO statistics ( as of July 2010 ) , the virus has killed more than 18 @,@ 000 people since it appeared in April 2009 , however they state that the total mortality ( including deaths unconfirmed or unreported ) from the H1N1 strain is " unquestionably higher " . Critics claimed the WHO had exaggerated the danger , spreading " fear and confusion " rather than " immediate information " . The WHO began an investigation to determine whether it had " frightened people unnecessarily " . A flu follow @-@ up study done in September 2010 , found that " the risk of most serious complications was not elevated in adults or children . " In an 5 August 2011 PLoS ONE article , researchers estimated that the 2009 H1N1 global infection rate was 11 % to 21 % , lower than what was previously expected . However , by 2012 , research showed that as many as 579 @,@ 000 people could have been killed by the disease , as only those fatalities confirmed by laboratory testing were included in the original number , and meant that many of those without access to health facilities went uncounted . The majority of these deaths occurred in Africa and Southeast Asia . Experts , including the WHO , have agreed that an estimated 284 @,@ 500 people were killed by the disease , much higher than the initial death toll . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The initial outbreak was called the " H1N1 influenza " , or " Swine Flu " by American media . It is called the pandemic H1N1 / 09 virus by the WHO , while the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention refer to it as " novel influenza A ( H1N1 ) " or " 2009 H1N1 flu " . In the Netherlands , it was originally called " Pig Flu " , but is now called " New Influenza A ( H1N1 ) " by the national health institute , although the media and general population use the name " Mexican Flu " . South Korea and Israel briefly considered calling it the " Mexican virus " . Later , the South Korean press used " SI " , short for " swine influenza " . Taiwan suggested the names " H1N1 flu " or " new flu " , which most local media adopted . The World Organization for Animal Health proposed the name " North American influenza " . The European Commission adopted the term " novel flu virus " . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The symptoms of H1N1 flu are similar to those of other <unk> , and may include fever , cough ( typically a " dry cough " ) , headache , muscle or joint pain , sore throat , chills , fatigue , and runny nose . Diarrhea , vomiting , and neurological problems have also been reported in some cases . People at higher risk of serious complications include those aged over 65 , children younger than 5 , children with neurodevelopmental conditions , pregnant women ( especially during the third trimester ) , and those of any age with underlying medical conditions , such as asthma , diabetes , obesity , heart disease , or a weakened immune system ( e.g. , taking immunosuppressive medications or infected with HIV ) . More than 70 % of hospitalizations in the U.S. have been people with such underlying conditions , according to the CDC . 
 In September 2009 , the CDC reported that the H1N1 flu " seems to be taking a heavier toll among chronically ill children than the seasonal flu usually does . " Through 8 August 2009 , the CDC had received 36 reports of paediatric deaths with associated influenza symptoms and laboratory @-@ confirmed pandemic H1N1 from state and local health authorities within the United States , with 22 of these children having neurodevelopmental conditions such as cerebral palsy , muscular dystrophy , or developmental delays . " Children with nerve and muscle problems may be at especially high risk for complications because they cannot cough hard enough to clear their airways " . From 26 April 2009 , to 13 February 2010 , the CDC had received reports of the deaths of 277 children with laboratory @-@ confirmed 2009 influenza A ( H1N1 ) within the United States . 
 = = = Severe cases = = = 
 The World Health Organization reports that the clinical picture in severe cases is strikingly different from the disease pattern seen during epidemics of seasonal influenza . While people with certain underlying medical conditions are known to be at increased risk , many severe cases occur in previously healthy people . In severe cases , patients generally begin to deteriorate around three to five days after symptom onset . Deterioration is rapid , with many patients progressing to respiratory failure within 24 hours , requiring immediate admission to an intensive care unit . Upon admission , most patients need immediate respiratory support with mechanical ventilation . 
 A November 2009 CDC recommendation stated that the following constitute " emergency warning signs " and advised seeking immediate care if a person experiences any one of these signs : 
 In adults : 
 Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath 
 Pain or pressure in the chest or abdomen 
 Sudden dizziness 
 Confusion 
 Severe or persistent vomiting 
 Low temperature 
 In children : 
 Fast breathing or working hard to breathe 
 <unk> skin color 
 Not drinking enough fluids 
 Not waking up or not interacting 
 Being so irritable that the child does not want to be held 
 Flu @-@ like symptoms which improve but then return with fever and worse cough 
 Fever with a rash 
 Being unable to eat 
 Having no tears when crying 
 Research later indicated that the severe flu effects in healthy young and middle @-@ aged adults are caused by an excessive immune response . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Most complications have occurred among previously healthy individuals , with obesity and respiratory disease as the strongest risk factors . Pulmonary complications are common . Primary influenza pneumonia occurs most commonly in adults and may progress rapidly to acute lung injury requiring mechanical ventilation . Secondary bacterial infection is more common in children . Staphylococcus aureus , including methicillin @-@ resistant strains , is an important cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia with a high mortality rate ; streptococcus pneumoniae is the second most important cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia for children and primary for adults . Neuromuscular and cardiac complications are unusual but may occur . 
 A United Kingdom investigation of risk factors for hospitalisation and poor outcome with pandemic A / H1N1 influenza looked at 631 patients from 55 hospitals admitted with confirmed infection from May through September 2009 . 13 % were admitted to a high dependency or intensive care unit and 5 % died ; 36 % were aged < 16 years and 5 % were aged ≥ 65 years . Non @-@ white and pregnant patients were over @-@ represented . 45 % of patients had at least one underlying condition , mainly asthma , and 13 % received antiviral drugs before admission . Of 349 with documented chest x @-@ rays on admission , 29 % had evidence of pneumonia , but bacterial co @-@ infection was uncommon . <unk> analyses showed that physician @-@ recorded obesity on admission and pulmonary conditions other than asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) were associated with a severe outcome , as were radiologically confirmed pneumonia and a raised C @-@ reactive protein ( CRP ) level ( ≥ 100 mg / l ) . 59 % of all in @-@ hospital deaths occurred in previously healthy people . 
 <unk> ( sudden @-@ onset ) myocarditis has been linked to infection with H1N1 , with at least four cases of myocarditis confirmed in patients also infected with A / H1N1 . Three out of the four cases of H1N1 @-@ associated myocarditis were classified as fulminant , and one of the patients died . Also , there appears to be a link between severe A / H1N1 influenza infection and pulmonary embolism . In one report , five out of 14 patients admitted to the intensive care unit with severe A / H1N1 infection were found to have pulmonary emboli . 
 An article published in JAMA in September 2010 challenged previous reports and stated that children infected in the 2009 flu pandemic were no more likely to be hospitalised with complications or get pneumonia than those who catch seasonal strains . Researchers found that about 1 @.@ 5 % of children with the H1N1 swine flu strain were hospitalised within 30 days , compared with 3 @.@ 7 % of those sick with a seasonal strain of H1N1 and 3 @.@ 1 % with an H3N2 virus . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Confirmed diagnosis of pandemic H1N1 flu requires testing of a nasopharyngeal , nasal or oropharyngeal tissue swab from the patient . Real @-@ time RT @-@ PCR is the recommended test as others are unable to differentiate between pandemic H1N1 and regular seasonal flu . However , most people with flu symptoms do not need a test for pandemic H1N1 flu specifically , because the test results usually do not affect the recommended course of treatment . The U.S. CDC recommend testing only for people who are hospitalized with suspected flu , pregnant women and people with weakened immune systems . For the mere diagnosis of influenza and not pandemic H1N1 flu specifically , more widely available tests include rapid influenza diagnostic tests ( RIDT ) , which yield results in about 30 minutes , and direct and indirect immunofluorescence assays ( DFA and IFA ) , which take 2 – 4 hours . Due to the high rate of RIDT false negatives , the CDC advises that patients with illnesses compatible with novel influenza A ( H1N1 ) virus infection but with negative RIDT results should be treated empirically based on the level of clinical suspicion , underlying medical conditions , severity of illness and risk for complications , and if a more definitive determination of infection with influenza virus is required , testing with <unk> @-@ PCR or virus isolation should be performed . Rhonda Medows of the Georgia Department of Community Health states that the rapid tests are incorrect anywhere from 30 % to 90 % of the time and warns doctors in her state not to use them because they are wrong so often . The use of <unk> has also been questioned by researcher Paul <unk> of the Loyola University Health System , who suggests that rapid tests may actually pose a dangerous public health risk . Nikki Shindo of the WHO has expressed regret at reports of treatment being delayed by waiting for H1N1 test results and suggests , " [ D ] <unk> should not wait for the laboratory confirmation but make diagnosis based on clinical and epidemiological backgrounds and start treatment early " . 
 On 22 June 2010 , the CDC announced a new test called the " CDC Influenza 2009 A ( H1N1 ) <unk> Real @-@ Time RT @-@ PCR Panel ( <unk> ) " . It uses a molecular biology technique to detect influenza A viruses and specifically the 2009 H1N1 virus . The new test will replace the previous real @-@ time RT @-@ PCR diagnostic test used during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic , which received an emergency use authorization from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in April 2009 . Tests results are available in four hours and are 96 % accurate . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The virus was found to be a novel strain of influenza for which extant vaccines against seasonal flu provided little protection . A study at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published in May 2009 found that children had no preexisting immunity to the new strain but that adults , particularly those older than 60 , had some degree of immunity . Children showed no cross @-@ reactive antibody reaction to the new strain , adults aged 18 to 60 had 6 – 9 % , and older adults 33 % . While it has been thought that these findings suggest the partial immunity in older adults may be due to previous exposure to similar seasonal influenza viruses , a November 2009 study of a rural unvaccinated population in China found only a 0 @.@ 3 % cross @-@ reactive antibody reaction to the H1N1 strain , suggesting that previous vaccinations for seasonal flu and not exposure may have resulted in the immunity found in the older U.S. population . 
 It has been determined that the strain contains genes from five different flu viruses : North American swine influenza , North American avian influenza , human influenza and two swine influenza viruses typically found in Asia and Europe . Further analysis has shown that several proteins of the virus are most similar to strains that cause mild symptoms in humans , leading virologist Wendy Barclay to suggest on 1 May 2009 , that the initial indications are that the virus was unlikely to cause severe symptoms for most people . 
 The virus is currently less lethal than previous pandemic strains and kills about 0 @.@ 01 – 0 @.@ 03 % of those infected ; the 1918 influenza was about one hundred times more lethal and had a case fatality rate of 2 – 3 % . By 14 November 2009 , the virus had infected one in six Americans with 200 @,@ 000 hospitalisations and 10 @,@ 000 deaths – as many hospitalizations and fewer deaths than in an average flu season overall , but with much higher risk for those under 50 . With deaths of 1 @,@ 100 children and 7 @,@ 500 adults 18 to 64 , these figures " are much higher than in a usual flu season " . 
 In June 2010 , scientists from Hong Kong reported discovery of a new swine flu virus which is a hybrid of the pandemic H1N1 virus and viruses previously found in pigs . It is the first report of a reassortment of the pandemic virus , which in humans has been slow to evolve . Nancy Cox , head of the influenza division at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , has said , " This particular paper is extremely interesting because it demonstrates for the first time what we had worried about at the very onset of the pandemic , and that is that this particular virus , when introduced into pigs , could reassort with the resident viruses in pigs and we would have new gene constellations . And bingo , here we are . " Pigs have been termed the mixing vessel of flu because they can be infected both by avian flu viruses , which rarely directly infect people , and by human viruses . When pigs become simultaneously infected with more than one virus , the viruses can swap genes , producing new variants which can pass to humans and sometimes spread amongst them . " Unlike the situation with birds and humans , we have a situation with pigs and humans where there 's a two @-@ way street of exchange of viruses . With pigs it 's very much a two @-@ way street " . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 Spread of the H1N1 virus is thought to occur in the same way that seasonal flu spreads . Flu viruses are spread mainly from person to person through coughing or sneezing by people with influenza . Sometimes people may become infected by touching something – such as a surface or object – with flu viruses on it and then touching their face . " Avoid touching your eyes , nose or mouth . Germs spread this way " . 
 The basic reproduction number ( the average number of other individuals whom each infected individual will infect , in a population which has no immunity to the disease ) for the 2009 novel H1N1 is estimated to be 1 @.@ 75 . A December 2009 study found that the <unk> of the H1N1 influenza virus in households is lower than that seen in past pandemics . Most transmissions occur soon before or after the onset of symptoms . 
 The H1N1 virus has been transmitted to animals , including swine , turkeys , ferrets , household cats , at least one dog and a cheetah . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The H1N1 vaccine was initially in short supply and in the U.S. , the CDC recommended that initial doses should go to priority groups such as pregnant women , people who live with or care for babies under six months old , children six months to four years old and health @-@ care workers . In the UK , the NHS recommended vaccine priority go to people over six months old who were clinically at risk for seasonal flu , pregnant women and households of people with compromised immunity . 
 Although it was initially thought that two injections would be required , clinical trials showed that the new vaccine protected adults " with only one dose instead of two " , and so the limited vaccine supplies would go twice as far as had been predicted . Health officials worldwide were also concerned because the virus was new and could easily mutate and become more virulent , even though most flu symptoms were mild and lasted only a few days without treatment . Officials also urged communities , businesses and individuals to make contingency plans for possible school closures , multiple employee absences for illness , surges of patients in hospitals and other effects of potentially widespread outbreaks . 
 In February 2010 , the CDC 's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices voted for " universal " flu vaccination in the U.S. to include all people over six months of age . The 2010 – 2011 vaccine will protect against the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus and two other flu viruses . 
 = = = Public health response = = = 
 On 27 April 2009 , the European Union health commissioner advised Europeans to postpone nonessential travel to the United States or Mexico . This followed the discovery of the first confirmed case in Spain . On 6 May 2009 , the Public Health Agency of Canada announced that their National Microbiology Laboratory ( <unk> ) had mapped the genetic code of the swine flu virus , the first time that had been done . In the U.K. , the National Health Service launched a website , the National Pandemic Flu Service , allowing patients to self @-@ assess and get an authorisation number for antiviral medication . The system was expected to reduce the burden on general practitioners . 
 U.S. officials observed that six years of concern about H5N1 avian flu did much to prepare for the current H1N1 flu outbreak , noting that after H5N1 emerged in Asia , ultimately killing about 60 % of the few hundred people infected by it over the years , many countries took steps to try to prevent any similar crisis from spreading further . The CDC and other U.S. governmental agencies used the summer lull to take stock of the United States ' response to H1N1 flu and attempt to patch any gaps in the public health safety net before flu season started in early autumn . Preparations included planning a second influenza vaccination program in addition to that for seasonal influenza , and improving coordination between federal , state and local governments and private health providers . On 24 October 2009 , U.S. President Obama declared swine flu a national emergency , giving Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius authority to grant waivers to requesting hospitals from usual federal requirements . 
 = = = Vaccines = = = 
 By 19 November 2009 , doses of vaccine had been administered in over 16 countries . [ 1 ] A 2009 review by the U.S. National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) concluded that the 2009 H1N1 vaccine has a safety profile similar to that of seasonal vaccine . [ 2 ] 
 In 2011 , a study from the US Flu Vaccine Effectiveness Network estimated the overall effectiveness of all pandemic H1N1 vaccines at 56 % . A CDC study released 28 Jan 2013 , estimated that the Pandemic H1N1 vaccine saved roughly 300 lives and prevented about 1 million illnesses in the US . The study concluded that had the vaccination program started 2 weeks earlier , close to 60 % more cases could have been prevented . The study was based on an effectiveness in preventing cases , hospitalizations , and deaths of 62 % for all subgroups except people over 65 , for whom the effectiveness was estimated at 43 % . The effectiveness was based on European and Asian studies and expert opinion . [ 3 ] The delay in vaccine administration demonstrated the shortcomings of the world 's capacity for vaccine @-@ production , as well as problems with international distribution . Some manufacturers and wealthy countries had concerns regarding liability and regulations , as well as the logistics of transporting , storing , and administering vaccines to be donated to poorer countries . 
 = = = Accusations of conflict of interest = = = 
 In January 2010 , Wolfgang <unk> , a German deputy who trained as a physician and now chairs the health committee at the Council of Europe , claimed major firms had organised a " campaign of panic " to put pressure on the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) to declare a " false pandemic " to sell vaccines . <unk> said the WHO 's " false pandemic " flu campaign is " one of the greatest medicine scandals of the century " . He said that the " false pandemic " campaign began last May in Mexico City , when a hundred or so " normal " reported influenza cases were declared to be the beginning of a threatening new pandemic , although he said there was little scientific evidence for this . Nevertheless , he argued that the WHO , " in cooperation with some big pharmaceutical companies and their scientists , re @-@ defined pandemics " , removing the statement that " an enormous amount of people have contracted the illness or died " from its existing definition and replacing it by stating simply that there has to be a virus , spreading beyond borders and to which people have no immunity . 
 The WHO responded by stating that they take their duty to provide independent advice seriously and guarded against interference from outside interests . Announcing a review of the WHO 's actions , spokeswoman <unk> <unk> stated : " Criticism is part of an outbreak cycle . We expect and indeed welcome criticism and the chance to discuss it " . In March 2010 , the Council of Europe launched an enquiry into " the influence of the pharmaceutical companies on the global swine flu campaign " , and a preliminary report is in preparation . 
 On 12 April 2010 , Keiji Fukuda , the WHO 's top influenza expert , stated that the system leading to the declaration of a pandemic led to confusion about H1N1 circulating around the world , and he expressed concern that there was a failure to communicate in regard to uncertainties about the new virus , which turned out to be not as deadly as feared . WHO Director @-@ General Margaret Chan has appointed 29 flu experts from outside the organization to conduct a review of WHO 's handling of the H1N1 flu pandemic . She has told them , " We want a frank , critical , transparent , credible and independent review of our performance " . 
 In June 2010 , Fiona <unk> , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the BMJ , published an editorial which criticised the WHO , saying that an investigation had disclosed that some of the experts advising WHO on the pandemic had financial ties with drug companies which were producing antivirals and vaccines . Margaret Chan , Director @-@ General of the WHO , replied stating , " Without question , the BMJ feature and editorial will leave many readers with the impression that WHO 's decision to declare a pandemic was at least partially influenced by a desire to boost the profits of the pharmaceutical industry . The bottom line , however , is that decisions to raise the level of pandemic alert were based on clearly defined virological and epidemiological criteria . It is hard to bend these criteria , no matter what the motive " . In August 2010 , the Daily Mail printed an article stating that " a third of the experts advising the World Health Organisation about the swine flu pandemic had ties to drugs firms " and that of the 20 members of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies , which advised the British Government on swine flu , 11 had done work for the pharmaceutical industry or were linked to it through their universities . 
 = = = Infection control = = = 
 = = = = Travel precautions = = = = 
 On 7 May 2009 , the WHO stated that containment was not feasible and that countries should focus on mitigating the effect of the virus . They did not recommend closing borders or restricting travel . On 26 April 2009 , the Chinese government announced that visitors returning from flu @-@ affected areas who experienced flu @-@ like symptoms within two weeks would be quarantined . 
 U.S. airlines had made no major changes as of the beginning of June 2009 , but continued standing practices which include looking for passengers with symptoms of flu , measles or other infections , and relying on in @-@ flight air filters to ensure that aircraft were sanitised . Masks were not generally provided by airlines and the CDC did not recommend that airline crews wear them . Some non @-@ U.S. airlines , mostly Asian , including Singapore Airlines , China Eastern Airlines , China Southern Airlines , Cathay Pacific and Aeromexico , took measures such as stepping up cabin cleaning , installing state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art air filters and allowing in @-@ flight staff to wear face masks . 
 According to studies conducted in Australia and Japan , screening individuals for influenza symptoms at airports during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak was not an effective method of infection control . 
 = = = = Schools = = = = 
 U.S. government officials have been especially concerned about schools because the H1N1 flu virus appears to disproportionately affect young and school @-@ age people , between six months and 24 years of age . The H1N1 outbreak led to numerous precautionary school closures in some areas . Rather than closing schools , the CDC recommended that students and school workers with flu symptoms should stay home for either seven days total , or until 24 hours after symptoms subsided , whichever was longer . The CDC also recommended that colleges should consider suspending fall 2009 classes if the virus began to cause severe illness in a significantly larger share of students than the previous spring . They also urged schools to suspend rules , such as penalties for late papers or missed classes or requirements for a doctor 's note , to enforce " self @-@ isolation " and prevent students from venturing out while ill ; schools were advised to set aside a room for people developing flu @-@ like symptoms while they waited to go home and to have ill students or staff and those caring for them use face masks . 
 In California , school districts and universities were on alert and worked with health officials to launch education campaigns . Many planned to stockpile medical supplies and discuss worst @-@ case scenarios , including plans to provide lessons and meals for low @-@ income children in case elementary and secondary schools closed . University of California campuses stockpiled supplies , from paper masks and hand sanitizer to food and water . To help prepare for contingencies , University of Maryland School of Medicine professor of pediatrics James C. King Jr. suggested that every county should create an " influenza action team " to be run by the local health department , parents and school administrators . By 28 October 2009 , about 600 schools in the United States had been temporarily closed , affecting over 126 @,@ 000 students in 19 states . 
 = = = = Workplace = = = = 
 Fearing a worst @-@ case scenario , the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) developed updated guidance and a video for employers to use as they developed plans to respond to the H1N1 outbreak . The guidance suggested that employers consider and communicate their objectives , such as reducing transmission among staff , protecting people who are at increased risk of influenza @-@ related complications from becoming infected , maintaining business operations , and minimising adverse effects on other entities in their supply chains . 
 The CDC estimated that as much as 40 % of the workforce might be unable to work at the peak of the pandemic due to the need for many healthy adults to stay home and care for an ill family member , and advised that individuals should have steps in place should a workplace close down or a situation arise that requires working from home . The CDC further advised that persons in the workplace should stay home sick for seven days after getting the flu , or 24 hours after symptoms end , whichever is longer . 
 In the UK , the Health and Safety Executive ( HSE ) also issued general guidance for employers . 
 = = = = Facial masks = = = = 
 The U.S. CDC does not recommend use of face masks or respirators in non @-@ health care settings , such as schools , workplaces , or public places , with a few exceptions : people who are ill with the virus when around other people , and people who are at risk for severe illness while caring for someone with the flu . There has been some disagreement about the value of wearing facial masks , some experts fearing that masks may give people a false sense of security and should not replace other standard precautions . Masks may benefit people in close contact with infected persons , but it is unknown whether they prevent H1N1 flu infection . Yukihiro Nishiyama , professor of virology at Nagoya University 's School of Medicine , commented that the masks are " better than nothing , but it 's hard to completely block out an airborne virus since it can easily slip through the gaps " . 
 According to mask manufacturer 3M , masks will filter out particles in industrial settings , but " there are no established exposure limits for biological agents such as swine flu virus " . However , despite the lack of evidence of effectiveness , the use of such masks is common in Asia . They are particularly popular in Japan , where cleanliness and hygiene are highly valued and where etiquette obligates those who are sick to wear masks to avoid spreading disease . 
 = = = = Quarantine = = = = 
 During the height of the fear of a pandemic , some countries initiated or threatened to initiate quarantines of foreign visitors suspected of having or being in contact with others who may have been infected . In May 2009 , the Chinese government confined 21 U.S. students and three teachers to their hotel rooms . As a result , the US State Department issued a travel alert about China 's anti @-@ flu measures and warned travellers against travelling to China if ill . In Hong Kong , an entire hotel was quarantined with 240 guests ; Australia ordered a cruise ship with 2 @,@ 000 passengers to stay at sea because of a swine flu threat . Egyptian Muslims who went on the annual pilgrimage to Mecca risked being quarantined upon their return . Russia and Taiwan said they would quarantine visitors with fevers who come from areas where the flu was present . Japan quarantined 47 airline passengers in a hotel for a week in mid @-@ May , then in mid @-@ June India suggested pre @-@ screening " outbound " passengers from countries thought to have a high rate of infection . 
 = = = = Pigs and food safety = = = = 
 The pandemic virus is a type of swine influenza , derived originally from a strain which lived in pigs , and this origin gave rise to the common name of " swine flu " . This term is widely used by mass media . The virus has been found in American hogs , and Canadian as well as in hogs in Northern Ireland , Argentina , and Norway . Leading health agencies and the United States Secretary of Agriculture have stressed that eating properly cooked pork or other food products derived from pigs will not cause flu . Nevertheless , on 27 April , Azerbaijan imposed a ban on the importation of animal husbandry products from the entire Americas . The Indonesian government also halted the importation of pigs and initiated the examination of 9 million pigs in Indonesia . The Egyptian government ordered the slaughter of all pigs in Egypt on 29 April 2009 . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 A number of methods have been recommended to help ease symptoms , including adequate liquid intake and rest . Over @-@ the @-@ counter pain medications such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen do not kill the virus ; however , they may be useful to reduce symptoms . Aspirin and other salicylate products should not be used by people under 19 with any flu @-@ type symptoms because of the risk of developing Reye 's Syndrome . 
 If the fever is mild and there are no other complications , fever medication is not recommended . Most people recover without medical attention , although those with pre @-@ existing or underlying medical conditions are more prone to complications and may benefit from further treatments . 
 People in at @-@ risk groups should be treated with antivirals ( oseltamivir or zanamivir ) as soon as possible when they first experience flu symptoms . The at @-@ risk groups include pregnant and post partum women , children under two years old , and people with underlying conditions such as respiratory problems . People who are not in an at @-@ risk group who have persistent or rapidly worsening symptoms should also be treated with antivirals . People who have developed pneumonia should be given both antivirals and antibiotics , as in many severe cases of H1N1 @-@ caused illness , bacterial infection develops . Antivirals are most useful if given within 48 hours of the start of symptoms and may improve outcomes in hospitalised patients . In those beyond 48 hours who are moderately or severely ill , antivirals may still be beneficial . If oseltamivir ( Tamiflu ) is unavailable or cannot be used , zanamivir ( Relenza ) is recommended as a substitute . <unk> is an experimental antiviral drug approved for hospitalised patients in cases where the other available methods of treatment are ineffective or unavailable . 
 To help avoid shortages of these drugs , the U.S. CDC recommended oseltamivir treatment primarily for people hospitalised with pandemic flu ; people at risk of serious flu complications due to underlying medical conditions ; and patients at risk of serious flu complications . The CDC warned that the indiscriminate use of antiviral medications to prevent and treat influenza could ease the way for drug @-@ resistant strains to emerge , which would make the fight against the pandemic that much harder . In addition , a British report found that people often failed to complete a full course of the drug or took the medication when not needed . 
 = = = Side effects = = = 
 Both medications have known side effects , including lightheadedness , chills , nausea , vomiting , loss of appetite and trouble breathing . Children were reported to be at increased risk of self @-@ injury and confusion after taking oseltamivir . The WHO warn against buying antiviral medications from online sources , and estimate that half the drugs sold by online pharmacies without a physical address are counterfeit . 
 = = = Resistance = = = 
 In December 2012 , 2010 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) reported 314 samples of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 flu tested worldwide have shown resistance to oseltamivir ( Tamiflu ) . This is not totally unexpected as 99 @.@ 6 % of the seasonal H1N1 flu strains tested have developed resistance to oseltamivir . No circulating flu has yet shown any resistance to zanamivir ( Relenza ) , the other available anti @-@ viral . 
 = = = Effectiveness of antivirals questioned = = = 
 On 8 December 2009 , the Cochrane Collaboration , which reviews medical evidence , announced in a review published in BMJ that it had reversed its previous findings that the antiviral drugs oseltamivir ( Tamiflu ) and zanamivir ( Relenza ) can ward off pneumonia and other serious conditions linked to influenza . They reported that an analysis of 20 studies showed oseltamivir offered mild benefits for healthy adults if taken within 24 hours of onset of symptoms , but found no clear evidence it prevented lower respiratory tract infections or other complications of influenza . Their published finding relates only to its use in healthy adults with influenza ; they say nothing about its use in patients judged to be at high risk of complications ( pregnant women , children under five and those with underlying medical conditions ) , and uncertainty over its role in reducing complications in healthy adults may still leave it as a useful drug for reducing the duration of symptoms . The drugs might eventually be demonstrated to be effective against flu @-@ related complications ; in general , the Cochrane Collaboration concluded " <unk> of good data " . 
 Some specific results from the BMJ article include : " The efficacy of oral oseltamivir against symptomatic laboratory confirmed influenza was 61 % ( risk ratio 0 @.@ 39 , 95 % confidence interval 0 @.@ 18 to 0 @.@ 85 ) at 75 mg daily ... The remaining evidence suggests oseltamivir did not reduce influenza related lower respiratory tract complications ( risk ratio 0 @.@ 55 , 95 % confidence interval 0 @.@ 22 to 1 @.@ 35 ) " . Notice especially the wide range for this second result . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 While it is not known precisely where or when the virus originated , analyses in scientific journals have suggested that the H1N1 strain responsible for the 2009 outbreak first evolved in September 2008 and circulated amongst humans for several months before being formally recognised and identified as a novel strain of influenza . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 The virus was first reported in two U.S. children in March 2009 , but health officials have reported that it apparently infected people as early as January 2009 in Mexico . The outbreak was first detected in Mexico City on 18 March 2009 ; immediately after the outbreak was officially announced , Mexico notified the U.S. and World Health Organization , and within days of the outbreak Mexico City was " effectively shut down " . Some countries cancelled flights to Mexico while others halted trade . Calls to close the border to contain the spread were rejected . Mexico already had hundreds of non @-@ lethal cases before the outbreak was officially discovered , and was therefore in the midst of a " silent epidemic " . As a result , Mexico was reporting only the most serious cases which showed more severe signs different from those of normal flu , possibly leading to a skewed initial estimate of the case fatality rate . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The new strain was first identified by the CDC in two children , neither of whom had been in contact with pigs . The first case , from San Diego County , California , was confirmed from clinical specimens ( nasopharyngeal swab ) examined by the CDC on 14 April 2009 . A second case , from nearby Imperial County , California , was confirmed on 17 April . The patient in the first confirmed case had flu symptoms including fever and cough on clinical examination on 30 March , and the second on 28 March . 
 The first confirmed H1N1 / 09 pandemic flu death , which occurred at Texas Children 's Hospital in Houston , Texas , was of a toddler from Mexico City who was visiting family in Brownsville , Texas , before being air @-@ lifted to Houston for treatment . 
 = = = Data reporting and accuracy = = = 
 Influenza surveillance information " answers the questions of where , when , and what influenza viruses are circulating . It can be used to determine if influenza activity is increasing or decreasing , but cannot be used to ascertain how many people have become ill with influenza " . For example , as of late June 2009 , influenza surveillance information showed the U.S. had nearly 28 @,@ 000 laboratory @-@ confirmed cases including 3 @,@ 065 hospitalisations and 127 deaths ; but mathematical modelling showed an estimated 1 million Americans currently had the 2009 pandemic flu , according to Lyn <unk> , a flu surveillance official with the CDC . Estimating deaths from influenza is also a complicated process . In 2005 , influenza only appeared on the death certificates of 1 @,@ 812 people in the US . The average annual US death toll from flu is , however , estimated to be 36 @,@ 000 . The CDC explains : " [ I ] <unk> is infrequently listed on death certificates of people who die from flu @-@ related complications " and hence , " Only counting deaths where influenza was included on a death certificate would be a gross underestimation of influenza 's true impact " . 
 Influenza surveillance information on the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic is available , but almost no studies attempted to estimate the total number of deaths attributable to H1N1 flu . Two studies were carried out by the CDC ; the later of them estimated that between 7 @,@ 070 and 13 @,@ 930 deaths were attributable to H1N1 flu from April to 14 November 2009 . During the same period , 1642 deaths were officially confirmed as caused by H1N1 flu . The WHO state that total mortality ( including deaths unconfirmed or unreported ) from H1N1 flu is " unquestionably higher " than their own confirmed death statistics . 
 The initial outbreak received a week of near @-@ constant media attention . <unk> cautioned that the number of cases reported in the early days of an outbreak can be very inaccurate and deceptive , due to several causes , among them selection bias , media bias and incorrect reporting by governments . Inaccuracies could also be caused by authorities in different countries looking at differing population groups . Furthermore , countries with poor health care systems and older laboratory facilities may take longer to identify or report cases . " [ E ] ven in developed countries the [ numbers of flu deaths ] are uncertain , because medical authorities don 't usually verify who actually died of influenza and who died of a flu @-@ like illness " . Joseph S. Bresee ( the CDC flu division 's epidemiology chief ) and Michael <unk> ( director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy ) have pointed out that millions of people have had H1N1 flu , usually in a mild form , so the numbers of laboratory @-@ confirmed cases were actually meaningless , and in July 2009 , the WHO stopped keeping count of individual cases and focused more on major outbreaks . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A Wisconsin study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in September 2010 , reported that findings showed that the 2009 H1N1 flu was no more severe than the seasonal flu . " The risk of most serious complications was not elevated in adults or children " , the study 's authors wrote . " Children were disproportionately affected by 2009 H1N1 infection , but the perceived severity of symptoms and risk of serious outcomes were not increased . " Children infected in the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic were no more likely to be hospitalized with complications or get pneumonia than those who catch seasonal strains . About 1 @.@ 5 % of children with the H1N1 swine flu strain were hospitalized within 30 days , compared with 3 @.@ 7 % of those sick with a seasonal strain of H1N1 and 3 @.@ 1 % with an H3N2 virus . 
 CDC illness and death estimates from April 2009 to April 2010 , in the US are as follows : 
 CDC estimates that between 43 million and 89 million cases of 2009 H1N1 occurred between April 2009 and 10 April 2010 . The mid @-@ level in this range is about 61 million people infected with 2009 H1N1 . 
 CDC estimates that between about 195 @,@ 000 and 403 @,@ 000 H1N1 @-@ related hospitalizations occurred between April 2009 and 10 April 2010 . The mid @-@ level in this range is about 274 @,@ 000 2009 H1N1 @-@ related hospitalizations . 
 CDC estimates that between about 8 @,@ 870 and 18 @,@ 300 2009 H1N1 @-@ related deaths occurred between April 2009 and 10 April 2010 . The mid @-@ level in this range is about 12 @,@ 470 2009 H1N1 @-@ related deaths . 
 It is often stated that about 36 @,@ 000 die from the seasonal flu in the U.S. each year , and this is frequently understood as an indication that the H1N1 strain was not as severe as seasonal influenza . The 36 @,@ 000 estimate was presented in a 2003 study by CDC scientists published in the Journal of the American Medical Association but only refers to a period from 1990 – 91 through 1998 – 99 . During those years , the number of estimated deaths ranged from 17 @,@ 000 to 52 @,@ 000 , with an average of about 36 @,@ 000 . The JAMA study also looked at seasonal influenza @-@ associated deaths over a 23 @-@ year period , from 1976 – 77 and 1998 – 99 . During that period , estimates of respiratory and circulatory influenza @-@ associated deaths ranged from about 5 @,@ 000 to about 52 @,@ 000 , with an average of about 25 @,@ 000 . While the 36 @,@ 000 number is often cited , it 's important to note that during that decade , influenza A ( H3N2 ) was the predominant virus during most of the seasons , and H3N2 influenza viruses are typically associated with higher death rates . CDC believes that the range of deaths over the past 31 years ( ~ 3 @,@ 000 to ~ 49 @,@ 000 ) is a more accurate representation of the unpredictability and variability of flu @-@ associated deaths . The annual toll from seasonal influenza in the US is more accurately estimated at 3000 – 49 @,@ 000 deaths per year . So the H1N1 pandemic estimated mortality of 8 @,@ 870 to 18 @,@ 300 , places it in the mid @-@ range of estimates . 
 The 2009 pandemic caused hospitals around the country to make significant preparations in terms of hospital surge capacities , especially within the emergency department and among vulnerable populations . In many cases , hospitals were relatively successful in making sure that those patients most severely affected by the influenza strain were able to be seen , treated , and discharged in an efficient manner . A proper case @-@ study of the preparation , planning , mitigation , and response efforts during the Fall of 2009 is that of the Children 's Hospital of Philadelphia ( CHOP ) . For example , CHOP took several steps to increase the emergency department ( ED ) surge capacity response abilities through careful planning and mitigation efforts . To increase ED capacity and response , CHOP used portions of the main lobby area as an ED waiting room ; several of the region 's hospital @-@ based outpatient facilities were in use during evening and weekend hours for non @-@ emergency cases ; the ED 's 24 @-@ hour short @-@ stay unit was utilized to care for ED patients in a longer @-@ term capacity ; non @-@ board certified physicians ( in pediatric emergency medicine ) and inpatient @-@ unit medical nurses were utilized for ED patient care ; hospital units normally utilized for other medical or therapeutic purposes were transformed into ED patient rooms ; and rooms normally used for only one patient were expanded to at least a capacity of 2 
 = = Comparisons to other pandemics and epidemics = = 
 Annual influenza epidemics are estimated to affect 5 – 15 % of the global population . Although most cases are mild , these epidemics still cause severe illness in 3 – 5 million people and 250 @,@ 000 – 500 @,@ 000 deaths worldwide . On average 41 @,@ 400 people die of influenza @-@ related illnesses each year in the United States , based on data collected between 1979 and 2001 . In industrialised countries , severe illness and deaths occur mainly in the high @-@ risk populations of infants , the elderly and chronically ill patients , although the H1N1 flu outbreak ( like the 1918 Spanish flu ) differs in its tendency to affect younger , healthier people . 
 In addition to these annual epidemics , Influenza A virus strains caused three global pandemics during the 20th century : the Spanish flu in 1918 , Asian flu in 1957 , and Hong Kong flu in 1968 – 69 . These virus strains had undergone major genetic changes for which the population did not possess significant immunity . Recent genetic analysis has revealed that three @-@ quarters , or six out of the eight genetic segments , of the 2009 flu pandemic strain arose from the North American swine flu strains circulating since 1998 , when a new strain was first identified on a factory farm in North Carolina , and which was the first @-@ ever reported triple @-@ hybrid flu virus . 
 The 1918 flu epidemic began with a wave of mild cases in the spring , followed by more deadly waves in the autumn , eventually killing hundreds of thousands in the United States and 50- 100 million worldwide . The great majority of deaths in the 1918 flu pandemic were the result of secondary bacterial pneumonia . The influenza virus damaged the lining of the bronchial tubes and lungs of victims , allowing common bacteria from the nose and throat to infect their lungs . Subsequent pandemics have had many fewer fatalities due to the development of antibiotic medicines which can treat pneumonia . 
 The influenza virus has also caused several pandemic threats over the past century , including the pseudo @-@ pandemic of 1947 ( thought of as mild because although globally distributed , it caused relatively few deaths ) , the 1976 swine flu outbreak and the 1977 Russian flu , all caused by the H1N1 subtype . The world has been at an increased level of alert since the SARS epidemic in Southeast Asia ( caused by the SARS coronavirus ) . The level of preparedness was further increased and sustained with the advent of the H5N1 bird flu outbreaks because of H5N1 's high fatality rate , although the strains currently prevalent have limited human @-@ to @-@ human transmission ( <unk> ) capability , or <unk> . 
 People who contracted flu before 1957 appeared to have some immunity to H1N1 flu . Daniel Jernigan , head of flu epidemiology for the U.S. CDC , has stated : " Tests on blood serum from older people showed that they had antibodies that attacked the new virus ... That does not mean that everyone over 52 is immune , since Americans and Mexicans older than that have died of the new flu " . 
 In June 2012 , a model based study was published finding that the number of deaths related to the H1N1 influenza may have been fifteen times higher than the reported laboratory confirmed deaths . According to their findings , 80 % of the respiratory and cardiovascular deaths were in people younger than 65 years and 51 % occurred in southeast Asia and Africa . The researchers believe that a disproportionate number of pandemic deaths might have occurred in these regions and that their research suggests that efforts to prevent future influenza pandemics needs to effectively target these regions . 
 A WHO supported 2013 study estimated that the 2009 global pandemic respiratory mortality was ~ 10 @-@ fold higher than the World Health Organization 's laboratory @-@ confirmed mortality count ( 18 @.@ 631 ) . Although the pandemic mortality estimate was similar in magnitude to that of seasonal influenza , a marked shift toward mortality among persons < 65 y of age occurred , so that many more life @-@ years were lost . Between 123 @,@ 000 and 203 @,@ 000 pandemic respiratory deaths were estimated globally for the last 9 mo of 2009 . The majority ( 62 % – 85 % ) were attributed to persons under 65 y of age . The burden varied greatly among countries . There was an almost 20 @-@ fold higher mortality in some countries in the Americas than in Europe . The model attributed 148 @,@ 000 – 249 @,@ 000 respiratory deaths to influenza in an average pre @-@ pandemic season , with only 19 % in persons < 65 y . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Health @-@ EU Portal EU response to influenza 
 2009 influenza A ( H1N1 ) pandemic . European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) . 
 Summaries of the pandemic . European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) . 
 European Commission – Public Health EU coordination on Pandemic ( H1N1 ) 2009 . 
 UK National Pandemic Flu Service 
 Official UK government information on swine flu from <unk> 
 Human / Swine A / H1N1 Influenza Origins and Evolution – Analysis of genetic data for the origin and evolution of swine flu virus . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Health Canada flu portal 
 Pan @-@ American Health Organization ( PAHO ) Swine Influenza portal 
 H1N1 Influenza ( Flu ) portal at the US Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) 
 US Government swine , avian and pandemic flu portal 
 Medical Encyclopedia Medline Plus : Swine Flu 
 Swine Flu Outbreak , Influenza Virus Resource – Sequences and related resources ( GenBank , NCBI ) 
 = Blyth Power Station = 
 Blyth Power Station ( also known as Cambois Power Station ) refers to a pair of now demolished coal @-@ fired power stations , which were located on the Northumberland coast in North East England . The two stations were built alongside each other on a site near Cambois in Northumberland , on the northern bank of the River Blyth , between its tidal estuary and the North Sea . The stations took their name from the town of Blyth on the opposite bank of the estuary . Blyth A Power Station was built and opened first but had a smaller generating capacity than its sister station , Blyth B Power Station , which was built to its west four years later . The power stations ' four large chimneys were a landmark of the Northumberland skyline for over 40 years ; the A Station 's two chimneys each stood at 140 metres ( 460 ft ) ; the B Station 's two chimneys were taller , at 170 metres ( 560 ft ) each . 
 Construction of the B Station began shortly after the A station was completed . The stations were built during a period in which there were great advances in power station technology , and in the scale of production , which led to them having a variety of intermediate generator set sizes along with a mix of design styles . Blyth A had a generating capacity of 480 megawatts ( MW ) and the B Station 1 @,@ 250 MW . Their combined capacity of 1 @,@ 730 MW briefly made Blyth Power Station the largest electricity generation site in England , until Ferrybridge C Power Station came into full operation in 1966 . The stations were capable of generating enough electricity to power 300 @,@ 000 homes . 
 The A Station first generated electricity in 1958 , a year after the creation of the Central Electricity Generating Board , and the stations operated until 2001 . They were operated by the successors of the CEGB , including National Power , following the privatisation of the UK 's power industry . After their closure in 2001 , the stations were demolished over the course of two years , ending with the demolition of the stations ' chimneys on 7 December 2003 . As of 2009 , the site is still covered in debris from the demolition . RWE Npower have proposed the construction of a clean coal @-@ fired power station on the site . However , as of November 2009 , these plans have been postponed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following the Second World War the demand for electricity increased in the United Kingdom . In North East England , this led to the construction of two new power stations at Stella , along with the expansion of stations at Dunston and Billingham , to meet the demand for power quickly . At Blyth , a larger and more efficient plant was planned , consisting of six 100 megawatts ( MW ) generating units . This increased to six 120 MW units , before increasing again in the final proposal for an A station consisting of four 120 MW units and a B station consisting of two 275 MW units and two 350 MW units . This gave the A and B stations generating capacities of 480 MW and 1 @,@ 250 MW respectively . The Blyth Power Stations were to be an experiment , using a variety of generating set sizes at a time when engineers were trying to standardise power station plant and layout . Blyth was the first in the UK to use generating sets larger than the then standard 30 MW and 60 MW . The station 's location was chosen because of its position within the super grid , rather than to be near a load centre . 
 The site chosen for the construction of the power stations was close to the coal mining town of Cambois . Ordnance Survey maps as far back as 1860 show that before building work began the land had been used as open farmland , with fields of varying shapes and sizes . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Permission for Blyth A Power Station to be built was granted in February 1955 , and its construction took place between 1955 and 1960 . The station 's first unit went into operation in December 1958 , and the A Station was fully operational by June 1960 . Its four 120 MW sets were the first commissioned in Britain of what became for a time that standardised size . The construction of the B Station began on 4 December 1961 . Its first unit was commissioned in December 1962 , and the rest of the station was fully operational by September 1966 . The station had a total generating capacity of 1 @,@ 730 MW , the highest of any site in the UK until later in the same year , when Ferrybridge C Power Station came into full operation . Blyth B was the first power station in Britain to have 275 MW sets installed . Its two 350 MW sets were an intermediate stage toward the 500 MW standard , so very few of the 350 MW sets were ever commissioned in the UK . Both of the stations were designed by L J <unk> & Partners . They were engineered by Merz & McLellan and built by the Cleveland Bridge Company . 
 = = Design and specification = = 
 The large 98 @-@ hectare ( 240 @-@ acre ) site was separated by Bedlington @-@ Cambois Road , with the stations ' main buildings , admin blocks and ash dock to the south of the road , and coal storage area and railway sidings to the north . The ground to the south of this road consisted of a 21 @-@ metre ( 69 ft ) thick layer of boulder clay , overlaying sandstone and coal . The main foundations of the buildings were spread out , giving a load of about 2 @.@ 3 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 264 long tons ; 2 @.@ 535 short tons ) per square foot . 
 Each of the stations featured large boiler houses , turbine halls , switch houses , flue gas cleaning plant and a pair of concrete chimneys . Blyth A 's chimneys stood at 140 metres ( 460 ft ) and Blyth B 's chimneys stood at 170 metres ( 560 ft ) , major landmarks on the South East Northumberland skyline . Each chimney weighed approximately 17 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 16 @,@ 730 long tons ; 18 @,@ 740 short tons ) . The prominence and large scale of the buildings in the surrounding flat rural area , was the subject of much contemporary architectural debate . Blyth A 's turbine hall was 120 metres ( 390 ft ) long by 37 metres ( 121 ft ) wide , and 26 metres ( 85 ft ) high . It was built from a reinforced concrete frame , clad with brickwork . It housed four 120 MW Metropolitan @-@ Vickers 3 @,@ 000 rpm turbo generators , each connected to a Babcock & Wilcox boiler , situated in the boiler house . Each boiler and generator set operated independently , with no connections to other sets . Coal fed into the boilers was pulverised by a Babcock & Wilcox pulveriser , fed by a coal bunker with a capacity of 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 968 long tons ; 2 @,@ 205 short tons ) . Each pulveriser was capable of pulverising 15 tonnes ( 14 @.@ 76 long tons ; 16 @.@ 53 short tons ) of coal an hour , sufficient to keep its associated boiler at full output . The boiler house was 110 metres ( 360 ft ) long by 28 metres ( 92 ft ) wide and 48 metres ( 157 ft ) high . It was built from a steel frame with aluminium cladding . The A station 's design was an unusual mix of styles ; the brick construction of the turbine hall was a style used more often in the 1950s , while the aluminium and glass cladding boiler house was a construction style used more in the 1960s . The A Station housed two control rooms , each of which served two generating sets and contained the controls to operate boilers , turbo generators and auxiliary plant . The A Station 's switchgear was provided by A. Reyrolle & Company . 
 Blyth B 's turbine hall was 206 metres ( 676 ft ) long by 51 metres ( 167 ft ) wide and 30 metres ( 98 ft ) high . It housed two 275 MW and two 350 MW English Electric 3 @,@ 000 rpm turbo generators , each connected to a Clarke Chapman & Co boiler , situated in the boiler house . The boiler house was 206 metres ( 676 ft ) long by 32 metres ( 105 ft ) wide and 52 metres ( 171 ft ) high . The coal fed into the boilers was pulverised by a Babcock & Wilcox pulveriser . Each pulveriser was capable of pulverising 40 tonnes ( 39 @.@ 37 long tons ; 44 @.@ 09 short tons ) of coal an hour , and two pulverisers fed each boiler . Both the turbine hall and boiler house were built from a steel frame , clad with aluminium and glazing . The roofs of the B Station 's buildings were made from a lightweight aluminium decking . The B Station 's switchgear was provided by A. Reyrolle & Company and by M & C <unk> . The volume of Blyth B 's main buildings represented 0 @.@ 76 cubic metres ( 27 cu ft ) / kW of installed capacity , while Blyth A 's building volume represented 0 @.@ 74 cubic metres ( 26 cu ft ) / kW . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Coal transportation = = = 
 The stations burned a mix of bituminous and anthracite coal . They consumed 51 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 50 @,@ 190 long tons ; 56 @,@ 220 short tons ) of coal per week and had a peak consumption of 70 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 68 @,@ 890 long tons ; 77 @,@ 160 short tons ) per week during the winter . They were well positioned to use coal from the Northumberland and County Durham coal fields . All of the coal used in the stations was brought to them via rail transport from UK coal stocks . Trains delivered coal to the station using the North Blyth Branch of the Blyth and Tyne Railway . The stations ' coal handling facility was fitted with a Merry go Round ( MGR ) coal delivery system in 1981 , after high capacity rapid discharge waggons became the British Rail standard . This system involved the trains slowly passing over a hopper and automatically discharging their cargo through doors underneath the train . Because of site space restrictions , a balloon loop track layout could not be constructed , so instead of being able to move continuously , trains arriving on site had to pull onto a reception track ; the locomotive would then uncouple and <unk> at the opposite end , before slowly moving over the unloading track hopper and discharging the coal and eventually leaving site . Towards the end of the station 's operation , coal was more frequently brought in by road . All coal was delivered to and stored in a large open area to the north of the power stations . This had a tarmac barrier underneath it to prevent downward contamination . The coal was brought from the storage area to the station using a system of conveyor belts , which travelled over the Bedlington @-@ Cambois Road separating the two sites , before being integrated to feed both stations as necessary . 
 = = = Cooling system = = = 
 Water is essential to a thermal power station , to create the steam to turn the steam turbines and generate electricity . Water used in the power station at Blyth was extracted from the Blyth Harbour tidal basin at the ash dock . Once used in the station , the hot water had to be cooled before it could be discharged . <unk> were used to convert steam from the turbines back into water . The stations ' condensers were of twin two @-@ pass design and had a total cooling surface of 70 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 500 m2 ) . Condensed water was then extracted by two duty pumps . The water then passed through a drains cooler . The cooled waste water was discharged into the sea off Cambois beach below low tide level . 
 = = = Ash removal = = = 
 Pulverised Fuel Ash ( PFA ) and Furnace Bottom Ash ( FBA ) were byproducts produced through the burning of coal in the station . Bottom ash was removed from ash hoppers at the bottom of the boilers by high pressure water jets . It then travelled to ash settling ponds via <unk> . For much of the station 's life , the station was served by a series of barges , which took the ash to dump 4 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) out into the North Sea . Two barges provided this service over the years ; Sir Fon and MVA . The barges were loaded by silos situated at a special dock to the east of the stations . However , dumping in the sea stopped in 1992 when the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships prevented further dumping in the North Sea . From then on FBA was sold to the construction industry , while PFA was either dried for sale , or was disposed of at a licensed landfill on @-@ site . 
 = = Closure and demolition = = 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 In 1989 , Blyth A won a place in the Guinness Book of Records by setting the world record for total running hours in a plant of its size , when all four generating units achieved 200 @,@ 000 running hours . With the privatisation of the UK 's electricity supply industry in 1990 , the station passed into the ownership of National Power . In 1991 , the two 275 MW units at Blyth B ( units 5 & 6 ) were decommissioned on the grounds of economy , despite the station having been modernised in the early 1980s . This decommissioning resulted in 260 job losses . 
 During the 1990s , the station became one of the UK 's least efficient power stations . In 1998 , plans were announced to use the station as a test @-@ bed for clean coal technology , but the plans did not come to fruition . In 1999 , then owners Innogy decided to take Blyth A out of operation , while Blyth B began operating only at times of peak demand , because the stations had become surplus to their generating needs . From 1 April 2000 onwards the station was taken out of service for the summer months , because of the low demand for electricity at that time of year . However , staff were retained to maintain the station . Innogy then began looking for a buyer for the station , to decide the site 's future . They had been in talks with American based NRG Energy , over a £ 410 million purchase of the station , along with the <unk> Power Station in North Lincolnshire . There had also been rumours that a deal had been made to convert the station into a waste @-@ to @-@ energy plant . However , any plans to save the station fell through and the generation of electricity at the station ceased on 31 January 2001 , after 43 years of operating , resulting in the loss of 131 jobs . 
 At the time of its closure , Blyth Power Station was the oldest coal @-@ fired power station in Britain . The station long outlived its life expectancy of 25 years . The length of time that the station was in use is partly due to its value in the National Grid , as a " charge " near to a major node in the system . 
 Shortly after its closure , a joint proposal was made by the British Army and the Ministry of Agriculture to burn the carcasses of animals slaughtered during the 2001 foot @-@ and @-@ mouth crisis in portable incinerators at the station . The station was proposed because of its high chimneys , but strong opposition from local residents and Members of Parliament , along with the proximity of over 100 @,@ 000 people living within 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) of the site , meant that the proposal was quickly rejected . 
 = = = Demolition = = = 
 The demolition contract for the station was won by London @-@ based company Brown & Mason . Before the demolition of the stations ' main structures , it was required that they be decommissioned . This involved the removal of hazardous materials and contaminants , to keep in line with Health & Safety at Work regulations . Oils and chemicals were removed for re @-@ use or disposal and storage tanks were flushed out . Methanol was removed from hydrogen production plants on site , along with bottled propane used for welding . The remaining coal in the coal storage area was dispatched to operating power stations in other parts of the country . The landfill site where ash waste from the station was dumped was <unk> . Asbestos used in the stations was removed prior to the demolition of the stations ' structures . 
 The stations were demolished between 2001 and 2003 . The smaller buildings and structures were first to be demolished . One worker was killed during the demolition work , in May 2001 , crushed underneath an electrical connection box which fell from a wall . On 31 October 2001 , the ash silo which stood at the ash dock was toppled using explosives to demolish the stilts the structure stood on . The silo was then dismantled by bulldozers . All of the smaller structures had been removed by July 2002 . On 11 July 2002 , the A Station 's boiler house was demolished . The 61 @-@ metre ( 200 ft ) high coal conveyor belt was demolished on 6 February 2003 . The station 's precipitators were demolished on 27 March and 17 April 2003 . On 1 May 2003 , the B Station 's bunker bay building was demolished , and on 22 May 2003 , the stations air heater was demolished . A fire started at the station on 17 June 2003 , when a bunker caught fire after hot cutting equipment set fire to coke remnants . All of the larger structures had been demolished by July 2003 . It was planned for the stations ' chimneys to be demolished in October 2003 , but that had to be postponed due to the complexity of the demolition . However , at noon on 7 December 2003 , the four chimneys , each weighing 17 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 16 @,@ 730 long tons ; 18 @,@ 740 short tons ) , were demolished using a total of 150 kilograms ( 330 lb ) of the industrial explosive <unk> . The demolition is thought to have been the biggest chimney demolition in 50 years . 
 = = Present and future uses of the site = = 
 Since Innogy was taken over by RWE in 2002 , the site has been owned by RWE Npower . The only substantial structures remaining are the National Grid and <unk> substations . These buildings will continue to remain and there are plans to extend the National Grid substation . The rest of the power station site is unused brownfield land . The site of the main station buildings is currently covered in crushed concrete , left over from the demolition process . Underground workings , such as tunnels and culverts , also still exist on the site . The coal storage area to the north has been <unk> and ash settling ponds have been filled with concrete . Some ash mounds are still situated to the east of the site . 
 = = = Clean coal power station = = = 
 In May 2007 , Npower announced plans to build a new £ 2 billion clean coal power station on the site . The proposed station would have generated electricity using three 800 MW advanced supercritical steam , high @-@ efficiency coal @-@ fired units , giving the station a total generation capacity of 2 @,@ 400 MW . This was one of two new coal @-@ fired stations proposed by Npower in the UK . The site was chosen because of its readily available proximity to the national grid , its rail and port links , and its position next to the North Sea , which is useful for both cooling water , and as a potential CO2 storage site , where CO2 could be piped to oil and gas wells , and saline aquifers . 
 The station would have had an efficiency of 46 % , which in comparison to conventional subcritical coal @-@ fired power stations , equates to a reduction in carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) of 23 % per unit of electricity generated . The station would have utilised pollution abatement and gas cleaning systems , including selective catalytic reduction , to remove nitrogen oxide , and Flue @-@ gas desulphurisation , to remove sulphur dioxide . The station would also have been able to allow the installation of Carbon Capture and Storage ( CCS ) technology , when it becomes technically and commercially viable . There was also a possibility that the station may have co @-@ fired biomass , and <unk> heat as a combined heat and power plant . 
 Coal was expected to be able to be delivered to the station by rail , as well as by ship to the Port of Blyth . The station 's coal storage area would have stored a minimum 45 days worth of coal supply . All of the station 's pulverised fuel ash ( PFA ) may have been sold to the construction industry , transported to which in dry dust tankers . Unsold PFA and furnace bottom ash would be taken to a landfill site by road . 
 Fifteen hundred jobs would have been created during the station 's construction , and more than 200 full @-@ time jobs would have been available once the station was operating . 
 The Environmental Assessment <unk> Report for the proposed station was submitted to the Department of Trade and Industry in 2007 , and the application for the development was to be made to the Secretary of State for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform once the Environmental Impact Assessment was completed . A contract had already been signed with the Shaw Group to design and engineer the station . If Npower had been granted permission to build the new station , construction work would have begun in 2010 , and the station was expected to be fully commissioned by 2014 . It would have been one of the most efficient coal @-@ fired power stations of its size in the UK . 
 Blyth Valley Council said the proposal did not fit with regeneration plans in the area . Residents living in the area voiced opinions that the land should be redeveloped for other purposes , rather than continue to be used as an industrial site . The MP for Wansbeck , Denis Murphy , stated that , although the project would have benefits for the area , he still had concerns . Ronnie Campbell , the MP for Blyth Valley , claimed he would welcome the development as long as it did not have an adverse effect on the overall regeneration of the area . On 5 June 2008 , Npower reopened the original gatehouse at the entrance to the power station 's site , to provide a " drop @-@ in " centre for the public to find out more about the proposed plans . 
 In August 2009 , following a visit to Cambois from Minister of State for Energy at the Department of Energy and Climate Change Joan Ruddock , it was revealed that the government were determined to go ahead with four new coal @-@ fired power stations . She stated that they had no scepticism about CCS technology , with a competition having been started between the big energy companies to create a viable form of the technology , set to end in 2014 . However this meant the station may not have been completed until 2020 . 
 Despite this support , RWE announced in November 2009 that they have postponed their plans for the new power station . They are not yet going make a formal planning application for the plant , saying that the time is not right for such a huge investment . Dave Carlton , RWE 's project manager , has said that they " see the site as an important one , both for RWE npower and in terms of the UK ’ s future power generation ” , and so RWE npower have retained the site for a possible future power station . Malcolm Reid of People Against New Coal Stations , a group opposed to the power station development , said : 
 " We would now like to see Northumberland County Council re @-@ designate the Cambois site for green , clean technology , to match what is happening at the New and Renewable Energy Centre ( <unk> ) in Blyth . It is a perfect area for a factory for offshore wind turbines and housing development . If Cambois is re @-@ designated then the prospect of the area being regenerated rises colossally . " 
 = = = Wind turbine factory = = = 
 In April 2010 , Malcolm Reid proposed the station 's site as a possible location for a £ 80 million Siemens wind turbine factory . The factory would create 700 jobs and up to 1 @,@ 500 further jobs in the supply chain if built . He has said the site would be perfect for the factory because of its close proximity to <unk> and the site 's existing deep dock facilities . The factory is likely to be built either in Blyth or on Humberside . 
 = = Social and cultural impact = = 
 The power stations had very few television and film appearances : 
 In 1991 , the site was used as a shooting location for the sci @-@ fi horror film Alien 3 . Various locations in the North East of England were used in shooting the film , and the power station provided the location for some shots of the planet surface . 
 During the latter stages of the stations ' demolition , a documentary was made . The documentary was included in the Channel Five television programme The Demolition Squad . 
 Despite the small amount of media usage of the power stations , their four chimneys were still a strong landmark within the south east Northumberland landscape . They could be seen from as far south as 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) away at <unk> , in Newcastle upon Tyne , and over an 13 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 2 mi ) stretch of coast , from Seaton Sluice up to Newbiggin @-@ by @-@ the @-@ Sea . This is mostly because the stations were constructed in a largely flat , rural area . 
 In 1995 , the site was considered for scheduling by English Heritage , because of its national importance as a good example of a late 20th @-@ century power station . It was also important because of its use as a testing ground for various generating sizes , from which came success in the UK 's electricity industry . However , by then the station 's buildings were in poor condition and it would have been financially difficult to ensure their long term preservation . Instead , it was decided a comprehensive study and photographic record of the station would be commissioned . 
 Due to the closure of Blyth Power Stations , along with the power stations at Dunston and Stella in the 1980s and 1990s respectively , the northern part of North East England has become heavily dependent upon the National Grid for electrical supply . However , there are still two large power stations at Hartlepool and Wilton in the south of the region . 
 = Pope Pius XII = 
 Pope Pius XII ( Italian : Pio XII ) , born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 2 March 1876 – 9 October 1958 ) , reigned as Pope from 2 March 1939 to his death in 1958 . Before his election to the papacy , Pacelli served as secretary of the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs , papal nuncio to Germany ( 1917 – 1929 ) , and Cardinal Secretary of State , in which capacity he worked to conclude treaties with European and Latin American nations , most notably the Reichskonkordat with Nazi Germany , with which most historians believe the Vatican sought to protect the Church in Germany while Adolf Hitler sought the destruction of " political Catholicism " . A pre @-@ war critic of Nazism , Pius XII lobbied world leaders to avoid war and , as Pope at the outbreak of war , issued Summi Pontificatus , expressing dismay at the invasion of Poland , reiterating Church teaching against racial persecution and calling for love , compassion and charity to prevail over war . 
 While the Vatican was officially neutral during the war , Pius XII maintained links to the German Resistance , used diplomacy to aid the victims of the war and lobby for peace and spoke out against race @-@ based murders and other atrocities . The Reichskonkordat of 1933 and Pius 's leadership of the Catholic Church during World War II remain the subject of controversy — including allegations of public silence and inaction about the fate of the Jews . After the war Pius XII advocated peace and reconciliation , including lenient policies towards Axis and Axis @-@ satellite nations . The Church experienced severe persecution and mass deportations of Catholic clergy in the Eastern Bloc . Pius XII was a staunch opponent of Communism and of the Italian Communist Party . Pius XII explicitly invoked ex cathedra papal infallibility with the dogma of the Assumption of Mary in his 1950 Apostolic constitution <unk> Deus . His magisterium includes almost 1 @,@ 000 addresses and radio broadcasts . His forty @-@ one encyclicals include Mystici corporis , the Church as the Body of Christ ; Mediator Dei on liturgy reform ; and Humani generis on the Church 's positions on theology and evolution . He eliminated the Italian majority in the College of Cardinals in 1946 . 
 In 1954 , Pius XII began to suffer from ill health , which would continue until his death in 1958 . The embalming of his body was mishandled , with effects that were evident during the funeral . He was buried in the Vatican grottos and was succeeded by Pope John XXIII . 
 In the process toward sainthood , his cause for canonization was opened on 18 November 1965 by Pope Paul VI during the final session of the Second Vatican Council . He was made a Servant of God by Pope John Paul II in 1990 and Pope Benedict XVI declared Pius XII Venerable on 19 December 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli was born on 2 March 1876 in Rome into a family of intense Catholic piety with a history of ties to the papacy ( the " Black Nobility " ) . His parents were Filippo Pacelli ( 1837 – 1916 ) and Virginia ( née <unk> ) Pacelli ( 1844 – 1920 ) . His grandfather , Marcantonio Pacelli , had been Under @-@ Secretary in the Papal Ministry of Finances and then Secretary of the Interior under Pope Pius IX from 1851 to 1870 and helped found the Vatican 's newspaper , L 'Osservatore Romano in 1861 . His cousin , Ernesto Pacelli , was a key financial advisor to Pope Leo XIII ; his father , Filippo Pacelli , a Franciscan tertiary , was the dean of the Roman Rota ; and his brother , Francesco Pacelli , became a lay canon lawyer and the legal advisor to Pope Pius XI , in which role he negotiated the Lateran Treaty in 1929 , the pact with Benito Mussolini , bringing an end to the Roman Question . 
 Together with his brother Francesco and his two sisters , Giuseppina and Elisabetta , he grew up in the <unk> district in the centre of Rome . Soon after the family had moved to Via <unk> in 1880 he began school at the convent of the French Sisters of Divine Providence in the Piazza Fiammetta . The family worshipped at Chiesa Nuova . Eugenio and the other children made their First Communion at this church and Eugenio served there as an altar boy from 1886 . In 1886 too he was sent to the private school of Professor Giuseppe Marchi , close to the Piazza Venezia . In 1891 Pacelli 's father sent Eugenio to the Liceo Ennio Quirino Visconti Institute , a state school situated in what had been the Collegio Romano , the premier Jesuit university in Rome . 
 In 1894 , aged 18 , Pacelli began his theology studies at Rome 's oldest seminary , the Almo Collegio Capranica , and in November of the same year , registered to take a philosophy course at the Jesuit Pontifical Gregorian University and theology at the Pontifical Roman Athenaeum S. <unk> . He was also enrolled at the State University , La Sapienza where he studied modern languages and history . At the end of the first academic year however , in the summer of 1895 , he dropped out of both the Capranica and the Gregorian University . According to his sister Elisabetta , the food at the Capranica was to blame . Having received a special dispensation he continued his studies from home and so spent most of his seminary years as an external student . In 1899 he completed his education in Sacred Theology with a doctoral degree awarded on the basis of a short dissertation and an oral examination in Latin . 
 = = Church career = = 
 = = = Priest and Monsignor = = = 
 While all other candidates from the Rome diocese were ordained in the Basilica of St. John Lateran , Pacelli was ordained a priest on Easter Sunday , 2 April 1899 alone in the private chapel of a family friend the Vice @-@ Regent of Rome , Mgr Paolo <unk> . Shortly after ordination he began postgraduate studies in canon law at Sant <unk> . He received his first assignment as a curate at Chiesa Nuova . In 1901 he entered the Congregation for Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs , a sub @-@ office of the Vatican Secretariat of State . 
 Monsignor Pietro Gasparri , the recently appointed undersecretary at the Department of Extraordinary Affairs , had underscored his proposal to Pacelli to work in the ' Vatican 's equivalent of the Foreign office ' by highlighting the ' necessity of defending the Church from the onslaughts of secularism and liberalism throughout Europe . ' Pacelli became an <unk> , an apprentice , in Gasparri 's department . In January 1901 he was also chosen , by Pope Leo XIII himself , according to an official account , to deliver condolences on behalf of the Vatican to King Edward VII of the UK after the death of Queen Victoria . 
 By 1904 Pacelli received his doctorate . The theme of his thesis was the nature of concordats and the function of canon law when a concordat falls into abeyance . Promoted to the position of <unk> , he prepared digests of reports that had been sent to the Secretariat from all over the world and in the same year became a papal chamberlain . In 1905 he received the title domestic prelate . From 1904 until 1916 , he assisted Cardinal Pietro Gasparri in his codification of canon law with the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs . According to John Cornwell , " the text , together with the Anti @-@ Modernist Oath , became the means by which the Holy See was to establish and sustain the new , unequal , and unprecedented power relationship that had arisen between the papacy and the Church . " 
 In 1908 , Pacelli served as a Vatican representative on the International Eucharistic Congress , accompanying Rafael Merry del Val to London , where he met Winston Churchill . In 1911 , he represented the Holy See at the coronation of King George V. Pacelli became the under @-@ secretary in 1911 , adjunct @-@ secretary in 1912 ( a position he received under Pope Pius X and retained under Pope Benedict XV ) , and secretary of the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs in February 1914 . On 24 June 1914 , just four days before Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated in Sarajevo , Pacelli , together with Cardinal Merry del Val , represented the Vatican when the Serbian Concordat was signed . Serbia 's success in the First Balkan War against Turkey in 1912 had increased the number of Catholics within greater Serbia . At this time Serbia , encouraged by Russia , was challenging Austria @-@ Hungary 's sphere of influence throughout the Balkans . Pius X died on 20 August 1914 . His successor Benedict XV named Gasparri as secretary of state and Gasparri took Pacelli with him into the Secretariat of State , making him undersecretary . During World War I , Pacelli maintained the Vatican 's registry of prisoners of war and worked to implement papal relief initiatives . In 1915 , he travelled to Vienna to assist Monsignor Raffaele <unk> , nuncio to Vienna , in his negotiations with Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria regarding Italy . 
 = = = Archbishop and Papal Nuncio = = = 
 Pope Benedict XV appointed Pacelli as nuncio to Bavaria on 23 April 1917 , consecrating him as titular Bishop of Sardis and immediately elevating him to archbishop in the Sistine Chapel on 13 May 1917 . After his consecration , Eugenio Pacelli left for Bavaria . As there was no nuncio to Prussia or Germany at the time , Pacelli was , for all practical purposes , the nuncio to all of the German Empire . 
 Once in Munich , he conveyed the papal initiative to end the war to German authorities . He met with King Ludwig III on 29 May , and later with Kaiser Wilhelm II and Chancellor Bethmann @-@ Hollweg , who replied positively to the Papal initiative . However , Bethmann @-@ Hollweg was forced to resign and the German High Command , hoping for a military victory , delayed the German reply until 20 September . 
 Sister Pascalina later recalled that the Nuncio was heartbroken that the Kaiser turned " deaf ear to all his proposals " . She later wrote , " Thinking back today on that time , when we Germans still all believed that our weapons would be victorious and the Nuncio was deeply sorry that the chance had been missed to save what there was to save , it occurs to me over and over again how clearly he foresaw what was to come . Once as he traced the course of the Rhine with his finger on a map , he said sadly , ' No doubt this will be lost as well . ' I did not want to believe it , but here , too , he was to be proved right . " 
 For the remainder of the Great War , Pacelli concentrated on Benedict 's humanitarian efforts especially among Allied POWs in German custody . In the upheaval following the Armistice , a disconcerted Pacelli sought Benedict XV 's permission to leave Munich , where Kurt Eisner had formed the Bavarian Soviet Republic , and he left for a while to Rorschach , and a tranquil Swiss sanatorium run by nuns . Monsignor Schioppa , the <unk> , was left in Munich . 
 " His recovery began with a ' rapport ' " with the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Sister Pascalina Lehnert — she would soon be transferred to Munich when Pacelli " pulled strings at the highest level " . 
 When he returned to Munich , following Eisner 's assassination by an anti @-@ Semitic extreme nationalist , Count Anton von Arco auf Valley , he informed Gasparri @-@ using Schioppa 's eye @-@ witness testimony of the chaotic scene at the former royal palace as the trio of Max Levien , Eugen Levine , and <unk> Axelrod sought power : " the scene was indescribable [ - ] the confusion totally chaotic [ - ] in the midst of all this , a gang of young women , of dubious appearance , Jews like the rest of them hanging around [ - ] the boss of this female rabble was Levien 's mistress , a young Russian woman , a Jew and a divorcée [ - ] and it was to her that the nunciature was obliged to pay homage in order to proceed [ - ] Levien is a young man , also Russian and a Jew . Pale , dirty , with drugged eyes , vulgar , repulsive ... " John Cornwell alleges that a worrying impression of anti @-@ Semitism is discernible in the ' catalogue of epithets describing their physical and moral repulsiveness ' and Pacelli 's " constant harping on the Jewishness of this party of power usurpers " chimed with the " growing and widespread belief among Germans that the Jews were the instigators of the Bolshevik revolution , their principal aim being the destruction of Christian civilization " . Also according to Cornwell , Pacelli informed Gasparri that " the capital of Bavaria , is suffering under a harsh Jewish @-@ Russian revolutionary tyranny " 
 According to Sister Pascalina Lehnert , the Nuncio was repeatedly threatened by emissaries of the Bavarian Soviet Republic . Once , in a violation of international law , the Bavarian Revolutionary Government attempted to confiscate the Nunciature 's car at gunpoint . Despite their demands , however , Pacelli refused to leave his post . 
 After the Munich Soviet Republic defeated and toppled by Freikorps and Reichswehr troops , the Nuncio focused on , according to Lehnert , " alleviating the distress of the postwar period , consoling , supporting all in word and deed . " 
 Pacelli was appointed Apostolic Nuncio to Germany on 23 June 1920 , and — after the completion of a Bavarian concordat — his nunciature was moved to Berlin in August 1925 . Many of Pacelli 's Munich staff stayed with him for the rest of his life , including his advisor Robert Leiber and Sister Pascalina Lehnert — housekeeper , cook friend , and adviser for 41 years . In Berlin , Pacelli was Dean of the Diplomatic Corps and active in diplomatic and many social activities . He was aided by the German priest Ludwig Kaas , who was known for his expertise in Church @-@ state relations and was a full @-@ time politician , politically active in the Catholic Centre Party , a party he led following Wilhelm Marx 's resignation in October 1928 . While in Germany , he travelled to all regions , attended <unk> ( national gatherings of the faithful ) , and delivered some 50 sermons and speeches to the German people . In Berlin he lived in the Tiergarten quarter and threw parties for the official and diplomatic elite . Paul von Hindenburg , Gustav Stresemann , and other members of the Cabinet were regular guests . 
 In post @-@ war Germany , in the absence of a nuncio in Moscow , Pacelli worked also on diplomatic arrangements between the Vatican and the Soviet Union . He negotiated food shipments for Russia , where the Church was persecuted . He met with Soviet representatives including Foreign Minister Georgi <unk> , who rejected any kind of religious education , the ordination of priests and bishops , but offered agreements without the points vital to the Vatican . 
 Despite Vatican pessimism and a lack of visible progress , Pacelli continued the secret negotiations , until Pius XI ordered them to be discontinued in 1927 . Pacelli supported German diplomatic activity aimed at rejection of punitive measures from victorious former enemies . He blocked French attempts for an ecclesiastical separation of the Saar region , supported the appointment of a papal administrator for Danzig and aided the reintegration of priests expelled from Poland . A Prussian Concordat was signed on 14 June 1929 . Following the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , the beginnings of a world economic slump appeared , and the days of the Weimar Republic were numbered . Pacelli was summoned back to Rome at this time — the call coming by telegram when he was resting at his favourite retreat , the Rorschach convent sanatorium . He left Berlin on 10 December 1929 . David Dalin wrote " of the forty @-@ four speeches Pacelli gave in Germany as papal nuncio between 1917 and 1929 , forty denounced some aspect of the emerging Nazi ideology . " In 1935 he wrote a letter to the bishop of Cologne describing the Nazis as " false prophets with the pride of Lucifer . " and as " bearers of a new faith and a new <unk> " who were attempting to create " a mendacious antimony between faithfulness to the Church and the Fatherland " . Two years later at Notre Dame in Paris he named Germany as " that noble and powerful nation whom bad shepherds would lead astray into an ideology of race . " 
 = = = Cardinal Secretary of State and Camerlengo = = = 
 Pacelli was made a Cardinal @-@ Priest of Santi Giovanni e Paolo on 16 December 1929 by Pope Pius XI , and within a few months , on 7 February 1930 , Pius XI appointed him Cardinal Secretary of State , responsible for foreign policy and state relations throughout the world . In 1935 , Pacelli was named Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church . 
 As Cardinal Secretary of State , Pacelli signed concordats with a number of countries and states . Immediately on becoming Cardinal Secretary of State , Pacelli and Ludwig Kaas took up negotiations on a Baden Concordat which continued until the spring and summer of 1932 . Papal fiat appointed a supporter of Pacelli and his concordat policy , Conrad <unk> , the new Archbishop of Freiburg , and the treaty was signed in August 1932 . Others followed : Austria ( 1933 ) , Germany ( 1933 ) , Yugoslavia ( 1935 ) and Portugal ( 1940 ) . The Lateran treaties with Italy ( 1929 ) were concluded before Pacelli became Secretary of State . Roman Catholicism had become the sole recognized religion ; the powerful democratic Catholic Popular Party , in many ways similar to the Centre Party in Germany , had been disbanded , and in place of political Catholicism the Holy See encouraged Catholic Action , ' an anaemic form of <unk> dominated religious rally @-@ rousing . ' It was permitted only so long as it developed " its activity outside every political party and in direct dependence upon the Church hierarchy for the dissemination and implementation of Catholic principles . ' Such concordats allowed the Catholic Church to organize youth groups , make ecclesiastical appointments , run schools , hospitals , and charities , or even conduct religious services . They also ensured that canon law would be recognized within some spheres ( e.g. , church decrees of nullity in the area of marriage ) . 
 As the decade began Pacelli wanted the Centre Party in Germany to turn away from the socialists . In the summer of 1931 he clashed with Catholic chancellor Heinrich <unk> , who frankly told Pacelli he believed that he " misunderstood the political situation in Germany and the real character of the Nazis . " Following <unk> 's resignation in May 1932 Pacelli , like the new Catholic chancellor Franz von Papen , wondered if the Centre Party should look to the Right for a coalition , " that would correspond to their principles ' . He made many diplomatic visits throughout Europe and the Americas , including an extensive visit to the United States in 1936 where he met President Franklin D. Roosevelt , who appointed a personal envoy — who did not require Senate confirmation — to the Holy See in December 1939 , re @-@ establishing a diplomatic tradition that had been broken since 1870 when the pope lost temporal power . 
 Pacelli presided as Papal Legate over the International Eucharistic Congress in Buenos Aires , Argentina from 10 – 14 October 1934 , and in Budapest from 25 – 30 May 1938 . At this time , anti @-@ semitic laws were in the process of being formulated in Hungary . Pacelli made reference to the Jews " whose lips curse [ Christ ] and whose hearts reject him even today " . This traditional adversarial relationship with Judaism would be reversed in Nostra aetate issued during the Second Vatican Council . According to Joseph Bottum , Pacelli in 1937 " warned A. W. <unk> , the American consul to Berlin , that Hitler was " an untrustworthy scoundrel and fundamentally wicked person " ; <unk> wrote that Pacelli " did not believe Hitler capable of moderation , and ... fully supported the German bishops in their anti @-@ Nazi stand . " A report written by Pacelli the following year for Roosevelt and filed with Ambassador Joseph Kennedy declared that the Church regarded compromise with the Third Reich as " out of the question " . 
 Historian Walter <unk> argued that Pacelli , as Cardinal Secretary of State , dissuaded Pope Pius XI — who was nearing death at the time — from condemning the Kristallnacht in November 1938 , when he was informed of it by the papal nuncio in Berlin . Likewise the draft encyclical Humani generis <unk> ( " On the Unity of the Human Race " ) , which was ready in September 1938 but , according to those responsible for an edition of the document and other sources , it was not forwarded to the Holy See by the Jesuit General <unk> <unk> . The draft encyclical contained an open and clear condemnation of colonialism , racial persecution and antisemitism . 
 Historians <unk> and <unk> have argued that Pacelli learned about its existence only after the death of Pius XI and did not promulgate it as Pope . He did use parts of it in his inaugural encyclical Summi Pontificatus , which he titled " On the Unity of Human Society . " His various positions on Church and policy issues during his tenure as Cardinal Secretary of State were made public by the Holy See in 1939 . Most noteworthy among the 50 speeches is his review of Church @-@ State issues in Budapest in 1938 . 
 = = = Reichskonkordat and Mit brennender Sorge = = = 
 The Reichskonkordat was an integral part of four concordats Pacelli concluded on behalf of the Vatican with German States . The state concordats were necessary because the German federalist Weimar constitution gave the German states authority in the area of education and culture and thus diminished the authority of the churches in these areas ; this diminution of church authority was a primary concern of the Vatican . As Bavarian Nuncio , Pacelli negotiated successfully with the Bavarian authorities in 1925 . He expected the concordat with Catholic Bavaria to be the model for the rest of Germany . Prussia showed interest in negotiations only after the Bavarian concordat . However , Pacelli obtained less favorable conditions for the Church in the Prussian concordat of 1929 , which excluded educational issues . A concordat with the German state of Baden was completed by Pacelli in 1932 , after he had moved to Rome . There he also negotiated a concordat with Austria in 1933 . A total of 16 concordats and treaties with European states had been concluded in the ten @-@ year period 1922 – 1932 . 
 The Reichskonkordat , signed on 20 July 1933 , between Germany and the Holy See , while thus a part of an overall Vatican policy , was controversial from its beginning . It remains the most important of Pacelli 's concordats . It is debated , not because of its content , which is still valid today , but because of its timing . A national concordat with Germany was one of Pacelli 's main objectives as secretary of state , because he had hoped to strengthen the legal position of the Church . Pacelli , who knew German conditions well , emphasized in particular protection for Catholic associations ( § 31 ) , freedom for education and Catholic schools , and freedom for publications . 
 As nuncio during the 1920s , he had made unsuccessful attempts to obtain German agreement for such a treaty , and between 1930 and 1933 he attempted to initiate negotiations with representatives of successive German governments , but the opposition of Protestant and Socialist parties , the instability of national governments and the care of the individual states to guard their autonomy thwarted this aim . In particular , the questions of denominational schools and pastoral work in the armed forces prevented any agreement on the national level , despite talks in the winter of 1932 . 
 Adolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor on 30 January 1933 and sought to gain international respectability and to remove internal opposition by representatives of the Church and the Catholic Centre Party . He sent his vice chancellor Franz von Papen , a Catholic nobleman and member of the Centre Party , to Rome to offer negotiations about a Reichskonkordat . On behalf of Pacelli , Prelate Ludwig Kaas , the outgoing chairman of the Centre Party , negotiated first drafts of the terms with Papen . The concordat was finally signed , by Pacelli for the Vatican and von Papen for Germany , on 20 July and ratified on 10 September 1933 . Father <unk> <unk> , senior Catholic chaplain at Berlin University wrote " The souls of well @-@ disposed people are in a turmoil as a result of the tyranny of the National Socialists , and I am merely stating a fact when I say that the authority of the bishops among innumerable Catholics and non @-@ Catholics has been shaken by the quasi @-@ approval of the National Socialist movement " . Bishop Preysing cautioned against compromise with the new regime , against those who saw the Nazi persecution of the church as an aberration that Hitler would correct . 
 Between 1933 and 1939 , Pacelli issued 55 protests of violations of the Reichskonkordat . Most notably , early in 1937 , Pacelli asked several German cardinals , including Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber to help him write a protest of Nazi violations of the Reichskonkordat ; this was to become Pius XI 's 1937 encyclical , Mit brennender Sorge . The encyclical was written in German and not the usual Latin of official Roman Catholic Church documents . Secretly distributed by an army of motorcyclists and read from every German Catholic Church pulpit on Palm Sunday , it condemned the paganism of the National Socialism ideology . Pius XI credited its creation and writing to Pacelli . It was the first official denunciation of Nazism made by any major organization and resulted in persecution of the Church by the infuriated Nazis who closed all the participating presses and " took numerous vindictive measures against the Church , including staging a long series of immorality trials of the Catholic clergy . " On 10 June 1941 , the pope commented on the problems of the Reichskonkordat in a letter to the Bishop of Passau , in Bavaria : " The history of the Reichskonkordat shows , that the other side lacked the most basic prerequisites to accept minimal freedoms and rights of the Church , without which the Church simply cannot live and operate , formal agreements notwithstanding " . 
 = = = Relation with the Media = = = 
 Cardinal Pacelli gave a lecture entitled " La Presse et L <unk> " at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas , Angelicum on April 17 , 1936 . 
 = = Papacy = = 
 = = = Election and coronation = = = 
 Pope Pius XI died on 10 February 1939 . Several historians have interpreted the conclave to choose his successor as facing a choice between a diplomatic or a spiritual candidate , and they view Pacelli 's diplomatic experience , especially with Germany , as one of the deciding factors in his election on 2 March 1939 , his 63rd birthday , after only one day of deliberation and three ballots . He was the first cardinal Secretary of State to be elected pope since Clement IX in 1667 . He was one of only two men known to have served as Camerlengo immediately prior to being elected as pope ( the other being Pope Leo XIII ) . According to rumours , he asked for another ballot to be taken to ensure the validity of his election . After his election was indeed confirmed , he chose the name Pius XII in honour of his immediate predecessor . 
 His coronation took place on 12 March 1939 . Upon being elected pope he was also formally the Grand Master of the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem , prefect of the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office , prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Oriental Churches and prefect of the Sacred <unk> Congregation . There was however a Cardinal @-@ Secretary to run these bodies on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis . 
 Pacelli took the same papal name as his predecessor , a title used exclusively by Italian Popes . He was quoted as saying , " I call myself Pius ; my whole life was under Popes with this name , but especially as a sign of gratitude towards Pius XI . " On 15 December 1937 , during his last consistory , Pius XI strongly hinted to the cardinals that he expected Pacelli to be his successor , saying " He is in your midst . " He had previously been quoted as saying : " When today the Pope dies , you 'll get another one tomorrow , because the Church continues . It would be a much bigger tragedy , if Cardinal Pacelli dies , because there is only one . I pray every day , God may send another one into one of our seminaries , but as of today , there is only one in this world . " 
 = = = Appointments = = = 
 After his election , he made Luigi Maglione his successor as Cardinal Secretary of State . Cardinal Maglione , a seasoned Vatican diplomat , had reestablished diplomatic relations with Switzerland and was for many years nuncio in Paris . Yet , Maglione did not exercise the influence of his predecessor Pacelli , who as Pope continued his close relation with <unk> Montini ( later Pope Paul VI ) and Domenico Tardini . After the death of Maglione in 1944 , Pius left the position open and named Tardini head of its foreign section and Montini head of the internal section . Tardini and Montini continued serving there until 1953 , when Pius XII decided to appoint them cardinals , an honor which both turned down . They were then later appointed to be Pro @-@ Secretary with the privilege to wear Episcopal Insignia . Tardini continued to be a close co @-@ worker of the Pope until the death of Pius XII , while Montini became archbishop of Milan , after the death of Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster . 
 Pius XII slowly eroded the Italian monopoly on the Roman Curia ; he employed German and Dutch Jesuit advisors , Robert Leiber , Augustin Bea , and Sebastian Tromp . He also supported the elevation of Americans such as Cardinal Francis Spellman from a minor to a major role in the Church . After World War II , Pius XII appointed more non @-@ Italians than any Pope before him . American appointees included Joseph P. Hurley as regent of the nunciature in Belgrade , Gerald P. O 'Hara as nuncio to Romania , and Monsignor Muench as nuncio to Germany . For the first time , numerous young Europeans , Asians and " Americans were trained in various congregations and secretariats within the Vatican for eventual service throughout the world . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Only twice in his pontificate did Pius XII hold a consistory to create new cardinals , in contrast to Pius XI , who had done so 17 times in as many years . Pius XII chose not to name new cardinals during World War II , and the number of cardinals shrank to 38 , with Dennis Joseph Dougherty of Philadelphia being the only living U.S. cardinal . The first occasion on 18 February 1946 — which has become known as the " Grand Consistory " — yielded the elevation of a record 32 new cardinals , almost 50 percent of the College of Cardinals and reaching the canonical limit of 70 cardinals . In the 1946 consistory , Pius XII , while maintaining the maximum size of the College of Cardinals at 70 , named cardinals from China , India , the Middle East and increased the number of Cardinals from the Americas , proportionally lessening the Italian influence . 
 In his second consistory on 12 January 1953 , it was expected that his closest co @-@ workers , <unk> . Domenico Tardini and Giovanni Montini would be elevated and Pius XII informed the assembled cardinals that both of them were originally on the top of his list , but they had turned down the offer , and were rewarded instead with other promotions . The two <unk> of 1946 and 1953 brought an end to over five hundred years of Italians constituting a majority of the College of Cardinals . 
 With few exceptions , Italian prelates accepted the changes positively ; there was no protest movement or open opposition to the internationalization efforts . 
 = = Church reforms = = 
 = = = Liturgy reforms = = = 
 In his encyclical Mediator Dei , Pius XII links liturgy with the last will of Jesus Christ . 
 But it is His will , that the worship He instituted and practiced during His life on earth shall continue ever afterwards without intermission . For he has not left mankind an orphan . He still offers us the support of His powerful , unfailing intercession , acting as our " advocate with the Father . " He aids us likewise through His Church , where He is present <unk> as the ages run their course : through the Church which He constituted " the pillar of truth " and dispenser of grace , and which by His sacrifice on the cross , He founded , consecrated and confirmed forever . 
 The Church has , therefore , according to Pius XII , a common aim with Christ himself , teaching all men the truth , and offering to God a pleasing and acceptable sacrifice . This way , the Church re @-@ establishes the unity between the Creator and his creatures . The sacrifice of the altar , being Christ 's own actions , convey and dispense divine grace from Christ to the members of the Mystical Body . 
 Bishop Carlos Duarte Costa , a long @-@ time critic of Pius XII 's policies during World War II and an opponent of clerical celibacy and the use of Latin as language of the liturgy , was excommunicated by Pius XII on 2 July 1945 . 
 The numerous reforms of Pius XII show two characteristics . Renewal and rediscovery of old liturgical traditions , such as the reintroduction of the Easter Vigil , and a more structured atmosphere within the Church buildings . 
 = = = Canon Law reforms = = = 
 <unk> authority and increased independence of the Uniate Churches were aimed at in the Canon Law / <unk> Iuris <unk> ( CIC ) reform . In its new constitutions , Eastern Patriarchs were made almost independent from Rome ( CIC Orientalis , 1957 ) Eastern marriage law ( CIC Orientalis , 1949 ) , civil law ( CIC Orientalis , 1950 ) , laws governing religious associations ( CIC Orientalis , 1952 ) property law ( CIC Orientalis , 1952 ) and other laws . These reforms and writings of Pius XII were intended to establish Eastern Orientals as equal parts of the mystical body of Christ , as explained in the encyclical Mystici corporis . 
 = = = Priests and religious = = = 
 With the Apostolic constitution Sedis <unk> , Pius XII added social sciences , sociology , psychology and social psychology , to the pastoral training of future priests . Pius XII emphasised the need to systematically analyze the psychological condition of candidates to the priesthood to ensure that they are capable of a life of celibacy and service . Pius XII added one year to the theological formation of future priests . He included a " pastoral year " , an introduction into the practice of parish work . 
 Pius XII wrote in <unk> <unk> that the call to constant interior reform and Christian heroism means to be above average , to be a living example of Christian virtue . The strict norms governing their lives are meant to make them models of Christian perfection for lay people . Bishops are encouraged to look at model saints like Boniface , and Pope Pius X. Priests were encouraged to be living examples of the love of Christ and his sacrifice . 
 = = Theology = = 
 Pius XII explained the Catholic faith in 41 encyclicals and almost 1000 messages and speeches during his long pontificate . Mediator Dei clarified membership and participation in the Church . The encyclical Divino <unk> Spiritu opened the doors for biblical research . His magisterium was far larger and is difficult to summarize . In numerous speeches Catholic teaching is related to various aspects of life , education , medicine , politics , war and peace , the life of saints , Mary , the Mother of God , things eternal and contemporary . Theologically , Pius XII specified the nature of the teaching authority of the Church . He also gave a new freedom to engage in theological investigations . 
 = = = Theological orientation = = = 
 Biblical Research 
 The encyclical Divino <unk> Spiritu , published in 1943 , emphasized the role of the Bible . Pius XII freed biblical research from previous limitations . He encouraged Christian theologians to revisit original versions of the Bible in Greek and Hebrew . Noting improvements in archaeology , the encyclical reversed Pope Leo XIII 's encyclical , which had only advocated going back to the original texts to resolve ambiguity in the Latin Vulgate . The encyclical demands a much better understanding of ancient Jewish history and traditions . It requires bishops throughout the Church to initiate biblical studies for lay people . The Pontiff also requests a reorientation of Catholic teaching and education , relying much more on sacred scriptures in sermons and religious instruction . 
 The role of theology 
 This theological investigative freedom does not , however , extend to all aspects of theology . According to Pius , theologians , employed by the Church , are assistants , to teach the official teachings of the Church and not their own private thoughts . They are free to engage in empirical research , which the Church generously supports , but in matters of morality and religion , they are subjected to the teaching office and authority of the Church , the Magisterium . " The most noble office of theology is to show how a doctrine defined by the Church is contained in the sources of revelation , ... in that sense in which it has been defined by the Church . " The deposit of faith is authentically interpreted not to each of the faithful , not even to theologians , but only to the teaching authority of the Church . 
 = = = Mariology and the Dogma of the Assumption = = = 
 World Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary 
 As a young boy and in later life , Pacelli was an ardent follower of the Virgin Mary . He was consecrated as a bishop on 13 May 1917 , the very first day of the apparitions of Our Lady of Fátima . He consecrated the world to the Immaculate Heart of Mary in 1942 , however , in the second " secret " of Our Lady of Fátima and the letters received from several bishops from Portugal based on the revelations of Lucia Santos in 1929 , Our Lady expressly , and specifically asked for the consecration of Russia , not " the world " . His remains were to be buried in the crypt of Saint Peter 's Basilica on the feast day of Our Lady of Fátima , 13 October 1958 . 
 The dogma of the Assumption of Our Lady 
 On 1 November 1950 , Pius XII defined the dogma of the Assumption of Mary , namely that she " having completed the course of her earthly life , was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory . " The dogma was preceded by the 1946 encyclical <unk> Virginis Mariae , which requested all Catholic bishops to express their opinion on a possible <unk> . On 8 September 1953 , the encyclical Fulgens corona announced a Marian year for 1954 , the centennial of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception . In the encyclical Ad <unk> <unk> he promulgated the <unk> of Mary feast . Mystici corporis summarizes his <unk> . 
 = = = Social teachings = = = 
 Medical theology 
 Pius XII delivered numerous speeches to medical professionals and researchers . He addressed doctors , nurses , midwives , to detail all aspects of rights and dignity of patients , medical responsibilities , moral implications of psychological illnesses and the uses of psycho <unk> . He also took on issues like the uses of medicine in terminally ill persons , medical lies in face of grave illness , and the rights of family members to make decisions against expert medical advice . Pope Pius XII often reconsidered previously accepted truth , thus he was first to determine that the use of pain medicine in terminally ill patients is justified , even if this may shorten the life of the patient , as long as life shortening is not the objective itself . 
 Family and sexuality 
 Pope Pius XII developed an extensive theology of the family , taking issue with family roles , sharing of household duties , education of children , conflict resolution , financial dilemmas , psychological problems , illness , taking care of older generations , unemployment , marital holiness and virtue , common prayer , religious discussions and more . He accepted the rhythm method as a moral form of family planning , although only in limited circumstances , within the context of family . 
 Theology and science 
 To Pius XII , science and religion were heavenly sisters , different manifestations of divine exactness , who could not possibly contradict each other over the long term Regarding their relation , his advisor Professor Robert Leiber wrote : " Pius XII was very careful not to close any doors prematurely . He was energetic on this point and regretted that in the case of Galileo " . 
 Evolution 
 In 1950 , Pius XII promulgated Humani generis which acknowledged that evolution might accurately describe the biological origins of human life , but at the same time criticized those who " imprudently and indiscreetly hold that evolution ... explains the origin of all things " . Catholics must believe that the human soul was created immediately by God . Since the soul is a spiritual substance it is not brought into being through transformation of matter , but directly by God , whence the special uniqueness of each person .. " Fifty years later , Pope John Paul II , stating that scientific evidence now seemed to favour the evolutionary theory , upheld the distinction of Pius XII regarding the human soul . " Even if the human body originates from pre @-@ existent living matter , the spiritual soul is spontaneously created by God . " 
 = = = <unk> , writings and speeches = = = 
