 Pius XII issued 41 encyclicals during his pontificate — more than all his successors in the past 50 years taken together — along with many other writings and speeches . The pontificate of Pius XII was the first in Vatican history that published papal speeches and addresses in vernacular language on a systematic basis . Until then , papal documents were issued mainly in Latin in Acta <unk> Sedis since 1909 . Because of the novelty of it all , and a feared occupation of the Vatican by the German Wehrmacht , not all documents exist today . In 1944 , a number of papal documents were burned or " walled in " , to avoid detection by the advancing German army . Insisting that all publications must be reviewed by him on a prior basis to avoid any misunderstanding , several speeches by Pius XII , who did not find sufficient time , were never published or appeared only once issued in the Vatican daily , <unk> Romano . 
 Several encyclicals addressed the Eastern Catholic Churches . Orientalis Ecclesiae was issued in 1944 on the 15th centenary of the death of Cyril of Alexandria , a saint common to Eastern Christianity and Latin Churches . Pius XII asks for prayer for better understanding and unification of the Churches . Orientales omnes <unk> , issued in 1945 on the 350th anniversary of the reunion , is a call to continued unity of the Ruthenian Church , threatened in its very existence by the authorities of the Soviet Union . <unk> Rex was issued in 1951 on the 1500th anniversary of the Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon . It included a call to oriental communities adhering to Miaphysite theology to return to the Catholic Church . Orientales <unk> was issued in 1952 and addressed to the Eastern Churches , protesting the continued Stalinist persecution of the Church . Several Apostolic Letters were sent to the bishops in the East . On 13 May 1956 , Pope Pius addressed all bishops of the Eastern Rite . Mary , the mother of God , was the subject of encyclical letters to the people of Russia in Fulgens corona , as well as a papal letter to the people of Russia . 
 Pius XII made two substantial interventions on the media . His 1955 discourse The Ideal Movie , originally given in two parts to members of the Italian cinema industry , offered a " sophisticated analysis of the film industry and the role of cinema in modern society . " Compared to his predecessor 's teaching , the encyclical Miranda <unk> ( 1957 ) shows a " high regard for the importance of cinema , television , and radio . " 
 = = = Feasts and devotions = = = 
 In 1958 , Pope Pius XII declared the Feast of the Holy Face of Jesus as Shrove Tuesday ( the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday ) for all Roman Catholics . The first medal of the Holy Face , produced by Sister Maria <unk> De Micheli , based on the image on the Shroud of Turin had been offered to Pius XII who approved the medal and the devotion based on it . The general devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus had been approved by Pope Leo XIII in 1885 before the image on the Turin Shroud had been photographed . 
 = = <unk> and <unk> = = 
 Pope Pius XII canonized numerous people , including Pope Pius X — " both were determined to stamp out , as far as possible , all traces of dangerous heterodoxy " — and Maria Goretti . He beatified Pope Innocent XI . The first <unk> were two women , the founder of a female order , Mary <unk> Pelletier , and a young housekeeper said to have stigmata , Gemma <unk> . Pelletier had a reputation for opening new ways for Catholic charities , helping people in difficulties with the law , who had been neglected by the system and the Church . <unk> was a woman in her twenties whose virtue became model by her canonization . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Pius XII lobbied world leaders to prevent the outbreak of World War II and then expressed his dismay that war had come in his October 1939 Summi Pontificatus encyclical . He followed a strict public policy of Vatican neutrality for the duration of the conflict mirroring that of Pope Benedict XV during World War I , but preached against selfish nationalism and , through the use of diplomacy , sermons and radio broadcasts and the creation of the Vatican Information Service , Pius worked to ameliorate the suffering of the victims of the war . He permitted local churches to assess and formulate responses to the Nazis , and instructed them to provide discreet aid to Jews . 
 In 1939 , Pius XII turned the Vatican into a centre of aid which he organized from various parts of the world . At the request of the Pope , an information office for prisoners of war and refugees operated in the Vatican under Giovanni Battista Montini , which in the years of its existence from 1939 until 1947 received almost 10 million ( 9 @,@ 891 @,@ 497 ) information requests and produced over 11 million ( 11 @,@ 293 @,@ 511 ) answers about missing persons . 
 McGoldrick ( 2012 ) concludes that during the war : 
 Pius XII had genuine affection for Germany , though not the criminal element into whose hands it had fallen ; he feared Bolshevism , an ideology dedicated to the annihilation of the church of which he was head , but his sympathies lay with the Allies and the democracies , especially the United States , into whose war economy he had transferred and invested the Vatican 's considerable assets . 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 = = = = Summi Pontificatus = = = = 
 Summi Pontificatus was the first papal encyclical issued by Pope Pius XII , in October 1939 and established some of the themes of his pontificate . During the drafting of the letter , the Second World War commenced with the German / Soviet invasion of Catholic Poland — the " dread tempest of war is already raging despite all Our efforts to avert it " . The papal letter denounced antisemitism , war , totalitarianism , the attack on Poland and the Nazi persecution of the Church . 
 Pius XII reiterated Church teaching on the " principle of equality " — with specific reference to Jews : " there is neither Gentile nor Jew , circumcision nor <unk> " . The forgetting of solidarity " imposed by our common origin and by the equality of rational nature in all men " was called " pernicious error " . Catholics everywhere were called upon to offer " compassion and help " to the victims of the war . The Pope declared determination to work to hasten the return of peace and trust in prayers for justice , love and mercy , to prevail against the scourge of war . The letter also decried the deaths of noncombatants . 
 Following themes addressed in Non <unk> <unk> ( 1931 ) ; Mit brennender Sorge ( 1937 ) and Divini redemptoris ( 1937 ) , Pius wrote against " anti @-@ Christian movements " and needing to bring back to the Church those who were following " a false standard ... misled by error , passion , temptation and prejudice , [ who ] have strayed away from faith in the true God " . Pius wrote of " Christians unfortunately more in name than in fact " having shown " cowardice " in the face of persecution by these creeds , and endorsed resistance : 
 Who among " the Soldiers of Christ " – ecclesiastic or layman – does not feel himself incited and spurred on to a greater vigilance , to a more determined resistance , by the sight of the ever @-@ increasing host of Christ 's enemies ; as he perceives the spokesmen of these tendencies deny or in practice neglect the vivifying truths and the values inherent in belief in God and in Christ ; as he perceives them wantonly break the Tables of God 's Commandments to substitute other tables and other standards stripped of the ethical content of the Revelation on Sinai , standards in which the spirit of the Sermon on the Mount and of the Cross has no place ? 
 Pius wrote of a persecuted Church and a time requiring " charity " for victims who had a " right " to compassion . Against the invasion of Poland and killing of civilians he wrote : 
 [ This is an ] " Hour of Darkness " ... in which the spirit of violence and of discord brings indescribable suffering on mankind ... The nations swept into the tragic whirlpool of war are perhaps as yet only at the " beginnings of sorrows " ... but even now there reigns in thousands of families death and desolation , lamentation and misery . The blood of countless human beings , even noncombatants , raises a piteous dirge over a nation such as Our dear Poland , which , for its fidelity to the Church , for its services in the defense of Christian civilization , written in indelible characters in the annals of history , has a right to the generous and brotherly sympathy of the whole world , while it awaits , relying on the powerful intercession of Mary , Help of Christians , the hour of a resurrection in harmony with the principles of justice and true peace . 
 With Italy not yet an ally of Hitler in the war , Italians were called upon to remain faithful to the Church . Pius avoided explicit denunciations of Hitlerism or Stalinism , establishing the " impartial " public tone which would become controversial in later assessment of his pontificate : " A full statement of the doctrinal stand to be taken in face of the errors of today , if necessary , can be put off to another time unless there is disturbance by calamitous external events ; for the moment We limit Ourselves to some fundamental observations . " 
 = = = = Invasion of Poland = = = = 
 In Summi Pontificatus , Pius expressed dismay at the killing of non @-@ combatants in the Nazi / Soviet invasion of Poland and expressed hope for the " resurrection " of that country . The Nazis and Soviets commenced a persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland . In April 1940 , the Vatican advised the US government that its efforts to provide humanitarian aid had been blocked by the Germans and that the Holy See had been forced to seek indirect channels through which to direct its aid . Michael Phayer , a critic of Pius XII , assesses his policy as having been to " refuse to censure " the " German " invasion and annexation of Poland . This , Phayer wrote , was regarded as a " betrayal " by many Polish Catholics and clergy , who saw his appointment of <unk> <unk> as the apostolic administrator for the Wartheland in May 1942 , a " implicit recognition " of the breakup of Poland ; the opinions of the Volksdeutsche , mostly German Catholic minorities living in occupied Poland , were more mixed . Phayer argues that Pius XII — both before and during his papacy — consistently " deferred to Germany at the expense of Poland " , and saw Germany — not Poland — as critical to " rebuilding a large Catholic presence in Central Europe " . In May 1942 , Kazimierz <unk> , Polish ambassador to the Vatican , complained that Pius had failed to condemn the recent wave of atrocities in Poland ; when Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione replied that the Vatican could not document individual atrocities , <unk> declared , " when something becomes notorious , proof is not required . " Although Pius XII received frequent reports about atrocities committed by and / or against Catholics , his knowledge was incomplete ; for example , he wept after the war on learning that Cardinal <unk> had banned German liturgical services in Poland . 
 There is well known case of Jewish Rabbis , who seeking support against the persecution of the Third Reich in the <unk> ( German @-@ occupied Polish zone ) complained to the representatives of the Church . An attempt to intervene with the German authorities resulted but not as was expected : Germany responded arresting rabbis and deporting them to the death camp . Drawing conclusions Church in Poland abandoned this kind of " help " with the words and concentrated on the organization of practical help in the underground , with huge international support orchestrated by Pope Pius XII and his Holy See . In consequence Pope was informed in details by both Polish Church people and Polish Underground about atrocities committed in Poland by German Third Reich . Those intelligence materials ware used by Pius XII on March 11 , 1940 during a formal audience of Von Ribbentrop ( Hitler 's foreign affairs adviser ) when Pope was " [ [ .. ] ] listing the date , place , and precise details of each crime " as described by Joseph L. Lichten after others . 
 = = = = Early actions to end conflict = = = = 
 With Poland overrun , but France and the Low Countries yet to be attacked , Pius continued to hope for a negotiated peace to prevent the spread of the conflict . The similarly minded US President Franklin D. Roosevelt re @-@ established American diplomatic relations with the Vatican after a seventy @-@ year hiatus and dispatched Myron C. Taylor as his personal representative . Pius warmly welcomed Roosevelt 's envoy and peace initiative , calling it " an exemplary act of fraternal and hearty solidarity ... in defence against the chilling breath of aggressive and deadly godless anti @-@ Christian tendencies " . American correspondence spoke of " parallel endeavours for peace and the alleviation of suffering " . Despite the early collapse of peace hopes , the Taylor mission continued at the Vatican . 
 According to Hitler biographer John Toland , following the November 1939 assassination attempt by Johann Georg <unk> , Hitler said Pius would have wanted the plot to succeed : " he 's no friend of mine " . In the spring of 1940 , a group of German generals seeking to overthrow Hitler and make peace with the British approached Pope Pius XII , who acted as an interlocutor between the British and the abortive plot . According to Toland , Munich lawyer , Joseph Muller , made a clandestine trip to Rome in October 1939 , met with Pius XII and found him willing to act as intermediary . The Vatican agreed to send a letter outlining the bases for peace with England and the participation of the Pope was used to try to persuade senior German Generals Halder and Brauchitsch to act against Hitler . 
 Pius warned the Allies of the planned German invasion of the Low Countries in 1940 . In Rome in 1942 , US envoy Myron C. Taylor , thanked the Holy See for the " forthright and heroic expressions of indignation made by Pope Pius XII when Germany invaded the Low countries " . After Germany invaded the Low Countries during 1940 , Pius XII sent expressions of sympathy to the Queen of the Netherlands , the King of Belgium , and the Grand Duchess of Luxembourg . When Mussolini learned of the warnings and the telegrams of sympathy , he took them as a personal affront and had his ambassador to the Vatican file an official protest , charging that Pius XII had taken sides against Italy 's ally Germany . Mussolini 's foreign minister claimed that Pius XII was " ready to let himself be deported to a concentration camp , rather than do anything against his conscience . " 
 When in 1940 , the Nazi Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop led the only senior Nazi delegation permitted an audience with Pius XII and asked why the Pope had sided with the Allies , Pius replied with a list of recent Nazi atrocities and religious persecutions committed against Christians and Jews , in Germany , and in Poland , leading the New York Times to headline its report " Jews Rights Defended " and write of " burning words he spoke to Herr Ribbentrop about religious persecution " . During the meeting , Ribbentrop suggested an overall settlement between the Vatican and the Reich government in exchange for Pius XII instructing the German bishops to refrain from political criticism of the German government , but no agreement was reached . 
 At a special mass at St Peters for the victims of the war , held in November 1940 , soon after the commencement of the London Blitz bombing by the Luftwaffe , Pius preached in his homily : " may the whirlwinds , that in the light of day or the dark of night , scatter terror , fire , destruction , and slaughter on helpless folk cease . May justice and charity on one side and on the other be in perfect balance , so that all injustice be repaired , the reign of right restored .... " Later he appealed to the Allies to spare Rome from aerial bombing , and visited wounded victims of the Allied bombing of 19 July 1943 . 
 = = = = Widening conflict = = = = 
 <unk> , Pius attempted to dissuade the Italian Dictator Benito Mussolini from joining Hitler in the war . In April 1941 , Pius XII granted a private audience to Ante Pavelić , the leader of the newly proclaimed Croatian state ( rather than the diplomatic audience Pavelić had wanted ) . Pius was criticised for his reception of Pavelić : an unattributed British Foreign Office memo on the subject described Pius as " the greatest moral coward of our age . " The Vatican did not officially recognise Pavelić 's regime . Pius XII did not publicly condemn the expulsions and forced conversions to Catholicism perpetrated on Serbs by Pavelić ; however , the Holy See did expressly repudiate the forced conversions in a memorandum dated 25 January 1942 , from the Vatican Secretariat of State to the Yugoslavian Legation . The pope was well @-@ informed of Catholic clergy involvement with the Ustaše regime , even possessing a list of <unk> who had " joined in the slaughter " , but decided against condemning the regime or taking action against the clergy involved , fearing that it would lead to schism in the Croatian church or undermine the formation of a future Croatian state . Pius XII elevated Aloysius Stepinac — a Croatian archbishop convicted of collaborating with the Ustaše — to the cardinalate . Phayer agrees that Stepinac 's was a " show trial " , but states " the charge that he [ Pius XII ] supported the Ustaša regime was , of course , true , as everyone knew " , and that " if Stepinac had responded to the charges against him , his defense would have inevitably unraveled , exposing the Vatican 's support of the genocidal Pavelić . " 
 In 1941 , Pius XII interpreted Divini <unk> , an encyclical of Pope Pius XI , which forbade Catholics to help communists , as not applying to military assistance to the Soviet Union . This interpretation assuaged American Roman Catholics who had previously opposed Lend @-@ Lease arrangements with the Soviet Union . 
 In March 1942 , Pius XII established diplomatic relations with the Japanese Empire and received ambassador Ken Harada , who remained in that position until the end of the war . 
 In June 1942 , diplomatic relations were established with the Nationalist government of China . This step was envisaged earlier , but delayed due to Japanese pressure to establish relations with the pro @-@ Japanese Wang Jingwei government . The first Chinese Minister to the Vatican , Hsieh Shou @-@ kang , was only able to arrive at the Vatican in January 1943 , due to difficulties of travel resulting from the war . He remained in that position until late 1946 . 
 The Pope employed the new technology of radio and a series of Christmas messages to preach against selfish nationalism and the evils of modern warfare and offer sympathy to the victims of the war . Pius XII 's 1942 Christmas address via Vatican Radio voiced concern at human rights abuses and the murder of innocents based on race . The majority of the speech spoke generally about human rights and civil society ; at the very end of the speech , Pius XII mentioned " the hundreds of thousands of persons who , without any fault on their part , sometimes only because of their nationality or race , have been consigned to death or to a slow decline " . According to Rittner , the speech remains a " lightning rod " in debates about Pius XII . The Nazis themselves responded to the speech by stating that it was " one long attack on everything we stand for .... He is clearly speaking on behalf of the Jews .... He is virtually accusing the German people of injustice toward the Jews , and makes himself the mouthpiece of the Jewish war criminals . " The New York Times wrote that " The voice of Pius XII is a lonely voice in the silence and darkness enveloping Europe this Christmas .... In calling for a ' real new order ' based on ' liberty , justice and love , ' ... the pope put himself squarely against Hitlerism . " Historian Michael Phayer claims , however , that " it is still not clear whose genocide or which genocide he was referring to " . Speaking on the 50th anniversary of Pius 's death in 2008 , the German Pope Benedict XVI recalled that the Pope 's voice had been " broken by emotion " as he " deplored the situation " with a " clear reference to the deportation and extermination of the Jews . " 
 Several authors have alleged a plot to kidnap Pius XII by the Nazis during their occupation of Rome in 1943 ( Vatican City itself was not occupied ) ; British historian Owen Chadwick and the Jesuit <unk> editor Rev. Robert Graham each concluded such claims were an invention of British wartime propagandists . However , in 2007 , subsequent to those accounts , Dan Kurzman published a work which he maintains establishes that the plot was a fact . 
 = = = = Final stages = = = = 
 As the war was approaching its end in 1945 , Pius advocated a lenient policy by the Allied leaders in an effort to prevent what he perceived to be the mistakes made at the end of World War I. In August 1944 , he met British Prime Minister Winston Churchill , who was visiting Rome . At their meeting , the Pope acknowledged the justice of punishing war criminals , but expressed a hope that the people of Italy would not be punished , preferring that they be made " full allies " in the remaining war effort . 
 = = = Holocaust = = = 
 During the Second World War , after Nazi Germany commenced its mass executions of Jews in occupied Soviet territory , Pius XII employed diplomacy to aid victims of the Holocaust and directed his Church to provide discreet aid to Jews . Upon his death in 1958 , among many Jewish tributes , the Chief Rabbi of Rome Elio <unk> , said : " Jews will always remember what the Catholic Church did for them by order of the Pope during the Second World War . When the war was raging , Pius spoke out very often to condemn the false race theory . " This is disputed by commentator John Cornwell , who in his book , Hitler 's Pope , argues that the pope was weak and vacillating in his approach to Nazism . Cornwell asserts that the pope did little to challenge the progressing holocaust of the Jews out of fear of provoking the Nazis into invading Vatican City . 
 In his 1939 Summi Pontificatus first papal encyclical , Pius reiterated Catholic teaching against racial persecution and antisemitism and affirmed the ethical principles of the " Revelation on Sinai " . At Christmas 1942 , once evidence of mass executions of Jews had emerged , Pius XII voiced concern at the murder of " hundreds of thousands " of " faultless " people because of their " nationality or race " and intervened to attempt to block Nazi deportations of Jews in various countries . Upon his death in 1958 , Pius was praised emphatically by the Israeli Foreign Minister , and other world leaders . But his insistence on Vatican neutrality and avoidance of naming the Nazis as the evildoers of the conflict became the foundation for contemporary and later criticisms from some quarters . His strongest public condemnation of genocide was considered inadequate by the Allied Powers , while the Nazis viewed him as an Allied sympathizer who had dishonoured his policy of Vatican neutrality . Hitler biographer John Toland , while scathing of Pius 's cautious public comments in relation to the mistreatment of Jews , concluded that the Allies ' own record of action against the Holocaust was " shameful " , while " The Church , under the Pope 's guidance , had already saved the lives of more Jews than all other churches , religious institutions and rescue organizations combined ... " . 
 In 1939 , the newly elected Pope Pius XII appointed several prominent Jewish scholars to posts at the Vatican after they had been dismissed from Italian universities under Fascist leader Benito Mussolini 's racial laws . In 1939 , the Pope employed a Jewish cartographer , Roberto Almagia , to work on old maps in the Vatican library . Almagia had been at the University of Rome since 1915 but was dismissed after Benito Mussolini 's antisemitic legislation of 1938 . The Pope 's appointment of two Jews to the Vatican Academy of Science as well as the hiring of Almagia were reported by The New York Times in the editions of 11 November 1939 and 10 January 1940 . 
 Pius later engineered an agreement — formally approved on 23 June 1939 — with Brazilian President Getúlio Vargas to issue 3 @,@ 000 visas to " non @-@ Aryan Catholics " . However , over the next 18 months Brazil 's Conselho de <unk> e <unk> ( CIC ) continued to tighten the restrictions on their issuance , including requiring a baptismal certificate dated before 1933 , a substantial monetary transfer to the Banco do Brasil , and approval by the Brazilian Propaganda Office in Berlin . The program was cancelled 14 months later , after fewer than 1 @,@ 000 visas had been issued , amid suspicions of " improper conduct " ( i.e. , continuing to practice Judaism ) among those who had received visas . 
 In April 1939 , after the submission of Charles Maurras and the intervention of the Carmel of Lisieux , Pius XII ended his predecessor 's ban on Action Française , an organisation described by some authors as virulently antisemitic and anti @-@ Communist . 
 Following the German / Soviet invasion of Poland , the Pope 's first encyclical , Summi Pontificatus reiterated Catholic teaching against racial persecution and rejected antisemitism , quoting scripture singling out the " principle of equality " — with specific reference to Jews : " there is neither Gentile nor Jew , circumcision nor <unk> " and direct affirmation of the Jewish Revelation on Sinai . The forgetting of solidarity " imposed by our common origin and by the equality of rational nature in all men " was called " pernicious error " . Catholics everywhere were called upon to offer " compassion and help " to the victims of the war . The Pope declared determination to work to hasten the return of peace and trust in prayers for justice , love and mercy , to prevail against the scourge of war . The letter also decried the deaths of noncombatants . 
 Cardinal Secretary of State Luigi Maglione received a request from Chief Rabbi of Palestine Isaac Herzog in the spring of 1940 to intercede on behalf of Lithuanian Jews about to be deported to Germany . Pius called Ribbentrop on 11 March , repeatedly protesting against the treatment of Jews . In 1940 , Pius asked members of the clergy , on Vatican letterhead , to do whatever they could on behalf of interned Jews . 
 In 1941 , Cardinal Theodor <unk> of Vienna informed Pius of Jewish deportations in Vienna . Later that year , when asked by French Marshal Philippe Pétain if the Vatican objected to antisemitic laws , Pius responded that the church condemned antisemitism , but would not comment on specific rules . Similarly , when Philippe Pétain 's regime adopted the " Jewish statutes " , the Vichy ambassador to the Vatican , Léon Bérard ( a French politician ) , was told that the legislation did not conflict with Catholic teachings . Valerio Valeri , the nuncio to France was " embarrassed " when he learned of this publicly from Pétain and personally checked the information with Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione who confirmed the Vatican 's position . In June 1942 , Pius XII personally protested against the mass deportations of Jews from France , ordering the papal nuncio to protest to Pétain against " the inhuman arrests and deportations of Jews " . In September 1941 , Pius XII objected to a Slovak Jewish Code , which , unlike the earlier Vichy codes , prohibited intermarriage between Jews and non @-@ Jews . In October 1941 , Harold Tittmann , a US delegate to the Vatican , asked the pope to condemn the atrocities against Jews ; Pius replied that the Vatican wished to remain " neutral , " reiterating the neutrality policy which Pius invoked as early as September 1940 . 
 In 1942 , the Slovak chargé d 'affaires told Pius that Slovak Jews were being sent to concentration camps . On 11 March 1942 , several days before the first transport was due to leave , the chargé d 'affaires in Bratislava reported to the Vatican : " I have been assured that this atrocious plan is the <unk> of ... Prime Minister ( <unk> ) , who confirmed the plan ... he dared to tell me — he who makes such a show of his Catholicism — that he saw nothing inhuman or un @-@ Christian in it ... the deportation of 80 @,@ 000 persons to Poland , is equivalent to condemning a great number of them to certain death . " The Vatican protested to the Slovak government that it " deplore ( s ) these ... measures which gravely hurt the natural human rights of persons , merely because of their race . " 
 On 18 September 1942 , Pius XII received a letter from Monsignor Montini ( future Pope Paul VI ) , saying , " the massacres of the Jews reach frightening proportions and forms . " Later that month , Myron Taylor , U.S. representative to the Vatican , warned Pius that the Vatican 's " moral prestige " was being injured by silence on European atrocities , a warning which was echoed simultaneously by representatives from the United Kingdom , Brazil , Uruguay , Belgium , and Poland . Myron C. Taylor passed a US Government memorandum to Pius on 26 September 1942 , outlining intelligence received from the Jewish Agency for Palestine which said that Jews from across the Nazi Empire were being systematically " butchered " . Taylor asked if the Vatican might have any information which might " tend to confirm the reports " , and if so , what the Pope might be able to do to influence public opinion against the " barbarities " . Cardinal Maglione handed Harold Tittmann a response to the letter on 10 October . The note thanked Washington for passing on the intelligence , and confirmed that reports of severe measures against the Jews had reached the Vatican from other sources , though it had not been possible to " verify their accuracy " . Nevertheless , " every opportunity is being taken by the Holy See , however , to mitigate the suffering of these unfortunate people " . In December 1942 , when Tittmann asked Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione if Pius would issue a proclamation similar to the Allied declaration " German Policy of Extermination of the Jewish Race " , Maglione replied that the Vatican was " unable to denounce publicly particular atrocities . " Pius XII directly explained to <unk> that he could not name the Nazis without at the same time mentioning the Bolsheviks . 
 Following the Nazi / Soviet invasion of Poland , Pius XII 's Summi Pontificatus called for the sympathy of the whole world towards Poland , where " the blood of countless human beings , even noncombatants " was being spilled . Pius never publicly condemned the Nazi massacre of 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 Poles , overwhelmingly Roman Catholic ( including 2 @,@ 935 members of the Catholic clergy ) , In late 1942 , Pius XII advised German and Hungarian bishops to speak out against the massacres on the Eastern Front . In his 1942 Christmas Eve message , he expressed concern for " those hundreds of thousands , who ... sometimes only by reason of their nationality or race , are marked down for death or progressive extinction . On 7 April 1943 , Msgr. Tardini , one of Pius XII 's closest advisors , advised Pius XII that it would be politically advantageous after the war to take steps to help Slovak Jews . 
 In January 1943 , Pius XII declined to denounce publicly the Nazi discrimination against the Jews , following requests to do so from Władysław Raczkiewicz , president of the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile , and Bishop Konrad von Preysing of Berlin . According to Toland , in June 1943 , Pius XII addressed the issue of mistreatment of Jews at a conference of the Sacred College of Cardinals and said : " Every word We address to the competent authority on this subject , and all Our public utterances have to be carefully weighed and measured by Us in the interests of the victims themselves , lest , contrary to Our intentions , We make their situation worse and harder to bear " . 
 On 26 September 1943 , following the German occupation of northern Italy , Nazi officials gave Jewish leaders in Rome 36 hours to produce 50 kilograms ( 110 lb ) of gold ( or the equivalent ) threatening to take 300 hostages . Then Chief Rabbi of Rome Israel <unk> recounts in his memoir that he was selected to go to the Vatican and seek help . The Vatican offered to loan 15 kilos , but the offer proved unnecessary when the Jews received an extension . Soon afterward , when deportations from Italy were imminent , 477 Jews were hidden in the Vatican itself and another 4 @,@ 238 were protected in Roman monasteries and convents . Eighty percent of Roman Jews were saved from deportation . Phayer argues that the German diplomats in Rome were the " initiators of the effort to save the city 's Jews " , but holds that Pius XII " cooperated in this attempt at rescue " , while agreeing with Zuccotti that the pope " did not give orders " for any Roman Catholic institution to hide Jews . 
 On 30 April 1943 , Pius XII wrote to Bishop Graf von Preysing of Berlin to say : " We give to the pastors who are working on the local level the duty of determining if and to what degree the danger of reprisals and of various forms of oppression occasioned by episcopal declarations ... ad <unk> mala <unk> ( to avoid worse ) ... seem to advise caution . Here lies one of the reasons , why We impose self @-@ restraint on Ourselves in our speeches ; the experience , that we made in 1942 with papal addresses , which We authorized to be forwarded to the Believers , justifies our opinion , as far as We see .... The Holy See has done whatever was in its power , with charitable , financial and moral assistance . To say nothing of the substantial sums which we spent in American money for the fares of immigrants . " 
 On 28 October 1943 , Ernst von Weizsäcker , the German Ambassador to the Vatican , telegraphed Berlin that " ... the Pope has not yet let himself be persuaded to make an official condemnation of the deportation of the Roman Jews .... Since it is currently thought that the Germans will take no further steps against the Jews in Rome , the question of our relations with the Vatican may be considered closed . " 
 In March 1944 , through the papal nuncio in Budapest , Angelo Rotta , the pope urged the Hungarian government to moderate its treatment of the Jews . The pope ordered Rotta and other papal legates to hide and shelter Jews . These protests , along with others from the King of Sweden , the International Red Cross , the United States , and Britain led to the cessation of deportations on 8 July 1944 . Also in 1944 , Pius appealed to 13 Latin American governments to accept " emergency passports " , although it also took the intervention of the U.S. State Department for those countries to honor the documents . The Kaltenbrunner Report to Hitler , dated 29 November 1944 , against the backdrop of the 20 July 1944 Plot to assassinate Hitler , states that the Pope was somehow a conspirator , specifically naming Eugenio Pacelli ( Pope Pius XII ) , as being a party in the attempt . 
 Jewish orphans controversy 
 In 2005 , Corriere della Sera published a document dated 20 November 1946 on the subject of Jewish children baptized in war @-@ time France . The document ordered that baptized children , if orphaned , should be kept in Catholic custody and stated that the decision " has been approved by the Holy Father " . Nuncio Angelo Roncalli ( who became Pope John XXIII , and was recognized by Yad Vashem as Righteous Among the Nations ) ignored this directive . Abe Foxman , the national director of the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) , who had himself been baptized as a child and had undergone a custody battle afterwards , called for an immediate freeze on Pius 's beatification process until the relevant Vatican Secret Archives and baptismal records were opened . Two Italian scholars , Matteo Luigi Napolitano and Andrea <unk> , confirmed that the memorandum was genuine although the reporting by the Corriere della Sera was misleading , as the document had originated in the French Catholic Church archives rather than the Vatican archives and strictly concerned itself with children without living blood relatives who were supposed to be handed over to Jewish organizations . 
 = = Post @-@ World War II = = 
 After World War II Pope Pius XII focused on material aid to war @-@ torn Europe , an internal internationalization of the Roman Catholic Church , and the development of its worldwide diplomatic relations . His encyclicals , Evangelii <unk> and Fidei <unk> , issued on 2 June 1951 and 21 April 1957 , respectively , increased the local decision @-@ making of Catholic missions , many of which became independent dioceses . Pius XII demanded recognition of local cultures as fully equal to European culture . Though his language retained old conceptions – Africa , for example , merited special attention since the church there worked ' to forward her work among the heathen multitudes ' - in 1956 he expressed solidarity with the ' non @-@ Europeans who aspire to full political independence . ' Continuing the line of his predecessors , Pius XII supported the establishment of local administration in Church affairs : in 1950 , the hierarchy of Western Africa became independent ; in 1951 , Southern Africa ; and in 1953 , British East Africa . Finland , Burma and French Africa became independent dioceses in 1955 . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the war , Pius XII elevated a number of high @-@ profile resistors of Nazism to the College of Cardinals in 1946 , among them the German Bishops Joseph Frings of Cologne , August von Galen of Münster and Konrad von Preysing of Berlin . From elsewhere in the liberated Nazi Empire Pius selected other resistors : Dutch Archbishop Johannes de Jong ; Hungarian Bishop József Mindszenty ; Polish Archbishop Adam Stefan Sapieha ; and French Archbishop Jules @-@ <unk> <unk> . In 1946 and 1953 , respectively , he named as cardinals Thomas Tien of China and Valerian Gracias of India – the first indigenous Catholics of their respective nations to sit in the College of Cardinals . Italian Papal diplomat Angelo Roncalli ( later Pope John XXIII ) and Polish Archbishop Stefan Wyszyński were others among those elevated in 1953 . 
 A German contingent dominated his inner circle at this period – the German Jesuits Robert Leiber , Wilhelm <unk> and Ivo <unk> . His personal confessor Augustin Bea was a German Jesuit and Mother Pascalina Lehnert and the other German speaking sisters of the papal household added to this element . The American bishop Aloisius Muench wrote in November 1948 that Pius XII was ' more interested in affairs of the Church in Germany than in any other part of the Church ' and resolved to make the postwar German crisis a top priority - ' its refugee crisis , poverty , hunger and disease , the fate of prisoners @-@ of @-@ war and accused war criminals , the disruption to the internal organization and communal life of German Catholicism , and Germany 's uncertain political <unk> 
 He was concerned too about the potential spread of Communism in Western Europe and the Americas . As he sought to secure resources from abroad to aid post @-@ war recovery , believing deprivation fuelled political agitation , so he also sought to influence Italian politics . In January 1948 , Luigi Gedda , of Italy 's Catholic Action movement , was called to the Vatican as the campaign for the first parliament of Italy 's post @-@ fascist republic was underway . The Communists and Socialists seemed headed for victory and Pius XII wanted Catholic Action , an organization of Catholic laity , to mobilise the Catholic vote against parties of the Left . In July 1949 he approved a controversial move by the Holy Office to threaten with excommunication anyone with known Communist affiliations . A group of Jesuits around the journal La <unk> Cattolica , active in Vatican circles , further spread alarm that fifth columns of Soviet Communism were active in Western Europe poised to exploit popular discontent to aid Soviet expansionism . 
 Pius XII was rather distrustful of Alcide de Gasperi and Italy 's Christian Democrats , considering the party indecisive and fractious – reformist currents within it particularly , which tended to the moderate Left – represented by the Sicilian priest Luigi <unk> for example – he considered too accommodating to the Left . On the eve of the 1952 local elections in Rome , in which again the Communist and Socialist parties threatened to win out , he used informal connections to make his views known . Pius XII stated that the war against communism was a holy war and excommunicated members of the Communist Party . Having decided to encourage the Christian Democrats to consider a political alliance with the Rightist parties as part of an anti @-@ left coalition , he asked the Jesuit , Father Riccardo Lombardi , to speak with de Gasperi to consider such an alliance – an electoral alliance with those even of monarchist and neo @-@ fascist tendencies -including the Italian Social Movement . Adopting a domino theory he warned that , " If the Communists win in Rome , in Italy , it will cast a shadow on the entire world : France would become Communist , and then Spain and then all of Europe ' . de Gasperi rejected the idea as politically dangerous to the long term fortunes of a centrist Catholic party . 
 = = Later life , illness and death = = 
 = = = Late years of Pope Pius XII = = = 
 The last years of the pontificate of Pius XII began in late 1954 with a long illness , during which he considered abdication . Afterwards , changes in his work habit became noticeable . The Pope avoided long ceremonies , <unk> and <unk> and displayed hesitancy in personnel matters . He found it increasingly difficult to chastise subordinates and appointees such as his physician , Riccardo Galeazzi @-@ Lisi , who , after numerous indiscretions was excluded from Papal service for the last years , but , keeping his title , was able to enter the papal apartments to make photos of the dying Pope , which he sold to French magazines . Pius underwent three courses of cellular rejuvenation treatment administered by Dr. Paul <unk> , the most important in 1954 when Pacelli was gravely ill . Side @-@ effects of the treatment included hallucinations , from which the Pope suffered in his last years . " These years were also plagued by horrific nightmares . Pacelli 's blood @-@ curdling screams could be heard throughout the papal apartments . " 
 Pius XII often elevated young priests as bishops , such as Julius <unk> ( 35 years ) and Karol <unk> ( later Pope John Paul II , 38 years ) , one of his last appointees in 1958 . He took a firm stand against pastoral experiments , such as " worker @-@ priests " , who worked full @-@ time in factories and joined political parties and unions . He continued to defend the theological tradition of <unk> as worthy of continued reform , and as superior to modern trends such as phenomenology or existentialism . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 Following his 1954 illness , Pope Pius XII still addressed lay people and groups about a wide range of topics . Sometimes he answered specific moral questions , which were addressed to him . To professional associations he explained specific occupational ethics in light of Church teachings . Robert Leiber helped him occasionally with his speeches and publications . Cardinal Augustine Bea SJ was his personal confessor . Sister Pasqualina was for forty years his " housekeeper , muse and lifelong companion " . 
 Pius XII died on 9 October 1958 of acute heart failure brought on by a sudden myocardial infarction in Castel Gandolfo , the papal summer residence . His doctor <unk> said afterwards : " The Holy Father did not die because of any specific illness . He was completely exhausted . He was overworked beyond limit . His heart was healthy , his lungs were good . He could have lived another 20 years , had he spared himself . " 
 = = = <unk> embalming = = = 
 Pius XII 's physician , Dr. Riccardo Galeazzi @-@ Lisi , reported that the pontiff 's body was embalmed in the room where he died using a novel process invented by Dr. Oreste Nuzzi . 
 Pope Pius XII did not want the vital organs removed from his body , demanding instead that it be kept in the same condition " in which God created it " . According to Galeazzi @-@ Lisi , this was the reason why he and Professor Nuzzi , an embalmer from Naples , used a novel embalming approach invented by Nuzzi . In a controversial press conference , Galeazzi @-@ Lisi described in great detail the embalming of the body of the late pontiff . He claimed to have used the same system of oils and resins with which the body of Jesus Christ was preserved . 
 Galeazzi @-@ Lisi asserted that the new process would " preserve the body indefinitely in its natural state " However , whatever chance the new embalming process had of <unk> preserving the body was obliterated by intense heat in Castel Gandolfo during the embalming process . As a result , the body decomposed rapidly and the viewing of the faithful had to be terminated abruptly . Galeazzi @-@ Lisi reported that heat in the halls , where the body of the late Pope lay in state , caused chemical reactions which required it to be treated twice after the original preparation . Swiss Guards stationed around Pius XII 's body were reported to have become ill during their vigil . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 His funeral procession into Rome was the largest congregation of Romans as of that date . Romans mourned " their " pope , who was born in their own city , especially as a hero in the time of war . Cardinal Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli ( later to be Pope John XXIII ) wrote in his diary on 11 October 1958 that probably no Roman emperor had enjoyed such a triumph , which he viewed as a reflection of the spiritual majesty and religious dignity of the late Pius XII . 
 The late pope lay in state on a bier surrounded by four Swiss Guards , and was then placed in the coffin for burial . Pius XII was buried in the grottos beneath St. Peter 's Basilica in a simple tomb in a small chapel . 
 = = Cause for canonisation = = 
 The Testament of Pope Pius XII was published immediately after his death . Pope Pius XII 's cause of canonization was opened on 18 November 1965 by Pope Paul VI during the final session of the Second Vatican Council . In May 2007 , the congregation recommended that Pius XII should be declared Venerable . Pope Benedict XVI did so on 19 December 2009 , simultaneously making the same declaration in regard to Pope John Paul II . 
 For Venerable status The Congregation for the Causes of Saints certifies the " heroic virtues " of the candidate . Making Pius XII Venerable met with various responses , most centred on the papal words and actions during World War II . Benedict 's signature on the Decree of Heroic Virtue was regarded by some as a public relations blunder , though acceptance of Pius XII as a saviour of Europe 's Jews is regarded as ' proof of fidelity to the Church , the pope and the Tradition ' by neoconservative Catholic groups . On the other hand , Rabbi Marvin Hier , founder and dean at the Simon Wiesenthal Center said , " ... there would be a great distortion of history " if Pius XII were canonized . Rabbi Jeremy Lawrence , the head of Sydney 's Great Synagogue , said : " How can one venerate a man who ... seemed to give his passive permission to the Nazis as the Jews were prised from his doorstep in Rome ? " A counterpoint to such comments is the case of Israel <unk> , the Chief Rabbi in Rome from 1939 to 1945 , who became a Catholic and took the name of Eugenio in honor of Pius XII . 
 Father Peter <unk> , the relator of the Pius XII 's cause for canonization , claims that there are already several miracles attributable to Pius XII , including " one quite extraordinary one " . 
 On 1 August 2013 , an anonymous " source who works for the Congregation for the Causes of Saints " said Pope Francis is considering canonization without a miracle , " us [ ing ] the formula of <unk> <unk> " . 
 Pope Francis also announced his intention in January 2014 to open the Vatican Secret Archives to scholars so that an evaluation to the late pontiff 's role in the war can be determined before canonization . This has been met with praise by the Jewish community . However , it was said that it could take up to a year to gather all the documents and then analyze them . 
 On 26 May 2014 on his way back from the Holy Land to Vatican City , Pope Francis stated that the late pope would not be beatified because the cause has stalled . The pope said that he checked the progress of the cause for the controversial pope and said that there were no miracles attributed to his intercession which was the main reason that the cause halted . 
 Father Peter <unk> stated , on a 12 January 2016 documentary on the late pope , that there was consultation of the Vatican Secret Archives which were carried out in secret ; in short it means that there are no controversies surrounding the late pontiff that could impede the potential beatification . In that same documentary , the cause 's vice @-@ <unk> Marc <unk> stated that several miracles attributed to the late pope are reported to the postulation every year but the individuals ' related to the healings do not come forward to enact diocesan proceedings of investigation . <unk> explained that this was the reason that the cause has stalled in the past as none have come forward to assist the postulation in their investigations . 
 = = = Potential miracle = = = 
 Reports from 2014 indicate a potential miracle from the United States of America attributed to the intercession of the late pope that was reported to the postulation . The miracle pertains to a male plagued with severe influenza and pneumonia that could have proven to be fatal ; the individual was said to have been healed in full after a <unk> to Pius XII . 
 = = Views , interpretations and scholarship = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 During the war , Time magazine credited Pius XII and the Catholic Church for " fighting totalitarianism more knowingly , devoutly and authoritatively , and for a longer time , than any other organised power " . During the war he was also praised editorially by the New York Times for opposing Nazi anti @-@ Semitism and aggression . According to Paul O 'Shea , " The Nazis demonised the Pope as the agent of international Jewry ; the Americans and British were continually frustrated because he would not condemn Nazi aggression ; and the Russians accused him of being an agent of Fascism and the Nazis . " 
 On 21 September 1945 , the general secretary of the World Jewish Council , Dr. Leon <unk> , presented an amount of money to the pope , " in recognition of the work of the Holy See in rescuing Jews from Fascist and Nazi persecutions . " After the war , in the autumn of 1945 , Harry Greenstein from Baltimore , a close friend of Chief Rabbi Herzog of Jerusalem , told Pius XII how grateful Jews were for all he had done for them . " My only regret " , the pope replied , " is not to have been able to save a greater number of Jews . " 
 Pius XII was also criticised during his lifetime . Leon <unk> wrote in 1950 that Pius XII had been a tacit supporter of Vichy France 's anti @-@ Semitic laws , calling him " less forthright " than Pope Pius XI either out of " <unk> " or the hope that Hitler would defeat communist Russia . 
 After Pius XII 's death on 9 October 1958 many Jewish organisations and newspapers around the world paid tribute to his legacy . At the United Nations , Golda Meir , Israel 's Foreign Minister , said , " When fearful martyrdom came to our people in the decade of Nazi terror , the voice of the Pope was raised for the victims . The life of our times was enriched by a voice speaking out on the great moral truths above the tumult of daily conflict . " The Jewish Chronicle ( London ) stated on 10 October that " Adherents of all creeds and parties will recall how Pius XII faced the responsibilities of his exalted office with courage and devotion . Before , during , and after the Second World War , he constantly preached the message of peace . Confronted by the monstrous cruelties of Nazism , Fascism and Communism , he repeatedly proclaimed the virtues of humanity and compassion " . In the Canadian Jewish Chronicle ( 17 October ) , Rabbi J. Stern stated that Pius XII " made it possible for thousands of Jewish victims of Nazism and Fascism to be hidden away ... " In the 6 November edition of the Jewish Post in Winnipeg , William Zukerman , the former American Hebrew columnist , wrote that no other leader " did more to help the Jews in their hour of greatest tragedy , during the Nazi occupation of Europe , than the late Pope " . Other prominent Jewish figures , such as Israeli Prime Minister Moshe Sharett and Chief Rabbi Isaac Herzog expressed their public gratitude to Pius XII . 
 = = = Early historical accounts = = = 
 Some early works echoed the favourable sentiments of the war period , including Polish historian Oskar Halecki 's Pius XII : Eugenio Pacelli : Pope of peace ( 1954 ) and <unk> <unk> 's Portrait of Pius XII ( 1949 ) . 
 Pinchas Lapide , a Jewish theologian and Israeli diplomat to Milan in the 1960s , estimated controversially in Three Popes and the Jews that Pius " was instrumental in saving at least 700 @,@ 000 but probably as many as 860 @,@ 000 Jews from certain death at Nazi hands . " Some historians have questioned this often cited number , which Lapide reached by " deducting all reasonable claims of rescue " by non @-@ Catholics from the total number of European Jews surviving the Holocaust . A Roman Catholic scholar , Kevin Madigan , has interpreted this and other praise from prominent Jewish leaders , including Golda Meir , as less than sincere , an attempt to secure Vatican recognition of the State of Israel . 
 = = = The Deputy = = = 
 In 1963 , Rolf Hochhuth 's controversial drama Der <unk> . Ein <unk> <unk> ( The Deputy , a Christian tragedy , released in English in 1964 ) portrayed Pope Pius XII as a hypocrite who remained silent about the Holocaust . The depiction is described as lacking " credible substantiation " by the Encyclopædia Britannica . Books such as Dr. Joseph Lichten 's A Question of Judgment ( 1963 ) , written in response to The Deputy , defended Pius XII 's actions during the war . Lichten labelled any criticism of the pope 's actions during World War II as " a stupefying paradox " and said , " no one who reads the record of Pius XII 's actions on behalf of Jews can subscribe to Hochhuth 's accusation . " Critical scholarly works like Guenter Lewy 's controversial The Catholic Church and Nazi Germany ( 1964 ) also followed the publication of The Deputy . Lewy 's conclusion was that " the Pope and his advisers — influenced by the long tradition of moderate anti @-@ Semitism so widely accepted in Vatican circles — did not view the plight of the Jews with a real sense of urgency and moral outrage . For this assertion no documentation is possible , but it is a conclusion difficult to avoid " . In 2002 the play was adapted into the film , Amen .. An article on La <unk> Cattolica in March 2009 indicated that the accusations that Hochhuth 's play made widely known originated not among Jews but in the Communist bloc . It was on Moscow Radio , on 2 June 1945 , that the first accusation directly against Pius XII of refusing to speak out against the exterminations in Nazi concentration camps . It was also the first medium to call him " Hitler 's Pope " . 
 A former high @-@ ranking KGB officer , Securitate General Ion Mihai <unk> stated in 2007 that Hochhuth 's play and numerous publications attacking Pius XII as a Nazi sympathizer were fabrications that were part of a KGB and Eastern bloc Marxist secret services disinformation campaign , named Seat 12 , to discredit the moral authority of the Church and Christianity in the west . <unk> indicated that he was involved in contacting eastern bloc agents close the Vatican in order to fabricate the story to be used for the attack against the wartime pope . 
 = = = Actes = = = 
 In the aftermath of the controversy surrounding The Deputy , in 1964 , Pope Paul VI authorized Jesuit scholars to access the Vatican State Department Archives , which are normally not opened for seventy @-@ five years . Original documents in French and Italian , Actes et documents du Saint <unk> <unk> à la Seconde Guerre Mondiale , were published in eleven volumes between 1965 and 1981 . The volumes were edited by Four Jesuits : Angelo Martini , Burkhart Schneider , Robert Graham and Pierre Blet . Blet also published a summary of the eleven volumes . 
 = = = Hitler 's Pope and The Myth of Hitler 's Pope = = = 
 In 1999 , British author John Cornwell 's Hitler 's Pope criticised Pius XII for his actions and <unk> during the Holocaust . Cornwell argued that Pius XII subordinated opposition to the Nazis to his goal of increasing and centralising the power of the Papacy . Further , Cornwell accused Pius XII of anti @-@ Semitism . The Encyclopædia Britannica described Cornwell 's depiction of Pius XII as anti @-@ Semitic as lacking " credible substantiation " . Kenneth L. Woodward stated in his review in Newsweek that " errors of fact and ignorance of context appear on almost every page . " Paul O 'Shea summarized the work by saying it was " disappointing because of its many inaccuracies , selective use of sources , and claims that do not bear any scrutiny . However , [ Cornwell ] has rendered a service by insisting Pacelli be re @-@ examined thoroughly and placed firmly within the context of his times " . Five years after the publication of Hitler 's Pope , Cornwell stated : " I would now argue , in the light of the debates and evidence following Hitler 's Pope , that Pius XII had so little scope of action that it is impossible to judge the motives for his silence during the war , while Rome was under the heel of Mussolini and later occupied by Germany " . 
 Cornwell 's work was the first to have access to testimonies from Pius XII 's beatification process as well as to many documents from Pacelli 's nunciature which had just been opened under the 75 @-@ year rule by the Vatican State Secretary archives . Susan Zuccotti 's Under His Very Windows : The Vatican and the Holocaust in Italy ( 2000 ) and Michael Phayer 's The Catholic Church and the Holocaust , 1930 – 1965 ( 2000 ) and Pius XII , The Holocaust , and the Cold War ( 2008 ) provided further critical , though more scholarly analysis of Pius 's legacy . Daniel Goldhagen 's A Moral Reckoning and David <unk> 's The Pope Against the Jews denounced Pius , while Ralph <unk> and José Sanchez wrote more nuanced critical assessments of Pius XII 's pontificate . 
 In specific riposte to Cornwell 's criticism , American Rabbi and historian , David Dalin , published The Myth of Hitler 's Pope : How Pope Pius XII Rescued Jews from the Nazis in 2005 . He reaffirmed previous accounts of Pius having been a saviour of thousands of Europe 's Jews . In a review of the book , another Jewish scholar — Churchill biographer , Martin Gilbert — wrote that Dalin 's work was " an essential contribution to our understanding of the reality of Pope Pius XII 's support for Jews at their time of greatest danger . Hopefully , his account will replace the <unk> harmful version of papal neglect , and even collaboration , that has held the field for far too long " . Dalin 's book also argued that Cornwell and others were liberal Catholics and ex @-@ Catholics who " exploit the tragedy of the Jewish people during the Holocaust to foster their own political agenda of forcing changes on the Catholic Church today " and that Pius XII was responsible for saving the lives of many thousands of Jews . 
 A number of other scholars replied with favourable accounts of Pius XII , including Margherita <unk> 's Yours Is a Precious Witness : Memoirs of Jews and Catholics in Wartime Italy ( 1997 ) , Pope Pius XII : Architect for Peace ( 2000 ) and Consensus and Controversy : Defending Pope Pius XII ( 2002 ) ; Pierre Blet 's Pius XII and the Second World War , According to the Archives of the Vatican ( 1999 ) ; and Ronald J. Rychlak 's Hitler , the War and the Pope ( 2000 ) . Ecclesiastical historian William <unk> ( author of The Pius War : Responses to the Critics of Pius XII ) , concluded that Pius was " emphatically not silent " . Other important works challenging the negative characterization of Pius 's legacy were written by Eamon Duffy , Clifford Longley , Cardinal Winning , Michael Burleigh , Paul Johnson , and Denis Mack Smith . 
 In his 2003 book , A Moral Reckoning , Daniel Goldhagen , asserted that Pius XII " chose again and again not to mention the Jews publicly .... [ In ] public statements by Pius XII ... any mention of the Jews is conspicuously absent . " In a review of Goldhagen 's book , Mark <unk> counters that Pius used the word " Jew " in his first encyclical , Summi Pontificatus , published on 20 October 1939 . " There Pius insisted that all human beings be treated charitably — for , as Paul had written to the Colossians , in God 's eyes " there is neither Gentile nor Jew . " In saying this , the Pope affirmed that Jews were full members of the human community — which is Goldhagen 's own criterion for establishing ' dissent from the anti @-@ Semitic creed . ' " 
 In Pius XII , The Hound of Hitler , Catholic journalist Gerard Noel , dismissed accusations that Pius was " anti @-@ semitic " or " pro @-@ Nazi " , but accused him of " silence " based on fear of retaliation and wrote that " Hitler played the Pope with consummate expertise " . Gerald <unk> 's Nazis on the Run accused Pius of turning a blind eye to the activities of Vatican priests assisting " denazification through conversion " - which , he said , helped ex @-@ Nazi <unk> to escape justice . 
 Any accusations of Pope Pius XII about not speaking openly against crimes and atrocities committed by Third Reisch - not only on Jews - should take into account testimony like this of one Berlin Jewish couple , Mr. and Mrs. <unk> : " None of us wanted the Pope to take an open stand . We were all fugitives , and fugitives do not wish to be pointed at . The Gestapo would have become more excited and would have intensified its inquisitions . If the Pope had protested , Rome would have become the center of attention . It was better that the Pope said nothing . We all shared this opinion at the time , and this is still our conviction today . " . There ware examples when Church reaction to Nazi brutality only intensified SS persecutions of both : Jews and the Church . 
 = = = International Catholic @-@ Jewish Historical Commission = = = 
 In 1999 , in an attempt to address some of this controversy , the International Catholic @-@ Jewish Historical Commission ( Historical Commission ) , a group of three Catholic and three Jewish scholars was appointed , respectively , by the Holy See 's Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews ( Holy See 's Commission ) and the International Jewish Committee for Interreligious Consultations ( <unk> ) , to whom a preliminary report was issued in October 2000 . 
 The Commission did not discover any documents , but had the agreed @-@ upon task to review the existing Vatican volumes , that make up the Actes et Documents du Saint Siege ( <unk> ) The Commission was internally divided over the question of access to additional documents from the Holy See , access to the news media by individual commission members , and , questions to be raised in the preliminary report . It was agreed to include all 47 individual questions by the six members , and use them as Preliminary Report . In addition to the 47 questions , the commission issued no findings of its own . It stated that it was not their task to sit in judgment of the Pope and his advisors but to contribute to a more nuanced understanding of the papacy during the Holocaust . 
 The 47 questions by the six scholars were grouped into three parts : ( a ) 27 specific questions on existing documents , mostly asking for background and additional information such as drafts of the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge , which was largely written by Eugenio Pacelli . ( b ) Fourteen questions dealt with themes of individual volumes , such as the question how Pius viewed the role of the Church during the war . ( c ) Six general questions , such as the absence of any anti @-@ communist sentiments in the documents . The disagreement between members over additional documents locked up under the Holy See 's 70 year rule resulted in a discontinuation of the Commission in 2001 on friendly terms . Unsatisfied with the findings , Dr. Michael <unk> , one of the three Jewish members of the Commission , said the commission " ran up against a brick wall .... It would have been really helpful to have had support from the Holy See on this issue . " 
 Peter Stanford , a Catholic journalist and writer , wrote , regarding Fatal Silence : the pope , the resistance and the German occupation of Rome ( written by Robert Katz ; ISBN 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ; Weidenfeld & Nicolson , 2003 ) : 
 [ The Vatican ] still refuses to open all its files from the period — which seems to me to be a conclusive admission of guilt — but Katz has <unk> various papers out of God 's business address on earth to add to the stash of new information he has uncovered in America in the archives of the Office of Strategic Services . From this we learn that , although Pius 's defenders still say that he paid a golden ransom in a vain effort to save Rome 's Jews from transportation to the death camps , the most he did was indicate a willingness to chip in if the Jews could not raise the sum demanded . He also shows that no individual Jews were spared , as is often claimed , after Pius personally intervened with the Nazis . Moreover , Katz reveals that those who did escape the Nazi round @-@ up and found sanctuary in church buildings in Rome did so in the face of explicit opposition from the Vatican . The real heroes and heroines were the priests and nuns who refused to bow to Pius 's officials and hand over the desperate people whom they were hiding . The main problem with writing about Pius 's wartime is that in effect , he did nothing . Facing the murders of six million people , he remained silent . As Jews were taken away from the ghetto that sat right alongside St Peter 's , he may have agonised , but he did not intervene . When he did raise his voice with the German occupiers , it was either to ensure that the Vatican City state would not be compromised — that is to say , he would be safe — or to emphasise his own neutrality in a conflict which , for many , became a battle between good and evil . His unrealistic hope was that the Catholic Church could emerge as the peacemaker across Europe . Instead , both the American and British leaderships , as Katz shows , regarded the papacy as tainted by its association with Nazism and irrelevant in the post @-@ 1945 reshaping of the continent . Both had urged Pius to speak up against the Holocaust and so drew their own conclusions about him . Far from being a saint , then , he was at best a fool , perhaps an anti @-@ Semite and probably a coward . 
 Katz 's book also discusses how the Pope 's view of the anti @-@ Nazi resistance — as harbingers of Communism — meant he chose not to intervene in the Ardeatine Caves Massacre . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 Two important and recent studies are worth mentioning here . In The Real Odessa . How Peron Brought the Nazi War Criminals to Argentina ( 2002 ) , the Argentine journalist , <unk> Goñi described how the Argentinean government dealt with war criminals that entered Argentina . However , during his research Goñi accidentally stumbled on documents of the British Foreign Office about the involvement of Vatican personnel in the smuggling of war criminals , the so @-@ called post @-@ war " ratlines " . Goñi found out that the British Envoy D 'Arcy Osborne had intervened with Pope Pius XII to put an end to these illegal activities . Furthermore , he discovered " that the Pope secretly pleaded with Washington and London on behalf of notorious criminals and Nazi collaborators " . Suzanne Brown @-@ Fleming 's The Holocaust and Catholic Conscience . Cardinal Aloisius Muench and the Guilt Question in Germany ( 2006 ) underlines Goñi 's findings . In her remarkable study , Brown @-@ Fleming clearly demonstrated how Pius XII intervened on behalf of rather vicious German war criminals ( e.g. Otto Ohlendorf ) . Brown @-@ Fleming 's main source was the archive of Pope Pius XII 's representative in post @-@ war Germany , Cardinal Aloisius Muench . Then , Phayer 's Pius XII , The Holocaust , and the Cold War ( 2008 ) makes use of many documents that have recently come to light thanks to Bill Clinton 's 1997 executive order declassifying wartime and postwar documents , many of which are currently at the US National Archives and Holocaust Memorial Museum . These documents include diplomatic correspondence , American espionage , and even decryptions of German communications . Relevant documents have also been released by the Argentine government and the British Foreign Office and other information sources have become available , including the diary of Bishop Hurley . These documents reveal new information about Pius XII 's actions regarding the Ustaše regime , the genocides in Poland , the finances of the wartime church , the deportation of the Roman Jews , and the ratlines for Nazis and fascists fleeing Europe . According to Phayer , " the face of Pope Pius that we see in these documents is not the same face we see in the eleven volumes the Vatican published of World War II documents , a collection which , though valuable , is nonetheless critically flawed because of its many omissions " . 
 A special conference of scholars on Pius XII on the 50th anniversary of his death was held in Rome on 15 – 17 September 2008 , by Pave the Way Foundation , a nonsectarian organisation founded by Gary Krupp , a Jewish American , which promotes interfaith cooperation . Pope Benedict XVI held on 19 September 2008 a reception for the conference participants , where he praised Pius XII as a pope who made every effort to save Jews during the war . A second conference was held from 6 – 8 November 2008 by the Pontifical Academy of Life . 
 On 9 October 2008 , the 50th anniversary of Pius XII 's death , Benedict XVI celebrated pontifical Mass in his memory . Shortly before and after the Mass , dialectics continued between the Jewish hierarchy and the Vatican as Rabbi Shear <unk> Cohen of Haifa addressed the Synod of Bishops and expressed his disappointment towards Pius XII 's " silence " during the war . 
 On 16 June 2009 , the Pave the Way Foundation announced that it would release of 2 @,@ 300 pages of documents in Avellino , Italy , dating from 1940 to 1945 , which the organisation claims show that Pius XII " worked diligently to save Jews from Nazi tyranny " ; the organisation 's founder , Krupp has accused historians of harbouring " private agendas " and having " let down " the public . The foundation 's research led to the publication of the book Pope Pius XII and World War II : the documented truth , authored by Krupp ; the book reproduces 225 pages of the new documents produced by the foundation 's research . 
 On 17 September 2009 , Pave the Way Foundation nominated Pius XII to be listed as Righteous Among the Nations at the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial . The foundation 's efforts produced some 3 @,@ 000 original documents and photos on the life of Pius XII and his work to save Jews during World War II . 
 = Glenn T. Seaborg = 
 Glenn Theodore Seaborg ( / <unk> / ; April 19 , 1912 – February 25 , 1999 ) was an American chemist whose involvement in the synthesis , discovery and investigation of ten transuranium elements earned him a share of the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . His work in this area also led to his development of the actinide concept and the arrangement of the actinide series in the periodic table of the elements . 
 Seaborg spent most of his career as an educator and research scientist at the University of California , Berkeley , serving as a professor , and , between 1958 and 1961 , as the university 's second chancellor . He advised ten US Presidents – from Harry S. Truman to Bill Clinton – on nuclear policy and was Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission from 1961 to 1971 , where he pushed for commercial nuclear energy and the peaceful applications of nuclear science . Throughout his career , Seaborg worked for arms control . He was a signatory to the Franck Report and contributed to the Limited Test Ban Treaty , the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . He was a well @-@ known advocate of science education and federal funding for pure research . Toward the end of the Eisenhower administration , he was the principal author of the Seaborg Report on academic science , and , as a member of President Ronald Reagan 's National Commission on Excellence in Education , he was a key contributor to its 1983 report " A Nation at Risk " . 
 Seaborg was the principal or co @-@ discoverer of ten elements : plutonium , americium , curium , berkelium , californium , einsteinium , fermium , mendelevium , nobelium and element 106 , which , while he was still living , was named seaborgium in his honor . He also discovered more than 100 atomic isotopes and is credited with important contributions to the chemistry of plutonium , originally as part of the Manhattan Project where he developed the extraction process used to isolate the plutonium fuel for the second atomic bomb . Early in his career , he was a pioneer in nuclear medicine and discovered isotopes of elements with important applications in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases , most notably iodine @-@ 131 , which is used in the treatment of thyroid disease . In addition to his theoretical work in the development of the actinide concept , which placed the actinide series beneath the lanthanide series on the periodic table , he postulated the existence of super @-@ heavy elements in the transactinide and superactinide series . 
 After sharing the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Edwin McMillan , he received approximately 50 honorary doctorates and numerous other awards and honors . The list of things named after Seaborg ranges from his atomic element to an asteroid . He was a prolific author , penning numerous books and 500 journal articles , often in collaboration with others . He was once listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as the person with the longest entry in Who 's Who in America . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Glenn Theodore Seaborg was born in Ishpeming , Michigan , on April 19 , 1912 , the son of Herman Theodore ( Ted ) and Selma Olivia Erickson Seaborg . He had one sister , Jeanette , who was two years younger . His family spoke Swedish at home . When Glenn Seaborg was a boy , the family moved to Los Angeles County , California , settling in a subdivision called Home Gardens , later annexed to the City of South Gate , California . About this time he changed the spelling of his first name from ' Glen ' to " Glenn " . 
 Seaborg kept a daily journal from 1927 until he suffered a stroke in 1998 . As a youth , Seaborg was both a devoted sports fan and an avid movie buff . His mother encouraged him to become a bookkeeper as she felt his literary interests were impractical . He did not take an interest in science until his junior year when he was inspired by Dwight Logan Reid , a chemistry and physics teacher at David Starr Jordan High School in Watts . 
 Seaborg graduated from Jordan in 1929 at the top of his class and received a bachelor of arts ( AB ) degree in chemistry at the University of California , Los Angeles , in 1933 . He worked his way through school as a stevedore and a laboratory assistant at Firestone . Seaborg took his PhD in chemistry at the University of California , Berkeley , in 1937 with a doctoral thesis on the " Interaction of Fast Neutrons with Lead " , in which he coined the term " nuclear spallation " . 
 Seaborg was a member of the professional chemistry fraternity Alpha Chi Sigma . As a graduate student in the 1930s Seaborg performed wet chemistry research for his advisor Gilbert Newton Lewis , and published three papers with him on the theory of acids and bases . Seaborg studied the text Applied <unk> by Otto Hahn , of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in Berlin , and it had a major impact on his developing interests as a research scientist . For several years , Seaborg conducted important research in artificial radioactivity using the Lawrence cyclotron at UC Berkeley . He was excited to learn from others that nuclear fission was possible — but also chagrined , as his own research might have led him to the same discovery . 
 Seaborg also became an expert in dealing with noted Berkeley physicist Robert Oppenheimer . Oppenheimer had a daunting reputation , and often answered a junior man 's question before it had even been stated . Often the question answered was more profound than the one asked , but of little practical help . Seaborg learned to state his questions to Oppenheimer quickly and succinctly . 
 = = Pioneering work in nuclear chemistry = = 
 Seaborg remained at the University of California , Berkeley , for post @-@ doctoral research . He followed Frederick Soddy 's work investigating isotopes and contributed to the discovery of more than 100 isotopes of elements . Using one of Lawrence 's advanced cyclotrons , John Livingood , Fred Fairbrother , and Seaborg created a new isotope of iron , iron @-@ 59 ( Fe @-@ 59 ) in 1937 . Iron @-@ 59 was useful in the studies of the hemoglobin in human blood . In 1938 , Livingood and Seaborg collaborated ( as they did for five years ) to create an important isotope of iodine , iodine @-@ 131 ( I @-@ 131 ) , which is still used to treat thyroid disease . ( Many years later , it was credited with prolonging the life of Seaborg 's mother . ) As a result of these and other contributions , Seaborg is regarded as a pioneer in nuclear medicine and is one of its most prolific discoverers of isotopes . 
 In 1939 he became an instructor in chemistry at Berkeley , was promoted to assistant professor in 1941 and professor in 1945 . University of California , Berkeley , physicist Edwin McMillan led a team that discovered element 93 , which he named neptunium in 1940 . In November , he was persuaded to leave Berkeley temporarily to assist with urgent research in radar technology . Since Seaborg and his colleagues had perfected McMillan 's oxidation @-@ reduction technique for isolating neptunium , he asked McMillan for permission to continue the research and search for element 94 . McMillan agreed to the collaboration . Seaborg first reported alpha decay proportionate to only a fraction of the element 93 under observation . The first hypothesis for this alpha particle accumulation was contamination by uranium , which produces alpha @-@ decay particles ; analysis of alpha @-@ decay particles ruled this out . Seaborg then postulated that a distinct alpha @-@ producing element was being formed from element 93 . 
 In February 1941 , Seaborg and his collaborators produced plutonium @-@ 239 through the bombardment of uranium . In their experiments bombarding uranium with deuterons , they observed the creation of neptunium , element 93 . But it then underwent beta @-@ decay , forming a new element , plutonium , with 94 protons . Plutonium is fairly stable , but undergoes alpha @-@ decay , which explained the presence of alpha particles coming from neptunium . Thus , on March 28 , 1941 , Seaborg , physicist Emilio Segrè and Berkeley chemist Joseph W. Kennedy were able to show that plutonium ( then known only as element 94 ) was fissile , an important distinction that was crucial to the decisions made in directing Manhattan Project research . In 1966 , Room 307 of Gilman Hall on the campus at the Berkeley , where Seaborg did his work , was declared a U.S. National Historic Landmark . 
 In addition to plutonium , he is credited as a lead discoverer of americium , curium , and berkelium , and as a co @-@ discoverer of californium , einsteinium , fermium , mendelevium , nobelium and seaborgium . He shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1951 with Edwin McMillan for " their discoveries in the chemistry of the first transuranium elements . " 
 = = Scientific contributions during the Manhattan Project = = 
 On April 19 , 1942 , Seaborg reached Chicago and joined the chemistry group at the Metallurgical Laboratory of the Manhattan Project at the University of Chicago , where Enrico Fermi and his group would later convert uranium @-@ 238 to plutonium @-@ 239 in a controlled nuclear chain reaction . Seaborg 's role was to figure out how to extract the tiny bit of plutonium from the mass of uranium . Plutonium @-@ 239 was isolated in visible amounts using a transmutation reaction on August 20 , 1942 , and weighed on September 10 , 1942 , in Seaborg 's Chicago laboratory . He was responsible for the multi @-@ stage chemical process that separated , concentrated and isolated plutonium . This process was further developed at the Clinton Engineering Works in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , and then entered full @-@ scale production at the Hanford Engineer Works , in Richland , Washington . 
 Seaborg 's theoretical development of the actinide concept resulted in a redrawing of the Periodic Table of the Elements into its current configuration with the actinide series appearing below the lanthanide series . Seaborg developed the chemical elements americium and curium while in Chicago . He managed to secure patents for both elements . His patent on curium never proved commercially viable because of the element 's short half @-@ life , but americium is commonly used in household smoke detectors and thus provided a good source of royalty income to Seaborg in later years . Prior to the test of the first nuclear weapon , Seaborg joined with several other leading scientists in a written statement known as the Franck Report ( secret at the time but since published ) unsuccessfully calling on President Truman to conduct a public demonstration of the atomic bomb witnessed by the Japanese . 
 = = Professor and Chancellor at the University of California , Berkeley = = 
 After the conclusion of World War II and the Manhattan Project , Seaborg was eager to return to academic life and university research free from the restrictions of wartime secrecy . In 1946 , he added to his responsibilities as a professor by heading the nuclear chemistry research at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory operated by the University of California on behalf of the United States Atomic Energy Commission . Seaborg was named one of the " Ten Outstanding Young Men in America " by the U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce in 1947 ( along with Richard Nixon and others ) . Seaborg was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1948 . From 1954 to 1961 he served as associate director of the radiation laboratory . He was appointed by President Truman to serve as a member of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission , an assignment he retained until 1960 . 
 Seaborg served as chancellor at the University of California , Berkeley , from 1958 to 1961 . His term coincided with a relaxation of McCarthy @-@ era restrictions on students ' freedom of expression that had begun under his predecessor , Clark Kerr . In October 1958 , Seaborg announced that the University had relaxed its prior prohibitions on political activity on a trial basis , and the ban on communists speaking on campus was lifted . This paved the way for the Free Speech Movement of 1964 @-@ 65 . 
 Seaborg was an enthusiastic supporter of Cal 's sports teams . San Francisco columnist Herb Caen was fond of pointing out that Seaborg 's surname is an anagram of " Go Bears " , a popular cheer at UC Berkeley . Seaborg was proud of the fact that the Cal Bears won their first and only National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) basketball championship in 1959 , while he was chancellor . The football team also won the conference title and played in the Rose Bowl that year . He served on the Faculty Athletic Committee for several years and was the co @-@ author of a book , Roses from the Ashes : Breakup and Rebirth in Pacific Coast Intercollegiate Athletics ( 2000 ) , concerning the Pacific Coast Conference recruiting scandal , and the founding of what is now the Pac @-@ 12 , in which he played a role in restoring confidence in the integrity of collegiate sports . 
 Seaborg served on the President 's Science Advisory Committee ( PSAC ) during the Eisenhower administration . PSAC produced a report on " Scientific Progress , the Universities , and the Federal Government " , also known as the " Seaborg Report " , in November 1960 , that urged greater federal funding of science . In 1959 , he helped found the Berkeley Space Sciences Laboratory with Clark Kerr . 
 = = Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission = = 
 After appointment by President John F. Kennedy and confirmation by the United States Senate , Seaborg was chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) from 1961 to 1971 . His pending appointment by President @-@ elect Kennedy was nearly derailed in late 1960 when members of the Kennedy transition team learned that Seaborg had been listed in a U.S. News & World Report article as a member of " Nixon 's Idea Men " . Seaborg said that as a lifetime Democrat he was baffled when the article appeared associating him with outgoing Vice President Richard Nixon , a Republican whom Seaborg considered a casual acquaintance . 
 While chairman of the AEC , Seaborg participated on the negotiating team for the Limited Test Ban Treaty ( <unk> ) , in which the US , UK , and USSR agreed to ban all above @-@ ground test detonations of nuclear weapons . Seaborg considered his contributions to the achievement of the <unk> as one of his greatest accomplishments . Despite strict rules from the Soviets about photography at the signing ceremony , Seaborg sneaked a tiny camera past the Soviet guards to take a close @-@ up photograph of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev as he signed the treaty . 
 Seaborg enjoyed a close relationship with President Lyndon Johnson and influenced the administration to pursue the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty . Seaborg was called to the White House in the first week of the Nixon Administration in January 1969 to advise President Richard Nixon on his first diplomatic crisis involving the Soviets and nuclear testing . He clashed with Nixon presidential adviser John Ehrlichman over the treatment of a Jewish scientist , Zalman Shapiro , whom the Nixon administration suspected of leaking nuclear secrets to Israel . 
 Seaborg published several books and journal articles during his tenure at the Atomic Energy Commission . He predicted the existence of elements beyond those on the periodic table , the transactinide series and the superactinide series of undiscovered synthetic elements . While most of these theoretical future elements have extremely short half @-@ lives and thus no expected practical applications , he also hypothesized the existence of stable super @-@ heavy isotopes of certain elements in an island of stability . Seaborg served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission until 1971 . 
 = = Return to California = = 
 Following his service as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission , Seaborg returned to UC Berkeley where he was awarded the position of University Professor . At the time , there had been fewer University Professors at UC Berkeley than Nobel Prize winners . He also served as Chairman of the Lawrence Hall of Science where he became the principal investigator for Great Explorations in Math and Science ( GEMS ) working with director Jacqueline Barber . Seaborg served as at the University of California , Berkeley , from 1958 to 1961 , and served as President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1972 and as President of the American Chemical Society in 1976 . 
 In 1980 , he transmuted several thousand atoms of bismuth into gold at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory . His experimental technique , using nuclear physics , was able to remove protons and neutrons from the bismuth atoms . Seaborg 's technique would have been far too expensive to enable routine manufacturing of gold , but his work was close to the mythical Philosopher 's Stone . 
 In 1983 , President Ronald Reagan appointed Seaborg to serve on the National Commission on Excellence in Education . The commission produced a report " A Nation at Risk : The Imperative for Educational Reform " , which focused national attention on education as a national issue germane to the federal government . In 2008 , Margaret Spellings wrote that 
 A Nation at Risk delivered a wake up call for our education system . It described stark realities like a significant number of functionally illiterate high schoolers , plummeting student performance , and international competitors breathing down our necks . It was a warning , a reproach , and a call to arms . 
 Seaborg lived most of his later life in Lafayette , California , where he devoted himself to editing and publishing the journals that documented both his early life and later career . He rallied a group of scientists who criticized the science curriculum in the state of California , which he viewed as far too socially oriented and not nearly focused enough on hard science . California Governor Pete Wilson appointed Seaborg to head a committee that proposed changes to California 's science curriculum despite outcries from labor organizations and others . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1942 , Seaborg married Helen Griggs , the secretary of physicist Ernest Lawrence . Under wartime pressure , Seaborg had moved to Chicago while engaged to Griggs . When Seaborg returned to accompany Griggs for the journey back to Chicago , friends expected them to marry in Chicago . But , eager to be married , Seaborg and Griggs impulsively got off the train in the town of Caliente , Nevada , for what they thought would be a quick wedding . When they asked for City Hall , they found Caliente had none — they would have to travel 25 miles ( 40 km ) north to Pioche , the county seat . With no car , this was no easy feat , but one of Caliente 's newest deputy sheriffs turned out to be a recent graduate of the Cal Berkeley chemistry department and was more than happy to do a favor for Seaborg . The deputy sheriff arranged for the wedding couple to ride up and back to Pioche in a mail truck . The witnesses at the Seaborg wedding were a clerk and a janitor . Glenn Seaborg and Helen Griggs Seaborg had six children , of whom the first , Peter Glenn Seaborg , died in 1997 . The others were Lynne Seaborg Cobb , David Seaborg , Steve Seaborg , Eric Seaborg , and Dianne Seaborg . 
 Seaborg was an avid hiker . Upon becoming Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission in 1961 , he commenced taking daily hikes through a trail that he blazed at the headquarters site in Germantown , Maryland . He frequently invited colleagues and visitors to accompany him , and the trail became known as the " Glenn Seaborg Trail . " He and his wife Helen are credited with blazing a 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) trail in the East Bay area near their home in Lafayette , California . This trail has since become a part of the American Hiking Association 's cross @-@ country network of trails . Seaborg and his wife walked the trail network from Contra Costa County all the way to the California – Nevada border . 
 Seaborg was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1972 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society ( ForMemRS ) of London in 1985 . He was honored as Swedish @-@ American of the Year in 1962 by the Vasa Order of America . In 1991 , the organization named " Local Lodge Glenn T. Seaborg No. 719 " in his honor during the Seaborg Honors ceremony at which he appeared . This lodge maintains a scholarship fund in his name , as does the unrelated Swedish @-@ American Club of Los Angeles . 
 Seaborg kept a close bond to his Swedish origin . He visited Sweden every so often , and his family were members of the Swedish <unk> Genealogical Society , a family association open for every descendant of the <unk> family , a Swedish family with German origin , from which Seaborg was descended on his mother 's side . 
 On August 24 , 1998 , while in Boston to attend a meeting by the American Chemical Society , Seaborg suffered a stroke , which led to his death six months later on February 25 , 1999 , at his home in Lafayette . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 During his lifetime , Seaborg is said to have been the author or co @-@ author of numerous books and 500 scientific journal articles , many of them brief reports on fast @-@ breaking discoveries in nuclear science while other subjects , most notably the actinide concept , represented major theoretical contributions in the history of science . He held more than 40 patents – among them the only patents ever issued for chemical elements , americium and curium , and received more than 50 doctorates and honorary degrees in his lifetime . At one time , he was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as having the longest entry in Marquis Who 's Who in America . In February 2005 , he was posthumously inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame . His papers are in the Library of Congress . 
 The American Chemical Society @-@ Chicago Section honored him with the Willard Gibbs Award in 1966 . The element seaborgium was named after Seaborg by Albert Ghiorso , E. Kenneth Hulet , and others , who also credited Seaborg as a co @-@ discoverer . It was named while Seaborg was still alive , which proved controversial . He influenced the naming of so many elements that with the announcement of seaborgium , it was noted in Discover magazine 's review of the year in science that he could receive a letter addressed in chemical elements : seaborgium , lawrencium ( for the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory where he worked ) , berkelium , californium , americium . <unk> is the only element to have been officially named after a living person , though the name oganesson has been proposed for element 118 , after Yuri Oganessian . 
 = The Statue ( Seinfeld ) = 
 " The Statue " is the sixth episode of the second season of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld , and the show 's 11th episode overall . In the episode , protagonist Jerry Seinfeld ( Jerry Seinfeld ) inherits some old possessions of his grandfather . One of these is a statue , resembling one that his friend George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) broke when he was ten years old . When Jerry sees the statue in the house of Ray ( Michael D. Conway ) , the man who cleaned his apartment , he believes Ray stole the statue . Jerry struggles to get back at Ray , as his friend Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) is editing a book written by Ray 's girlfriend . 
 The episode was written by Larry Charles and directed by Tom Cherones . The character of Jerry 's neighbor Kramer ( Michael Richards ) is developed in this episode , as he goes undercover as a cop to retrieve the statue . Charles was interested in the development of Kramer , as he felt George and Jerry had their counterparts in co @-@ creators Larry David and Seinfeld . Richards enjoyed how his character acted in the episode and encouraged Charles to continue exploiting the Kramer character . " The Statue " first aired on NBC on April 11 , 1991 in the United States and was watched by over 23 million American homes . It received mixed responses from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jerry inherits some old possessions of his grandfather Irving . Among them is a statue that looks just like one George 's family had , until George broke it . Jerry promises that George can have it , but leaves it in his apartment for a few days . Kramer takes a few of Irving 's old clothes , including a hat which he believes makes him look like Joe Friday of Dragnet . Elaine persuades Jerry to have his apartment cleaned by her client Rava 's ( <unk> Koppel ) boyfriend Ray ( Michael D. Conway ) . Jerry is very impressed by the quality of the cleaning ; but when he and Elaine visit Rava , Jerry notices a statue with a vivid similarity to the one he inherited , and believes Ray stole it . He calls Kramer to check his apartment , and when Kramer cannot find the statue there , Jerry ’ s suspicion is confirmed . 
 Jerry , Elaine , George and Kramer discuss the situation and Kramer urges Jerry to do something about it , but Elaine argues that Rava will no longer let her edit her book if Jerry does this . Jerry calls Ray and has lunch with him , while George sits in the next booth and eavesdrops on their conversation . Jerry and George asks him about the statue , but Ray gets offended and leaves when he hears their opinion . Elaine and Rava get into an argument about Jerry 's accusation , and Elaine is no longer allowed to edit Rava 's book . Without notifying anybody , Kramer dresses up in Irving 's old clothes and goes to Ray 's apartment , pretending to be a cop , and recovers the statue , despite Ray 's protests . Kramer returns the statue to a grateful George . But while George is holding the statue , Kramer gives him a friendly pat on the back , causing George to drop the statue , which breaks when it hits the floor . The episode ends without ever revealing whether or not Ray had in fact stolen the statue from Jerry 's apartment . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contained a number of references to pop culture . George explains that he broke the original statue when he was using it as a microphone , singing the song " MacArthur Park " , by Jimmy Webb ; in early drafts of the script , George broke it while singing Eddie Cochran 's " Summertime Blues " . The episode also contained numerous references to the 1960s television crime drama Dragnet , . This was because Larry Charles , who wrote the episode , watched a lot of reruns of the show when he was writing for Seinfeld . The cop Kramer pretends to be when he retrieves the statue was inspired by Joe Friday , the central character of Dragnet . Finland is also mentioned multiple times , as Rava is from there . At the end of the episode Kramer states " Well , lets put it this way , I didn 't take them to The People 's Court " , a reference to the judicial television show . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Larry Charles and directed by Tom Cherones , who directed all of the episodes in Season 2 . " The Statue " was the second episode Charles wrote for the show , though it was the first to be aired . Charles was mostly interested in the development of the Kramer character , as he felt " Jerry and George were so well @-@ defined through Larry [ David ] and Jerry , that there was less room for me to , sort of , expand on those personas . But Kramer was very unformed at the beginning of the show and it gave me an area of creativity to , sort of , expand upon . So I spent a lot of time with Kramer because he was a character that I could have an impact on in the future of the show " . Richards enjoyed how his character evolved and , after the filming of the episode , went to Seinfeld , Charles and David and said " we should keep going that way . " He cites this episode , as well as " The Revenge " ( in which Kramer puts concrete in a washing machine ) , as episodes that really defined the character . 
 The first read @-@ through of the episode was held on January 23 , 1991 , the same night the second season premiered . " The Statue " was filmed in front of a live audience six days later . A few scenes were changed prior to filming ; in an early draft of the script Elaine sat next to George eavesdropping on Jerry and Ray 's conversation . She would wear a floppy hat to look inconspicuous and would complain about it , stating that she looks like one of the Cowsills , a singing group that was active between the 1960s and 1970s . The same scene initially featured George admitting that he spied on Ray a day earlier , showing Ray pictures of him in a bar . Ray would reply that it was his day off and asks why George is not at work , to which George replies that he should be getting back and leaves . In the original script , Elaine and Rava would argue over who is a better person : Jerry or Ray . 
 Writer 's assistant Karen Wilkie can be seen in the audience during Seinfeld 's stand @-@ up comedy act . <unk> Koppel portrayed Rava , at the time she was known for her appearance in the CBS television movie Sweet Bird of Youth ( 1989 ) as well as a guest appearance on the NBC crime drama Hunter . Jane Leeves , who would later appear as Marla the Virgin in season four and season nine also auditioned for the part , she also went on to star in the popular NBC sitcom Frasier ( 1993 – 2004 ) . In the script , Ray Thomas ' description was , " although he carries cleaning equipment , he also carries the air of a pretentious mannerly , affected actor " . Various actors auditioned for the part , among which were Hank Azaria , Michael D. Conway and Tony Shalhoub , who had also auditioned for the part of Kramer . Conway was eventually cast for the part . Norman Brenner , who worked as Richards ' stand @-@ in on the show for all its nine seasons , appears as an extra ; he appears in the background when Jerry and Ray talk at Monk 's Cafe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 First broadcast in the United States on NBC on April 11 , 1991 , " The Statue " gained a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 1 and an audience share of 26 . This means that 16 @.@ 1 % of American households watched the episode , and that 26 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Nielsen estimated that over 23 million people watched the episode 's initial broadcast , making it the tenth most @-@ watched program of the week it was broadcast in . 
 The episode received mixed reactions from critics . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , critics Mary Kaye Schilling and Mike Flaherty stated " Even Seinfeld 's bit players must have some grounding in reality — you need to love to hate them . Ultimately , there 's no redeeming comic payoff to Rava 's and Ray 's weirdness " . Flaherty and Schilling graded the episode with a C- . Colin Jacobson of the DVD Movie Guide called the episode 's storyline " fairly pedestrian " , but felt the performances of Conway and Koppel saved the episode . 
 = Pinkeye ( South Park ) = 
 " Pinkeye " is the seventh episode in the first season of the American animated television series South Park . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on October 29 , 1997 . In " Pinkeye " , Kenny is killed and , through a freak accident , he is brought back to life as a zombie and starts terrorizing South Park residents , who believe the rise of the living dead is an epidemic of " pinkeye " . 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone , along with writer Philip Stark . The episode was the first of a new slate of South Park episodes Parker and Stone made after Comedy Central agreed to permanently pick up the show . The duo were not happy with the episode , particularly the ending , and were surprised by the positive response it received from fans . Parker said he also wanted the episode to convey , in part , that Halloween is a positive holiday for children . 
 " Pinkeye " received generally positive reviews and has been described as one of the classic episodes of South Park . It was viewed by 1 @.@ 75 million households the week it aired , an unusually high amount for Comedy Central at the time . The episode introduced the recurring character Principal Victoria when Cartman dresses as Adolf Hitler . Victoria removes Cartman 's costume and attempts to dress him as a ghost , but inadvertently makes Cartman resemble a member of the Ku Klux Klan . The costumes initially worried Comedy Central executives , but the negative feedback received was minimal . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stan , Kyle , Cartman , and Kenny are waiting for the school bus as usual when the Mir Space Station lands and kills Kenny . Kenny 's body is taken to the local morgue . One of the men at the morgue accidentally leaves a bottle of Worcestershire sauce open and its contents mix with the embalming fluid , turning Kenny into a zombie . Kenny bites the two men and leaves in the middle of the night . 
 The next day Kenny rejoins his friends , who are dressed up for a Halloween costume contest . Stan is dressed as Raggedy Andy ( since Wendy would be going as Raggedy Ann , thus making a pair ) , Kyle wears a Chewbacca mask , and Cartman is dressed as Hitler , much to the fury of Kyle , who is Jewish . A zombified Kenny joins the boys , but they fail to notice that he is a zombie . At school , Kyle gets more annoyed after discovering that the other students ( as well as Mr. Hat ) are also dressed as Chewbacca , while Mr. Garrison is dressed as Marilyn Monroe . Worst of all , Wendy is dressed as Chewbacca ; she explains that she changed costumes because they would have looked stupid as the Raggedy couple and she figured Stan would realize it too . A stubborn Kyle decides to make a new costume so he can win the prize , two tons of candy . Both Chef ( dressed as Evel Knievel ) and Principal Victoria are annoyed to see Cartman dressed as Hitler . Victoria makes him a " ghost " costume but he ends up looking more like a Ku Klux Klan member , which annoys Chef even more . At the contest , which is judged by Tina Yothers , Wendy ( despite wearing the same costume as the other students ) wins the candy , much to the fury of Kyle , who is now dressed as the Solar System . Stan wins the worst costume and everyone laughs at him , leaving him humiliated . 
 Meanwhile , thanks to Kenny , the two men are mistakenly diagnosed to have " pinkeye " , but they turn into zombies and go around biting other people , turning them into zombies . Back home , Chef , who sees the outbreak on TV , tries to warn both the doctor and Mayor McDaniels ( who is having sex with Officer Barbrady ) , but his pleas are ignored . The boys go trick @-@ or @-@ treating ( Kyle now dressed as a vampire ) , not noticing the outbreak , and abandon Kenny , who continues to eat people . They arrive at Chef 's home , and Chef tells them what is really going on before taking them to the morgue to stop the outbreak . After discovering the hotline number on the Worcestershire sauce bottle , the boys and Chef are attacked by the zombies with Chef becoming the next victim and acting like Michael Jackson in parody of Thriller . Stan and Cartman kill the other zombies with chainsaws and Stan hesitates to kill a zombified Wendy . After Kyle discovers he has to kill the original zombie ( after being told <unk> by the hotline lady ) , he slices Kenny in half , killing him . The spell is broken and all the zombies turn back to normal . Stan makes up with Wendy and they are about to kiss but he ends up puking on her , leaving her disgusted . 
 The episode ends with the boys mourning at Kenny 's grave and deciding to go home to eat candy as well as look at photos of Liane Cartman , who is on the cover of a porn magazine , much to the fury of Cartman claiming she was young and needed the money ; Stan says the photos were taken a month ago , infuriating Cartman even more . Kenny returns as a zombie again , but a statue lands on him , followed by an airplane . 
 = = Production = = 
 Comedy Central originally ordered only six episodes of South Park for the first season 's initial run . However , when the show proved to be a success , they requested an additional seven , the first ones of which creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone had to produce quickly . " Pinkeye " was the first of those new seven episodes to be produced . It was also the first South Park Halloween episode . The script was written by Parker , Stone and writer Philip Stark , and was directed by Parker and Stone , who made the pinkeye a major element of the plot because they associate the illness with the elementary school experience . Parker said , " Pinkeye is just such a huge part of your life when you 're in third grade . Pinkeye is the thing every third grader gets and it 's just such a bizarre thing . " In writing the episode , Parker said he wanted to convey his belief that Halloween is a positive holiday , especially for children : " Halloween 's a great thing . That was part of what we wanted ( to say ) . I think kids having this kind of mythology is great . " 
 " Pinkeye " was the first South Park episode to feature a cold open , or an opening scene jumping right into the story before the opening credits are shown . In all previous episodes , and the majority of those following it , the episode starts after the opening credits and follows a three @-@ act model , more in the style of a short film than a traditional television episode . " Pinkeye " was the first episode in which Kenny 's death was a key element of the episode and a catalyst of the plot , rather than a throwaway gag . It was also the first time Kenny died multiple times : once in the beginning , once as a zombie and once at the end when he is resurrected a second time . The blood featured in the episode was deliberately designed to look primitive as a reference to The Spirit of Christmas , the 1995 animated short film by Parker and Stone that served as a precursor to South Park , in which the blood was literally drawn with a Sharpie marker . For the final scene when Kenny comes back to life a second time , the dramatic music was inserted at the last moment by Parker with a synthesizer . 
 Parker and Stone had trouble deciding how to resolve the episode and bring the zombie characters back to life . Although they ultimately settled on having Kyle kill the " main zombie " to bring back the others , Parker did not feel the resolution made sense and described it as a deus ex machina . Parker said of the ending , " This was another big one of those episodes where we were sort of ( like ) , ' How do we get out of this one ? ' " Parker also described the ending of the episode as " a bloodbath , ( which ) is what a good zombie movie should be " . " Pinkeye " was the first South Park episode Parker and Stone felt unsatisfied with once production was complete . Parker said , " We were pretty bummed out , and we kind of thought , well , we 're going to have a bad episode go on the air , and hopefully it won 't alienate too many people , and we 'll try to get our viewers back for Thanksgiving . But we were totally wrong , people totally loved it . " 
 Stone said he felt the episode solidified major characteristics embodied by the Chef character , particularly the fact that he is one of the only adults in South Park who always understands the truth of any given situation and believes the children almost all of the time . Stone said , " It 's like the parents are all nuts that live in the town . The boys are kind of the most sane and Chef is really the only one in town who believes the kids when they say ( something ) is happening , when the kids are actually right and it 's the town that 's crazy . " " Pinkeye " was also the first episode in which Liane Cartman , Eric Cartman 's mother , was portrayed as a promiscuous woman who was previously a crack whore and is willing to engage in pornographic sex for money ; during the episode , she is mentioned and actually featured on the cover of " Crack Whore Magazine " , much to Cartman 's shock and dismay . 
 = = Release = = 
 Before its release on Comedy Central , " Pinkeye " was shown at the first annual New York Comedy Film Festival at New York Film Academy on October 26 , 1997 . Out of about 50 films shown in the festival , " Pinkeye " was chosen as the final exhibition to close the festival . Parker and Stone appeared on The Daily Show with Craig Kilborn on October 27 , to promote the episode and the first season in general . In its original American television broadcast , " Pinkeye " received a Nielsen Rating of 3 @.@ 8 , meaning the episode was seen by about 1 @.@ 75 million households . Television journalists said the rating was unusually high for Comedy Central standards ; the network averages a 0 @.@ 6 rating ( 276 @,@ 000 households ) during prime time , and prior to South Park , the channel 's highest rating was a 2 @.@ 7 ( 1 @.@ 24 million households ) for the second season premiere of Absolutely Fabulous . In 2000 , The Museum of Television & Radio in Beverly Hills , California held a three @-@ month horror festival called " Monster in the Box : Horror on Television " , which included " Pinkeye " in its selection of classic or excellent horror @-@ related television comedy episodes . It also included The Munsters episode " Munster Masquerade " and The Simpsons episode " Treehouse of Horror V " . 
 " Pinkeye " was released , along with 11 other episodes , in a three @-@ DVD set in November 1998 . It was included in the second volume , which also included the episodes " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " , " Death " and " Damien " . " Pinkeye " was also one of six episodes included on a 1998 VHS called " South Park Festival Special " , which included " Mr. Hankey , the Christmas Poo " , " Merry Christmas , Charlie Manson ! " , " Mr. Hankey 's Christmas Classics " , " Korn 's Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery " , and " Starvin ' Marvin " . The episode , along with the other twelve from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD completely separate from the DVDs . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Pinkeye " included the first appearance of Principal Victoria , the principal of South Park Elementary . Her appearance is based on Comedy Central executive Debbie Liebling , who served as a South Park producer at the time of the episode 's broadcast . Unlike Liebling , however , Principal Victoria spoke with a thick Minnesotan accent ; the voice was chosen simply because it was an accent voice actress Mary Kay Bergman could do particularly well . 
 Cartman dresses like Adolf Hitler , the leader of the Nazi Party ; Cartman occasionally says " Sieg Heil " , a common phrase previously used in Nazi Germany . Comedy Central had reservations about the idea and sought ideas for other possible costumes , but Parker and Stone insisted it had to be the Hitler costume . Once the episode aired , however , the two received very few letters from upset viewers over the costume ; Parker attributed this to the fact that people were becoming more familiar with the Cartman character , and thus recognized that most of what he said and did was usually wrong . More than Hitler , however , Comedy Central executives were worried about the use of Chewbacca costumes throughout the episode because of George Lucas ' well @-@ known tendency to file lawsuits against unauthorized Star Wars references or parodies . The channel contacted his production company , Lucasfilm , about the episode and was asked to send a copy of the episode to them for review . The voice used by the supposedly actual Adolf Hitler in the educational video shown to Cartman is based on Monty Python alum John Cleese 's Hitler impression , which both Parker and Stone particularly praised . 
 Actress and singer Tina Yothers , best known for her role in the television series Family Ties , is featured in the episode as a celebrity judge in the school 's costume judging contest . About one year after the episode aired , Stone met Yothers at a venue where she was performing with her band . Stone was uncomfortable because it was the first time he had met a celebrity the show previously mocked , but Yothers said she was a big fan of the show and enjoyed her parody appearance . She used a clip of Kyle saying " Up yours , Tina Yothers " from the episode as an introductory sound clip to introduce her band 's shows . 
 Kenny is turned into a zombie after a mortician accidentally knocks Worcestershire sauce , a fermented liquid condiment , into his embalming fluid . Parker and Stone originally planned to have a Dr Pepper fall into the embalming fluid ( in a belated response to that product 's slogan " Dr Pepper , What 's the Worst That Could Happen ? " ) , but it was changed after the soft drink company objected to that use of their product . 
 The episode features a parody of the Michael Jackson song " Thriller " , as well as the music video . When Chef becomes a zombie , he is dressed like Jackson from the " Thriller " video , and he and the other zombies dance in a similar way . Chef also shouts " Oh " the same way Jackson often did during music performances . The song Chef sings is extremely similar to the actual " Thriller " song , but Parker said they deliberately made it " ( just ) different enough that we can 't get sued " . Stan is ridiculed for his likeness to Raggedy Andy , based on the rag doll character by children 's writer Johnny Gruelle ; Stan 's girlfriend Wendy was originally supposed to dress as Raggedy Ann with Stan , but she instead chose to dress as Chewbacca . When Cartman later dons a " ghost " costume , it resembles a costume from the Ku Klux Klan , the militant white supremacy organization . Parker and Stone said they feel Klan jokes are particularly funny because the concept of KKK is so stupid . Stone said , " Dressing up like ghosts to scare black people is just stupid . <unk> funny . " The zombie @-@ version of Kenny is said to resemble Edward James Olmos , the American actor who played Lt. Martin <unk> in Miami Vice . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Pinkeye " has been described as one of the classic episodes of South Park . In " Doug Pratt 's DVD @-@ Video Guide " , Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , calls " Pinkeye " his favorite episode of the first season of South Park : " We like it primarily because the subject – a horror satire – seems ideally suited for the show 's irreverent attitude . " Eric Mink of the New York Daily News complimented the episode , which he felt illustrated many of the outrageous and shocking elements that had made South Park so popular . He said the episode was particularly notable for its graphic violence : " Most sitcoms would have a problem doing an episode in which one regular character slices another regular character in half with a chainsaw . Not South Park . " Mike Higgins of The Independent said this episode helped " cement ( Eric Cartman 's ) position as one of the great , obnoxious characters of the Nineties " , particularly through his Adolf Hitler Halloween costume . 
 Matt Roush of USA Today said of the episode , " <unk> nihilistic and savagely derisive ... South Park 's twisted take on a holiday special will delight anyone who favors <unk> over candy corn . " Kevin M. Williams of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times described the episode as " a Halloween @-@ themed tour de force of crudeness , a wild romp with blood , brains and gore . " Vijay <unk> of The Plain Dealer said the episode was " very offensive " , particularly for its mockery of Kyle for his Judaism . The Baltimore Sun also described the episode as offensive and said of it , " Looking for sophisticated humor , finely honed satire and superior animation in your cartoons ? Then stay far away from Comedy Central tonight . " 
 <unk> , a 1999 website that examined real @-@ life people and places that may have inspired South Park episodes , suggested the settings in " Pinkeye " may have been inspired by a supposedly haunted hotel in Fairplay , Colorado , a Park County town that serves as the basis for the South Park location within the show . In a review of the site , however , The Australian suggested the interpretation was unlikely , since the hotel is rumored to be haunted by ghosts , not zombies . 
 = Korn = 
 Korn ( stylized as KoЯn ) is an American nu metal band from Bakersfield , California , formed in 1993 . The band 's current lineup includes founding members Jonathan Davis ( vocals , bagpipes ) , James " Munky " Shaffer ( guitar ) , Brian " Head " Welch ( guitar , backing vocals ) , and Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu ( bass ) , with the addition of Ray Luzier ( drums ) , who replaced the band 's original member , David Silveria in 2007 . Korn was originally formed by three of the members of the band L.A.P.D. 
 Korn released their first demo album , Neidermayer 's Mind , in 1993 . The band later went on to release their self @-@ titled debut album in 1994 , followed by Life Is Peachy in 1996 . The band experienced mainstream success with Follow the Leader ( 1998 ) and Issues ( 1999 ) , both of which debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . The band 's mainstream success continued with Untouchables ( 2002 ) , Take a Look in the Mirror ( 2003 ) and See You on the Other Side ( 2005 ) . 
 A compilation album , Greatest Hits Vol . 1 , was released in 2004 , spanning a decade of singles and concluding the band 's recording contract with Immortal Records and Epic Records . They signed to Virgin Records , releasing See You on the Other Side in 2005 , and an untitled album in 2007 . Korn 's other recent albums , Korn III : Remember Who You Are ( 2010 ) and The Path of Totality ( 2011 ) , were released via Roadrunner Records , with the latest album The Paradigm Shift ( 2013 ) being released via Prospect Park and Caroline Records . 
 As of 2012 , Korn had sold around 35 million copies worldwide . Twelve of the band 's official releases have peaked in the top ten of the Billboard 200 , eight of which have peaked in the top five . Seven official releases are certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , two are certified double platinum , one is certified triple platinum , one is certified five times platinum and two are certified Gold . Korn has released seven video albums and thirty @-@ nine music videos . The band has released forty @-@ one singles , twenty @-@ eight of which have charted . Korn has earned two Grammy Awards out of seven nominations and two MTV Video Music Awards out of eleven nominations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and formation ( 1989 – 93 ) = = = 
 Before Korn was formed , three of the original members of the band were associated with the band L.A.P.D. – James Shaffer , Reginald Arvizu , and David Silveria . Originally consisting of Richard Morrill , James Shaffer , and Reginald Arvizu , David Silveria joined when he was 16 . When the band moved from Bakersfield , California to Los Angeles , Silveria dropped out of high school and Shaffer stayed in Bakersfield . When Shaffer reunited with the band , they found a manager and released an EP entitled Love and Peace Dude in 1989 through Triple X Records . L.A.P.D. released their first full @-@ length studio album on May 3 , 1991 which consisted of eleven tracks . The album was entitled Who 's Laughing Now . After releasing two albums , L.A.P.D. broke up . They were also briefly known as Creep , recording a demo with a singer named Corey until Shaffer , Arvizu , and Silveria enlisted Brian Welch and Jonathan Davis to form the band that went on to become Korn . 
 When thinking of a band name , someone suggested " corn " , but the band rejected that name , so Shaffer had the idea to spell the name with both a " K " instead of a " C " , and a backwards " R " , so the band 's name would appear as " KoЯn " . The logo was designed by vocalist Jonathan Davis . Silveria explained , " the music makes the name , because Korn 's a dumb name . But once we get established , it makes the name cool . " 
 Korn rented a studio from Jeff <unk> , called Underground Chicken Sound , in Huntington Beach , California . While they were recording at Underground Chicken Sound , a crowd had been loitering outside the studio . The band began playing a prelude to a later song , " Clown " , resulting in a larger crowd gathering . Arvizu said the crowd gathered because it sounded so " different . " Korn started performing at gigs in the summer of 1993 , with members saying that touring was a " pain @-@ in @-@ the @-@ ass . " While in Huntington Beach , the band was spotted by Epic Records A & R employee Paul Pontius . Pontius would describe Korn 's sound as " the new genre of rock . " In 1993 , Korn released their first demo album , Neidermayer 's Mind . The album had very limited printing , and was not well received by critics or the public . It was released to record companies and to people who filled out a flyer given out at gigs they played for free with Biohazard and House of Pain . With this demo , Korn pioneered the nu metal sound . 
 = = = Korn ( 1994 – 96 ) = = = 
 By May 1994 , Korn began recording their debut album with Ross Robinson . It was finished recording by the end of June 1994 . On October 11 , 1994 , Korn released a self – titled album through Immortal Records , an Epic imprint label , which peaked at number one on the Heatseekers Albums chart , and would eventually reach number seventy @-@ two on the Billboard 200 in February 1996 . The album received positive reviews by critics , and it is said to have established the new wave of metal . As well as sparking the nu metal genre , the album also started record producer Ross Robinson 's music career . It also influenced other bands , such as Slipknot , Coal Chamber and Limp Bizkit . 
 After Korn finished recording the album , they began touring with Biohazard and House of Pain . Their record company gave them enough money for their own tour bus . Korn 's first gig was in Atlanta . About halfway through the tour , the tour bus that their record company gave them stopped working , and Korn had to find a new one . Their first tour was not very successful in promoting the album . The band went on tour with Sick of It All in January 1995 . Later that year , Korn was chosen , alongside Deftones , as direct support for Ozzy Osbourne . The self @-@ titled album went gold in the midst of the tour . It was eventually certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Aside from touring , Korn released four singles . " Blind " was released on August 1 , 1994 , and " Shoots and Ladders " was released on October 31 , 1995 . The latter received a Grammy nomination in 1997 for Best Metal Performance . " Need To " was also released in 1995 , on April 8 . The fourth and final single , " Clown " , was released on February 2 , 1996 . " Blind " was the only single to chart , peaking at number fifteen on the Canadian RPM Alternative 30 . 
 = = = Life Is Peachy ( 1996 – 97 ) = = = 
 After the success of their debut , Korn decided to enter the studio again for a second album . By then , the band had created a large fan base , and the expectations for their follow @-@ up album were high . They went back into the studio in early April 1996 at Indigo Ranch Studios , Malibu , California . 
 The album was released October 15 , 1996 , and despite minimal radio airplay and television attention , Life Is Peachy debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , and peaked at number one in New Zealand . The album sold 106 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Jon Pareles from The New York Times said that the band was " Mad at everybody , including themselves . " The album was certified double platinum in the United States , platinum in Australia , and gold in Canada . 
 The first single , " No Place to Hide " , spawned a Grammy nomination for Best Metal Performance . " A.D.I.D.A.S. " was released as the second single on March 4 , 1997 . It became the band 's first charting single on Billboard , peaking at number thirteen on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . The third single , " Good God " , was released on July 14 , 1997 . The band gained more popularity after co @-@ headlining the Lollapalooza music festival in 1997 with Tool . However , Korn was forced to stop touring after Shaffer was diagnosed with viral meningitis . A promotional disc was released in 1997 to promote both the band and the Life Is Peachy Tour featuring Incubus and The Urge , and included three live tracks . 
 = = = Follow the Leader ( 1998 – 99 ) = = = 
 Prior to the release of the band 's third album , Korn produced a weekly online TV show , <unk> , which documented the making of the record and featured special guests such as porn star Ron Jeremy , Limp Bizkit and 311 . The project also gave fans the chance to call in and ask the band questions , an approach that represented one of the first times a band utilized the Internet in such a way . Korn released their third album , Follow the Leader , on August 18 , 1998 , which featured a number of guest vocalists such as Ice Cube , Pharcyde member Tre Hardson , Fred Durst of Limp Bizkit , and actor Cheech Marin on the hidden track " Earache My Eye " ( written by Marin himself ) . 
 Korn launched a political campaign @-@ style tour to promote the release of Follow the Leader . The tour took the group , on a chartered jet , all over North America to help promote Follow the Leader . They talked to fans and answered questions during special " fan conferences " , which were organized at every stop along the tour route , and signed autographs . Jim Rose of the Jim Rose Circus hosted the entire " <unk> " tour . 
 The album was considered by band members a complete success , debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 with at least 268 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week of release , and , among other singles , spawning two of their biggest singles : " Got the Life " and " Freak on a Leash " . They both exposed Korn to a wider , mainstream audience , with the music videos being mainstays on MTV 's Total Request Live . " Got the Life " was the show 's very first " retired " video , with " Freak on a Leash " also reaching retirement several months later . 
 " Freak on a Leash " won a Grammy for Best Music Video , Short Form , and received a nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance . The video also earned nine MTV Video Music Awards nominations for Video of the Year , Best Rock Video , Breakthrough Video , Best Direction , Best Special Effects , Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , Best Editing , and Viewer 's Choice . It eventually won two awards , one being for Best Rock Video and the other for Best Editing . " Freak on a Leash " failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , although it did manage to peak at number six on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . Follow the Leader is considered by members of Korn to be the band 's most commercially – successful album , being certified five @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA , and having sold almost ten million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Issues ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 The band 's fourth album , Issues , produced by Brendan O 'Brien , was released on November 16 , 1999 , featuring cover art designed by Alfredo Carlos , who won a contest held for the fans by MTV . Issues was released during a week of many highly anticipated records . It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with more at least 573 @,@ 000 copies sold , keeping Dr. Dre 's second album 2001 and All the Way ... A Decade of Song by Céline Dion from hitting number one . 
 To celebrate the album 's release , the band performed the record in its entirety in front of a live audience at New York 's historic Apollo Theater and broadcast the concert simultaneously across many radio stations . This performance marked the first performance by a rock band since Buddy Holly in the late 1950s . This special event featured the New York Police Department marching drum and bagpipe band conducted by Richard Gibbs as well as a group of back @-@ up singers to enhance the more melodic choruses Davis used on the album . A snippet of " Falling Away from Me " was featured on <unk> with a brief interpretive dance by bassist Reginald Arvizu , and also featured on their official website as an MP3 file , although its release was against the advice of its attorneys and corporate establishment . The album was also promoted by the band 's highly successful Sick and Twisted Tour . 
 A little before Korn 's album Issues was released , the band appeared on an episode of South Park , titled " Korn 's Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery " , in which the first single from Issues , " Falling Away from Me " , was premiered . The single became Korn 's first entry on the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching number ninety @-@ nine . " Make Me Bad " was released as the album 's second single in February 2000 , peaking at number fourteen on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . A third single , " Somebody Someone " , followed with more moderate success . Music videos were filmed for all three singles , with long @-@ time friend Fred Durst directing " Falling Away from Me " , and Martin Weisz directing a concept video for " Make Me Bad " , as well as a performance @-@ based video for " Somebody Someone " , which featured the use of CGI effects . Every video was a staple on Total Request Live , two of which made it to retirement . Issues was described by Stephen Thomas Erlewine to be less hip hop @-@ oriented than Follow the Leader . It was certified three @-@ times Platinum , following up the success of Follow the Leader . 
 = = = Untouchables ( 2002 – 03 ) = = = 
 On June 11 , 2002 , Korn re @-@ emerged into the media with their fifth album , Untouchables . It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with 434 @,@ 000 in sales . The band has blamed music piracy for the drop in sales , as an unmastered version of the album had leaked three months prior to its official release date . On April 2 , 2002 , the Opie and Anthony Show began airing songs from Untouchables . After playing a few songs , the broadcasters received a cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter from Sony Music Entertainment . Opie and Anthony said " The reason for the premature premiere was to infuriate a rival New York station , which disallows their in @-@ studio guests to appear on ' The Opie and Anthony Show . ' " The release of this album was preceded by a show at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York , a day prior to the album 's release , broadcast digitally throughout movie theatres in the United States . 
 The album contained experiments and styles never previously attempted by Korn . AllMusic related : " The band is far more experimental this time out , delivering Helmet @-@ like ringing guitars that melt and morph into each other , a mix of Metallica @-@ esque <unk> and tight funk drumming from the constantly improving David Silveria , and memorable riffs that take the shape of dark sound structures and offer more than just a collection of chords . " The first two music videos from Untouchables , " Here to Stay " and " <unk> " , were directed by the Hughes Brothers . " Here to Stay " earned Korn a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance . " Here to Stay " peaked at number seventy @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = = Take a Look in the Mirror ( 2003 – 05 ) = = = 
 Due to the album Untouchables leaking onto the Internet , Take a Look in the Mirror was released on a Friday , November 21 , 2003 – four days earlier than its original release date . The album therefore received a weekend 's worth of sales , which resulted in a poor showing on the Billboard 200 . During its first full week , Take a Look in the Mirror soared ten places from number nineteen to number nine , increasing the album 's total sales to 179 @,@ 000 . It is the first album self @-@ produced by Korn . The band explained that they wanted fans to hear the music as it should be . The album presented different styles and themes compared to previous albums . Lead vocalist Jonathan Davis related : " The whole album is about love , hate and my hate of people and just losing my mind . The previous albums I did , I think the last three , I was coming from a place of hurt . And I just finally got to the point where I 'm done hurting and I 'm just pissed off about it now . It 's turned back to just sheer hate and anger . And it definitely comes across on the album . " MTV News said that Davis convinced his fans that they " will be shocked , particularly with the album 's second track , ' Break Some Off , ' which he called ' brutal ' . " Korn released the single " Did My Time " on July 22 , 2003 , which was used to promote the film but did not appear on the soundtrack to Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life due to unspecified legal issues . The single debuted and peaked at number thirty @-@ eight on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Korn 's first and only top @-@ forty hit in the United States . " Did My Time " gave Korn another Grammy nomination in the Best Metal Performance category . 
 Korn released their greatest hits album , Greatest Hits Vol . 1 , on October 5 , 2004 . The album debuted at number four on Billboard , selling more than 129 @,@ 000 copies . This album assembles choice tracks from six Korn studio albums released between 1994 and 2003 . The first single was a cover of the song " Word Up ! " , originally composed by Cameo . The single peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . Special editions of Greatest Hits Vol . 1 included a DVD titled Korn : Live at CBGB featuring seven select songs from their November 24 , 2003 show at CBGB . 
 In early 2005 , Brian Welch announced that he would be quitting the band . In front of a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 , in three services at Valley Bible Fellowship in Bakersfield , California , said " I was addicted to <unk> and tried everything ... rehab , stuff on the Internet , but nothing helped me kick it . I was trying on my own to quit and couldn 't do it . I wanted to die . No one knew what I was going through . I could not quit . Church was my last shot . I would sit in church high [ on drugs ] . I would wonder why people would go up to the front after the service . But one day it was for me . I said [ to God ] , ' Show me how to quit . ' " In a 2013 interview with Rolling Stone , Head described his final moments in the band as very tense ; " the last year I was in the band , we were gonna kick out the bass player , Fieldy , and this guy 's girlfriend couldn 't be on this side of the stage because there were fights with another wife in the band . And obviously the drugs – it 's no secret I was into the drugs , so crazy stuff , like having to finish our blow right before we got to the border because they were gonna come check to see if we had anything . " Following his departure from Korn , Welch released two autobiographies , a solo album , and formed a band , Love and Death , who released a debut album in 2013 . 
 = = = See You on the Other Side ( 2005 – 07 ) = = = 
 Upon completing their record deal with Sony , Korn partnered with EMI and signed to Virgin Records . As part of this innovative arrangement , Virgin paid Korn $ 25 million upfront in exchange for a share in the profits of their next two studio albums , including tours and merchandising . Virgin also received a 30 percent stake in the band 's licensing , ticket sales and other revenue sources . 
 The band 's first album for Virgin , See You on the Other Side , was released on December 6 , 2005 , and debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , scanning close to 221 @,@ 000 copies . The album managed to stay in the top half of the Billboard 200 for thirty @-@ four consecutive weeks . The first single from the album , " Twisted Transistor " , was accompanied by a music video directed by Dave Meyers in which hip hop artists Xzibit , Lil Jon , Snoop Dogg , and David Banner portray Korn . " Twisted Transistor " peaked at number sixty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 . The second single , " Coming Undone " , was released in February 2006 , peaking at number seventy @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video was directed by Little X. See You on the Other Side was certified Platinum in the United States , and by mid @-@ 2007 , the album had sold over 2 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . 
 Korn held a press conference at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery on January 13 , 2006 , announcing the See You on the Other Side Tour . 10 Years and Mudvayne were selected to open all dates of the trek , which kicked off in their hometown of Bakersfield , on what Mayor Harvey Hall officially declared as " Korn Day " , February 24 . The resurrection of their Family Values Tour was announced on April 18 , 2006 , which featured co @-@ headliners Deftones , Stone Sour , Flyleaf , and the Japanese metal group Dir En Grey on the main stage . Korn and Evanescence co @-@ headlined the 2007 edition , with Atreyu , Flyleaf , Hellyeah , and Trivium rounding out the main stage . 
 While promoting See You on the Other Side in Europe , Jonathan Davis was diagnosed with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura , a blood platelet disorder that hospitalized him for the weekend and prevented him from performing at the renowned Download Festival . Despite the illness , the band still performed , with guest singers including Corey Taylor of Slipknot and Stone Sour fame , Trivium 's Matt Heafy , <unk> 's Benji Webbe and Avenged Sevenfold 's M. Shadows . This led to Korn canceling the rest of their European bill for 2006 , including the Hellfest Summer Open Air . It was originally unknown to the public what his ailment was , but the singer revealed in a letter to fans that he was " dangerously low on blood platelets and at a high risk of death from a hemorrhage if the problem was not treated " . 
 In early December 2006 it was announced that founding drummer David Silveria would be taking an indefinite " temporary hiatus " from the band . Korn then performed at the MTV studios in Times Square on December 9 , 2006 , for the MTV Unplugged series , which was broadcast on February 23 , 2007 , through MTV.com and on March 2 , 2007 , across North American , South American , European and Asian MTV stations . Korn played a 14 @-@ song acoustic set complete with guest appearances by The Cure and Amy Lee of Evanescence . The performance was eventually cut down to 11 songs for the album , two of which did not air on MTV . Sales of nearly 51 @,@ 000 brought MTV Unplugged : Korn to number nine in its first week out . 
 = = = Untitled album ( 2007 – 08 ) = = = 
 Korn 's untitled album was released on July 31 , 2007 , debuting at number two on the Billboard 200 with 123 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . The album was certified gold by the RIAA . It concluded Korn 's deal with Virgin Records , and features touring keyboardist Zac Baird . Drumming duties were left up to Terry Bozzio , and Bad Religion 's Brooks Wackerman , as David Silveria went on a hiatus . Joey Jordison from Slipknot played drums during Korn 's live shows until the permanent addition of Ray Luzier ( Army of Anyone , David Lee Roth ) . This confirmed David 's departure . " Evolution " and " Hold On " were released as singles to promote the untitled album . The former peaked at number seven on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . A third single , " Kiss " , had a limited release in April 2008 . Korn covered the song " Kidnap the Sandy Claws " in 2008 , which was originally performed by Paul Reubens , Catherine O 'Hara , and Danny Elfman . It was released on Nightmare Revisited . 
 Ubisoft reported in October 2008 that Korn had " written and recorded an original song inspired by Ubisoft 's Haze video game , simply entitled " Haze " , which was released on April 22 , 2008 . Korn also released a live DVD , Live at Montreux 2004 , one of their performances with former guitarist Brian Welch on May 12 , 2008 . 
 = = = Korn III : Remember Who You Are ( 2009 – 11 ) = = = 
 In a YouTube video , bassist Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu affirmed that a charity song titled " A Song for Chi " would be released , featuring Slipknot guitarist Jim Root , Clint Lowery of Sevendust , drummer Dave McClain of Machine Head and former Korn guitarist Brian " Head " Welch , among many other musicians . The song was intended to raise money for Deftones bassist Chi Cheng , who fell into a comatose state following a car accident in November 2008 . 
 Along with the announcement of the Ballroom Blitz Tour in March 2010 , the title for the new album was revealed as Korn III : Remember Who You Are . Later that month , Munky announced that Korn has officially signed to Roadrunner Records . Jonathan Davis later confirmed the record deal : " We 're going to go to Roadrunner . [ It is ] real exciting for us , too , because they 're one of the last record companies to let you do what you want to do . " Davis continued , " All the great bands around are on that label and everything seems to just work out right and it seems like a good home for us right now . " The lead single , " <unk> ( Leave Me Alone ) " , was made available for streaming in May 2010 . " <unk> ( Leave Me Alone ) " was simultaneously released to radio stations , and became a top @-@ ten hit on the Billboard Active Rock and Mainstream Rock airplay charts . A music video , directed by Phil Mucci , received an exclusive premiere on MTV2 . 
 Korn III : Remember Who You Are was released on July 13 , 2010 . It debuted and peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 with 63 @,@ 000 purchases reported . A second single , " Let the Guilt Go " , was released that same month , and managed to peak in the top twenty on the Billboard Active Rock chart . " Pop a Pill " was scheduled to be the third single from Korn III : Remember Who You Are , but plans were scrapped by Roadrunner Records due to unsatisfactory results with previous singles . Korn co @-@ headlined the Music as a Weapon V tour with Disturbed in late 2010 and early 2011 . The tour also featured supporting acts Sevendust and In This Moment . 
 = = = The Path of Totality ( 2011 – 12 ) = = = 
 Korn 's tenth studio album , The Path of Totality , was released on December 6 , 2011 . It was the second and final studio album for Roadrunner Records . The album features contributions from Skrillex , 12th Planet , Excision , <unk> , Kill the Noise , <unk> , and various other EDM artists . The Path of Totality debuted and peaked at number ten on the Billboard 200 with 55 @,@ 000 copies scanned . " Get Up ! " was premiered as the lead single via Spin in April 2011 . The single managed to peak at number eight on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart . 150 @,@ 000 digital copies of " Get Up ! " have been purchased in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . The second single , " Narcissistic Cannibal " , was released in October 2011 , with its music video being directed and produced by Alexander Bulkley of <unk> Films . " Narcissistic Cannibal " peaked at number seventeen on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 . 
 After a stint of festival appearances , Korn promoted The Path of Totality during a headlining tour of the same name . Korn split their show into three sections . The band kicked off by playing " rare " songs from their first two albums , including the b @-@ side " Proud " , which was previously included on the soundtrack to the 1997 film I Know What You Did Last Summer . They followed with a different stage set up , playing several of their new songs . The setlist ended with hit singles and an encore . Other appearances came from Dope <unk> , Datsik and <unk> . A special album release performance filmed and recorded at the Hollywood Palladium was issued in various formats through Shout ! Factory in September 2012 . The Path of Totality won Album of the Year at the 2012 Revolver Golden Gods Awards . This was Korn 's first victory at the Golden Gods Awards , a ceremony that celebrates the best in hard rock and heavy metal music . Korn was also inducted into the Kerrang ! Hall of Fame during the 2011 Kerrang ! Awards . 
 = = = The Paradigm Shift and The Serenity of Suffering ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 On July 18 , 2012 , Jonathan Davis told Billboard.com that Korn was getting ready to start recording their eleventh studio album that would be released independently . It was also announced that their next album would not contain any dubstep influences like The Path of Totality . Guitarist James " Munky " Shaffer stated in an interview with the Phoenix New Times that the new album would be heavier , with more aggressive " in @-@ your @-@ face " guitars and vocals . He went on to say that he would be using new recording techniques in the studio to give his riffs a fresh approach . 
 In November 2012 , Mudvayne bassist Ryan <unk> toured Korn as a temporary replacement for Reginald Arvizu , who stayed at home during his wife 's pregnancy . 
 In January 2013 , guitarist Brian " Head " Welch was confirmed to return to the band to play a number of festival shows , including Rock on the Range , Rock am Ring , Rock im Park and the Download Festival . His status in the band was initially thought to be temporary and for touring purposes only . Ray Luzier later announced at the Sabian show during NAMM that Welch would be joining Korn for the whole tour . Later in that month , techno artist Beta Traxx confirmed he was working on a new Korn song for their upcoming album , which he commented would sound " like the past and the future at the same time . " It was also confirmed by Ray Luzier that Don Gilmore would be producing the upcoming album . On February 12 , 2013 , The BK Entertainment Group updated their clients list and confirmed that Korn has signed to their management 's independent label ; Prospect Park Productions . Later , On June 1 , 2013 Caroline Records added Korn to their roster confirming that the band have been signed on to a contract with the label ; they are partnered with Korn 's management Prospect Park . On February 18 , 2013 , Korn posted a photo showing Head as part of the line up , which escalated rumors that he was in the process to rejoin Korn permanently . This was confirmed by Head himself in May , when it was also confirmed that he had been recording as part of the band for their upcoming album . 
 Fieldy has said of the album " Right now , I will tell you this ... we 've done something we 've never done before . Normally if we do a new Korn record , we 'll normally put 12 or 13 songs and that 's how many we make . This time we 've made 20 @-@ plus songs , and we 'll put the best of what we have on there , whatever the numbers end up being . We have so many to choose from , I think it 's going to be a little extra special this time . " Munky later confirmed this by saying that the band completed 25 songs and 15 of them would be put on the album . Head later elaborated that musically this was Korn 's best album . 
 Korn 's eleventh studio album , The Paradigm Shift , was released on October 8 , 2013 . Their first single , " Never Never " was set to be released August 12 , 2013 . The band recorded an episode of Guitar Center Sessions for DirecTV on September 11 , 2013 which is scheduled to premiere November 1 , 2013 on DirecTV Audience Channel . Korn will also be the latest act to be inducted into the world @-@ famous Hollywood <unk> on October 8 , 2013 . The band brought back their Family Values Tour as a one @-@ day festival , on October 5 , 2013 . The venue and line up were revealed on September 3 , 2013 . The music video for " Spike In My Veins " was released on February 6 , 2014 . The band performed the entirety of their self @-@ titled debut album on several occasions during 2015 . They are in the process of writing new songs for a twelfth studio album . Guitarist Head has described the music on the new album as " heavier than anyone 's heard us in a long time " . 
 On July 14 , 2016 guitarist James " Munky " Shaffer revealed to Metal Hammer that Corey Taylor of Slipknot / Stone Sour would make a guest appearance on the new album . He also revealed Nick Raskulinecz as the producer of the album . On July 16 , 2016 Korn premiered a new song , " Rotting In Vain " , at Chicago Open Air Festival . 
 = = Style , influences and legacy = = 
 The band has stated that their primary influences include Metallica , Nirvana , Led Zeppelin , Alice in Chains , Sepultura , Faith No More , Red Hot Chili Peppers , Soundgarden , Duran Duran , Fear Factory , Cathedral , Living Color , Helmet , Rage Against the Machine , Slayer , Pink Floyd , Primus , Tool , Ministry , Mr. Bungle , Biohazard , Nine Inch Nails , Pantera , Beastie Boys , Black Sabbath , N.W.A , Anthrax , and Jane 's Addiction . Much of their work has been inspired by hip hop music , as suggested in the cover song of Ice Cube 's " Wicked " , and " All in the Family " . 
 Korn are identified as the pioneers of nu metal music , a form of alternative metal music which began in the mid @-@ 1990s . While generally considered an alternative metal and nu metal band , the band has also been labeled as heavy metal , grunge metal , hard rock , rap metal , funk metal , groove metal and industrial metal . Their debut album mixed metal , funk , hip @-@ hop , groove , and dissonance . Their lyrics focus on pain and personal alienation rather than traditional heavy metal themes . In Nu @-@ metal : The Next Generation of Rock & Punk , Korn was marked as the third biggest nu metal band in the world . 
 There have been controversies and arguments over the band being heavy metal or not . In 2015 , lead singer Jonathan Davis commented , " Yeah , we ’ re heavy and downtuned , but metal , to me , is like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden , that ’ s metal man . I always thought of us as a funk band . " 
 The band 's debut album warranted a Parental Advisory label because of the album 's lyrics . Many of Korn 's first works are based on early experiences . The song " Daddy " was described by lead singer Jonathan Davis : " When I was a kid , I was being abused by somebody else and I went to my parents and told them about it , and they thought I was lying and joking around . They never did shit about it . They didn 't believe it was happening to their son .... I don 't really like to talk about that song . This is as much as I 've ever talked about it ... " " Kill You " was written about Davis 's experiences as a child with his step mother . Follow the Leader marked the first album where the majority of the lyrics did not have origins relating to early occurrences , with songs like " Justin " and " Pretty " written about incidents occurring during adulthood . 
 Bassist Reginald Arvizu plays his instrument using both the techniques of fingerstyle and slapping . Jonathan Davis was said by Doug Small to be " the eye of the storm around which the music of Korn rages . " Small described the band as " a basket @-@ case full of contradictions . " Although the band virtually had no support by television or by radio broadcasting in its first four years , Korn would go on to influence <unk> , Adema , Limp Bizkit , Linkin Park , Evanescence , P.O.D. , Cold , Machine Head , Staind , Seether , One Minute Silence , Flyleaf , Kittie , Endo , Taproot , Crazy Town , Otep , Hoobastank , Five Pointe O , Deftones , Lacuna Coil , Chris <unk> , <unk> , Theory of a Deadman , Thousand Foot Krutch , Breaking Benjamin , Papa Roach , Sevendust , Nonpoint , Saliva , Drowning Pool , Spineshank , Trust Company , Ill Nino , Shinedown , Coal Chamber , Three Days Grace , <unk> , <unk> , Molotov , Hollywood Undead and other bands . Korn also created a fan @-@ base described by both Doug Small and Eaton Entertainment as extremely loyal . 
 Korn 's debut album is said to have established the nu metal genre . Bands such as Coal Chamber and Limp Bizkit were inspired by the album 's " churning rage , emphasising similar grooves and song structures " and " the sound 's hip – hop elements . " Slipknot , Machine Head , and Sepultura were also inspired by Korn 's debut album . The album launched the career of record producer Ross Robinson , who later produced albums such as Three Dollar Bill , Yall by Limp Bizkit , Sepultura 's Roots and Slipknot 's first two albums . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Prior to the release of 1998 's Follow the Leader , Gretchen <unk> , a Zeeland , Michigan high school assistant principal , said in an interview for a Michigan newspaper that Korn 's music is " indecent , vulgar , obscene and intends to be insulting " after giving a student , Eric <unk> , a one @-@ day suspension for wearing a shirt with the Korn logo on it . <unk> was filmed giving away hundreds of free Korn T @-@ shirts , which were donated by the band , outside the school . Ottawa County policemen helped hand out shirts as well . Korn filed a cease and desist order against <unk> and the school district for their comments . They also threatened a multimillion @-@ dollar lawsuit , but both actions were dropped due to the band members ' personal lives . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Band members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Korn ( 1994 ) 
 Life Is Peachy ( 1996 ) 
 Follow the Leader ( 1998 ) 
 Issues ( 1999 ) 
 Untouchables ( 2002 ) 
 Take a Look in the Mirror ( 2003 ) 
 See You on the Other Side ( 2005 ) 
 Untitled album ( 2007 ) 
 Korn III : Remember Who You Are ( 2010 ) 
 The Path of Totality ( 2011 ) 
 The Paradigm Shift ( 2013 ) 
 The Serenity of Suffering ( 2016 ) 
 = Kajol = 
 Kajol Devgan ( née Mukherjee ) ( born 5 August 1974 ) , known mononymously as Kajol , is an Indian film actress who predominantly works in Hindi cinema . Born into the Mukherjee @-@ Samarth family , she is the daughter of actress Tanuja and late filmmaker Shomu Mukherjee . Through her Bollywood career , Kajol has established herself as one of the most popular actresses in India . She is the recipient of numerous accolades , including six Filmfare Awards , among twelve nominations , and along with her late aunt Nutan , holds the record for most Best Actress wins at Filmfare , with five . In 2011 , the Government of India awarded her with the Padma Shri , the fourth highest civilian honour of the country . 
 Kajol made her acting debut with the unsuccessful romantic drama Bekhudi ( 1992 ) , while still in school . She quit her studies to pursue acting , and had her first commercial successes with the thriller Baazigar ( 1993 ) . She subsequently rose to prominence by playing the lead female role in several romantic dramas , including Dilwale <unk> Le Jayenge ( 1995 ) , Pyaar Kiya To Darna Kya ( 1998 ) , Pyaar To <unk> Hi Tha ( 1998 ) , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) . Kajol also garnered critical acclaim for playing against type in the 1997 mystery film Gupt : The Hidden Truth and the 1998 psychological thriller Dushman . Following a sabbatical from full @-@ time acting in 2001 , Kajol returned to films with the 2006 romantic thriller Fanaa , and continued working infrequently thereafter , playing leading roles in the dramas U Me Aur Hum ( 2008 ) , My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) , We Are Family ( 2010 ) , and the comedy @-@ drama Dilwale ( 2015 ) . She , thus , established herself as one of India 's most successful actresses . 
 In addition to acting in films , Kajol is a social activist and is noted for her work with widows and children , for which she received the <unk> <unk> in 2008 . She has featured as a talent judge for Zee TV 's reality show , Rock @-@ N @-@ Roll Family and holds a managerial position at Devgn Entertainment and Software Ltd . Kajol has been married to actor Ajay Devgan since 1999 with whom she has two children . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Kajol was born in Mumbai to the Mukherjee @-@ Samarth film family of Bengali @-@ Marathi descent . Her mother , Tanuja , is an actress , while her father Shomu Mukherjee was a film director and producer . Shomu died in 2008 after suffering cardiac arrest . Kajol 's younger sister , <unk> Mukherjee is also an actress . Her maternal aunt was actress Nutan and her maternal grandmother , <unk> Samarth , and great grandmother , Rattan Bai , were both involved in Hindi cinema . Her paternal uncles , Joy Mukherjee and Deb Mukherjee , are film producers , while her paternal grandfather , Sashadhar Mukherjee , was a filmmaker . Kajol 's cousins Rani Mukerji , <unk> Mukherjee and Mohnish Behl are also Bollywood actors ; whereas another cousin of hers , Ayan Mukerji is a director . 
 Kajol describes herself as being " extremely mischievous " as a child . She added that she was very stubborn and impulsive from a very young age . Her parents separated when she was young ; but according to Tanuja , Kajol was not affected by the split as " we never argued in front of [ her ] " . In the absence of her mother , Kajol was looked after by her maternal grandmother , who " never let me feel that my mother was away and working " . According to Kajol , her mother inculcated a sense of independence in her at a very young age . Growing up between two separate cultures , she inherited her " Maharashtrian pragmatism " from her mother and her " Bengali temperament " from her father . 
 Kajol studied at the St Joseph Convent boarding school in Panchgani . Apart from her studies , she participated in extra @-@ curricular activities , such as dancing . It was in school that she began to form an active interest in reading fiction , as it helped her " through the bad moments " in her life . At the age of sixteen , she began work on Rahul Rawail 's film Bekhudi , which according to her was a " big dose of luck " . She initially intended to return to school after shooting for the film during her summer vacations . However , she eventually dropped out of school to pursue a full @-@ time career in film . On not completing her education , she quoted , " I don 't think I am any less well @-@ rounded because I didn 't complete school " . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1992 – 96 : Debut and breakthrough = = = 
 Kajol made her acting debut at the age of seventeen in the 1992 romantic drama Bekhudi alongside debutante Kamal <unk> and her mother Tanuja , who in the film also played her mother . Kajol played Radhika , a girl who falls in love with <unk> 's character despite her parents ' wish for her to marry another man . Although the film turned out to be a box office flop , Kajol 's performance was noticed and she was signed for Baazigar ( 1993 ) , a thriller by Abbas @-@ Mustan , which emerged as a major commercial success . Inspired from the Hollywood film A Kiss Before Dying , the film co @-@ starred Shah Rukh Khan , Shilpa Shetty and Siddharth Ray , and saw Kajol portray the leading role of Priya Chopra , a girl who falls in love with her sister 's murderer . The film marked the first of her many collaborations with Khan . 
 In 1994 , Kajol featured in the melodrama <unk> Ki Zindagi , as the granddaughter of the characters played by <unk> and <unk> Chatterjee . The film , which was a remake of the hit Telugu film , Seetharamaiah Gari Manavaralu , failed to do well at the box @-@ office . However , Kajol received praise for her performance and won the <unk> Award for Best Actress . She subsequently starred in and earned public recognition with Yash Raj Films 's hit romantic drama Yeh <unk> , alongside Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan . The film , which was an unofficial remake of the Hollywood film Sabrina , narrated the story of a chauffeur 's daughter who becomes a model , and engages in a love triangle between two brothers . The success of Yeh <unk> proved a breakthrough for Kajol and her performance in the film fetched her a first Best Actress nomination at the annual Filmfare Awards . 
 In 1995 , Kajol starred in two major commercial successes — Rakesh Roshan 's Karan Arjun and Aditya Chopra 's Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge — both opposite Shah Rukh Khan . The former was a melodramatic thriller , based on the concept of reincarnation , in which she played Sonia Saxena , a supporting character who forms the love interest of Khan . The film eventually emerged as the second @-@ highest grossing film of the year in India . She justified playing a minor role in the film by saying , " I did Karan Arjun because I wanted to know how it feels to be an ornament . I had nothing to do in the film except look good " . Kajol 's next three releases that year — <unk> , <unk> and <unk> — failed to do well commercially ; the latter two were her earliest collaborations with her future @-@ husband , the actor Ajay Devgn . 
 Kajol 's fifth and final release of the year , the romance Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge , was not only the biggest commercial success of 1995 , but also one of the most successful films of all time in India . The film , which earned a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 23 billion ( US $ 18 million ) at the time of release , has been continuously running in Mumbai ever since . Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was also a major critical success ; it won ten Filmfare Awards , and Kajol 's performance as Simran Singh , a young Non @-@ resident Indian from London who falls for Shah Rukh Khan 's character was praised , earning her a first Filmfare Award for Best Actress . In 2005 , Indiatimes Movies ranked the movie amongst the 25 Must See Bollywood Films , citing it as a " trendsetter of sorts " . In that same year 's retrospective review by Rediff , Raja Sen stated that Kajol was " wisely picked ... to play Simran , the real @-@ as @-@ life actress bringing warmth and credulity to the initially prudish and reluctant Simran . Not to mention the on @-@ screen chemistry that has become the stuff of legend . " In 1996 , Kajol starred in Vikram Bhatt 's action drama <unk> Ka Babu , opposite Saif Ali Khan and Atul Agnihotri . Upon release , the film emerged as a major critical and commercial disaster . 
 = = = 1997 – 98 : Widespread success = = = 
 In 1997 , her portrayal of Isha Diwan , a psychopath serial killer and obsessive lover , in Gupt : The Hidden Truth , was lauded by critics and proved to be a major turning point in her career . She explained that playing Diwan was the " toughest role " of her career as it was " difficult to play a mean character " . In an interview with The Hindu , director Rajiv Rai quoted , " [ I ] tapped the versatile artistry in Kajol in Gupt ! [ She ] had a complex role and she certainly brought a rare finesse to her etching of that character in the film " . The suspense thriller , which co @-@ starred Bobby Deol and Manisha Koirala , also emerged as a major commercial success . Kajol eventually became the first actress to be nominated in and win the Filmfare Award for Best Performance in a Negative Role . 
 Following a leading role opposite Saif Ali Khan and Aditya Pancholi in Sanjay Gupta 's box office flop , the reincarnation romance <unk> , Kajol starred as an aspiring nun in Rajiv Menon 's Tamil film - the romantic drama <unk> Kanavu - opposite Arvind Swamy and Prabhu Deva . Kajol revealed that she found dancing alongside Prabhu Deva difficult and it " took me 20 retakes and 30 rehearsals " to get the steps right . Her performance met with appreciation with The Indian Express reviewing , " Kajol is full of beans and fits into her character with commendable ease . Hers is perhaps one of the most expressive faces of the present . " The film was dubbed in Hindi as <unk> and released in Northern India . The original Tamil version was a box @-@ office success , but the dubbed version emerged as a commercial failure . Her next release was Indra Kumar 's romantic comedy Ishq alongside Aamir Khan , Juhi Chawla and Ajay Devgn , in which she played Kajal , a poor girl in love with a rich boy , played by Devgn . Upon release , the film emerged as a major commercial success , with critical praise directed to the performances of the four leads . 
 In 1998 , Kajol established herself as a leading actress of contemporary Hindi cinema by featuring in three of the top @-@ grossing productions of the year . Her first release that year was Sohail Khan 's romantic comedy Pyaar Kiya To Darna Kya , in which she played <unk> Thakur , a naive village girl who falls in love with a rich boy ( played by Salman Khan ) , but faces difficulties in convincing her elder brother about her relationship . The film not just emerged as a box office hit , but also garnered positive comments from critics , as did Kajol 's performance . In her next release , the psychological thriller Dushman , Kajol played the dual roles of twin sisters , Sonia and Naina Saigal , alongside Sanjay Dutt and Ashutosh Rana . Directed by Tanuja Chandra and written by Mahesh Bhatt , the film revolves around Naina avenging the rape and murder of her sister , and won Kajol critical appreciation with reviewer Sukanya Verma writing , " Kajol is in superb form , both as the opinionated career @-@ minded twin who is murdered , and as the avenger . Even she must have preferred less glycerine and more restraint . " Despite underperforming at the box @-@ office , Dushman proved to be a major critical success . For her performance , Kajol won her first Screen Award for Best Actress and received a Best Actress nomination at Filmfare . 
 She next starred opposite Ajay Devgn in Anees Bazmee 's romantic comedy Pyaar To <unk> Hi Tha , a remake of the Hollywood hit French Kiss . In the film , she played the comic role of Sanjana , a clumsy woman who travels from Paris to India in search of her philandering fiancé , however , falls for another man , played by Devgn . A review from Planet Bollywood noted , " Kajol , like usual , is brilliant in her role as Sanjana . She makes you cry , laugh , get angry , and smile all within the two and a half hour movie . Her acting is on par with Meg Ryan in the English flick " . The film emerged as a " super @-@ hit " commercially and fetched Kajol a second Best Actress nomination at Filmfare that year . 
 However , her biggest success that year was her final release , Karan Johar 's directorial debut , the romance Kuch Kuch Hota Hai . Co @-@ starring Shah Rukh Khan , her cousin Rani Mukerji and Salman Khan , the film emerged as an all @-@ time blockbuster in both India and overseas with a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) . Kajol played Anjali Sharma , an unattractive fun @-@ loving tomboy , who later transforms into a feminine and beautiful girl , and is secretly in love with her best friend , played by Shah Rukh Khan . A review carried by The Times of India wrote , " Kajol is almost mesmeric as Anjali , the firebrand youngster who doesn 't know whether she should settle for best girl or basketball buddy . [ ... ] Kajol with her baggy apparel , her bouncy bob cut and her boyish banter is absolutely riveting . " She eventually won her second Best Actress award at the 44th Filmfare Awards ceremony and first Zee Cine Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film . Filmfare included Kajol 's work in both Dushman and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai in their listing of Indian cinema 's " 80 Most Iconic performances " . 
 = = = 1999 – 2001 : Career fluctuations and reinvented success = = = 
 In 1999 , post her marriage with Ajay Devgn , Kajol featured in a supporting role alongside him and Mahima Chaudhry in Prakash Jha 's drama Dil Kya Kare . She played Nandita Rai , the other woman in the life of Anant Kishore , played by Devgn . In an interview with Filmfare she explained , " The only reason , I agreed to play my character was because it had shades of grey . I would have probably refused the wife 's role . Because I felt it had nothing for me to do . " Upon release , the film met with largely negative reviews . Critic Sharmila <unk> , however , described Kajol as " the only person who gives her role a semblance of sanity " . Commercially too , the film failed to do well . However , her next release , Satish Kaushik 's woman 's film , the drama Hum Aapke Dil Mein <unk> Hain , emerged as a critical and commercial success . Starring alongside Anil Kapoor , Kajol received another Best Actress nomination at the Filmfare ceremony for her portrayal of Megha , the deceived wife of Kapoor 's character . The film met with wide media coverage for being one of the few woman @-@ centered films to emerge as a commercial success in India . 
 Kajol 's third and final release of 1999 was the critically and commercially unsuccessful romantic drama <unk> <unk> Pyar Ho Gaya , alongside Jackie Shroff , Atul Agnihotri and Ayesha <unk> . The following year , she featured alongside her husband once again , in his home @-@ production Raju Chacha . The children 's film , with a production cost of ₹ 300 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 million ) was described as the " most expensive Bollywood film ever " , at the time . Upon release , the film met with negative reviews and flopped at the box @-@ office . Kajol 's first release of 2001 was Rahul Rawail 's comedy film Kuch <unk> Kuch <unk> , where she played the double role of Tina and Sweety Khanna , twin sisters who are separated at birth . The film was a major commercial failure and fetched negative reviews from critics . Writing for Rediff.com , <unk> R <unk> criticised Kajol 's decision to star in the film ; termed her as a " glamorous prop " and described her performance as " uninspiring " . 
 Later that year , she played a leading role in Karan Johar 's family drama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... , which was a blockbuster in India and the top @-@ grossing Indian production of all @-@ time in the overseas market until 2006 . Also featuring Amitabh Bachchan , Jaya Bachchan , Shah Rukh Khan , Hrithik Roshan and Kareena Kapoor in prominent roles , Kajol played the role of Anjali Sharma , a young Punjabi woman from Delhi 's Chandni Chowk area , who falls for the rich Rahul Raichand , played by Khan . Kajol , faced initial difficulties while filming for her scenes , as she was required to speak in Punjabi , a language she wasn 't fluent in . However , she learnt the right pronunciation and diction with the help of producer , Yash Johar and the crew members . Her comic @-@ dramatic performance met with unanimous critical acclaim and won her several awards , including her third Filmfare Award and her second Screen Award in the Best Actress category . Taran Adarsh labelled her as " first @-@ rate " and predicted that her " Punjabi dialect will win her immense praise " . The Hindu wrote , " Kajol ... steals the thunder from under very high noses indeed . With her precise timing and subtle lingering expression , she is a delight all the way . " 
 Following the success of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... , Kajol took a sabbatical from full @-@ time acting . In an interview with The Times of India she revealed , " I 'm not quitting films , I 'm just being selective . Fortunately , I 'm in a position where I can pick and choose . " She added that the reason behind the break was to concentrate on her marriage and " start a family " . 
 = = = 2006 – 10 ; 2015 : Comeback and recent work = = = 
 Kajol returned to films in 2006 with Kunal Kohli 's romantic thriller Fanaa , opposite Aamir Khan . She , however , refused to term Fanaa as her " comeback film " because , " I never retired . I had just taken a break " . The film emerged as a major box @-@ office success with a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) . She portrayed the role of <unk> Ali Beg , a blind Kashmiri girl who unwittingly falls in love with a terrorist , played by Khan . Both the film as well as Kajol 's performance were well received , with reviewer Sudish Kamat calling her the " only reason to watch the film " and adding , " Kajol performs like she never took a break from celluloid and <unk> up the film with her presence . " A review carried by Bloomberg noted , " [ Kajol ] still has the ability to light up the screen with ease , making her one of the few leading ladies who can more than match Khan 's method @-@ driven prowess . " Her work in Fanaa fetched Kajol a fourth Filmfare Award and second Zee Cine Award in Best Actress category . 
 After the success of Fanaa , Kajol worked intermittently through the rest of the decade . She next starred in her husband 's directorial debut , the drama U Me Aur Hum ( 2008 ) as Piya , a woman suffering from Alzheimer 's disease . Devgn described Kajol 's participation in the project by saying , " She is always thorough with the nitty @-@ <unk> of her character before she begins shooting . Since the screenplay work happened at home , Kajol was present for all the sittings and even gave her inputs . " Upon release , the film performed moderately well at the box @-@ office and earned positive critical reviews for her performance . Udita Jhunjhunwala noted , " Kajol completely comes into her own here as an ailing woman unaware of her vulnerability and delicate situation . She is superb . " Raja Sen added , " [ Kajol ] can span through happy @-@ breezy with her eyes closed , and so the first half doesn 't even pose her a challenge , but when Alzheimer 's strikes Piya and she begins to forget all that matters in her life , Kajol raises the bar strikingly high . " The following year , Kajol received another Best Actress nomination at the Filmfare Awards ceremony . 
 Kajol was next cast opposite Shah Rukh Khan in Karan Johar 's My Name Is Khan , a counter @-@ terrorism drama based on the ethnic profiling and discrimination faced by American Muslims post the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks My Name Is Khan released in February 2010 to highly positive reviews and emerged as an international success with a worldwide gross of ₹ 2 billion ( US $ 30 million ) . Kajol 's portrayal of Mandira , a divorced , Hindu single mother who marries a Muslim autistic man was praised by critics , with Rajeev Masand observing , " Bringing emotional depth to what is essentially Rizwan 's story , Kajol is immensely likeable as Mandira , using her eyes to convey volumes , topping the performance off with a powerful breakdown scene that literally puts her through the wringer . " Kajol won her fifth Best Actress award at the Filmfare for the film , thereby sharing the record for the most Best Actress wins with her aunt , Nutan . 
 She next starred alongside Kareena Kapoor and Arjun Rampal in Siddharth Malhotra 's moderately successful family drama We Are Family , an official adaptation of the Hollywood tearjerker <unk> ( 1998 ) . Kajol played the role of Maya , a character originally played by Susan Sarandon , and which she described as " a control freak " , believing it " is something which every woman would identify with . " While reviewing the film for Hindustan Times , critic Mayank Shekhar stated , " The premise is stuff dry tissues are made for . Yet , the pathos here is produced not from moments , but from performances alone : a stunning Kajol 's in particular . She appears superior to Susan Sarandon , I suspect . " New York Times 's Rachel Saltz wrote , " The always appealing Kajol knows how to play melodrama without being melodramatic , and her naturalism gives the movie a genuine emotional kick . " Her final release of the year was <unk> Ka Super Hero , a live @-@ action / animated film , opposite Ajay Devgn . In an interview with The Express Tribune , Kajol mentioned that it was difficult to work on the film . She added , " Dubbing and shooting was equally frustrating . You had to keep so many things in mind and there were a few action sequences too where I had to do action in front of a green space , so I was smiling , scowling , laughing – all in the wrong places ! " The film was a critical and commercial failure and fetched Kajol mostly negative reviews for playing a role that provided her with " no scope " to perform . 
 After another five @-@ year absence from the screen , Kajol starred with Shah Rukh Khan for the seventh time ( alongside Varun Dhawan and Kriti Sanon ) in Rohit Shetty 's comedy @-@ drama Dilwale ( 2015 ) . She portrayed Meera Dev Malik , the daughter of a mafia don who falls in love with a man from her rival family . Reviewers were generally negative about the film , however , Kajol 's performance received a mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reception . <unk> Singh of India Today wrote : " Kajol is a radiant presence on the screen and delivers what 's expected out of her - which is not much . " Dilwale emerged as a major commercial success and garnered Kajol another Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination . 
 = = Off @-@ screen work = = 
 = = = Managerial work = = = 
 In 1999 , following the launch of Ajay Devgn 's production company , Devgan Films ( now renamed Devgn Entertainment and Software Ltd ) , Kajol worked towards building a website for the company . In 2000 , she launched an online portal , <unk> for the production company . She explained , " The portal takes into account every aspect of film @-@ making . My role is that of a supervisor . I just have to overlook the proceedings . We have our hands in everything . We are making software for TV and music videos . " She , however , clarified that she wasn 't involved in the production aspect of the company , but participated in supervising and " overseeing everything " . She was named a part @-@ time member of <unk> Bharati in 2016 . 
 = = = Stage performance and television = = = 
 In 1998 , Kajol participated in a concert tour entitled Awesome Foursome alongside Shahrukh Khan , Juhi Chawla , and Akshay Kumar . After travelling across United Kingdom , Canada and the United States of America , Kajol refused to participate in any more world tours , as she couldn 't handle " the stress " . 
 In 2008 , Kajol featured as a talent judge , alongside her husband , Ajay Devgn and mother , Tanuja , in Zee TV 's family reality show , Rock @-@ N @-@ Roll Family . She described her experience of working in television by saying , " Working on television is much , much tougher than films . But television has a great connect with a live audience which is a refreshing change for us actors . " 
 = = = Social work = = = 
 Kajol has been actively involved in several philanthropic endeavours related to women and children . According to her , " every child deserves education " , as " education is the basis of society " . In 2008 , she was awarded with the <unk> <unk> , for her contribution in the field of social service . 
 Kajol is involved with Shiksha , an NGO that works in the field of children 's education . In 2009 , she launched the Shiksha 2009 campaign , to support the cause . In 2011 , Kajol participated in a fashion show organised by the Cancer Patients Aid Association , to generate funds for the organisation . Kajol is the international goodwill ambassador and patron of The <unk> Trust — a charity organisation devoted to supporting widows and their children around the world , particularly in India . Speaking about the issue , she said : " It 's sad to know that widows are still considered a blight in our society . There are widows who are still not marriageable . I strongly feel for them and take it as a social responsibility to eradicate the issue . " 
 In 2012 , Kajol was appointed as the brand ambassador of Pratham , a charity organisation for children . In April , she featured in a short film about education and literacy , with the children of Hanuman <unk> Primary School in Mumbai , for the organisation . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kajol began dating fellow actor , Ajay Devgn , in 1994 , while filming for <unk> . Members of the media , however , labelled them as an " unlikely pair " due to their contrasting personalities . Devgn explained their relationship by saying , " We never resorted to the usual ' I Love you ' routine . A proposal never happened . We grew with each other . Marriage was never discussed , but it was always imminent " . They subsequently got married on 24 February 1999 in a traditional Maharashtrian style ceremony at the Devgan house . The wedding was subject to wide media scrutiny , as certain members of the media criticised Kajol 's decision to settle down at the " peak of her career " . Kajol , however , maintained that she would not quit films , but would cut down on the amount of work that she did . 
 Following her marriage , Kajol moved in with Devgn and his parents at the latter 's ancestral house in Juhu . While media members speculated about a lack of compatibility between her in @-@ laws and her , Kajol clarified that they were " like parents to me " and encouraged her to continue working in films . Tabloids have often romantically linked Devgn with other Bollywood actresses , and have reported about an imminent divorce . <unk> the rumours , Kajol stated , " I don 't believe in those rumours because I know the way this industry functions . [ ... ] You cannot continue a marriage without the basic trust . Frankly , I don 't care for such talk . " 
 In 2001 , Kajol was pregnant with her first child . However , due to an ectopic pregnancy , she suffered from a miscarriage . On 20 April 2003 , Kajol gave birth to a daughter , <unk> . Seven years later , on 13 September 2010 , she gave birth to a son , <unk> . She described motherhood as " fab " and added that her kids brought out " the best in her " . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Film critic Sukanya Verma has described Kajol as a " contrasting personality " . She wrote , " Think Kajol , think emotions . Either she is the firebrand or the emotional sensitive types . [ And sometimes ] she is pure , wicked fun . " Initially termed by journalists as " an impulsive and impetuous brat " , Kajol has defied the stereotypical image of a Hindi film heroine in several ways . Journalist Kaveree Bamzai elaborated , " She hardly looks into the mirror , barely even glances at the set monitor , usually the crutch of every insecure actor , puts on make @-@ up only under extreme duress , and [ ... ] never watches her old movies . " 
 Kajol has often been criticised in the media for " her lack of interest in maintaining her appearance by means of slimming , grooming , jewellery or fashion " . Filmfare labelled her as an " unconventional beauty " and added , " Not one to abide by the trending norms , Kajol set her own rules in the ' 90s , a time when individuality didn 't work for most heroines . " . 
 After portraying leading roles in a series of family dramas , Kajol showed versatility as an actress with Gupt , and was subsequently noted in the media for her unconventional approach in selecting projects . Her acting style has been described as being " natural " . According to the The Hindu , " What Kajol abounds in is talent and a felicity for expression . Kajol does not act out her scenes and deliver her lines ; she inhabits her characters . " Furthermore , unlike most of her contemporaries , Kajol has had a successful career post @-@ marriage and motherhood . Certain members of the media , however , attribute her success to her friendship with Karan Johar , Aditya Chopra and Shahrukh Khan , who " still find central roles for her in their movies " . 
 Kajol featured in Box Office India 's Top Actresses list for five consecutive years ( 1995 – 99 ) . In 2001 and 2006 , following the commercial success of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... and Fanaa , respectively , Kajol featured in Rediff 's annual Top Bollywood actresses listing . In 2007 , Kajol occupied the ninth spot in Rediff 's listing of the Best Bollywood Actresses . Ever . In 2011 , the Government of India honoured her with the Padma Shri for her contribution to Indian Cinema . 
 In 2006 , Kajol was one of the four Bollywood actors , alongside Priyanka Chopra , Hrithik Roshan and Shahrukh Khan , whose miniature dolls were launched in the United Kingdom , under the name of " Bollywood Legends " . In 2010 , Kajol and her My Name is Khan co @-@ star , Shahrukh Khan , became the first Indian actors to be invited by NASDAQ to open the American stock exchange . In 2012 , Kajol was placed at the fourth position by NDTV in the listing of " The most popular actresses of all time " , behind actresses Madhuri Dixit , Sridevi and Meena Kumari . The same year , she was featured by Yahoo.com as one of the ten most iconic beauties of Hindi cinema . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Kajol has received six Filmfare Awards , including five Best Actress awards for Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ( 1995 ) , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) , Fanaa ( 2006 ) and My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) , and a Best Villain award ( also known as Filmfare Award for Best Performance In a Negative Role ) for Gupt : The Hidden Truth ( 1997 ) . In 2011 , she was awarded Padma Shri , the fourth @-@ highest Indian civilian award , by the Government of India for her contributions to the arts . 
 = Banksia telmatiaea = 
 Banksia telmatiaea , commonly known as swamp fox banksia or rarely marsh banksia , is a shrub that grows in marshes and swamps along the lower west coast of Australia . It grows as an upright bush up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) tall , with narrow leaves and a pale brown flower spike , which can produce profuse quantities of nectar . First collected in the 1840s , it was not published as a separate species until 1981 ; as with several other similar species it was previously included in B. sphaerocarpa ( Fox Banksia ) . 
 The shrub grows amongst scrubland in seasonally wet lowland areas of the coastal sandplain between Badgingarra and Serpentine in Western Australia . A little studied species , not much is known of its ecology or conservation biology . Reports do suggest , however , that it is pollinated by a variety of birds and small mammals . Like many members of series Abietinae , it has not been considered to have much horticultural potential and is rarely cultivated . 
 = = Description = = 
 B. telmatiaea grows as an upright bush up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) high . It has hairy stems and branchlets , and straight , narrow leaves from 1 ½ to 3 cm ( ½ – 1 in ) long and about a millimetre ( 1 ⁄ 16 in ) wide . The leaves have a green upper surface and white hairy undersurface . The new growth is pale brown , later turning green . 
 Flowers occur in " flower spikes " , inflorescences made up of hundreds of flower pairs densely packed around a woody axis . Arising from short lateral branchlets off stems older than four years of age , the inflorescence of B. telmatiaea is roughly oval to cylindrical , with a height of 3 – 5 cm ( 1 – 2 in ) and diameter of 4 – 7 cm ( 11 ⁄ 2 – 23 ⁄ 4 in ) . It contains between 500 and 900 golden brown to pale brown flowers , each of which consists of a tubular perianth made up of four fused tepals , and one long wiry style . The styles are hooked rather than straight , and are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis . The species generally flowers from April to August , although flowers have been observed as late as November . They take five to six weeks to develop from bud , then reach anthesis over a period of two weeks . The flowers produce unusually large quantities of nectar ; indeed some flowers produce so much that it drips to the ground . 
 The fruiting structure is a stout woody " cone " , with a hairy appearance caused by the persistence of old withered flower parts . Up to 70 woody follicles , each of which contains a single seed , may be embedded in the cone . As with other Banksia species , only a small proportion of flowers go on to form follicles ; in the case of B. telmatiaea , the proportion is around 4 % for those " cones " that set some fruit . However , about 80 % of fruiting structures set no fruit at all . According to John K. Scott , " there [ is ] no obvious reason on the basis of morphology of pollination for this lack of seed set " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 B. telmatiaea was first collected around 1840 by Ludwig Preiss and James Drummond . For many years it was included in B. sphaerocarpa , but by 1980 it was recognised as a distinct species . In recognition of its distinctness from , yet affinity with , B. sphaerocarpa , it was for a time informally referred to as Banksia aff . <unk> . It was eventually published by Alex George in his 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) , based on a specimen collected by him on the Brand Highway about 45 km ( 28 mi ) north of Regans Ford on 14 May 1969 , and labelled " A. S. George <unk> " . He found it most closely resembled B. leptophylla , but regarded its preference for swampy rather than sandy soils and winter flowering as worthy of warranting species status . George gave it the specific name telmatiaea from the Greek stem <unk> / <unk> ( " the mud of a pond " ) , in reference to its swampy habitat . Thus the full name for the species is Banksia telmatiaea <unk> Common names for B. telmatiaea include swamp fox banksia and marsh banksia . 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 George placed B. telmatiaea in subgenus Banksia because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike , section Oncostylis because it has hooked styles , and series Abietinae because its inflorescence is roughly spherical . He considered its closest relative to be B. leptophylla ( Slender @-@ leaved Banksia ) , which differs from B. telmatiaea in having longer leaves and larger flowers ; yet in his arrangement he placed it between B. scabrella ( Burma Road Banksia ) and B. laricina ( Rose @-@ fruited Banksia ) . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . B. ser . Abietinae was found to be very nearly monophyletic , and so retained . It further resolved into four subclades , so Thiele and Ladiges split it into four subseries . B. telmatiaea appeared in the third of these : 
 This clade became the basis of B. subser . <unk> , which Thiele defined as containing those species with " <unk> and <unk> common bracts on the infructescence axes , and densely <unk> seedling stems . " In accordance with their cladogram , their arrangement placed B. telmatiaea next to B. scabrella . 
 Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement was not accepted by George , and was largely discarded by him in his 1999 arrangement . B. ser . Abietinae was restored to George 's 1981 circumscription , and all of Thiele and Ladiges ' subseries were abandoned . However , B. telmatiaea was moved in the phyletic order to between B. grossa ( Coarse Banksia ) and B. leptophylla , thus better according with the affinity with B. leptophylla claimed by George in 1981 . 
 The placement of B. telmatiaea in George 's 1999 arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia ( 9 series , 50 species , 9 subspecies , 3 varieties ) 
 B. sect . Coccinea ( 1 species ) 
 B. sect . Oncostylis 
 B. ser . Spicigerae ( 7 species , 2 subspecies , 4 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Tricuspidae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Dryandroideae ( 1 species ) 
 B. ser . Abietinae 
 B. sphaerocarpa ( 3 varieties ) 
 B. micrantha 
 B. grossa 
 B. telmatiaea 
 B. leptophylla ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. lanata 
 B. scabrella 
 B. violacea 
 B. incana 
 B. laricina 
 B. pulchella 
 B. meisneri ( 2 subspecies ) 
 B. nutans ( 2 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is very different from George 's arrangement . With respect to B. telmatiaea , Mast 's results accord closely with Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement , inferring a polytomous clade consisting of B. leptophylla , B. telmatiaea , B. scabrella and B. lanata , with B. grossa ( Coarse Banksia ) as the nearest outgroup : 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement of Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. telmatiaea is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. telmatiaea grows only in the Swan Coastal Plain , Geraldton Sandplains and Jarrah Forest biogeographic regions , inland from the coast but never east of the Darling Scarp . It occurs from Hill River near Badgingarra in the north , to Serpentine in the south . Most populations occur north of Moore River or south of Cannington , there being only a few scattered populations in between . 
 The species favours lowland areas that are seasonally wet but never inundated , such as the margins of swamps and marshes . For example , in the Yule Brook Botany Reserve , where parallel sand ridges cross a clay flat , B. telmatiaea occurs neither in the lowest parts of the flat , where seasonal inundation occurs ; nor on the tops of the ridges , where the drainage is good ; but it is one of the most abundant plants of intermediate habitats , on ridge slopes and in higher areas of the clay flat . 
 Favoured soils are deep grey sandy loams or shallower sand overlying <unk> . Associated vegetation is typically scrubland or shrubland , although moisture @-@ loving trees such as B. littoralis ( Swamp Banksia ) or Melaleuca preissiana ( <unk> ) may also be present , sometimes in sufficient numbers to form a low open woodland . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. telmatiaea has proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These roots are particularly efficient at absorbing nutrients from nutrient @-@ poor soils , such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . 
 Unlike many Banksia species , B. telmatiaea lacks a lignotuber , so plants are killed by bushfire . However , it is adapted to release its aerial seed bank following a bushfire , and so regenerates rapidly . This behaviour , known as serotiny , makes B. telmatiaea dependent upon a suitable fire regime for successful regeneration ; indeed , excessive fire frequency may be one reason why B. telmatiaea does not occur further south , despite suitable habitat throughout southwest Australia . Unlike most serotinous Banksia species , the seeds of B. telmatiaea are not released immediately after the passage of a bushfire . The follicles open straight away , but at first the seeds are blocked from falling out by the winged seed separator . If moistened , these wings close up , and as they dry they open out again , levering the seeds out of position , making it possible for them to fall . This adaptation ensures that seeds are released only after the first rains following a bushfire . 
 Four species of bird have been observed visiting the flowers of B. telmatiaea : the red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , silvereye ( Zosterops lateralis ) , New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) and the brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) . The introduced European honeybee ( Apis mellifera ) is also commonly observed , and visits by ants and Hylaeus plasterer bees have been recorded . Visits by nectarivorous mammals have not been directly observed , but their involvement in pollination is certain , as their scats have often been found on inflorescences , and studies of other Banksia species have consistently demonstrated their involvement . Moreover , a number of characteristics of the B. telmatiaea spike are purported to be adaptations to pollination by nocturnal mammals : the strong , musky odour , the occurrence of inflorescences hidden within the foliage close to the ground , the large amounts of nectar produced , and the pattern of nectar production , which peaks at dawn and dusk . This last adaptation is thought to favour visits by birds and mammals , which feed in the morning and evening respectively , as opposed to insects , which are most active during the day . 
 Reproductive success is strongly affected by insects that infest the flower spikes and fruiting structures . Infestation of the flower spikes is not as severe as in other Banksia species : one study found less than 10 % of B. telmatiaea inflorescences to be infested , compared to over 50 % for B. attenuata ( Candlestick Banksia ) , B. littoralis and B. menziesii ( Menzies ' Banksia ) , and over 90 % for B. grandis ( Bull Banksia ) . Also , whereas other species were attacked by a range of insects , the inflorescence of B. telmatiaea was attacked only by the <unk> moth Arotrophora <unk> ( Banksia Boring Moth ) , which burrows into the woody axis , rendering the spike barren . On the other hand , the same study observed heavy infestation of fruiting structures , with over 90 % of spikes with follicles found to contain at least one larva of an unidentified species of moth of the genus Xylorycta . These larvae burrow from follicle to follicle to eat the seed , resulting in 100 % seed loss for infested spikes . 
 B. telmatiaea is one of five Banksia species , all closely related to B. sphaerocarpa , that have highly unusual flower nectar . Whereas other Banksia species produce nectar that is clear and watery , the nectar of these species is pale yellow initially , but gradually becomes darker and thicker , changing to a thick , olive @-@ green mucilage within one to two days of secretion . In the case of B. telmatiaea , it eventually becomes " an almost black , gelatinous lump adhering to the base of the flowers " . This unusual nectar was first noted in 1980 by Byron Lamont , who attributed its transformation to the cyanobacteria that he observed feeding off the nectar sugars . Noting that many of these cyanobacteria had heterocysts , he speculated that they aid the plant by fixing atmospheric nitrogen , which is then washed off the flower heads by rain , and absorbed by the proteoid root mat . This purported symbiosis was investigated in 1985 , but no evidence of nitrogen fixing was found . Further investigations in 1996 suggested that the discolouration is not caused by cyanobacteria or other microorganisms in the nectar , but is rather " a chemical phenomenon of plant origin " . As of February 2007 , the cause was still unknown . Chemical analysis of B. telmatiaea nectar has shown it to have a normal nectar sugar composition , albeit dominated by sucrose . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 B. telmatiaea is a fairly secure species , as most populations are of more than 100 plants , and 26 % of known plants are in conservation reserves . Its proximity to Perth suggests that land clearing for urban development could pose a threat , and in 1988 The Banksia Atlas recommended that " the species should continue to be monitored since land clearing could change the situation greatly , particularly amongst its northern populations . " It is also known to be susceptible to dieback caused by the introduced plant pathogen Phytophthora cinnamomi , a soil @-@ borne water mould that causes root rot ; in fact it is so reliably susceptible that it used as an indicator species for the presence of the disease . An assessment of the potential impact of climate change on this species found that severe change is likely to lead to extinction ; but under less severe change scenarios the distribution may actually grow , depending on how effectively it can migrate into newly habitable areas . 
 In 1987 , George applied the Rare or Threatened Australian Plants ( ROTAP ) criteria to the species , determining it to have a conservation status of " 3R " : a rare species found only in small populations , but not considered endangered or vulnerable . Western Australia 's Department of Parks and Wildlife do not consider it to be rare , however , and have not included it on their Declared Rare and Priority Flora List . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 B. telmatiaea is rarely cultivated . It grows fairly quickly , but tends to become untidy as it ages . The flower spikes , though attractive , occur within the bush where they are usually obscured by foliage . In its natural habitat it flowers prolifically over several months , but according to George it may be reluctant to flower in cultivation . It tolerates light pruning not below the green foliage . George recommends a sunny position in poorly drained soil , preferably with moisture in winter . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take around 14 days to germinate . 
 = Monster ( Kanye West song ) = 
 " Monster " is a song by American hip hop recording artist Kanye West , released as the third single from his fifth studio album , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . The track features rappers Jay @-@ Z , Rick Ross , Nicki Minaj , and singer Justin Vernon of indie folk group Bon Iver . All five credited performers have writing credits on the posse cut , with the production handled by West and Mike Dean . Lyrically the song expresses often disturbing , horror film influenced concepts , with some comparing the track 's eerie aesthetic to the Michael Jackson song " Thriller " . The song contains an atmospheric , drum @-@ heavy composition , notable for featuring no samples . 
 Originally released through West 's GOOD Friday initiative , a weekly free music giveaway started by the rapper to promote My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , the song was later confirmed to be featured on the album , and was released as a digital download on October 23 . The song received acclaim from music critics , and was listed amongst the best tracks of 2010 by publications , with NME placing it at number 53 on its list of the " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . The song was applauded for its funky , bombastic beat , with West 's and Minaj 's contributions to the song receiving particularly positive notices . 
 The song debuted and peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at position 18 . The track was promoted with a music video directed by Jake Nava . The music video had several references to horror films and featured extensive horror imagery , with zombies , decapitated corpses and heavily atmospheric cinematography . The music video was widely controversial , being banned from MTV . The video has been criticized for its negative sexual portrayal of women , and the content of the video was described as weird and disturbing in nature . 
 = = Background = = 
 To promote his upcoming fifth album , West launched GOOD Fridays , a weekly free music giveaway . The intention was to release a free new song every Friday for a few months , and the weekly tracks generally featured various rappers from his label , GOOD Music , and other artists he usually collaborated with . In the first week West released onto his website a remix of the album 's first single , " Power " , and " Monster " was released on the second week . The song was promptly removed from his website and replaced with another track , with " Monster " being uploaded as a digital single onto iTunes . West announced that " Monster " was actually intended for his collaborative album Watch the Throne with Jay @-@ Z. West 's announcement failed to surface however , and the song actually appeared on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and was released as the album 's third single . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Following some media controversies , West chose to record his fifth studio My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy in a reclusive manner in Oahu , Hawaii . Like the majority of the album , " Monster " was composed there . Rapper Rick Ross was invited to Hawaii to work with West , because West was set to produce the song " Live Fast , Die Young " , which appeared on Teflon Don , an album by Ross . While Ross was there with West in his recording studio , he actually walked in on West while recording another song . Ross was not initially intended to be featured on West 's album , however Ross was so impressed with what he heard he decided to record a quick , though short verse . 
 Ross had the concept of the song explained to him by West , which according to Ross , blew him away in presentation . West was so impressed by Ross that he invited him back to his studio during the final stages of the album , where he also appeared on " Devil in a New Dress " . While Ross was there , both Jay @-@ Z and Minaj were recording their verses . Ross expressed his admiration for Minaj , who impressed him during the recording . He stated that what he had observed had earned him respect for Minaj , who called the recording process a " moment of history " . 
 Minaj expressed excitement when approached to collaborate on the song , and she had contributed 32 bars to the track . Her main inspiration behind working on the track was the possibility of meeting Jay @-@ Z , with whom she was obsessed since a young age . According to her , she literally couldn 't have a conversation without quoting a line by him , and it was a dream come true to collaborate with the artist . Minaj had recorded her lines around four months before the lyrics finally appeared on the song . Minaj described both Jay @-@ Z and West as " icons " , and stated that she was blessed to be working with them . In an interview with Rap @-@ Up , Minaj mused " never in a billion years would 've thought that I would 've not only been on a song with one of them but both them " . 
 Justin Vernon 's involvement on the song stemmed from being approached by West directly . West first got into contact with Vernon when he directly phoned him , with the intention of sampling his song " Woods " . The two talked on the phone for about 40 minutes , where West explained some of the concepts for the project , and invited him down to his studio in Hawaii . West is a big admirer of Bon Iver 's album For Emma , Forever Ago , and was impressed with Vernon 's unique use of auto @-@ tune . The two artists became friends while playing games of basketball together , and West introduced him to Jeff Bhasker , one of his main producers . 
 Vernon was sampled on another song from the album , " Lost in the World " and appears on vocals on " Monster " . While there during recording sessions , he had reportedly recorded 10 tracks . He watched Minaj record her verse , and he too , expressed admiration for Minaj 's performance on the song , however he noted that initially he had no idea who she was . Vernon described the process as highly artistic , stating that the fourteen @-@ hour day recording schedule allowed for a lot of fun and creativity . West , talking about recording the song with Vernon , stated that he was " similar to me , where he just does shit just so people would be like , ' Oh shit , how did you do that ? How did that happen ? ' He 's just a really cool guy to be around . ” 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Monster " has been described as brooding , disturbing , creepy and the " weirdest A @-@ list event @-@ rap posse cut in recent memory . " The song begins with an ominous , distorted vocal roar , sung by Justin Vernon of Bon Iver , with Vernon declaring " I shoot the lights out " , which sets up the dark atmosphere of the track . The intro of the song is followed by a brief verse given by Ross , delivered in the rapping style of boom bap . In a deep voice , Ross asserts the lines " bitch , I 'm a monster , no good bloodsucker , fat motherfucker , now look who 's in trouble , " over the eerie production featured during the beginning . Following the introduction by Ross , West then provides the song 's hook , singing " everybody know / I 'm a motherfuckin ' monster " in a heavily distorted manner . West then launches into a full verse . Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Thomas Conner stated that West rhymes “ esophagus ” with “ sarcophagus ” , commenting that it was surely a hip @-@ hop first . 
 Jay @-@ Z appears on the song after West 's verse , and raps in a more forceful , sinister flow . During his verse , Jay @-@ Z references several different horror characters , including the Sasquatch , Godzilla , King Kong , the Loch Ness Monster , goblins , ghouls and zombies . Lyrically Jay @-@ Z discusses his discontent at former associates , and concludes his verse by admitting that his achilles ' heel is " love " . Minaj is the final rapper to appear on the song , who delivers her lines in an urgent , energetic manner . Minaj 's delivery has been described as surreal , changing delivery in mid @-@ line . The song ends in a spooky , hoarse vocal riff delivered by Vernon , reminiscent of the track " Thriller " . An extended vocal riff , described as " <unk> " closes the track . Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan summarized the content of the song , writing : 
 Rick Ross drops by to say hi , keeping his appearance so brief that I can 't help but wonder what he 's even doing here . Justin Vernon inexplicably bookends the thing , pushing his falsetto into Antony range on the outro and muttering befuddling lyrics that have nothing to do with the rest of the song . All this over the straight @-@ up funkiest beat Kanye West has made in years , a rippling electro push @-@ pull that adds an effortless strut to his recent <unk> @-@ out chilliness . But all that other stuff fades into the background when Nicki Minaj shows up . [ ... ] She 's a whirlwind of energy , showing her full repertoire of <unk> voices and kicking the living fuck out of the beat , sounding like she 's having an absolute blast the whole time . " 
 The song heavily features bombastic tribal drums , and paranoia @-@ inducing strings that create a feeling of tension . The beat of " Monster " has been described as a " hyperventilating death rattle " by The Washington Post 's Chris Richards , commenting that the song was permeated with dark , urgent @-@ sounding moans . The chorus of the song has two separate meanings ; on the surface , it appears that West is bragging about his abilities as a rapper , while also making a comment on the media 's reception of him , with lines like " gossip , gossip , nigga just stop it , everybody knows I ’ m a <unk> ’ monster " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Monster " has received acclaim from music critics , who praised Minaj 's verse and rapping style , and West handling the production . Becky Bain of Idolator stated that while the song featured five distinct artists , Minaj actually had the brightest appearance on the song . Sara D. Anderson of AOL gave the song a positive review , complimenting each artist on their contribution . Chris Ryan of MTV positively reviewed West , Jay @-@ Z and Minaj as the stand out rappers in the song , stating " on car stereos , computers and in clubs all over , nothing got more burn than ' Monster , ' his new beastly posse cut . Kanye spits about his presence being a present to us all , Jay @-@ Z comes through with what might be his strongest verse in years , and that 's where Nicki comes in , more than holding her own against the bad boys . " Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal reported that Minaj gave the verse of her life , and applauded the contributions by Ross , who added a " hallucinatory tone " to the song . Another Pitchfork writer , Tom Breihan mused that the track contained the " straight @-@ up funkiest beat " West has made in years , while commenting that Minaj was the best in show . 
 The Village Voice 's Sean Fennessey commented that " Monster " was the track that announced Minaj 's " brilliance " to most people , stating that when the posse cut " crept up the Hot 100 , the song became more than track six — it became an essential part of this album ’ s story , delivered months early . " Alex Denney of NME mused that the track " proves a riotous bit of respite " and features West " sending up his rep with a self @-@ mocking diatribe about drowning his pain in a blizzard of blow jobs and mass adulation while Nicki Minaj sets the dials to ‘ ridiculous ’ with a fire @-@ breathing , raga @-@ inflected verse . " Embling of Tiny Mix Tapes felt that with " super @-@ sized cipher cuts " like " Monster " and " So Appalled " , West balanced out some of the darker moments of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , and that the song contained heavy " shit @-@ talking . " Slant Magazine 's Cole Matthew also commented that posse cuts " Monster " and " So Appalled " were amongst the hardest tracks ever produced by West . 
 IGN 's Chad Grischow mused that the track featured great guest appearances from Jay @-@ Z and Minaj , going as far as saying that Minaj 's performance " clears up what all the hype is about for anyone still unsure " . Robert Christgau of MSN Music stated that West perfectly acknowledged his status as a rapper , and noted that his persona seems to be aware that his " bling @-@ and @-@ sex brag is about to get blown away by padrone Jay @-@ Z 's ' all I see is these niggaz I made millionaires / Millin about ' and pink @-@ haired Nicki Minaj 's ' bitch from Sri Lanka @-@ Willy Wonka @-@ watch the queen conquer ' trifecta . " David Amidon of PopMatters praised the production of the song , and stated that the track features " glass @-@ shattering bass " . Nitsuh Abebe of New York declared that Minaj gave one of the best verses of the year . 
 Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club praised the guest picks on the album , musing that West trades verses with the " few superstars fit to breathe his rarified air , including Jay @-@ Z , Rick Ross , and Nicki Minaj , who single @-@ handedly justifies her deafening buzz with her verse on the song . " Kitty Empire of The Guardian praised West 's performance on the song describing it as " brilliant " , but also noted that on the particular song Minaj and Jay @-@ Z were superior to him , citing Minaj 's verse as her career 's best . Dan Vidal of URB stated that West milks the potential of his guest rappers to the most impressive degree , reporting that Jay @-@ Z 's generally relaxed performance was " with a fiery growl on " and that it " features Nicki Minaj going even more bonkers with her flow than we ’ re accustomed to . " Sputnikmusic 's Channing Freeman echoed the consensus about Minaj stating that her verse was the most memorable part of the song , though felt that Bon Iver 's appearance didn 't add up to much . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The song was named the " Collaboration of the Year " 2010 by HipHopDX . Minaj 's verse for the song was named " Verse of the Year " by the same website . Rolling Stone ranked it number 10 on its list of the Best Singles of 2010 . Rap @-@ Up declared the song the third best of 2010 . MTV News declared the track the 14th best of the year , with other West singles " Power " and " Runaway " making the top 10 . In October 2011 , NME placed it at number 53 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " , with the site 's staff stating that while West had a good performance on the song , it was " star turns from Jay @-@ Z ( channeling his world @-@ weary hip hop legend who just needed a cuddle ) and Nicki Minaj ( a show stealing turn from the heir apparent who was battling herself as much as the haters ) that took this track over . " In 2013 , Complex Magazine gave Minaj 's Monster verse the title " Best Rap Verse of the Past 5 Years " . In January 2011 , The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll named " Monster " the sixth @-@ best single of 2010 ; West 's other singles " Power " and " Runaway " were ranked at numbers five and four , respectively on the same poll , with their parent album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ranked the best album of 2010 as well . It was ranked at number 69 by Rolling Stone on their list of " 100 Greatest Hip @-@ Hop songs of all time " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Monster " was sent out to radio on September 21 , and it was released to the iTunes Store on October 23 , 2010 around Halloween . It spent five weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 18 on the chart . The song also appeared within the top 30 on both the Billboard Hot Rap Songs and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts . The song also appeared on the UK Singles Chart at position 146 . " Monster " was certified platinum on March 31st , 2014 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was performed at Jay @-@ Z 's and Eminem 's " Home & Home " concert in the new Yankee Stadium , during Jay @-@ Z 's portion of the performance . Both Minaj and West joined Jay @-@ Z at the concert and performed the song together as a group , though Ross was absent . After joining Jay @-@ Z during the performance , West remained on stage and performed his own singles , including the remixed version of " Power " , " Can 't Tell Me Nothing " and " Good Life " . West wore exactly the same outfit he did for his 2010 MTV Video Music Awards performance and his subsequent Saturday Night Live performance ; a red suit accessorized with his gold Egyptian god Horus necklace and red Louis Vuitton shoes . During a live performance in New York , West joined Ross and performed " Devil in a New Dress " and " Monster " . 
 Minaj performed the song live at Britney Spears ' Femme Fatale Tour as one of the final songs in her setlist . On one occasion , West performed the track alongside Minaj on the tour , on August 2 , 2011 at the Nassau Coliseum in Long Island , New York , as a surprise guest . During his set at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , West performed " Monster " during the first half of his setlist . The performance was accompanied by Vernon who provided his vocal hook on the song . West 's performance was described as " one of the most memorable performances in Coachella history . " The song was performed by West and Jay @-@ Z during their Watch the Throne Tour . Minaj has also performed her verse on the European and American legs of her debut concert tour , the Pink Friday Tour . She has also rapped her verse on her Pink Friday : Reloaded Tour . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 An unfinished version of a music video , directed by Jake Nava leaked online before the official release on December 30 , 2010 . West was annoyed at the leak of the video , and nearly shelved the video altogether . A finalized version of the video was officially released on June 4 , 2011 on West 's official website . A promotional trailer for the music video was released online . When released , the video came with a disclaimer , stating " the following content is in no way to be interpreted as misogynistic or negative towards any groups of people . It is an art piece and it shall be taken as such . " 
 The music video is inspired by horror films and extensively features gothic and horror related imagery , including references to Michael Jackson 's Thriller . The video features references to horror cult films such as Saw and American Psycho and the supposedly haunted painting The Hands Resist Him . The Hand <unk> Him is a painting created by artist Bill Stoneham in 1972 , depicting a young boy and female doll standing in front of a glass paneled door against which many hands are pressed . The painting became famous for apparently being haunted . The painting is referenced during a scene in the video where West attempts to hold a door closed , from the monsters outside attempting to enter . The video features mostly naked corpse looking models , some of which are decapitated . West 's role in the video is similar to Doctor Frankenstein , with the video set in a castle . Jay @-@ Z appears in the video dressed in a tuxedo , standing in front of a nude corpse in a darkly @-@ lit library . The video contains two versions of Minaj ; a vampire version who is dressed in a gothic inspired outfit ( representing her alter ego Roman Zolanski ) , and a pink @-@ haired version ( representing her alter ego Barbie ) which the other half tortures during the video . Zombies also appear in the video , with hanging corpses and blood @-@ splattered furniture . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 HitFix 's Melinda Newman called the video both " chilling " and " raw " and stated that the video captured the concept of the song well , expressing that it was a " brutal reveal of West ’ s psyche " . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly stated that the video should have been more creative and called it offensive , stating that Minaj 's appearance was the best part . Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone commented that the video was morbid , comparing it to " Thriller " , though noted that " instead of dancing zombies , he gives us undead , barely dressed and occasionally dismembered models " . Perpetua called Minaj 's appearance " cameo of the year " describing her appearance in the video : 
 " She switches up her delivery repeatedly over the course of 31 bars , veering between cartoonish sweetness and unhinged villainy . She dramatizes the jarring dynamic shifts in the clip by appearing as a fanged dominatrix torturing a far more innocent version of herself in a neon pink wig and frilly white dress . It 's a brilliant visual take on a breathtakingly badass verse , but really , they could 've just focused in on her incredible facial expressions and called it a day . She 's just that entertaining to watch . " 
 The music video for Monster was widely controversial , being banned on MTV . Ta @-@ Nehisi Coates of The Atlantic questioned " what would have become of John Mayer , had he cut a video with dead black women strewn about and invoked black women throughout his lyrics in the manner Kanye does " and labeled the video both racist and sexist in nature . However , Brandon Soderberg of Spin argues that the video was simply a " surreal response to hip @-@ hop misogyny " and a " knowing provocation " , and commented that the video was in fact inspired by horror films . 
 Daphne Bramham of the Vancouver Sun commented that " what 's entertaining about women in lingerie hanging by their necks on chains ? What 's artful about images of drugged , unconscious women about to be sexually assaulted ? " Mikhail <unk> of the Huffington Post had a negative opinion of the video , stating that the video " not @-@ so @-@ subtly suggests that complete female passivity , lifelessness , and even death are erotic " , and interpreted the message of the video as being that " for women , what 's sexually desirable is passivity , lifelessness , and death . " The release of the video was received by American activist Ann Simonton with an internet petition seeking the preemptive removal of the full video from broadcast or promotion , criticizing the video as glorifying sexual violence against women . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Produced by Kanye West 
 Additional Production by Mike Dean and Plain Pat 
 Recorded by Andrew Dawson , Anthony Kilhoffer and Mike Dean at the Avex Recording Studio , Honolulu 
 Mixed by Mike Dean at Electric Lady Studios and Glenwood Place Studios , Burbank - Assisted by Gaylord <unk> , Christian Mochizuki and Pete Bischoff 
 Background Vocals : Justin Vernon 
 Piano : Jeff Bhasker 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = John Northcott = 
 Lieutenant General Sir John Northcott KCMG , KCVO , CB , KStJ ( 24 March 1890 – 4 August 1966 ) was an Australian Army general who served as Chief of the General Staff during the Second World War , and commanded the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in the Occupation of Japan . He was the first Australian @-@ born Governor of New South Wales . 
 Northcott joined the Australian Army as a reservist in 1908 , before becoming a regular officer in 1912 . On duty in Tasmania when the Great War broke out in 1914 , he joined the 12th Infantry Battalion , a unit from that state . He was wounded in the landing at Gallipoli on Anzac Day and invalided to Egypt , the United Kingdom , and ultimately Australia , taking no further part in the fighting . After the war , Northcott served on a series of staff posts . He attended the Staff College , Camberley and Imperial Defence College and also spent time overseas as an exchange officer with the British Army and as a military attaché in the United States and Canada . 
 During World War II , Northcott was attached to the British 7th Armoured Division in the Middle East to study armoured warfare , returning to Australia in December 1941 to organise the new 1st Armoured Division . In March 1942 , he assumed command II Corps . In September 1942 , he was appointed Chief of the General Staff . As General Sir Thomas Blamey 's principal non @-@ operational subordinate , he was responsible for administering and training the wartime army . After the war , he served as commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in the post @-@ war Occupation of Japan . He retired from the Army in 1946 to become the Governor of New South Wales . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Northcott was born on 24 March 1890 at Creswick , Victoria , the eldest son of a storekeeper , John Northcott , and his wife Elizabeth Jane , née Reynolds . Northcott was educated at Dean State School , Grenville College , Ballarat and the University of Melbourne . While at school , he served in the Australian Army Cadets . He was commissioned as second lieutenant in the 9th Light Horse , a Militia unit , on 14 August 1908 , and was promoted to lieutenant on 31 October 1910 and captain on 31 July 1911 . On 16 November 1912 , he was granted a commission as a lieutenant in the Administrative and Instructional Staff of the regular forces , then known as the Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) , retaining the rank of honorary captain until he was promoted to that rank in the PMF on 1 June 1918 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Northcott was assigned to staff of the 6th Military District , the military district covering the state of Tasmania , where he was serving when the First World War broke out in August 1914 . His initial task was assisting with the raising of Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) units in Tasmania . He joined the AIF as a lieutenant on 24 August 1914 and was appointed adjutant of the 12th Infantry Battalion , which was forming at Anglesea Barracks near Hobart . He was promoted to captain in the AIF on 18 October 1914 . 
 Northcott embarked for Egypt from Hobart with the 12th Infantry Battalion on the transport A2 , HMAT Geelong on 20 October 1914 . This was one of the first battalions ashore in the landing at Anzac Cove on the first Anzac Day , 25 April 1915 . Northcott 's part in the battle was brief , for that day he was wounded in the chest by a Turkish bullet . He lay amongst a pile of dead bodies until the evening , when he was found to be alive . He was evacuated to Alexandria and later to England . While recuperating , he was joined by his fiancée , Winifred Mary Paton , who had travelled to England to be with him . The two were married at the parish church in Oxted on 14 September 1915 . He returned to Australia on 30 December 1915 and took no further part in the fighting , it being " a rigid rule that no regular officer once invalided to Australia could again go overseas " . His AIF appointment was terminated on 30 September 1916 and he was posted to the 5th Military District , the military district covering the state of Western Australia . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Northcott was granted the honorary rank of major on 1 January 1919 , and the brevet rank on 1 January 1920 , but this was not made substantive until 1 October 1923 . He attended the Staff College , Camberley from 1924 to 1926 . On returning to Australia , Northcott served as Staff Officer , and later Director , Stores and Transport , at Army Headquarters in Victoria Barracks , Melbourne . He was appointed a Member ( fourth class ) of the Royal Victorian Order on 8 July 1927 for coordinating the transport for the 1927 six @-@ month Royal Tour of the Duke and Duchess of York ( later George VI and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother ) that year to open the Old Parliament House , Canberra . 
 Northcott served on the staff of the 4th Division from 17 September 1931 to 31 January 1932 and then with the 3rd Division from 1 February to 22 November 1932 . He returned to England as an exchange officer with the British Army , where he served the staff of the 44th ( Home Counties ) Infantry Division . He attended the Imperial Defence College in 1935 . He was one of only six Australian Army officers to attend this prestigious course between 1928 and 1939 , the others being John Lavarack , Henry Wynter , Vernon Sturdee , Sydney Rowell and William Bridgeford . Frederick Shedden , later Secretary of the Department of Defence , also attended this course . Northcott was given the brevet rank of lieutenant colonel on 1 July 1935 , which was made substantive on 1 January 1936 . He attended the Senior Officers ' School at Sheerness in 1936 , and was seconded to the Committee of Imperial Defence . He then served as an Australian defence attaché in the United States and Canada from September 1936 to June 1937 . He was promoted to the brevet rank of colonel on 1 July 1937 and substantive rank on 13 October 1939 . He served on the staff of the 4th Division until 1 September 1939 , when he became Director of Military Operations and Intelligence . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Northcott was promoted to the local rank of major general on 13 October 1939 , when he was appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff . He accompanied Richard Casey to the Dominions ' Conference in London in later that year as his military adviser . For his service as Deputy Chief of the General Staff , he was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath on 1 January 1941 . 
 On 26 January 1940 , Northcott became acting Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) following the death of Lieutenant General Ernest Ker Squires . In August , his successor , General Sir Brudenell White , died in an air crash and Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee succeeded him . The post of commander of the 8th Division thereby became available but Northcott was excluded from consideration because his knowledge was vital to the new CGS . When the commander of the 9th Division , Major General Henry Wynter , fell ill in January 1941 , Lieutenant General Sir Thomas Blamey asked for Northcott to replace him , but Northcott was involved in organising the 1st Armoured Division and the appointment instead went to Brigadier Leslie Morshead . 
 Northcott joined the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) as a major general on 1 September 1941 and was given the AIF serial number <unk> . He was attached to the British 7th Armoured Division in the Middle East to study armoured warfare , returning to Australia in December 1941 to organise the new 1st Armoured Division . The job was a challenging one that some of his subordinates felt that Northcott was not up to , given his lack of command experience . In March 1942 , Northcott found out from The Herald newspaper that he was to be promoted to command II Corps . " This is what they do to me " , was his comment , " just as my first tank is coming down the road " . The new post came with a promotion to the temporary rank of lieutenant general on 6 April 1942 , which became substantive on 12 December 1945 . Northcott was succeeded as commander by Major General Horace Robertson , an officer with a distinguished combat record in the desert . 
 However , on 10 September 1942 , Northcott was appointed Chief of the General Staff . Formerly , the Army had been controlled by the Military Board . This ceased to function on 30 July 1942 , with its responsibilities being assumed by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , General Blamey . The Adjutant General , Major General Victor Stantke , the Quartermaster General , Major General James Cannan and the Master @-@ General of the Ordnance , Major General Leslie , who would formerly have been members of the board , now came under the Lieutenant General Administration ( LGA ) , Lieutenant General Henry Wynter . This left the CGS with responsibility for the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the Army . His job also involved liaison with Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) and the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , and he frequently had to represent Blamey in meetings with the Minister for the Army , Frank Forde . 
 Northcott spent much of his time from 1943 on in a long battle with the government over the number of men and women allocated to the Army . He attempted to do so without Blamey being dragged into a political fight but this proved to be impossible . In September 1944 , the government reduced the Army 's monthly intake of women from 925 to 500 , while it only received 420 out of 4 @,@ 020 men allocated to the three services . Such a meagre allocation was below what the Army needed to maintain its strength , and formations had to be disbanded . Blamey took up the matter with Prime Minister John Curtin , and managed to get a more satisfactory monthly allocation of 1 @,@ 500 men per month out of 3 @,@ 000 allocated to the three services . 
 The relationship between Northcott as Chief of the General Staff and Blamey as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief bore some similarities to the one between the RAAF 's Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , and Air Vice Marshal William Bostock , the commander of the RAAF forces in the field , but Blamey was senior to Northcott , both in rank and in the Army 's command structure . The relationship could still have been a delicate one , but in the event it was characterised by none of the rancour and rivalry that marred the wartime administration of the RAAF . In late 1943 , Blamey sought to appoint Northcott as his deputy , but the government turned down his request , on the advice of General Douglas MacArthur , who did not want another officer who was answerable both to himself and the Australian Government . However , when Blamey travelled to Washington , D.C. and London in April 1944 , he arranged for Northcott to act as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief in his absence . After Wynter 's death in February 1945 , the post of LGA was abolished and the CGS again became responsible for administration . 
 = = British Commonwealth Occupation Force = = 
 At the end of World War II , Sturdee was again invited to become CGS . He made it a condition of his acceptance that Northcott be given the appointment of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in Japan . Sturdee felt that Northcott had missed out on opportunities for active service through his being CGS and saw the BCOF post as a just reward for that service . 
 Northcott headed the BCOF from December 1945 until June 1946 . As such , he negotiated the Northcott @-@ MacArthur agreement with General of the Army Douglas MacArthur , which governed the terms and conditions under which the BCOF would occupy part of Japan . The BCOF would serve under American command , with American policy being followed . Northcott was offered , and accepted , the post of Governor of New South Wales in April 1946 . He remained in Japan until June though , because Prime Minister Ben Chifley wanted the changeover to coincide with his own visit to Japan in May , and because he needed to obtain consent of the other governments concerned for the appointment of Lieutenant General Horace Robertson as Northcott 's successor . Northcott 's lack of experience in command once again showed , and his command was again overhauled by Robertson . 
 = = Governor of New South Wales = = 
 On 1 August 1946 , Northcott became the first Australian @-@ born , and one of the longest @-@ serving , Governors of New South Wales . As such , he gave patronage and support to many charitable organisations and to youth , church and citizens ' groups . Blamey was unable to secure a knighthood for Northcott for his military service , it being Australian Labor Party policy not to award knighthoods at that time . 
 In April 1949 Northcott took part in an event of historic importance at Sydney 's famous Australia Hotel , being the venue of the first successful television demonstration in Australia . Northcott was televised in the hotel 's ballroom as he opened the demonstration . 
 Northcott was made a Knight of the Venerable Order of St John of Jerusalem in December 1946 , a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George for his services as governor in 1950 , and a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order in 1954 for his work with the Royal Tour of Queen Elizabeth II . He was a freemason who , during his term as governor , was Viceregal Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of New South Wales . 
 Northcott was Administrator of the Commonwealth in the absence of the governor @-@ general from 19 July to 14 December 1951 , and again from 30 July to 22 October 1956 . While occupying that office , he held the honorary rank of general . He was awarded honorary degrees of Doctor of Letters by the University of Sydney in 1952 and the University of New England in 1956 , and Doctor of Science by the New South Wales University of Technology in 1956 . He retired in July 1957 . In April 1964 , Northcott and Forde represented Australia at General MacArthur 's funeral in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Survived by his two daughters , Sir John died on 4 August 1966 in his home at Wahroonga , New South Wales . He was accorded a state funeral with military honours and was cremated . Like most governors of New South Wales , his papers are in the State Library of New South Wales . In 1968 the Electoral district of Northcott in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly was dedicated in his name and existed until redistribution and abolition in 1999 . In his military career , Northcott was both highly regarded and successful staff officer , as commander of the 1st Armoured Division , II Corps and BCOF he was " noted neither for innovation nor conspicuous success " , especially when compared with Robertson who " possessed the ebullience and flair that Northcott lacked " . While governor , Northcott was patron of the New South Wales Society for Crippled Children . He continued to take an active in its affairs for the rest of his life . In 1995 , this charity changed its name to The Northcott Society in his honour . In 2004 , it became Northcott Disability Services , providing case to people of all ages with disabilities . He is also remembered through Cranbrook School , Sydney by having one of the houses named after him , Northcott House . 
 He was a long @-@ standing Freemason , and served as Grand Master of the United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Honorary military appointments = = = 
 1 August 1946 – 3 July 1957 : Honorary Air Commodore of No. 22 Squadron , Royal Australian Air Force . 
 1 August 1946 – 3 July 1957 : Honorary Colonel of the 1st / 15th Royal New South Wales Lancers . 
 = Fatboy ( EastEnders ) = 
 Arthur " Fatboy " Chubb ( also credited as Fat Boy ) is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders and its Internet spin @-@ off EastEnders : E20 , played by Ricky Norwood . He made his first appearance in EastEnders on 5 January 2010 before appearing in the spin @-@ off . Fatboy is one of four main characters in the first series of E20 and makes cameo appearances in the second and third series . He was created by the EastEnders : E20 writing team during a BBC summer school in August 2009 . He frequently uses London street slang and is described as brash , confident , caring , a hustler and a womaniser . Critics have called him zany , an asset to the show , authentic , a cliché , and yet to serve a purpose , with Stuart Heritage from The Guardian calling for him to be axed . Norwood won the Best Newcomer award at the 2010 Inside Soap Awards and Most Popular Newcomer at the 2011 National Television Awards for his portrayal of Fatboy , and has been nominated for two further awards . In 2014 , Norwood was temporarily suspended from the soap for two months after a tape of improper conduct involving Norwood leaked onto the internet . In November 2015 , the character lost his nickname and was simply credited as Arthur Chubb from 20 November onwards . 
 On 16 October 2015 , it was announced that Norwood was to leave EastEnders at the end of his contract . Details of when or how Fatboy would leave were not revealed but Norwood filmed his final scenes later that month . He departed on 24 December 2015 , but was killed off @-@ screen in the next episode . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Fatboy first appears in EastEnders at Lucy Beale 's ( Melissa Suffield ) party , where he gets pleasure from watching a fight between two girls , and asks other girls to play Twister with him but nobody will . In EastEnders : E20 , he helps his friend Mercy Olubunmi ( Bunmi Mojekwu ) with a project to encourage more young people to the church , but his ideas leave them both humiliated . They meet Leon Small ( Sam Attwater ) and Zsa Zsa Carter ( Emer Kenny ) and start squatting in a flat . Fatboy tells Zsa Zsa and Leon both his parents were killed in a drive @-@ by shooting . He finds out Mercy is pregnant and accuses Leon of being the father . During an argument , Mercy reveals that Fatboy 's parents are alive , angering Zsa Zsa , who throws Fatboy 's laptop out of the window . On their last night in the flat , he arranges a party but leaves before the police arrive . Knowing they can no longer stay there , he invites Zsa Zsa , Mercy and Leon to stay at his house in Wanstead , but Mercy decides to go home to her grandmother . 
 After several weeks , Leon and Fatboy return to Walford to look for Zsa Zsa , who has run away . They eventually settle in and make new friends . Zsa Zsa finds three dates for Fatboy , but none of them are genuine . Fatboy borrows Darren Miller 's ( Charlie G. Hawkins ) ice cream van to practice for his driving test , which he fails , but he buys the van from Darren . He helps Whitney Dean ( Shona McGarty ) sell T @-@ shirts but sells them to Mo Harris ( Laila Morse ) , who has been asked by Becca Swanson ( Simone James ) to buy them so she can sell them for a greater profit . Becca insists she did not know they were Whitney 's and then flirts with Fatboy . However , he later humiliates her by designing T @-@ shirts for her that show a mirror image of the word " chav " . He finally passes his driving test and DJs for Ronnie Mitchell ( Samantha Womack ) at R & R nightclub . Fatboy , Leon , Zsa Zsa , Whitney , Lucy and Lucy 's brother Peter ( Thomas Law ) go to Hampshire and he attends a party with Peter while the others spend time in the woods . He is reunited with Mercy but a fight breaks out so they escape and drive back to Fatboy 's uncle 's home . Peter hits something with the van and the next day they fear it was Leon , as he is missing . However , Leon turns up and they realise Lucy wanted to turn everyone against him , so they play a trick on her in revenge . Fatboy is then shocked to discover that Mercy is planning to move back to Nigeria . He realises that neither Mercy nor her grandmother Grace ( Ellen Thomas ) want to leave London , and convinces them to stay . 
 During a party at the community centre , Fatboy smuggles in alcohol and kisses Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) , angering her husband Lucas ( Don <unk> ) , who throws Fatboy out and begins angrily preaching to him . This causes Fatboy to argue with Mercy . During the argument , Mercy pushes him and he falls onto a tree in the Square 's gardens planted in memory of Lucas 's ex @-@ wife Trina ( Sharon Duncan Brewster ) , snapping it . Fatboy enlists the help of Mercy , Leon and Zsa Zsa to replace it , but as they dig it up , they uncover a dead body , that of Denise 's ex @-@ husband Owen Turner ( Lee Ross ) , who Lucas murdered eight months previously . The next day , Fatboy comforts Mercy and to cheer her up , they play rounders . However , they smash Dot Branning 's ( June Brown ) window and she makes Fatboy fix it . He does a bad job so she insists he pay for a professional , asking Fatboy to wait in her house for the professional to arrive . While he waits , he plays dominoes with Dot 's husband Jim ( John Bardon ) and when Dot returns , she is impressed with Fatboy 's politeness when he offers to clean the new window and make her a cup of tea . 
 Leon obtains two tickets to a music festival in France and plans to take Zsa Zsa , but he tells Fatboy he slept with Glenda Mitchell ( Glynis Barber ) , leaving Fatboy unsure of what to do as he does not want to hurt Zsa Zsa . He tells Mercy , who then tells Zsa Zsa , who dumps Leon and takes Fatboy 's van to France . Leon decides to go to France anyway , leaving Fatboy sad at the loss of two of his best friends , however , Leon and Fatboy stay in contact . He joins the local church choir but fears he will be unable to perform at their event as he felt pressured into joining by Dot and cannot sing very well . Mercy tells him he should just mime , but then Dot and the choir leader Edward Bishop ( Frank Barrie ) decide to give Fatboy a solo . Fatboy is unable to go through with it and walks out of the performance , so Kim Fox ( Tameka Empson ) takes over . At a New Year 's Eve party , Fatboy kisses Mercy to put Kim off flirting with him . 
 Fatboy gets a month 's trial on the market with his own stall , starting a repair business . He reveals that his father , Ashley Chubb ( Colin Mace ) , has lost his job and his parents have split up . Ashley arrives in Walford , asking for his son 's help , as he has spent Fatboy 's inheritance on alcohol . Ashley then moves into Albert Square . Fatboy grows jealous when he sees Mercy with Seb Parker ( Tommy Bastow ) , and assumes they are having sex . Mercy reveals she may face exportation as her visa has expired , and Fatboy tells Ashley he is in love with Mercy . Ashley reports Mercy to the UK Border Agency so that Fatboy will forget about her , and she decides to leave before she has been asked to . Fatboy and Mercy say an emotional goodbye , but Fatboy stops her taxi and proposes marriage , realising she can stay in the country if they are married . Mercy agrees but Grace is opposed to the plan until she realises that Fatboy loves Mercy . Kim points out that Fatboy seems embarrassed about getting married and that Mercy does not seem to love him , and admits to fancying Fatboy . Fatboy then tells Kim why he is really marrying Mercy , but also that he wants to be married for real . 
 Mercy learns that she can stay in the UK but feels guilty about the deception , so decides to go back to Nigeria anyway . Fatboy loses his market stall but gets a job selling cars for Max Branning ( Jake Wood ) . He discovers Mercy is leaving , so tries to stop her from leaving but is unable to , and they say an emotional goodbye . Fatboy is distraught over his loss , and eventually decides to move in with Dot . He helps Dot to track down her half sister Rose Cotton ( Polly Perkins ) and helps Whitney when her former pimp , Rob Grayson ( Jody Latham ) tracks her down . Fatboy feels put out when Rose and Cora Cross ( Ann Mitchell ) both move in with Dot . Mercy 's sister Faith Olubunmi ( Modupe Adeyeye ) then arrives in Walford to tell Fatboy that Mercy has had their marriage annulled . Fatboy starts a relationship with Faith ( as seen in series 3 of EastEnders : E20 ) but it soon ends . Following this , Fatboy develops feelings for his friend Whitney Dean ( Shona McGarty ) , though Whitney is involved with Tyler Moon ( Tony Discipline ) . When Whitney and Tyler 's relationship breaks down , Fatboy admits his feelings for Whitney and the pair start a relationship . Fatboy buys a car for Whitney , but she is initially angry , saying she doesn 't want to be owned . However , Whitney relents and accepts the gift . Fatboy notices that Tyler continues to want Whitney , and so warns him off . However , after Whitney gets angry at Lucy ( now Hetti Bywater ) for dancing with Fatboy , Lucy convinces Tyler to talk to her . They accidentally get locked in a bathroom and Fatboy assumes Whitney has cheated on him , so ends the relationship . Fatboy later visits Tyler , who shows Fatboy that the bathroom door sticks , and Tyler says that he is happy for Fatboy and Whitney as a couple . However , Whitney soon feels smothered by Fatboy 's affection , and when he is about to take Whitney away on holiday , she refuses , and when they kiss she says it is like kissing a friend . She admits that she wants Tyler , and Fatboy is heartbroken . He later punches Tyler . He then becomes a regular DJ at R & R , and gets a job at the local fast food restaurant , McKlunkies . However , he is sacked when he stands up to his manager , Nico Papadopoulos ( <unk> Hilmi ) after taking advice from Alfie Moon ( Shane Richie ) . Alfie feels bad so offers Fatboy a job at The Queen Victoria public house , collecting glasses . 
 When Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) gets unwanted attention from a man at a party , Fatboy defends her and they end up having sex after Fatboy escorts her home . The next morning , an embarrassed Denise tells him it was a mistake , but he cannot stop thinking about her , and eventually plucks up the courage to go to her house , where she is unable to resist him . However , the relationship ends , and Fatboy then starts a relationship with Poppy Meadow ( Rachel Bright ) after they realise they have feelings for one another . Fatboy is forced out of his home but allows Joey Branning ( David Witts ) to move in with Poppy instead of asking to move in himself . Eventually , Fatboy and Poppy both go to lodge with their friend , Dot . Dot is suspicious when food starts going missing and it is later revealed that Fatboy is a <unk> . Poppy suspects Fatboy of having an affair when she sees text messages from " Chloe " ( Siobhan <unk> ) and then sees them together , and prepares to leave , but Fatboy reveals that she is his colleague and he has started working at McKlunkies again . 
 Fatboy and Poppy 's relationship turns sour when Poppy suggests that they should buy a house together . Fatboy eventually pulls himself together and tells her that they haven 't been together long enough yet . She then ends their relationship and Fatboy moves in with Tamwar . Fatboy later suggests to Poppy that they rent a flat to begin with and take it from there . The couple reunite with a romantic kiss . However , when Denise feels uncomfortable with the way her new fiancée Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) is currently treating her , she gets comfort from Fatboy and the pair are unable to resist each other . When Poppy finds out that they shared a kiss , they realise that they are not right for each other and Poppy returns to go and live with her mum . Upset by the couple 's break @-@ up , Fatboy gently tells Dot that her and Poppy are still friends . He supports Dot when he learns that her son Nick Cotton ( John Altman ) dies and is surprised by the arrival of her estranged grandson , Charlie Cotton ( Declan Bennett ) . When Fatboy is told that he is no longer needed at The Queen Vic , he accepts a job at Ian 's restaurant as a waiter . Denise feels awkward and confesses the truth to Ian , but doesn 't mention Fatboy 's name . Fatboy spends time away from Walford caring for his uncle when he falls ill , and , on his return , Dot suggests that he finds a new place to live , due to Charlie moving in with her and her only being allowed one lodger by council regulations . When Charlie 's son is born , Fatboy is unsuccessful in persuading Charlie to take the baby home . He follows Charlie home and discovers that Nick is alive . When Charlie later moves out , Fatboy moves back in with Dot . On Ladies ' Night at the Vic , Fatboy consoles Denise when their kiss during the engagement party is revealed . Tina visits Sonia Fowler ( Natalie Cassidy ) to find Fatboy with her . 
 Fatboy begins running the car lot when Charlie leaves Walford . His friendship with Donna Yates ( Lisa Hammond ) grows and they have a one @-@ night stand , but , feeling it is making their friendship weird , he rejects her afterwards despite her thinking she might have deeper feelings for him . Things between them are awkward , and when Donna 's foster brother Vincent Hubbard ( Richard Blackwood ) finds out , he confronts Fatboy and locks him a cupboard . He returns the next day to find that Fatboy has not been discovered , and from how scared Fatboy is , realises something is wrong . Fatboy opens up about the fact his mother used to lock him up for extended periods of time , which led to him assuming the comedic persona of ' Fatboy ' . Vincent convinces him to use his real name , Arthur , again , and gives him a job as DJ at his bar The Albert as long as he no longer puts on a false persona , starting with admitting to Donna that he will now be showing his true self to her . Over the coming weeks , Fatboy gets tangled in Vincent 's vendetta against the Mitchell family and trying to kill Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) . Fatboy repeatedly tries to convince Vincent to stop , and interrupts Vincent when as he is about to throttle Phil . Fed up with his interference , Vincent threatens Fatboy with violence against Dot if he does not leave Walford forever . Fatboy tells Dot that he is going to see his father for Christmas , and shares a final dinner with her before saying goodbye . He confronts Vincent one last time , demanding that he stay away from Dot , and leaves Walford . 
 The next day , Vincent discovers Ronnie planned to have him killed and crushed in a car , but asked for the car 's driver to be killed , assuming it would be Vincent , but Vincent finds the car and discovers Fatboy is dead . It is later revealed that Vincent 's mother , Claudette Hubbard ( Ellen Thomas ) , knew that Vincent would be killed if he was driving , so sent Fatboy instead . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Fatboy is one of four characters created for the first series of the EastEnders online spin @-@ off EastEnders : E20 who also appear in the main show , along with Zsa Zsa , Leon and Mercy . Fatboy , along with the other characters from E20 , was created by the show 's thirteen writers during a summer school run by the BBC in August 2009 . Open auditions for the cast were held at Theatre Royal Stratford East . Norwood 's casting was announced on 25 November 2009 , on which he said " I am so excited to be on the show . It 's an honour to now be part of a show that has been on in my house for as long as I have been alive . I am born and bred in the East End — a stone 's throw from the real Albert Square . It feels like a homecoming . I love being part of a cast that feels like family and can 't wait to have a scene in The Vic . " Kenny , who was also one of the writers , said a character like Fatboy would not have appeared in EastEnders had he not been written by young people . Norwood stated in 2013 that being from east London and playing a character from east London meant that he could " bring the truth to that character from the knowledge I have . [ I can ] try and bring the truth out of that instead of doing it from an outside perspective . " 
 Although his co @-@ stars Attwater and Kenny were axed from the cast in May 2010 , Norwood revealed his contract had been extended to December 2010 , saying that the producers saw " some future in Fatboy " . In January 2011 it was reported that due to the character 's popularity , producers were planning to expand Fatboy 's family and were in the process of casting his father , Ashley Chubb . An EastEnders insider is reported to have said " Fatboy has been a real hit with viewers and the bosses have decided that it 's now time to bring in his dad so people can see what Fatboy is really all about . " Norwood 's contract was once again renewed in late 2013 for another year , by the new executive <unk> Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins , who promised " juicy storylines " for the character . One source from the programme said " Fatboy is a popular character and appeals to all ages . He 's not had a decent storyline for a while but always provides much @-@ needed humour in Albert Square . [ ... ] He ’ s got some good stuff coming up and is an important member of the cast . " 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 When the character was announced , he was described as a hustler who sees everything as an opportunity , and has created several personas since the age of seven to hide his real self . Norwood expanded on this , saying " when he was in school and the register was being read out and it got to his name it would be ' Chubb ! ' and all the kids in school would start taking the mickey out of it . What he did was create something even more ridiculous to take away from that . He took the mickey out of himself and took the power away from those that were taking the mickey out of him . [ ... ] For the same reason most kids put on a front , it 's to protect himself from the world . He doesn 't like his real name so he tried to create something that would get away from that and Fatboy was that creation . The street and the slang stuff is not something that is far away from him , it is still from the area that he lives in . Fatboy was someone he adopted to put a brave face on , to put a mask on himself , to protect Arthur from the world . " Before adopting the " Fatboy " persona , he would adopt personas of men he saw on television , and Norwood said Fatboy was " an awkward kind of child " . Fatboy comes from a wealthy background , and gets what he wants from his parents , with whom he has a good relationship , but hustles to hide the fact . He often wears clothing brand Ed Hardy , and his speech has , according to Norwood , a " unique rhythm " . Norwood is able to make viable changes to the script to make it sound more authentic . 
 Norwood said the character 's introduction was " trying to bring the street to Albert Square " and that the street slang the character uses is what he grew up with himself . He described the character in an interview with entertainment website Digital Spy as " [ wanting ] to be a gangsta at times , a caring person , a player , a womaniser , the businessman ... There are so many things that he wants to be and that shifts depending on the situation , " adding that he is quick to solve problems and always has a plan . Additionally , a profile for the character on the official EastEnders website calls him brash , a wheeler @-@ dealer , confident and a loveable soft @-@ touch . 
 Norwood said in January 2011 that Fatboy has developed over time and is continuing to develop , with more sides to his personality being shown . Fatboy 's caring side is shown in several EastEnders scenes , most notably his friendship with Dot , and a scene where Fatboy and Mercy bring a cake to Kat Moon ( Jessie Wallace ) after her child dies of cot death . Although Norwood said in January 2011 that Fatboy will always be a joker , he felt it was good to show Fatboy 's softer , more intelligent side , saying that the character 's " street " side drops quickly when he is around Dot and Mercy . Norwood said that Fatboy wants to improve himself , but fears that showing his caring side in London will get him beaten up . 
 = = = Relationship with Mercy Olubunmi = = = 
 In April 2011 , Mercy faces deportation to Nigeria , and Fatboy plans to save her by proposing . Norwood revealed that Mercy is shocked by the proposal , adding " Mercy thinks he 's lost his marbles , but soon comes round to the idea . Fatboy reckons that this isn 't about his feelings , it 's all about keeping her in the UK . Of course , he 's also hoping that if she stays , maybe she 'll end up liking him in the way he likes her . [ ... ] You can get into a lot of trouble for [ trying to fool immigration officials ] , [ b ] ut all Fatboy can think is , ' How can I save Mercy ? ' She 's the girl he loves . " Although Fatboy is in love with Mercy , he does not believe that Mercy sees him as more than a friend and may call off the wedding if he tells her . He does not think of the consequences , such as imprisonment . Norwood revealed that Fatboy has known Mercy since they were nine years old and he had feelings for her when EastEnders : E20 started , as he was upset when she got pregnant by someone else . He said that Fatboy would be heartbroken when Mercy leaves . Norwood told Inside Soap that the wedding creates more problems for the characters , rather than solving all their problems . The fact that they try so hard to prove they are genuine makes it " very hard for them to be friends . " The wedding episode sees Fatboy have a dream come true , but at the same time it is a nightmare for him . Knowing the wedding is a sham he is " waiting for that monster to appear " . Ashley turns up and is annoyed that Fatboy has kept the wedding a secret , and of this , Norwood stated : " When [ Ashley ] finds out what has happened he is pretty shocked . He tries to make Fatboy see the consequences of his actions , but Fatboy doesn 't want to hear it — his dad has already betrayed him when it comes to Mercy . " Mercy is shocked to learn that Fatboy did not tell her that Ashley reported her . Although Norwood concluded that Fatboy " will go to the ends of the earth to make this marriage work " . 
 = = = Relationship with Denise Fox = = = 
 In October 2012 , it was confirmed by Daniel Kilkelly that a new storyline would see Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) and Fatboy spend the night together after he rescues her when she gets unwanted attention from a man . Norwood , who plays Fatboy , told Inside Soap , " Right now , I don 't think Fatboy is looking for love - but he 's happy to be swept off his feet by Denise , who 's this hot older woman he never imagined he could be with . " Denise is a scorching woman - she 's got a dynamite body and a beautiful smile . She 's way out of his league , but there is a lot of chemistry between them . I think they 'd make a really good couple . That would be cool . Fatboy may be young , but he 's got an old soul and he 's not just some young boy messing about . There is potential there if Denise could see it , but because of the age thing , I think she might worry that people were saying things about her . Right now , she 's just enjoying herself . " Norwood added that while the pair 's relationship was sexual , a serious future for them could be possible . They met for an afternoon of passion on 16 October 2012 but ended the affair a few days later when Denise told him that she will think of it as a ' great memory ' . In January 2014 , Denise and Fatboy kiss passionately during her engagement party to Ian Beale in The Queen Victoria . 
 = = = Relationship with Poppy Meadow = = = 
 In November 2012 , Fatboy starts a relationship with his friend Poppy Meadow ( Rachel Bright ) . This was teased by executive producer Lorraine Newman when it was announced Poppy was to become a full @-@ time character . She said , " We 'll see Poppy become involved in a relationship very soon , which is progressing very well in the material we 're working on at the moment . " Digital Spy said of the relationship that " viewers will have to wait and see who she falls for and how things pan out as the new plot develops " . It was confirmed that Fatboy would be Poppy 's new relationship when they kiss in 22 November 's episode . The pair " grow close " after Poppy 's sister Tansy Meadow Daisy Wood @-@ Davis visits and Fatboy acts as Poppy 's " high @-@ flying " businessman boyfriend to help Poppy look good in front of Tansy . Bright said of the relationship : " It 's really sweet . I don 't think Poppy or Fatboy realised they liked each other as they 've been friends for a while . She 's unsure at first because she doesn 't want to ruin a friendship . She 's also been unlucky in love , so she 's a little bit wary . But I think she can trust Fatboy . I think the pair of them need love . " 
 In December 2012 , it was announced that Fatboy and Poppy would have a BBC Red Button special episode , after Poppy decides to spend Christmas with Fatboy . The story continues on the Red Button . Bright said , " Poppy spends the day with Fatboy . She is under pressure to go back to her family , but realises she doesn 't want that . [ She ] and Fatboy have a romantic day , but you don 't see anything on screen [ in the Christmas episode ] because it is dominated by the Brannings . There will be an interactive section where viewers can press the red button and see a ten @-@ minute film of how Poppy and Fatboy spent their day . " 
 In January 2013 , Norwood told Amy Duncan from Metro that the relationship with Poppy was " needed for Fatboy " as he had so far been unlucky in love and " to find somebody that liked him as much as he liked her has been a great boost for him and it 's definitely put an extra spring in his step . " He noted a comedy aspect of their relationship , calling it " quite sweet " and " funny " . He opined that it would be " excellent " if they were to marry , saying their wedding would be " crazy " . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 16 October 2015 , it was announced Norwood had been axed from EastEnders after nearly six years in the role of Fatboy , after show bosses chose to write the character out . It was revealed that Norwood would be filming his final scenes in the upcoming weeks and producers had chosen to keep details surrounding Fatboy 's exit <unk> . A show spokesperson said : " We can confirm that Ricky will be leaving EastEnders . We wish him all the best for the future " whilst a show insider commented : " Ricky is a great guy and very popular on set . He 's leaving the show as it 's the end of Fatboy 's storyline , but everyone wishes him well for the future . " Fatboy 's last appearance was on 24 December 2015 . 
 On 7 December 2015 , the show 's executive producer , Dominic Treadwell @-@ Collins , said that " Someone will die on Christmas Day that we haven 't revealed to anyone , so that will be a surprise . " This turned out to be Fatboy , who died in a case of mistaken identity in the episode shown on 26 December 2015 . This was not well @-@ received by fans and many set up petitions to bring the character back . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Fatboy appears in extra content on the official EastEnders : E20 website . In one video , Fatboy gives his top ten tips for surviving life in Albert Square . Another features him recording a video on his mobile phone for Mercy , in which he admits he once thought he would end up in a romantic relationship with her . In other videos , he is filmed on a webcam singing along to the Destiny 's Child hit " Bootylicious " and catches Leon posing , threatening to post the video on the Internet . In August 2010 , an official account on the social networking site Twitter was created for Fatboy , along with three characters from series 2 of EastEnders : E20 . Posts on Twitter revealed Fatboy has sold a fake ID to Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) but the photo looked nothing like her and the age was wrong . 
 Fatboy makes cameo appearances in series 2 of E20 , where his argument with Naz continues in episode 1 , and she steals back her money . Fatboy attends a dance audition , and witnesses Asher Levi ( Heshima Thompson ) bribing Skolla ( Tony Adigun ) to let Asher 's brother Sol ( Tosin Cole ) through even though he failed his audition . Asher threatens Fatboy with a knife , telling him that he saw nothing . In episode 5 Fatboy attends callbacks for the dance group , and in episode 7 , he dances with the group again and helps break up a fight between Asher and Sol . In episode 10 , Fatboy attends the dance @-@ off between Skolla 's crew and Flawless . He also appears in series 3 . In episode 1 , when Faith Olubunmi is homeless , she asks Fatboy if she can stay with him but he refuses . 
 Fatboy also appears in " East Street " , a charity crossover episode between EastEnders and Coronation Street , broadcast on 19 November 2010 as part of the BBC One telethon for the children 's charity Children in Need . In the non @-@ canon episode , Fatboy is in Walford 's café while Denise Johnson and Gail McIntyre ( Helen Worth ) from Coronation Street argue over their similar storylines . Fatboy says Gail is the winner after saying she has been in prison . He also appears in scenes in The Queen Victoria . 
 In " All I Want for Christmas " , a mini @-@ episode shown on the BBC Red Button service on 27 December 2012 , Fatboy appears with his girlfriend Poppy , in which they are shown getting drunk on Christmas Eve , and having dinner on Christmas Day . Poppy is sick with food poisoning the next day , so Fatboy leaves her to look after herself . The next she is well again and Fatboy makes it clear that he wants sex with Poppy , as it would be their first time together . Poppy decides to spend the rest of Christmas with her family , and while she is gone , Fatboy buys food and gifts , but gives them to a homeless man who tells him Christmas is about love , not material things . As Poppy is about to leave with her sister Tansy Meadow ( Daisy Wood @-@ Davis ) , Fatboy stops the car . He later tells her he wants to wait to have sex with her and says he loves her , and she says it back to him . 
 Fatboy also appears in the third episode of the online spin @-@ off Tamwar Tales – The Life of an Assistant Market Inspector , titled " Fatboy " , which was first shown on 8 August 2013 . In the episode , Tamwar Masood ( Himesh Patel ) tries to get Fatboy to turn his music down but they end up doing the Harlem Shake . Their full Harlem Shake dance was also posted online separately , prior to the spin @-@ off . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In April 2010 , six main characters were axed from EastEnders by executive producer Bryan Kirkwood . Fatboy was not one of them , but Stuart Heritage from The Guardian felt that he should have been , calling him " A <unk> of irritating comic relief [ ... ] who is yet to serve a purpose other than making me genuinely dislike young people . [ ... ] He must go , preferably in a scene where he falls down the world 's largest flight of stairs . " Heritage later called Fatboy an " obnoxiously two @-@ dimensional dubstep @-@ fixated stock [ character ] transparently modelled on Jar Jar Binks . " A writer for the website Watch With Mothers called the character an asset to EastEnders , expressing pleasure that the show was trying to appeal to younger viewers , while another called him irritating and zany . A writer for The Northern Echo wondered if Fatboy , along with Leon and Zsa Zsa , brought a new injection of life into the soap or took away screen time from more established characters , and Caroline Fitton , writing for the Daily Mail , felt that Fatboy 's style of talking was a bit of a cliché . Grace Dent from The Guardian changed her opinion of Fatboy over time , saying : 
 Fatboy has won my heart . What began as horrified staring at this huge , bug @-@ eyed child in a <unk> Ed Hardy hoodie , the Venn diagram meeting point of Jar Jar Binks and <unk> from N @-@ <unk> , has now shifted to deep love . I love Fatboy 's " wheels " , ie a retired , graffiti @-@ splattered ice @-@ cream van . I love his simple approach to life : making money , " <unk> out batty " , eating <unk> rice . Get rich or die trying ( though by " die " , I really mean " get sulked at by Dot Branning and refused a last @-@ minute service wash " ) . I love how much Fatboy infuriates old @-@ fart viewers with the uncomfortable truth that he 's actually quite authentic . [ ... ] Without Fatboy , EastEnders right now is a wholly compelling , yet dark place . 
 Julie Emery from Heat criticised Fatboy 's fashion sense , especially from the episode broadcast on 12 May 2011 , saying " We know clashing prints are <unk> this season , but really , Fatboy , they do nothing for you . And while we 're at it , stop wearing that tinny ' F ' round your neck , for flip 's sake . You 're not a gangster rapper , and anyway your real name 's Arthur . " Emery also said the storyline where Fatboy asks Mercy to marry him so she can stay in the country sounded " somewhat familiar " , as Coronation Street was featuring a similar storyline at the same time . Amy Duncan from the Metro said Fatboy was one of her favourite young characters in EastEnders and said that , with Poppy , he " bring [ s ] some much @-@ needed light into the soap " . Vicky Prior from the Metro said that Fatboy " is easily one of the best characters in EastEnders , able to interact seamlessly with other characters , both young and old . " 
 Norwood has received four award nominations for his portrayal of Fatboy . In May 2010 , he received a nomination in the " Best Soap Newcomer " category at the 14th <unk> Awards , and in July he was nominated for " Best Newcomer " at the 2010 Inside Soap Awards , which he went on to win in September . In September 2010 , he was nominated in the newcomer category of the 16th National Television Awards , which he won in January 2011 . In May 2011 , he was nominated for " Best Newcomer " at the 2011 British Soap Awards . 
 Following the character 's death , " # Fatboy " trended on social network Twitter , with viewers saying that the character should not have been killed off and some voicing their beliefs that the character is not really dead . A petition was set up online asking for <unk> @-@ Collins to revive the character ; as of 30 December 2015 , the petition received 2 @,@ 780 signatures . 
 = The Final Cut ( album ) = 
 The Final Cut is the twelfth studio album by the English progressive rock band Pink Floyd , released on 21 March 1983 by Harvest Records in the United Kingdom and internationally and on 2 April 1983 in the United States by Columbia Records . It is Pink Floyd 's last studio album to include founding member , bass guitarist and songwriter Roger Waters , and their only album on which he alone is credited for writing and composition . It is also the only Pink Floyd album that does not feature keyboardist Richard Wright . 
 Waters originally planned The Final Cut as a soundtrack album for the 1982 film Pink Floyd – The Wall . With the onset of the Falklands War , he rewrote it as a concept album , exploring what he considered the betrayal of his father , who died serving in the Second World War . Waters sings most of the lyrics ; lead guitarist David Gilmour provides vocals on only one track . The packaging , also designed by Waters , reflects the album 's war theme . Although it reached the top of the UK Albums Chart , the album received mixed reviews . 
 Recorded in eight British studios from July to December 1982 , with an accompanying short film released in the same year , production of The Final Cut was dominated by interpersonal conflict . Waters left the band in 1985 and The Final Cut remains the last Pink Floyd studio album he worked on . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Final Cut was originally planned as a soundtrack album for the 1982 film Pink Floyd – The Wall . Under its working title Spare Bricks , it would have featured new music or songs re @-@ recorded for the film , such as " When the Tigers Broke Free " and " Bring the Boys Back Home " , respectively . Bass guitarist , vocalist , and primary songwriter Roger Waters also planned to record a small amount of new material for the album , further expanding The Wall 's narrative . 
 As a result of the Falklands War , Waters changed direction and wrote new material . He saw British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 's response to Argentina 's invasion of the islands as jingoistic and unnecessary , and dedicated the new album — provisionally titled Requiem for a Post @-@ War Dream — to his father , Eric Fletcher Waters . A second lieutenant of the 8th Royal Fusiliers , Eric Waters died during the Second World War at Aprilia in Italy , on 18 February 1944 . Gilmour was unimpressed by Waters ' apparent politicising and the new creative direction prompted arguments between the two . Several pieces of music considered for but not used on The Wall , including " Your Possible Pasts " , " One of the Few " , " The Final Cut " and " The Hero 's Return " , had initially been set aside for Spare Bricks , and although Pink Floyd had often re @-@ used older material in their work , Gilmour felt the songs were not good enough for a new album . He wanted to write new material , but Waters remained doubtful as Gilmour had lately contributed little to the band 's repertoire . 
 The Final Cut was about how , with the introduction of the Welfare State , we felt we were moving forward into something resembling a liberal country where we would all look after one another ... but I 'd seen all that chiselled away , and I 'd seen a return to an almost Dickensian society under Margaret Thatcher . I felt then , as now , that the British government should have pursued diplomatic avenues , rather than steaming in the moment that task force arrived in the South Atlantic . 
 I 'm certainly guilty at times of being lazy , and moments have arrived when Roger might say , " Well , what have you got ? " And I 'd be like , " Well , I haven 't got anything right now . I need a bit of time to put some ideas on tape . " There are elements of all this stuff that , years later , you can look back on and say , " Well , he had a point there . " But he wasn 't right about wanting to put some duff tracks on The Final Cut . I said to Roger , " If these songs weren 't good enough for The Wall , why are they good enough now ? " 
 The album 's working title was changed to The Final Cut , a reference to William Shakespeare 's Julius Caesar : " This was the most unkindest cut of all " . " When the Tigers Broke Free " was issued as a single on 26 July 1982 , with " Bring the Boys Back Home " on the B @-@ side . The single was labelled " Taken from the album The Final Cut " but was not included on that album until the 2004 CD reissue . 
 = = Concept and storyline = = 
 The Final Cut is an anti @-@ war concept album , whose lyrics explore what Waters regards as the betrayal of fallen British servicemen — such as his father — who during the Second World War sacrificed their lives in the spirit of a post @-@ war dream . This post @-@ war dream was that their victory would usher in a more peaceful world , whose leaders would no longer be so eager to resolve disputes by resorting to war . The album 's lyrics are critical of Thatcher , whose policies and decisions Waters regarded as an example of this betrayal . She is referred to as " Maggie " throughout the album . 
 The opening track , " The Post War Dream " , begins with a recorded announcement that the replacement for the Atlantic Conveyor , a ship lost during the Falklands campaign , will be built in Japan . Waters ' lyrics refer to his dead father , the loss of Britain 's shipbuilding industry to Japan , and Margaret Thatcher , before moving on to " Your Possible Pasts " , a rewritten version of one of the songs rejected for The Wall . In " One of the Few " , another rejected song , the schoolteacher from The Wall features as the main character , presented as a war hero returned to civilian life . He is unable to relate his experiences to his wife , and in " The Hero 's Return " is tormented by the loss of one of his air crew . " The Gunner 's Dream " discusses the post @-@ war dream of a world free from tyranny and the threat of terrorism ( a reference to the Hyde Park bombing ) and is followed in " Paranoid Eyes " by the teacher 's descent into alcoholism . 
 The second half of the album deals with various war @-@ related issues . While " Southampton Dock " is a lament to returning war heroes and other soldiers heading out to a likely death , " Not Now John " addresses society 's ignorance of political and economic problems . " Get Your Filthy Hands Off My Desert " deals with Waters ' feelings about war and invasion , and " The Fletcher Memorial Home " ( the title is a nod to Waters ' father ) reflects a fantastical application of " the final solution " on a gathering of political leaders including Leonid Brezhnev , Menachem Begin and Margaret Thatcher . The album 's titular song deals with the aftermath of a man 's isolation and sexual repression , as he contemplates suicide and struggles to reconnect with the world around him . The album ends with " Two Suns in the Sunset " , a song that portrays a nuclear holocaust ; the final result of a world obsessed with war and control . 
 = = Recording = = 
 American composer Michael Kamen , who had contributed to The Wall , oversaw the orchestral arrangements . He also stood in for absent keyboardist Richard Wright , co @-@ produced , and mediated between Waters and Gilmour . James Guthrie was employed as the studio engineer and co @-@ producer , while Mason 's drumming was supplemented by Ray Cooper , and when unable to perform the complex timing changes required of him , replaced on " Two Suns in the Sunset " by Andy Newmark . It was Mason who suggested the repeated reprises of " Maggie , what have we done " be rendered instrumental rather than sung . Raphael Ravenscroft was hired to play the saxophone . Recording took place in the latter half of 1982 across eight studios , including Gilmour 's home studio at Hookend Manor , and Waters ' Billiard Room Studios at East Sheen . The other venues were Mayfair Studios , Olympic Studios , Abbey Road Studios , Eel Pie Studios , Audio International and RAK Studios . 
 Tensions soon became apparent , and while Waters and Gilmour initially worked together , playing the video game Donkey Kong in their spare time , the two eventually chose to work separately . Co @-@ engineer Andy Jackson worked with Waters on the vocals , and Guthrie worked with Gilmour on the guitars . They would occasionally meet to discuss the work that had been completed and while this method was not in itself unusual , Gilmour began to feel strained , sometimes barely maintaining his composure . Kamen too felt pressured ; Waters had never been a confident vocalist and on one occasion , after repeated studio takes , Waters noticed him writing on a notepad . Losing his temper , he demanded to know what Kamen was doing , only to find that the pianist had been writing " I Must Not Fuck Sheep " repeatedly . 
 Like previous Pink Floyd albums , The Final Cut used sound effects combined with advances and innovations in audio recording technology . Mason 's contributions were almost entirely limited to recording sound effects for the experimental Holophonic system , an audio processing technique used to add an enhanced three @-@ dimensional effect to the recordings ( The Final Cut is the second album ever to feature this technology ) . The technique is featured on " Get Your Filthy Hands Off My Desert " , allowing the sound of an explosion to surround the listener . Sound effects from earlier Floyd albums are also evident ; the wind from Meddle is re @-@ used , as are parts of The Dark Side of the Moon , Wish You Were Here , Animals and The Wall . 
 After months of poor relations , and following a final confrontation , Gilmour was removed from the credit list as producer , but would still be paid his production royalties . Waters later admitted that he was also under significant pressure and that early in the production of The Final Cut he believed he would never record with either Gilmour or Mason again . He may have threatened to release the album as a solo record , although Pink Floyd were contracted to EMI and such a move would have been unlikely . Mason kept himself distant , dealing with his own marital problems . 
 In a June 1987 interview , Roger Waters recalled the making of the album : 
 The Final Cut was absolutely misery to make , although I listened to it of late and I rather like a lot of it . But I don 't like my singing on it . You can hear the mad tension running through it all . If you 're trying to express something and being prevented from doing it because you 're so uptight ... It was a horrible time . We were all fighting like cats and dogs . We were finally realising – or accepting , if you like – that there was no band . It was really being thrust upon us that we were not a band and had not been in accord for a long time . Not since 1975 , when we made Wish You Were Here . Even then there were big disagreements about content and how to put the record together ... But making The Final Cut was misery . We didn 't work together at all . I had to do it more or less single @-@ handed , working with Michael Kamen , my co @-@ producer . That 's one of the few things that the ' boys ' and I agreed about . But no one else would do anything on it . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Storm Thorgerson , a founder member of Hipgnosis ( designers of most of Pink Floyd 's previous artwork ) , was passed over for the cover design . Instead , Waters created the cover himself , using photographs taken by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Willie Christie . The front cover shows a Remembrance poppy and four Second World War medal ribbons against the black fabric of the jacket or blazer on which they are worn . From left to right the medals are the 1939 – 45 Star , the Africa Star , the Defence Medal , and the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 The poppy is a recurring design theme . The interior gatefold featured three photographs , the first depicting an outdoor scene with an outstretched hand holding three poppies and in the distance , a soldier with his back to the camera . Two more photographs show a welder at work , his mask emblazoned with the Japanese Rising Sun Flag , and a nuclear explosion ; a clear reference to " Two Suns in the Sunset " . The album 's lyrics are printed on the gatefold . Side one of the vinyl disc carries an image of a poppy field and on side two , a soldier with a knife in his back lies face down amongst the poppies , a dog beside him . The back cover features a photograph of a soldier stood upright and holding a film canister , with a knife protruding from his back ( the film canister and knife may reflect Waters ' tumultuous relationship with The Wall film director Alan Parker ) . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Final Cut was released in the UK on 21 March 1983 and in the US on 2 April . It reached number one in the UK , something that The Dark Side of the Moon and The Wall had each failed to do . It was less successful in America , peaking at number six on the Billboard album charts . Issued as a single , " Not Now John " reached the UK Top 30 , with its chorus of " Fuck all that " bowdlerised to " Stuff all that " . 
 Although it enjoyed a degree of commercial success , the album received mixed reviews . Melody Maker deemed it " a milestone in the history of awfulness " , and the NME 's Richard Cook wrote : " Like the poor damned Tommies that haunt his mind , Roger Waters ' writing has been blown to hell ... Waters stopped with The Wall , and The Final Cut isolates and juggles the identical themes of that elephantine concept with no fresh momentum to drive them . " Robert Christgau opined : " it 's a comfort to encounter antiwar rock that has the weight of years of self @-@ pity behind it " , and awarded the album a C + grade . More impressed , Rolling Stone 's Kurt Loder viewed it as " essentially a Roger Waters solo album ... a superlative achievement on several levels " . Dan Hedges of Record also approved , writing : " On paper it sounds hackneyed and contrived – the sort of thing that was worked into the ground by everyone from P. F. Sloan to Paul Kantner . In Pink Floyd 's case , it still works , partially through the understatement and ingenuity of the music and the special effects ... but mostly through the care Waters has taken in plotting out the imagery of his bleak visions . " 
 With over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units shipped in the United States , the Recording Industry Association of America certified The Final Cut Platinum in May 1983 . It was given double Platinum certification in 1997 . Despite these achievements , The Final Cut was the lowest @-@ selling Pink Floyd studio album in the United States and worldwide since Meddle . Gilmour claimed that this relative commercial failure supported his assertion that much of the material on the album was weak . Waters responded : 
 It 's absolutely ridiculous to judge a record solely on sales . If you 're going to use sales as the sole criterion , it makes Grease a better record than Graceland . Anyway , I was in a greengrocer 's shop , and this woman of about forty in a fur coat came up to me . She said she thought it was the most moving record she had ever heard . Her father had also been killed in World War II , she explained . And I got back into my car with my three pounds of potatoes and drove home and thought , good enough . 
 The album 's release was accompanied by a short film , also titled The Final Cut . It features four of the album 's songs : " The Gunner 's Dream " , " The Final Cut " , " The Fletcher Memorial Home " and " Not Now John " . Produced by Waters and directed by brother @-@ in @-@ law Willie Christie , it features Waters talking to a psychiatrist named A. Parker @-@ Marshall , while Alex McAvoy , who played the teacher in Pink Floyd – The Wall , also appears . 
 The Final Cut was released on compact disc in 1983 . A remastered and repackaged CD was issued by EMI in Europe and on Capitol Records in the US in 2004 ; this included an extra song , the previously released " When the Tigers Broke Free " . In 2007 , a remastered version was released as part of the Oh , by the Way boxed set , packaged in a miniature replica of the original gatefold LP sleeve . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 With no plans to tour the album , Waters and Gilmour instead turned to separate solo projects . Gilmour recorded and toured About Face in 1984 , using it to express his feelings on a range of topics from the murder of musician John Lennon to his relationship with Waters – who also began to tour his new solo album , The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking . Mason released his second solo album , Profiles , in August 1985 . 
 In 1985 , faced with a potentially ruinous lawsuit from his record company and fellow band members , Waters resigned . He believed that Pink Floyd was a " spent force " . He applied to the High Court to prevent the Pink Floyd name from ever being used again . His lawyers discovered that the partnership had never been formally confirmed , and Waters returned to the High Court in an attempt to gain a veto over further use of the band 's name . Gilmour 's team responded by issuing a press release affirming that Pink Floyd would continue to exist ; he later told a Sunday Times reporter that " Roger is a dog in the manger and I 'm going to fight him ... " 
 Waters wrote to EMI and Columbia declaring his intention to leave the group , asking them to release him from his contractual obligations . With a legal case pending , he dispensed with manager Steve O 'Rourke and employed Peter Rudge to manage his affairs . He later contributed to the soundtrack for When the Wind Blows and then recorded his second solo album , Radio K.A.O.S. 
 Owing to the combination of Pink Floyd 's partial breakup and Waters ' dominance on the project , The Final Cut is sometimes viewed as a de facto Waters solo album . The personal quality assigned to the lyrics are related to Waters ' struggle to reconcile his despair at the changing social face of Britain , and also the loss of his father during the Second World War . Gilmour 's guitar solos on " Your Possible Pasts " and " The Fletcher Memorial Home " are , however , sometimes considered the equal of his best work on The Wall . More recent reviews of the album have weighed its importance alongside the band 's breakup . Writing for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine said " with its anger , emphasis on lyrics , and sonic textures , it 's clear that it 's the album that Waters intended it to be . And it 's equally clear that Pink Floyd couldn 't have continued in this direction ... " , Stylus Magazine wrote : " It 's about pursuing something greater even when you have all the money that you could ever want . And either failing or succeeding brilliantly . It 's up to you decide whether this record is a success or a failure , but I 'd go with the former every time . " Rachel Mann of The Quietus said " flawed though it is , The Final Cut remains a tremendous album " and " still has something fresh to say " . Mike Diver of Drowned in Sound was less generous : " Rays of light are few and far between , and even on paper the track titles – including ' The Gunner 's Dream ' and ' Paranoid Eyes ' – suggest an arduous listen . Q Magazine once compiled a top ten list of depressing records , and this was on it . Enough said , I think . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Roger Waters . 
 All lead vocals performed by Roger Waters , except " Not Now John " by David Gilmour and Waters . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Burlesque : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack = 
 Burlesque : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the soundtrack album to the film of the same name by American recording artists Christina Aguilera and Cher . It was released on November 19 , 2010 by Screen Gems , Inc and RCA Records . 
 Burlesque soundtrack comprises ten songs , eight performed by Aguilera and two performed by Cher . The album is inspired by jazz music style , in contrast to Aguilera 's previous release Bionic ( 2010 ) but similar to her 1920s , 1930s and 1940s @-@ influenced album Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . Upon its release , the album received generally favorable reviews from music critics . It won a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 2011 ceremony for " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " by Cher . 
 Burlesque peaked at number eighteen on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart and reached the top ten of several national record charts . As of August 2014 , the album has sold 707 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The soundtrack spawned three promotional singles : " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " ( performed by Cher ) , " Express " and " Show Me How You Burlesque " ( performed by Aguilera ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In early May 2010 , Aguilera announced that she would embark on the supporting concert tour for her sixth studio album , Bionic . However , her management team announced shortly afterwards that the tour was postponed due to Aguilera 's promotion for her first feature film , Burlesque ( 2010 ) , in which she starred alongside Cher . Aguilera reported that she would reschedule the tour in 2011 , though the tour never happened . 
 Burlesque was released in November 2010 . The film was met with mixed reviews from critics , who criticized it for being " campy and clichéd " , yet praised Aguilera 's acting debut . The accompanying soundtrack , Burlesque : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , comprises ten songs : eight performed by Aguilera and two performed by Cher . It was Cher 's first major release since her compilation Gold in 2005 . Producer Tricky Stewart stated that the collaboration with Aguilera on Burlesque soundtrack was " a crazy opportunity different from anything [ he ] ' ve ever done before " . Danja was looking forward to working with Aguilera on the soundtrack , however it was not done . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Burlesque : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack comprises ten songs : eight performed by Aguilera and two performed by Cher . The soundtrack has a " brassy , jazzy " sound inspired by jazz , in contrast to Aguilera 's last electronic music @-@ inspired studio album Bionic ( 2010 ) but similar to her fifth 1920s , 1930s and 1940s @-@ influenced studio album Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . Four of the songs performed by Aguilera are cover versions , two of Etta James ' works : " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " and " Tough Lover " , a cover version of Marlene Dietrich 's " Guy What Takes His Time " , and a dance version of " The Beautiful People " by Marilyn Manson , including the " unmistakable " drum beats and guitar riff in the original version . " I Am a Good Girl " " sticks to the sassy swing of a bygone musical era " , while " Express " has the similar musical style to Aguilera 's previous single " Lady Marmalade " and lyrically evokes sexual theme as Aguilera " seductively " sings , " Show a little leg / You gotta shimmy your chest " . The uptempo number " Show Me How You Burlesque " has a " modern sounding " dance production , but " lack of melody and strong hooks " . The power ballad " Bound to You " , co @-@ written by Sia Furler , has the same musical style to " You Lost Me " which was also co @-@ written by Furler from Bionic , features Aguilera 's strong vocal delivery . 
 The two songs performed by Cher are : " Welcome to Burlesque " and " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " . " Welcome to Burlesque " was described as " a ' Cabaret ' -style oompah that shows both skill and humor " . The power ballad " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " features Cher 's powerful vocals . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In August 2010 , a video containing a scene from the film featuring Aguilera performing " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " was released onto YouTube . Later in early November , a clip featuring Aguilera performing " But I Am a Good Girl " from the movie was also released . On November 17 , 2010 , Aguilera performed the track " Bound to You " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . On November 19 , 2010 , she performed " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . Aguilera performed " Express " at the American Music Awards of 2010 on November 21 , 2010 . The following day , Aguilera performed " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " on Conan . On November 23 , 2010 , Aguilera performed " Show Me How You Burlesque " and " Beautiful " during the season finale of the eleventh season of U.S. television dancing competition Dancing with the Stars . 
 " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " performed by Cher was the first song to be released from Burlesque . On November 24 , 2010 , a digital remix extended play of " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " was released via iTunes Stores worldwide . On December 7 , the digital remix version of the song was purchased for sales onto iTunes Stores . In the United States , the single impacted adult contemporary radio stations on January 15 , 2011 . " Express " and " Show Me How You Burlesque " performed by Aguilera were the two next singles from the soundtrack , respectively : " Express " impacted Australian contemporary hit radio stations on December 6 , 2010 , while " Show Me How You Burlesque " was made available for digital sales on February 4 , 2011 . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave the soundtrack three out of five stars , commenting that " some of this stuff is quite good " . Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson provided a mixed review , writing that the soundtrack " seems to indicate her efforts are coming from a similarly era @-@ straddling psychological place " . Jim Farber from New York Daily News criticized Aguilera for her " vocals offer the same distracting loop @-@ de @-@ loops and showy tics " , but complimented Cher that she " balances both aspects ideally " . A reviewer from Blogcritics labelled the album a " grab bag of tracks that don 't really add up to cohesive album " . Leah <unk> from Entertainment Weekly gave the album a " B " score , naming it a " shamelessly diva @-@ fied mix of balladry , Broadway cabaret , and backroom boogie @-@ woogie " and complimented on its musical departure from Aguilera 's previous studio album Bionic . In a positive review , Billboard editor Kerri Mason praised Burlesque as " a campy celebration of diva @-@ dom and an over @-@ the @-@ top , triple @-@ threat performance " . James <unk> of The Advertiser praised Aguilera 's " vocal gymnastics " , but was mixed towards Cher 's numbers on the soundtrack . Maura Johnston from The Village Voice named " The Beautiful People ( from Burlesque ) " as the thirteenth worst song of 2010 , calling it " an interesting failure . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the US Billboard 200 , Burlesque debuted and peaked at number eighteen during the week of November 28 , 2010 , selling 63 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , having sold 707 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of September 2014 . On the Australian ARIA Albums Chart , the soundtrack peaked at number two . It was certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association in 2015 for selling over 70 @,@ 000 copies . Burlesque peaked at number 16 on the Canadian Albums Chart and was certified gold by the Music Canada for shipments of 40 @,@ 000 units in the region . The soundtrack also gained commercial success on several record charts : peaking at number five in Austria and New Zealand , and number eight in Switzerland . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs performed by Christina Aguilera , except two , which are performed by Cher . 
 Notes 
 Source : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rùm = 
 Rùm ( Scottish Gaelic pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , a Scottish Gaelic name often anglicised to Rum , is one of the Small Isles of the Inner Hebrides , in the district of Lochaber , Scotland . For much of the 20th century the name became Rhum , a spelling invented by the former owner , Sir George Bullough , because he did not relish the idea of having the title " Laird of Rum " . 
 It is the largest of the Small Isles , and the 15th largest Scottish island , but is inhabited by only about thirty or so people , all of whom live in the village of Kinloch on the east coast . The island has been inhabited since the 8th millennium BC and provides some of the earliest known evidence of human occupation in Scotland . The early Celtic and Norse settlers left only a few written accounts and artefacts . From the 12th to 13th centuries on , the island was held by various clans including the MacLeans of Coll . The population grew to over 400 by the late 18th century but was cleared of its indigenous population between 1826 and 1828 . The island then became a sporting estate , the exotic Kinloch Castle being constructed by the <unk> in 1900 . Rùm was purchased by the Nature Conservancy Council in 1957 . 
 Rùm is mainly igneous in origin , and its mountains have been eroded by Pleistocene glaciation . It is now an important study site for research in ecology , especially of red deer , and is the site of a successful reintroduction programme for the white @-@ tailed sea eagle . Its economy is entirely dependent on Scottish Natural Heritage , a public body that now manages the island , and there have been calls for a greater diversity of housing provision . A Caledonian MacBrayne ferry links the island with the mainland town of Mallaig . 
 = = Etymology and placenames = = 
 Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) suggests that Rum is " probably " pre @-@ Celtic , but may be Old Norse <unk> @-@ øy for " wide island " or Gaelic <unk> @-@ <unk> ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) meaning " isle of the ridge " . Ross ( 2007 ) notes that there is a written record of <unk> from 677 and suggests " spacious island " from the Gaelic <unk> . Mac an Tàilleir ( 2003 ) is unequivocal that Rùm is " a pre @-@ Gaelic name and unclear " . The origins are therefore speculative , but it is known for certain that George Bullough changed the spelling to Rhum to avoid the association with the alcoholic drink rum . However , the " Rhum " spelling is used on a Kilmory gravestone dated 1843 . In 1991 the Nature Conservancy Council of Scotland ( the forerunner to Scottish Natural Heritage ) reverted to the use of Rum without the h . 
 In the 13th century there may be references to the island as <unk> @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> and Dean Munro writing in 1549 calls it Ronin . Seafaring Hebrideans had numerous taboos concerning spoken references to islands . In the case of Rùm , use of the usual name was forbidden , the island being referred to as <unk> na <unk> <unk> — " the kingdom of the wild forest " . 
 The island was cleared of its indigenous population prior to being mapped by the Ordnance Survey , so it is possible that many place names are speculative . Nonetheless , the significant number of Norse @-@ derived names that exist eight centuries after Viking political control ended indicate the importance of their presence on the island . Of the nine hamlets that were mapped in 1801 , seven of the names are of Norse origin . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Rùm is the largest of the Small Isles , with an area of 10 @,@ 463 hectares ( 40 @.@ 40 sq mi ) . It had a population of only 22 in the 2001 census , making it one of the most sparsely populated of all Scottish islands . There is no indigenous population ; the residents are a mixture of employees of Scottish Natural Heritage and their families , together with a number of researchers and a school teacher . There are a variety of small businesses on the island including accommodation providers , artists and crafters , three newly created crofts are being worked ( as of 2012 ) with the introduction of sheep back to the island , along with pigs and poultry . Most of the residents live in the village of Kinloch , in the east of the island , which has no church or pub , but does have a village hall and a small primary school . It also has a shop and post office , which is run as a private business . There is a summer <unk> open . 
 Kinloch is at the head of Loch Scresort , the main anchorage . Kilmory Bay lies to the north . It has a fine beach and the remains of a village , and has for some years served as the base for research into red deer ( see below ) . The area is occasionally closed to visitors during the period of the deer rut in the autumn . The western point is the A <unk> peninsula , and to the southwest lie Wreck Bay , the cliffs of <unk> <unk> and Harris Bay . The last is the site of the Bullough 's mausoleum . The family decided the first version was inadequate and dynamited it . The second is in the incongruous style of a Greek temple . Papadil ( Old Norse : " valley of the hermit " ) near the southern extremity has the ruins of a lodge built and then abandoned by the <unk> . 
 An 1801 map produced by George Langlands identified nine villages : Kilmory to the north at the head of Glen Kilmory , <unk> <unk> just to the north between Kilmory and Rubha <unk> <unk> , Camas <unk> in the northeast , " <unk> " , ( the modern Kinloch ) , Cove ( <unk> at Bagh na h @-@ <unk> in the east ) , <unk> in the southeast , Papadil in the south , Harris in the southwest and <unk> at the head of Glen Shellesder in the northwest . 
 The island 's relief is spectacular , a 19th @-@ century commentator remarking that " the interior is one heap of rude mountains , scarcely possessing an acre of level land " . This combination of geology and topography make for less than ideal agricultural conditions , and it is doubtful that more than one tenth of the island has ever been cultivated . In the 18th century average land rental values on Rùm were a third those of neighbouring Eigg , and only a fifth of Canna 's . 
 Mean rainfall is high at 1 @,@ 800 millimetres ( 71 in ) at the coast and 3 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 120 in ) in the hills . Spring months are usually the driest and winter the wettest , but any month may receive the highest level of precipitation during the year . 
 = = Climate = = 
 As with the rest of the British Isles and Scotland , Rùm features a strongly maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters . 
 There is a <unk> weather station at Kinloch providing long term climate observations . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The main range of hills on Rùm are the Cuillin , usually referred to as the " Rùm Cuillin " , in order to distinguish them from the Cuillin of Skye . They are rocky peaks of basalt and gabbro , similar in many ways to their better @-@ known namesakes . Geologically , Rùm is the core of a deeply eroded volcano that was active in the Paleogene era some 66 - 23 million years ago , and which developed on a pre @-@ existing structure of Torridonian sandstone and shales resting on Lewisian gneiss . Two of the Cuillin are classified as Corbetts : Askival and <unk> , ( Old Norse for " mountain of the ash trees " and " hill of the strongholds " respectively ) and Rùm is the smallest Scottish island to have a summit above 762 metres ( 2 @,@ 500 ft ) . Other hills include Hallival , <unk> ( ' mountain of the trolls ' ) , Barkeval , and <unk> nan <unk> ( Gaelic : " peak of the young men " ) in the Cuillin and Ard Nev , Orval , Sròn an t @-@ <unk> and Bloodstone Hill in the west . It is likely that only the higher peaks remained above the Pleistocene ice sheets as nunataks . 
 Hallival and Askival are formed from an extraordinary series of layered igneous rocks created as olivine and feldspar crystals accumulated at the base of a magma chamber . The chamber eventually collapsed , forming a caldera . There are swarms of near @-@ vertical dykes of basalt on the northwest coast between Kilmory and <unk> , created by basaltic magma forcing its way into fissures in the pre @-@ existing rock . The western hills , although less elevated than the Cuillin , exhibit a superb collection of periglacial landforms including boulder sheets and lobes , turf @-@ banked terraces , ploughing boulders and patterned ground . On Orval and Ard Nev the weathered basalt and <unk> has been sorted by frost heaving into circles 50 centimetres in diameter and weathering on Barkeval has produced unusual rock sculptures . On Sròn an t @-@ <unk> there are large sorted granite boulder circles 2 – 3 metres across on the flat summit and sorted stripes on the slopes . Lava flowing away from the volcanic centre formed Bloodstone Hill , gas bubbles leaving holes in the structure that were then filled with green agate flecked with red . There are some outcrops of the pre @-@ volcanic Lewisian gneiss near <unk> in the southeast corner of the island , and more extensive deposits of sandstone in the north and east . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 Farm Fields , a site near Kinloch , provides some of the earliest known evidence of human occupation in Scotland . <unk> hazelnut shells found there have been dated to the Mesolithic period at 7700 @-@ 7500 BC . At this time the landscape was dominated by alder , hazel and willow scrub . A beach site above Loch Scresort has been dated to between 6500 and 5500 BC . The presence of this hunter @-@ gatherer community may have been to take advantage of the local supplies of <unk> , a workable material for the making of tools and weapons . There is a shell @-@ midden at Papadil in the south and evidence of tidal fish traps at both Kinloch and Kilmory . 
 Examination of peat cores and pollen records indicates that soil erosion ( suggesting clearance of woodland for agricultural purposes ) was taking place in 3470 BC and that evidence of arable cultivation by Neolithic communities exists from <unk> BC . As the climate became damper , peat expanded at the expense of woodland , and post @-@ glacial sea level changes left raised beaches around the coastline 18 – 45 metres above the present coastline , especially between Harris and A <unk> . There are prehistoric fort sites at Kilmory , Papadil and Shellesder of uncertain date . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early Christian period = = = 
 St Beccan of Rùm may have lived on the island for four decades from 632 AD , his death being recorded in the Annals of Ulster in 677 . He is known to have been conservative on doctrinal matters and surviving examples of his poetry suggest a passionate personality . He wrote of Columba : 
 In scores of <unk> with an army of wretches he crossed the long @-@ haired sea . 
 He crossed the wave @-@ strewn wild region , 
 Foam flecked , seal @-@ filled , savage , bounding , seething , white @-@ tipped , pleasing , doleful . 
 Simple stone pillars has been found at Kilmory and Bagh na h @-@ <unk> ( ' bay of the cave ' ) that may date from this period . 
 = = = Norse rule = = = 
 The Norse held sway in the Small Isles from 833 until the Treaty of Perth in 1266 . The <unk> clan held tutelage in the later period of Norse rule from at least 1240 , and possibly a century earlier . The only direct evidence of a Norse presence on Rùm to date is a piece of carved narwhal ivory unearthed at Bagh na h @-@ Uamh in 1940 . 
 = = = Medieval Scots rule = = = 
 By 1346 the island was chartered to John of Islay , the Scots Lord of the Isles . It is possible that during the early medieval period the island was used as a hunting reserve by the nobility ( hence the ' taboo name ' referred to above ) . John of Fordun indicates that Rùm was " with excellent sport , but few inhabitants " and " a wooded and hilly island " in 1380 . Two hundred years later Skene noted that 
 <unk> is ane Ile of small profit , except that it <unk> mony <unk> , and for <unk> <unk> the same is <unk> <unk> , except <unk> <unk> . It is ... all <unk> and waist <unk> , and commodious only for hunting of <unk> ... and will raise 6 or 7 men . 
 At the same time the much smaller nearby island of Muck was able to " raise " 16 able men and in 1625 there were only three villages on Rùm , suggesting the population was being deliberately constrained . Substantial stone walls built to funnel deer into pens that may date from this period still exist in the western glens . During the 13th century Rùm became part of the estates of the powerful Clann <unk> for a brief period and then passed into the hands of Clanranald . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 16th century , and probably a century earlier , the island was in the possession of the MacLeans of Coll . This transfer may have occurred by extortion , Allan <unk> of Clanranald having been held prisoner on Coll for 9 months . In 1549 Munro noted that although the island " pertained " to Coll it " obeys <unk> " to the Macleans of Duart , a situation that continued for some time . In 1588 the Small Isles suffered an armed invasion by Lachlan Maclean of Duart and his band of cutthroats , including up to one hundred Spaniards shipwrecked in the aftermath of the English defeat of the Armada . He burnt and put the isles to the sword , sparing neither women nor children . At a later date a report received by King James VI indicated that Clanranald had re @-@ occupied the island , but despite these temporary setbacks the island remained in Maclean of Coll 's hands for three centuries or more . 
 = = = 17th and 18th centuries = = = 
 By the late 17th century Rùm 's status as a hunting reserve went into decline and population numbers started to rise . Black cattle were raised for export to the mainland , fish caught and barley and potatoes grown . More unusually , goats were kept by the inhabitants , the hair being sent to Glasgow and made into wigs for export to America . The economy was in no small part dependent on the bounty of the sea . Edward Clarke visiting in 1797 dined on : 
 .... milk , <unk> and Lisbon wine . I was surprised to find wine of that species , and of a superior quality in such a hut , but they told us it was part of the freight of some unfortunate vessel wrecked near the island . 
 This largesse notwithstanding , conditions were primitive . There was no permanent minister and when one visited he was obliged to conduct sermons in the open air , there being no church . Nor was there a mill , and leather was tanned with willow bark and dressed with sea shells due to the lack of lime . The nearby smaller island of Muck was valued for land rental the same as the whole of Rùm at this time , again indicating the poverty of agriculture on Rùm . The growing population of Rùm 's demands on the land led to the extermination of the native red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) during the latter half of the 18th century . 
 James Boswell and Samuel Johnson met with MacLean of Coll at Talisker on Skye during their 1773 excursion to the Hebrides . Boswell reported that : 
 After dinner he and I walked to the top of <unk> , a very high rocky hill , from whence there is a view of Barra , the Long Island , Bernera , the Loch of Dunvegan , part of Rùm , part of Rasay , and a vast deal of the Isle of Skye . Col , though he had come into Skye with an intention to be at Dunvegan , and pass a considerable time in the island , most politely resolved first to conduct us to Mull , and then to return to Skye . This was a very fortunate circumstance ; for he planned an expedition for us of more variety than merely going to Mull . He proposed we should see the islands of Egg , Muck , Col , and Tyr @-@ yi . In all these islands he could shew us every thing worth seeing . 
 In the event , poor weather prevented the travellers visiting the Small Isles en route to Mull . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 By 1801 there were nine hamlets on the island , and its economy received a temporary boost from the kelp industry . The wooded island of five hundred years before was now essentially treeless outside of Kinloch village . 
 In 1825 the entire island was leased to Dr Lachlan Maclean , a relative of Hugh Maclean of Coll , and its inhabitants ( then numbering some 450 people ) were given a year 's notice to quit their homes , which essentially meant an enforced leaving of the island . ( Most of the population of Rùm were tenant farmers , paying rent to the island 's owner ; in law they neither owned the land they worked nor the houses in which they lived . ) On 11 July 1826 , about 300 of the inhabitants boarded two overcrowded ships — the Highland Lad and the Dove of Harmony — bound for Cape Breton in Nova Scotia , Canada . Their passage was paid by Dr Lachlan and by Maclean of Coll . The remaining population followed them in 1827 on the St. Lawrence , along with some 150 inhabitants from the island of Muck , another of Maclean of Coll 's properties . These evictions were part of a wider event that came to be known as the Highland Clearances , during which people whose culture had existed there for millennia were forced to emigrate . 
 In 1827 , when giving evidence to a government select committee on emigration , an agent of Maclean of Coll was asked " And were the people willing to go ? " " Some of them " , came the reply , " Others were not very willing , they did not like to leave the land of their ancestors " . Years later an eyewitness , a local shepherd , was more forthcoming in his description of the events : " The people of the island were carried off in one mass , for ever , from the sea @-@ girt spot where they were born and bred ... The wild outcries of the men and heart @-@ breaking wails of the women and children filled all the air between the mountainous shore of the bay " . 
 Dr Lachlan turned Rùm into a sheep farm , with its population replaced by some 8 @,@ 000 blackface sheep , but the price of mutton and wool was in decline . In 1839 Lachlan was forced to relinquish his tenancy of Rùm , bankrupt , penniless and , in the words of a Cape Breton letter from 1897 , " much worse off than the comfortable people he turned out of Rùm 13 years previously " . The same letter described Lachlan as " the Curse and Scourge of the Highland Crofters " . 
 In 1844 the visiting geologist , Hugh Miller , wrote : 
 The single sheep farmer who had occupied the holdings of so many had been unfortunate in his speculations , and had left the island : the proprietor , his landlord seemed to have been as little fortunate as his tenant , for the island itself was in the market ; and a report went current at the time that it was on the eve of being purchased by some wealthy Englishman , who purposed converting it into a deer forest . How strange a cycle ! 
 MacLean of Coll sold the island to the Marquess of Salisbury in 1845 , who converted it into a sporting estate . The island was then owned by the Campbell family from 1870 to 1888 , when John Bullough , a cotton machinery manufacturer and self @-@ made millionaire from Accrington in Lancashire , acquired the island , and continued to use it for recreational purposes . The estate 's prospectus for the 1888 sale described Rùm as " the most picturesque of the islands which lie off the west coast of Scotland " and " as a sporting estate it has at present few equals " . It gave its population as between 60 and 70 , all either shepherds or estate workers and their families . There were no crofts on the island . When Bullough died in 1891 he was buried on Rùm , in a rock @-@ cut mausoleum under an octagonal stone tower . This was later demolished and his sarcophagus moved into an elaborate mausoleum modelled as a Greek temple . He was succeeded in the ownership of Rùm by his son , George Bullough . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 George Bullough ( later Sir George ) , built Kinloch Castle in 1900 using sandstone quarried at Annan in Dumfries and Galloway ( some sources say the stone was from Arran ) . 
 At this time there were about 100 people employed on the estate . Fourteen under @-@ gardeners , who were paid extra to wear kilts , worked on the extensive grounds that included a nine @-@ hole golf course , tennis and squash courts , heated turtle and alligator ponds and an aviary including birds of paradise and humming birds . Soil for the grounds was imported from Ayrshire and figs , peaches , grapes and nectarines were grown in greenhouses . The interior boasted an <unk> that could simulate the sounds of brass , drum and woodwind , an air @-@ conditioned billiards room , and a jacuzzi . This opulence could not be sustained indefinitely . The Bullough finances gradually declined in the 1920s , and their interest in , and visits to Rùm decreased . Sir George died in France in July 1939 — he was interred in the family mausoleum on Rùm . His widow continued to visit Rùm as late as 1954 . She died in London in 1967 , aged 98 , and was buried next to her husband in the Rùm mausoleum . In 1957 Lady Bullough had sold the whole island , save for the mausoleum , but including the castle and its contents , to the Nature Conservancy Council ( now Scottish Natural Heritage ) for the " knock @-@ down price of £ 23 @,@ 000 " on the understanding that it would be used as a national nature reserve . 
 = = = Overview of population trends = = = 
 Source : <unk> ( 2001 ) unless otherwise stated 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Rùm is an important study site for research in ecology and numerous academic papers have been produced based on work undertaken on the island . In addition to its status as nature reserve , Rùm was designated a Biosphere Reserve from 1976 to 2002 , a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1987 , and has seventeen sites scheduled as nationally important ancient monuments . 
 = = = Red deer = = = 
 The red deer population has been the subject of research for many years , recently under the leadership of Tim Clutton @-@ Brock of the University of Cambridge . These efforts are based at the remote bay of Kilmory in the north of the island . It has been important in the development of sociobiology and behavioural ecology , particularly in relation to the understanding of aggression through game theory . 
 = = = Ponies , goats and cattle = = = 
