 The island has small herds of ponies , feral goats ( Capra hircus ) and Highland cattle . The pony herd , which now numbers about a dozen animals , was first recorded on the island in 1772 , and in 1775 they were described as being " very small , but a breed of eminent beauty " . They are small in stature , averaging only 13 hands in height and all have a dark stripe down their backs and zebra stripes on their forelegs . These features have led to speculation that they may be related to primitive northern European breeds , although it is more likely that they originate from the western Mediterranean . It is sometimes claimed that they are descended from animals that travelled with the Spanish Armada , although it is probable that they arrived by more conventional means . The goat stocks were improved for stalking in the early 20th century and acquired a reputation for the size of their horns and the thickness of their fleeces . The flock of about 200 spends most of its time on the western sea cliffs . The native cattle were re @-@ introduced in 1970 , having been absent since the 19th century clearances . The herd of 30 grazes in the Harris area from September to June , and further north in Glen Shellesder in the summer months . 
 = = = Other fauna = = = 
 Rùm is also noted for its bird life . The population of 70 @,@ 000 Manx shearwaters is one of the largest breeding colonies in the world . These migrating birds that spend their winters in the South Atlantic off Brazil , and return to Rùm every summer to breed in underground burrows high in the Cuillin Hills . White @-@ tailed sea eagles were exterminated on the island by 1912 and later became extinct in Scotland . A programme of reintroduction began in 1975 , and within ten years 82 young sea eagles from Norway had been released . There is now a successful breeding population in the wild . 
 There are brown trout , European eel and three @-@ spined stickleback in the streams , and salmon occasionally run in the Kinloch River . The only amphibian found on Rùm is the palmate newt and the only reptile native to Rùm is the common lizard . Invertebrates are diverse and have been studied there since 1884 , numerous species of damsel fly , dragonfly , beetle , butterflies , moths etc. having been recorded . Several rare upland species are found on the ultrabasic slopes of Barkeval , Hallival and Askival including the ground beetles <unk> montanus and Amara <unk> . The midge ( Culicoides <unk> ) , a biting gnat , occurs in " unbelievable numbers " . 
 In October 2006 the popular <unk> series on BBC television showed coverage of the deer rut at Kilmory Bay . 
 A 1 @.@ 5 hectare patch of brown earth soil at the abandoned settlement of Papadil is home to a thriving population of earthworms , which are rare in the elsewhere poor soil of the island . Some individuals of <unk> terrestris have reached tremendous sizes , with the largest weighing 12 @.@ 7 grams . This is speculated to be due to the good quality soil , and absence of predators . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 A tree nursery was established at Kinloch in 1960 in order to support a substantial programme of re @-@ introducing twenty native species including silver birch , hawthorn , rowan and holly . The forested area , which consists of over a million re @-@ introduced native trees and shrubs , is essentially confined to the vicinity of Kinloch and the slopes near this site surrounding Loch Scresort and on nearby Meall á <unk> . The island 's flora came to widespread attention with the 1999 publication of the book A Rum Affair by Karl Sabbagh , a British writer and television producer . The book told of a long @-@ running scientific controversy over the alleged discovery of certain plants on Rùm by botanist John William Heslop @-@ Harrison — discoveries that are now considered to be fraudulent . Heslop Harrison is widely believed to have placed many of these plants on the island himself to provide evidence for his theory about the geological development of the Hebridean islands . Nonetheless , the native flora offers much of interest . There are rare arctic <unk> and alpine <unk> , endemic varieties of the heath spotted @-@ orchid and <unk> , as well as more common species such as sundew , butterwort , blue heath <unk> and <unk> . A total of 590 higher plant and fern taxa have been recorded . 
 = = Economy , transport and culture = = 
 The entire island is owned and managed as a single estate by Scottish Natural Heritage ( SNH ) . As noted above , the island has a transient population comprising employees of SNH and their families , researchers , and a teacher . Until recently SNH have been opposed to the development of the island as a genuine community , but there has been a change in approach since the beginning of 2007 . Di Alexander , development manager for the Highlands Small Communities Housing Trust has said : " It has been clear for many years that the small community on Rùm needs to increase and diversify its housing supply away from exclusively SNH @-@ tied housing . Even a couple of new rented houses could make such a difference to the community 's wellbeing . " 
 Surprisingly perhaps , on an 10 @,@ 500 hectares ( 26 @,@ 000 acres ) estate with a population less than thirty , an issue has been lack of land for building . However , an SNH spokesman has stated " Once we are clear what the trust 's priorities are , we will release the land " . The Prince 's Regeneration Trust , which is drawing up a conservation plan for Kinloch Castle , may also make proposals for renewable energy generation on the island . 
 In 2008 a " Rùm Task Group " , chaired by Lesley Riddoch , was created to generate proposals for advancing community development opportunities . It reported to Mike Russell MSP the Minister for Environment in the Scottish Government , and in June a plan was announced to establish a locally @-@ run trust with the aim of reintroducing crofting settlements to the area around Kinloch village . In December it was announced that £ 250 @,@ 000 of land and buildings are likely to be placed into community ownership , subject to a ballot of the electorate in January 2009 . 
 A Caledonian MacBrayne ferry , MV <unk> , links Rùm and the neighbouring Small Isles of Canna , Eigg and Muck , to the mainland port of Mallaig some 17 miles ( 27 km ) and 1 ½ hours sailing time away . The <unk> has a landing craft @-@ style stern ramp allowing vehicles to be driven onto and off the vessel at a new slipway constructed in 2001 . However , visitors are not normally permitted to bring vehicles to the Small Isles . During the summer months the islands are also served by Arisaig Marine 's ferry MV <unk> from Arisaig , 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Mallaig . 
 The best anchorage is Loch Scresort , with other bays offering only temporary respites from poor weather . Robert Buchanan writing in the 19th century described it as : 
 As sweet a little nook as ever Ulysses <unk> away a day in , during his memorable voyage homeward . Though merely a small bay , about a mile in breadth , and curving inland for a mile and a half , it is quite sheltered from all winds save the east , being flanked to the south and west by <unk> and <unk> , and guarded on the northern side by a low range of <unk> slopes . In this sunny time , the sheep are bleating from the shores , the yacht lies double , yacht and shadow , and the bay is painted richly with the clear reflection of the mountains . 
 In the summer of 2002 a reality TV programme titled Escape from Experiment Island was filmed on the island . This short @-@ lived show ( 6 episodes ) was produced by the BBC in conjunction with the Discovery Channel . The show was to piggyback on the success of Junkyard Wars by having the teams build vehicles to escape from the island . 
 = Lloyd Kenyon , 1st Baron Kenyon = 
 Lloyd Kenyon , 1st Baron Kenyon PC SL KC ( 5 October 1732 – 4 April 1802 ) was a British politician and barrister , who served as Attorney General , Master of the Rolls and Lord Chief Justice . Born to a country gentleman , he was initially educated in Hanmer before moving to Ruthin School aged 12 . Rather than going to university he instead worked as a clerk to an attorney , joining the Middle Temple in 1750 and being called to the Bar in 1756 . Initially almost unemployed due to the lack of education and contacts which a university education would have provided , his business increased thanks to his friendships with John Dunning , who , overwhelmed with cases , allowed Kenyon to work many , and Lord Thurlow who secured for him the Chief Justiceship of Chester in 1780 . He was returned as the Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Hindon the same year , serving repeatedly as Attorney General under William Pitt the Younger . He effectively sacrificed his political career in 1784 to challenge the ballot of Charles James Fox , and was rewarded with a baronetcy ; from then on he did not speak in the House of Commons , despite remaining an MP . 
 On 27 March 1784 he was appointed Master of the Rolls , a job to which he dedicated himself once he ceased to act as an MP . He had previously practised in the Court of Chancery , and although unfamiliar with Roman law was highly efficient ; Lord Eldon said " I am mistaken if , after I am gone , the Chancery Records do not prove that if I have decided more than any of my predecessors in the same period of time , Sir Lloyd Kenyon beat us all " . On 9 June 1788 , Kenyon succeeded Lord Mansfield as Lord Chief Justice , and was granted a barony . Although not rated as highly as his predecessor , his work " restored the simplicity and rigor of the common law " . He remained Lord Chief Justice until his death in 1802 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Kenyon was born on 5 November 1732 in Gredington , Flintshire to Lloyd Kenyon , a country gentleman and Justice of the peace , and his wife Jane Eddowes . He was initially educated at a school in Hanmer – it was written that " no man ever set out on his career with fewer advantages " than Kenyon . When he was 12 he was sent to Ruthin School , where he learnt French and Latin , and was considered one of the best students at the school . His knowledge of Greek was non @-@ existent , and his scientific training minor ; " he was said to have believed to his dying day that the sun goes around the earth " . As a second son , he had initially considered joining the clergy , but instead decided on the law and spent 5 years working as a clerk to Mr W.J. Tomkinson , an attorney . He proved to be an excellent clerk , becoming a " rapid and accurate conveyancer " . Originally happy with the idea of being a simple attorney , after the death of his older brother it was instead assumed he would become a barrister , and Kenyon joined the Middle Temple in November 1750 . In February 1755 he left Tomkinson 's practice and moved to London , where he was called to the Bar on 10 February 1756 . 
 = = Career as a barrister = = 
 Without the education or connections that a university education would have provided he was almost entirely unemployed for several years . Kenyon instead lived off an £ 80 allowance from his father , and money from his richer relatives , spending the time watching Lord Mansfield conduct cases at the Court of King 's Bench . His early business was almost entirely conveyancing , and to make extra money he began to attend the Welsh Circuit , where Tomlinson 's contacts allowed him to pick up some small cases . After several years of this he also began attending quarter sessions at Oxford , Stafford and Shrewsbury , " where he was more successful " . While his work slowly began to increase , his main rise was due to his friendship with John Dunning , at the time a similarly near @-@ unemployed barrister . In 1762 one of the leaders of the Northern Circuit died , and his work was given to Dunning ; as he found himself with too many cases , he gave many to Kenyon . In 1767 , for example , Kenyon dealt with 20 of Dunning 's cases . As a result of his speedy and efficient work attorneys began to employ him directly , and within 10 years he was making £ 3 @,@ 000 a year just from opinions . 
 Kenyon 's next rise came about as a result of his introduction to the Duke of Richmond , who was struggling with Sir James Lowther for the control of several Parliamentary constituencies . Kenyon went with Richmond to Carlisle and Cockermouth as his lawyer , and secured the constituencies for Richmond ; as a result , Richmond chose to employ Kenyon as his lawyer from then onwards . In 1780 he successfully defended Lord George Gordon for high treason , assisted by Thomas Erskine , and the resulting fame was enough to propel him further up the ranks of his profession and within the political sphere . At the same time he became friends with Lord Thurlow , and when the holder of the Chief Justiceship of Chester died that year , Thurlow ensured that it was given to Kenyon . The rise of Kenyon 's work in the Court of Chancery was also attributed to his friendship with Thurlow , who as Lord Chancellor was the head of the Court . 
 = = Political career = = 
 When Parliament was dissolved in 1780 , Thurlow ensured that Kenyon was returned as a Member of Parliament for Hindon . In April 1782 , on the formation of the Rockingham government , Kenyon was made Attorney @-@ General for England and Wales , despite having never sat in the lower office of Solicitor @-@ General or spoken in Parliament . As Attorney General he spoke on only one subject , on 18 June 1782 , in regards to the amount of money owed to the Exchequer by the Paymaster of the Forces . This provoked the opposition of Charles James Fox , whose father , Lord Holland , had profited greatly by that office ; Kenyon 's programme could have ruined Fox by making him liable for <unk> his father 's profits as Paymaster . On the death of Rockingham Kenyon continued in his post under the Shelburne Ministry , but left office in April 1783 when that government fell to the Fox @-@ North Coalition . He instead allied himself with William Pitt the Younger , leading the opposition to the first Act of the new government and strongly supporting an opposition bill to reform the Exchequer . When the new government was dismissed on 19 December and Pitt took control , Kenyon was again made Attorney @-@ General . He again took the lead on the issue of the Paymaster of the Forces , and commanded that Richard Rigby , Paymaster until 1782 , " do deliver to the House an account of the balance of all public money remaining in his hands on the 13th day of November last " , something Rigby complained was against common practice . 
 In 1784 Thomas Sewell died , and , as was tradition , Kenyon succeeded him as Master of the Rolls on 27 March . Initially intending to withdraw from Parliament , Kenyon was persuaded to remain as an MP and Attorney General to increase Pitt 's majority . Having purchased the seat of Tregony he " was resolved to go the whole hog " , and became one of the strongest and most visible supporters of Pitt . With his contacts in Wales , he secured votes for several ministerial candidates in Welsh constituencies . In an attempt to have Charles James Fox removed as an MP he had Fox 's ballot challenged ; while this backfired , he was awarded with a baronetcy for the effective sacrifice of his political career . As a result of this controversy he stated that " legislation was a task to which he had by no means thought himself equal " , and stayed silent in Parliament for the rest of his life . 
 = = Judicial career = = 
 Having withdrawn from politics , Kenyon instead switched his focus to his job as Master of the Rolls . As a judge of the Court of Chancery he was required to deal with cases of equity ; though he was almost entirely unfamiliar with the Roman law it was based on , he had previously practised in the Chancery . He was not considered as good as his successor , Sir William Grant , but Lord Eldon wrote that " I am mistaken if , after I am gone , the Chancery Records do not prove that if I have decided more than any of my predecessors in the same period of time , Sir Lloyd Kenyon beat us all " . With the retirement of Lord Mansfield as Lord Chief Justice , Kenyon succeeded him on 9 June 1788 , and was made Baron Kenyon of Gredington , in the county of Flint . 
 Kenyon 's appointment was initially greeted with caution by his fellow barristers , who worried that , as he had practised in a court of equity rather than a court of common law , he might be unfamiliar with the area covered by his new posting in the Court of King 's Bench . Despite this , he was noted as an excellent judge , although one who suffered from an " excess of zeal " in moral issues . One of his flaws was his defective education ; he was too proud to avoid exhibiting his ignorance . He was particularly noted for using Latin incorrectly , leading George III to say " My Lord ... it would be well if you would stick to your good law and leave off your bad Latin " . As a judge , Kenyon over @-@ ruled the principles that a court of law could not consider trusts or a pecuniary legacy ; it was said that he " restored the simplicity and rigor of the common law " . After nearly one and a half decades as a judge , Kenyon died on 4 April 1802 in Bath . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1773 he married his cousin , Mary Kenyon , with whom he had three sons ; Lloyd , who predeceased him , George , and Thomas . Kenyon was noted by John Campbell , 1st Baron Campbell as " a man of wonderful quickness of perception , of considerable intellectual nimbleness , of much energy of purpose , and of unwearied industry " , although Campbell noted that , thanks to Kenyon 's lack of a university education , he knew only " the corner of jurisprudence which he professionally cultivated ; he had not even the information generally picked up by the clever clerk of a country attorney " . He was noted as arrogant , despising things he did not understand and condemning any opinions he disagreed with regardless of his knowledge of them . He never attempted to reform the judicial system , and " his habits of sordid parsimony brought discredit on the high station which he filled " . Despite this , as a judge he was seen as " profound in legal erudition , patient in judicial discrimination , and of the most determined integrity " . 
 = The Boat Race 1891 = 
 The 48th Boat Race took place on 21 March 1891 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race leading 24 – 22 in the event overall . In total , eight rowers who were participating had previous Boat Race experience . Umpired by former Oxford rower Frank Willan , pre @-@ race favourites Oxford won by half @-@ a @-@ length in a time of 21 minutes 48 seconds . It was Oxford 's narrowest winning margin since the 1867 race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the boat clubs of University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by one length in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 24 victories to Cambridge 's 22 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Arthur Middleton Hutchinson ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1881 and 1882 races ) while Oxford 's coach was R. C. Lehmann , former president of the Cambridge Union Society and captain of the 1st Trinity Boat Club . Although Lehmann had rowed in the trials eights for Cambridge , he was never selected for the Blue boat . 
 The umpire for the race for the third year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 75 lb ( 77 @.@ 7 kg ) , 7 @.@ 75 pounds ( 3 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw four former Blues return to the boat , in Gilbert <unk> , Edmund Towers Fison , John Friend Rowlatt and Cambridge University Boat Club president Gerard Elin . Oxford 's crew contained four rowers with Boat Race experience , including Guy Nickalls who was rowing in his fourth consecutive race , this year alongside his brother Vivian . The Dark Blues also featured cox John Pemberton Heywood @-@ Lonsdale for the third time in a row . 
 Four of the Oxford crew were studying at Magdalen College while five of the Cambridge crew had matriculated to Trinity Hall . Two rowers were registered as non @-@ British , F. Wilkinson for Oxford and Edward Wason Lord for Cambridge both hailed from Australia . Wilkinson was forced to leave the Oxford crew during practice as he suffered from influenza ; he was considered sufficiently fit to return to the crew but , according to Drinkwater , " never found his real form again " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were pre @-@ race favourites , and won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . The race commenced at 11 : 09 a.m. , in a northerly wind , and despite being outrated by Cambridge , the Dark Blues took an early lead and were a quarter of a length ahead as the crews passed Craven Steps . Just before the Mile Post , Oxford 's lead was around half a length , but Cambridge pushed on to take the lead by Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford responded and held a marginal lead as the crews passed The Doves pub , and the boats exchanged the lead several times along Chiswick Reach . 
 The Dark Blues took the lead and were three @-@ quarters of a length up at Barnes Bridge . Elin increased Cambridge 's stroke rate ; Charles Kent , the Oxford stroke responded and although the bend in the river favoured the Dark Blues , Cambridge closed the gap . However , it was too late to stop Oxford taking the victory . The Dark Blues passed the finishing post with a half @-@ length lead in a time of 21 minutes 48 seconds . It was their second consecutive victory and the narrowest winning margin since the 1867 race , taking the overall record to 25 – 22 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Deimatic behaviour = 
 Deimatic behaviour in animals means any pattern of threatening or startling behaviour , such as suddenly displaying conspicuous eyespots , so as to scare off or momentarily distract a predator , thus giving the prey animal an opportunity to escape . The term deimatic or <unk> originates from the Greek root <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning ' to frighten ' . 
 Deimatic display occurs in widely separated groups of animals , including moths , butterflies , mantises and phasmids among the insects . In the cephalopods , different species of octopuses , squids , cuttlefish and the paper nautilus are deimatic . 
 Displays are classified as deimatic or aposematic by the responses of the animals that see them . Where predators are initially startled but learn to eat the displaying prey , the display is classed as deimatic , and the prey is bluffing ; where they continue to avoid the prey after tasting it , the display is taken as aposematic , meaning the prey is genuinely distasteful . However , these categories are not entirely mutually exclusive . It is possible for a behaviour to be both deimatic and aposematic , if it both startles a predator and indicates the presence of antipredator adaptations . 
 Vertebrates including several species of frog put on warning displays ; some of these species have poison glands . Among the mammals , deimatic displays are found in species with strong defences , such as in foul @-@ smelling skunks and spiny porcupines . Such displays are often combined with warning coloration . Thus these displays in both frogs and mammals are at least in part aposematic . 
 = = In insects = = 
 Deimatic displays are made by insects including the praying mantises ( Mantidae ) and stick insects ( Phasmatodea ) . While undisturbed , these insects are usually well camouflaged . When disturbed by a potential predator , they suddenly reveal their hind wings , which are brightly coloured . In mantises , the wing display is sometimes reinforced by showing brightly coloured front legs , and accompanied by a loud hissing sound created by stridulation . For example , the grasshopper <unk> displays red and yellow areas on its hind wings ; it is also aposematic , producing a distasteful secretion from its thorax . Similarly the threat display of the walking stick phasmid ( <unk> <unk> ) is not a bluff : the insect sprays defensive <unk> @-@ like monoterpene chemical compounds at attackers . 
 Among moths with deimatic behaviour , the eyed hawkmoth ( <unk> ocellatus ) displays its large eyespots , moving them slowly as if it were a vertebrate predator such as an owl . Among butterflies , the peacock butterfly <unk> io is a cryptic leaf mimic with wings closed , but displays 4 conspicuous eyespots when disturbed , in a display effective against insectivorous birds ( flycatchers ) . 
 An experiment by the Australian zoologist A.D. Blest demonstrated that the more an eyespot resembled a real vertebrate eye in both colour and pattern , the more effective it was in scaring off insectivorous birds . In another experiment using peacock butterflies , Blest showed that when the conspicuous eyespots had been rubbed off , insectivorous birds ( yellow buntings ) were much less effectively frightened off , and therefore both the sudden appearance of colour , and the actual eyespot pattern , contribute to the effectiveness of the deimatic display . 
 Some noctuid moths , such as the large red underwing ( Catocala nupta ) , are cryptic at rest , but display a flash of startlingly bright colours when disturbed . Others , such as many species of genus <unk> and <unk> , look threatening while at rest . Also <unk> moths of the genera <unk> and <unk> display snake heads , but not from the frontal position . 
 Many <unk> moths make clicks when hunted by echolocating bats ; they also often contain unpalatable chemicals . Some such as <unk> tiger moths ( <unk> <unk> ) have ears and conspicuous coloration , and start to make clicks when echolocating bats approach . An experiment by Canadian zoologists John M. Ratcliffe and James H. <unk> , using <unk> tiger moths and northern long @-@ eared bats ( Myotis septentrionalis ) , suggests the signals in fact both disrupt echolocation and warn of chemical defence . The behaviour of these insects is thus both deimatic and aposematic . 
 = = In arachnids = = 
 Both spiders and scorpions are venomous , so their threat displays can be considered generally aposematic . However , some predators such as hedgehogs and spider @-@ hunting wasps ( Pompilidae ) actively hunt arachnids , overcoming their defences , so when a hedgehog is startled by , for instance , the sounds made by a scorpion , there is reason to describe the display as deimatic . 
 Spiders make use of a variety of different threat displays . Some such as Argiope and Pholcus make themselves and their webs vibrate rapidly when they are disturbed ; this blurs their outline and perhaps makes them look larger , as well as more difficult to locate precisely for an attack . Mygalomorphae spiders such as tarantulas exhibit deimatic behaviour ; when threatened , the spider rears back with its front legs and pedipalps spread and fangs bared . Some species , such as the dangerous Indian ornamental tree spider ( <unk> regalis ) have bright colouring on the front legs and mouthparts which are shown off in its threat display when it " rears up on its hind legs , and brandishes the fore limbs and palpi in the air " . 
 Scorpions perform threat displays ; when provoked , they spread their pincers and in some cases raise their abdomens , their tails standing near @-@ erect with the sting ready for immediate use . Some scorpions in addition produce deimatic noises by <unk> with the pedipalps and first legs . 
 = = In cephalopods = = 
 Deimatic behaviour is found in cephalopods including the common cuttlefish Sepia officinalis , squid such as the Caribbean reef squid ( Sepioteuthis sepioidea ) and bigfin reef squid ( Sepioteuthis lessoniana ) , octopuses including the common octopus Octopus vulgaris and the Atlantic white @-@ spotted octopus ( Octopus macropus ) , and the paper nautilus ( Argonauta <unk> ) . Deimatic cephalopod displays involve suddenly creating bold stripes , often reinforced by stretching out the animal 's arms , fins or web to make it look as big and threatening as possible . 
 For example , in the common cuttlefish the display consists of flattening the body , making the skin pale , showing a pair of eyespots on the mantle , dark eye rings , and a dark line on the fins , and dilating the pupils of the eyes . The common octopus similarly displays pale skin and dark eye rings with dilated pupils , but also curls its arms and stretches out the web between the arms as far as possible , and squirts out jets of water . Other octopuses such as Atlantic white @-@ spotted octopus turn bright brownish red with oval white spots all over in a high contrast display . The paper nautilus can rapidly change its appearance : it suddenly withdraws the shining iridescent web formed by its first pair of arms from its shell . 
 = = In vertebrates = = 
 Among vertebrates , the Australian frilled lizard ( <unk> kingii ) has a startling display in which wide semicircular frills on either side of the head are fanned out ; the mouth is opened wide exposing the gape ; the tail is waved over the body , and the body is raised , so that the animal appears as large and threatening as possible . 
 Frogs such as Physalaemus nattereri , Physalaemus <unk> , and <unk> <unk> have deimatic behaviour . These animals inflate themselves with air and raise their hind parts to appear as large as possible , and display brightly coloured markings and eyespots to intimidate predators . Seven species of frogs in the genus <unk> have lumbar glands ( making the animals distasteful ) ; these glands are usually boldly contrasted in black as a further warning . 
 Non @-@ bluffing ( aposematic ) displays occur in mammals which possess powerful defences such as spines or stink glands , and which habitually warn off potential predators rather than attempting escape by running . The lowland streaked tenrec ( <unk> <unk> ) raises the spines on its head and back when confronted by a predator , and moves its head up and down . <unk> such as Erethizon erect their long sharp quills and adopt a hunched , head @-@ down posture when a predator is nearby . The spotted skunk ( <unk> putorius ) balances on its front legs , its body raised vertically with its bold pelage pattern conspicuously displayed , and its tail ( near the scent glands ) raised and spread out . 
 = = Deimatic or aposematic ? = = 
 In a study of the rattling made by rattlesnakes of different species , the Canadian zoologists Brock Fenton and Lawrence Licht found that the sounds are always similar : they have rapid onset ( starting suddenly , and reaching full volume in a few milliseconds ) ; they consist of a ' broadband ' mixture of frequencies between 2 kHz and 20 kHz , with little energy either in the ultrasonic ( above 20 kHz ) or in the rattlesnakes ' hearing range ( below 700 Hz ) ; and the frequencies do not change much with time ( the rattling after 2 minutes having a similar spectrum to that at onset ) . There was no clear difference in the sounds made by the different species measured : Crotalus horridus , Crotalus <unk> , Crotalus atrox , Crotalus <unk> , Crotalus viridis and <unk> <unk> . This pattern implies that the rattling " could serve as a general attention @-@ getting device " , which " is designed as a deimatic or startle display " . Its similarity to the " broadband , harsh sounds " used as warning calls by birds and mammals may enhance its effectiveness . Since rattlesnakes can barely hear the sound , it is unlikely to serve as any form of communication to other snakes of the same species . Finally , the sounds are not in themselves loud enough to cause pain and hence keep predators away . 
 Fenton and Licht note that the effect of a rattlesnake 's rattling could be deimatic ( startle ) in inexperienced animals , whether predators or large animals that might injure the snake by stepping on it , but aposematic ( a warning signal ) in animals that are aware of the rattle 's meaning . They refer to the work of Fenton and his colleague David Bates on the responses of the big brown bat , Eptesicus fuscus , to the defensive clicks made by moths in the family Arctiidae , which includes the garden tiger moth , <unk> caja . This family includes large , furry , bitter @-@ tasting or poisonous moths . They found that while sounds can startle inexperienced bats , after a few trials the bats ignored the sounds if the prey was edible ; but the same sounds can warn experienced bats of bitter @-@ tasting prey ( an honest signal ) . 
 = Jean Michel Jarre = 
 Jean Michel Jarre ( born Jean @-@ Michel André Jarre , pronounced : [ ʒɑ ̃ <unk> ɑ ̃ <unk> <unk> ] ; 24 August 1948 ) is a French composer , performer , and music producer . He is a pioneer in the electronic , ambient , and new @-@ age genres , and known as an organiser of outdoor spectacles of his music featuring lights , laser displays , and fireworks . 
 Jarre was raised in Lyon by his mother and grandparents , and trained on the piano . From an early age he was introduced to a variety of art forms , including those of street performers , jazz musicians , and the artist Pierre Soulages . He played guitar in a band , but his musical style was perhaps most heavily influenced by Pierre Schaeffer , a pioneer of musique concrète at the Groupe de Recherches Musicales . 
 His first mainstream success was the 1976 album Oxygène . Recorded in a makeshift studio at his home , the album sold an estimated 12 million copies . Oxygène was followed in 1978 by Équinoxe , and in 1979 Jarre performed to a record @-@ breaking audience of more than a million people at the Place de la Concorde , a record he has since broken three times . More albums were to follow , but his 1979 concert served as a blueprint for his future performances around the world . Several of his albums have been released to coincide with large @-@ scale outdoor events , and he is now perhaps as well known as a performer as he is as a musician . 
 As of 2004 Jarre had sold an estimated 80 million albums . He was the first Western musician officially invited to perform in the People 's Republic of China , and holds the world record for the largest @-@ ever audience at an outdoor event . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life , influences , and education = = = 
 Jean Michel Jarre was born in Lyon on 24 August 1948 , to France <unk> , a French Resistance member and concentration camp survivor , and Maurice Jarre , a composer . When Jarre was five , his parents split up and his father moved to America , leaving him with his mother . He did not see his father again until reaching the age of 18 . For the first eight years of his life , Jarre spent six months each year at his maternal grandparents ' flat on the Cours de Verdun , in the <unk> district of Lyon . Jarre 's grandfather was an oboe player , engineer and inventor , designing an early audio mixer used at Radio Lyon . He also gave Jean Michel his first record player . From his vantage point high above the pavement , the young French boy was able to watch street performers at work , an experience he later cited as proving influential on his art . 
 Jarre struggled with classical piano studies , although he later changed teachers and worked on his scales . A more general interest in musical instruments was sparked by his discovery at the Saint @-@ Ouen flea market , where his mother sold antiques , of a Boris Vian trumpet violin . He often accompanied his mother to Le Chat Qui <unk> ( The Fishing Cat ) , a friend 's Paris jazz club , where saxophonists Archie Shepp and John Coltrane , and trumpet players Don Cherry and Chet Baker were regular performers . These early jazz experiences suggested to him that music may be " descriptive , without lyrics " . He was also influenced by the work of French artist Pierre Soulages , whose exhibition at the Musée d 'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris he attended . Soulages ' paintings used multiple textured layers , and Jarre realised that " for the first time in music , you could act as a painter with frequencies and sounds . " He was also influenced by classical , modernist music ; in a 2004 interview for The Guardian , he spoke of the effect that a performance of Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring had upon him : 
 This is where Stravinsky created it in 1913 , and it was a huge shock . I also saw the last concert by the great Arabic singer Om <unk> . She is the goddess , the Maria Callas of the Orient . Then I heard " Georgia on My Mind " by Ray Charles , and I realised that music can talk to your tummy . I was so impressed by the organic sensuality coming from Ray Charles 's music – there was no intellectual process and it was great . 
 As a young man he earned money by selling his paintings , exhibiting some of his works at the Lyon Gallery – L <unk> <unk> , and by playing in a band called Mystère IV . While he studied at the Lycée Michelet , his mother arranged for him to take lessons in harmony , counterpoint and fugue with Jeannine <unk> of the Conservatoire de Paris . In 1967 he played guitar in a band called The <unk> , who appear in the film Des <unk> et des filles . He mixed instruments including the electric guitar and the flute , and tape effects and other sounds . More experimentation followed in 1968 , when he began to use tape loops , radios and other electronic devices , but joining the Groupe de Recherches Musicales ( GRM ) in 1969 , then under the direction of Pierre Schaeffer ( " father " of musique concrète ) , proved hugely influential . Jarre was introduced to the Moog modular synthesizer and spent time working at the studio of influential German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen in Cologne . 
 In the kitchen of his flat on Rue de la Trémoille , near the Champs @-@ Élysées , he set up a small recording studio . It included his first synthesiser , an EMS VCS 3 , and an EMS Synthi AKS , each linked to <unk> tape machines . For a 1969 exposition at the Maison de la Culture ( Cultural House ) in Reims , Jarre wrote the five @-@ minute song " Happiness Is a Sad Song . " His first commercial release was in 1969 with La Cage / <unk> , a mixture of harmony , tape effects and synthesisers . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1971 Jarre was commissioned by choreographer Norbert <unk> to perform a ballet called AOR ( in Hebrew , " the light " ) , at the Palais Garnier . He also composed music for ballet , theatre , advertisements and television programs , as well as music and lyrics for artists like Patrick Juvet and Christophe . Jarre composed the soundtrack for Les Granges <unk> and in 1972 wrote music for the International Festival of Magic . That year he also released his first solo album , Deserted Palace , and from 1973 – 74 wrote music for Françoise Hardy and Gérard <unk> , as well as writing lyrics for Christophe and directing Christophe 's Olympia show . 
 Jarre 's 1976 low budget solo album Oxygène , recorded at his home studio , made him internationally famous . It comprises six numbered synthesiser tracks that make strong use of melody , rather than rhythm or dissonance . A Scully eight @-@ track recorder was used to record instruments like the Eminent 310 ( with an Electro @-@ Harmonix Small Stone phaser on its string pads ) and the Korg <unk> drum machine . Liberal use of echo was used on the various sound effects generated by the VCS3 synthesiser . Jarre 's ARP 2600 synthesiser , previously used on his collaborations with Christophe , also featured , as did his EMS VCS 3 . 
 Oxygène initially proved difficult to sell . Jarre was turned down by several record companies , until another of Schaeffer 's students , Hélène Dreyfus , persuaded her husband to publish the album on his label , Disques Motors . The first pressing of 50 @,@ 000 copies was promoted through hi @-@ fi shops , clubs and discos , and by April 1977 the album had sold 70 @,@ 000 copies in France . When interviewed in Billboard magazine , Dreyfus 's director Stanislas Witold said " In a sense we 're putting most of our bets on Jean Michel Jarre . He is quite exceptional and we 're sure that by 1980 he will be recognised worldwide . " Oxygène has since sold an estimated 12 million copies , the best @-@ selling French record of all time . It reached number 2 in the UK , number 65 in Canada [ 1 ] , and broke the top 100 in the US . It also contains his most recognisable single , " Oxygène IV " , which reached number 4 in the UK single charts . 
 Jarre 's follow @-@ up album , Équinoxe , was released in 1978 . It was composed with sequencers , particularly on the bass , and features a more baroque and classical style than Oxygène , with more emphasis on melodic development . Though its sales were still very healthy , it had less of an impact than Oxygène , but the following year Jarre held a large open @-@ air concert on Bastille Day , at the Place de la Concorde . The free outdoor event set a new world record for the largest number of spectators ever at an open @-@ air concert , drawing more than 1 million spectators . The crowds were so large that Jarre 's wife , Charlotte Rampling , found it difficult to access the venue . Although it was not the first time he had performed in concert ( Jarre had already played at the Paris Opera Ballet ) , the 40 minute @-@ long event , which used projections of light , images and fireworks , served as a blueprint for Jarre 's future concerts . Its popularity helped create a surge in sales — a further 800 @,@ 000 records were sold between 14 July and 31 August 1979 — and introduced the Frenchman to Francis Rimbert , who now works for Jarre on a full @-@ time basis . 
 = = = 1980 – 1984 = = = 
 By the time Les Chants <unk> was released on 20 May 1981 , Oxygène and Équinoxe had achieved global sales of about 6 million units . In its first two months the new album sold a reported 200 @,@ 000 units in France alone . The album uses sounds from the Fairlight CMI , a new instrument of which Jarre was an early pioneer . Its digital technology allowed him to continue his earlier sonic experimentation in new ways . 
 The album 's release coincided with Jarre 's first foreign tour . In 1981 the British Embassy gave Radio Beijing copies of Oxygène and Équinoxe , which became the first pieces of foreign music to be played on Chinese national radio in decades . The republic invited Jarre to become the first western musician to play there , with The Concerts in China . The performances were scheduled to run from 18 October to 5 November 1981 . The first , in Beijing , was initially attended mostly by officials , but before the concert began technicians realised that not enough power was available to supply the stage and auditorium . Chinese officials solved the problem by temporarily cutting power to the surrounding districts . The stadium was almost full when the concert began , but as Beijing 's buses stopped running at about 10 o 'clock , about half the audience left before it finished . To boost the audience attendance for the second night , Jarre and his production team purchased some of the concert tickets and gave them to children on the streets ( Jarre originally wanted the concerts to be free , but the Chinese authorities decided to charge between £ 0 @.@ 20 and £ 0 @.@ 50 per ticket ) . The event was notable for its lack of audience involvement ; the Chinese were apparently unmoved by both the music and the light show , and applause was muted . The second venue , in Shanghai , was a different matter . Jarre actively encouraged audience participation by stepping into the crowd , which became much more exuberant than that in Beijing . Recordings of the concerts , which featured one of Jarre 's signature electronic instruments , the laser harp , were released as a double @-@ disc LP in 1982 . 
 Musique pour Supermarché was created for a planned performance at the " Supermarché " art exhibition . Jarre allowed Radio Luxembourg to broadcast it uninterrupted , in its entirety , before he auctioned off a single vinyl print on 5 July 1983 , at the Hôtel Drouot in Paris . The sale raised about 70 @,@ 000 francs , and in protest at the " silly industrialisation of music " , Jarre promised to burn the original tapes in the presence of a bailiff . Parts of the destroyed album were reworked into works in subsequent releases ( including Diva and Blah Blah Café from Zoolook , and sections of the Fifth Rendez @-@ Vous ) . Both Music for Supermarkets and Zoolook make heavy use of the Fairlight CMI 's ability to sample audio . Zoolook features snippets of words and speech from languages across the globe . Laurie Anderson provided the vocals for the track " Diva " . A long list of musicians , including Adrian Belew and Marcus Miller , also made significant contributions . The album was somewhat less successful than Jarre 's previous works , reaching only number 47 in the UK album charts . 
 I 've always been involved in ethnic music , though I thought the way a lot of people have been using ethnic music was a little superficial . Sometimes it works , like the Brian Eno stuff , it worked the first time , but for me what was more interesting was not making a particular statement about recording in Africa or in China , but taking some sounds and having exactly the same attitude as when you were in front of a Moog 55 or a modular system , replacing the oscillators with a bank of actors or people , treating them through the Fairlight or the EMS synth , and establishing an orchestration using only voices . 
 = = = 1985 – 1989 = = = 
 In 1985 , Jarre was invited by the musical director of the Houston Grand Opera to perform a concert celebrating Texas 's 150th anniversary on 5 April 1986 . Although he was busy with other projects and was at first unimpressed by the proposal , on a later visit to the city , he was immediately impressed by the visual grandeur of the city 's skyline and agreed to perform . Also , 1985 marked the 25th anniversary of the foundation of the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center ; and NASA asked Jarre to integrate the anniversary into the concert . 
 Rendez @-@ Vous was created over a period of about two months and , as with Zoolook , contains elements of his 1983 album Musique pour Supermarché . Its three movements represent Houston 's development , from a rural economy to its role as a leader in space technology . Baroque in style , the album uses a mixture of French horns , trombones , and violins ; and it features heavy use of the Elka <unk> , notably so on " Third Rendez @-@ Vous " , a track Jarre often performs using a laser harp . Jarre worked with several Houston @-@ based astronauts , including Bruce McCandless II and Ronald McNair , an accomplished musician who was to have played the saxophone on " Rendez @-@ Vous VI " , recorded in the weightless environment of space . The live performance was curtailed by McNair 's death in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster on 28 January 1986 . Consideration was given to the cancellation of the concert ; but McCandless contacted Jarre and urged him to proceed , in memory of the shuttle 's crew . McNair 's saxophone piece was recorded by Kirk <unk> and retitled " Ron 's Piece " . 
 I remember just before take @-@ off , Ron calling me in Paris saying " Everything 's ready , see you in a week 's time , watch me on television for the take @-@ off " ... I will really , keep always , the bit of Ron 's smile and Ron 's face in my heart . 
 About 2 @,@ 000 projectors shone images onto buildings and giant screens up to 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) high , transforming the city 's skyscrapers into spectacular backdrops for an elaborate display of fireworks and lasers . Rendez @-@ vous Houston entered the Guinness Book of Records for its audience of over 1 @.@ 5 million , beating his earlier record , set in 1979 . The display was so impressive that a nearby freeway was blocked by passing vehicles , forcing the authorities to close it for the duration of the concert . Several months later he performed to an audience of about a million at his home city of Lyon , in celebration of a visit by Pope John Paul II . Watching from Lyon Cathedral , the Pope began the concert with a good @-@ night blessing , a recording of which appears on Cities in Concert – Houston / Lyon . 
 In 1988 Jarre released Revolutions . The album spans several genres , including symphonic industrial , Arabian inspired , light guitar pop and ethnic electro jazz . A two @-@ hour concert called Destination Docklands was planned for September 1988 , to be held at the Royal Victoria Dock in east London . Close to the heart of London , the location was chosen in part for its desolate environment , but also because Jarre thought the architecture was ideally suited for his music . Early in 1988 Jarre met with local officials and members of the community , but Newham Borough Council expressed their fears about the event 's safety and delayed their decision on whether to allow the concert to proceed until 12 September eventually rejecting the licence application . The local fire service were also concerned about access in the event of a fire . Site work continued as Jarre 's team searched for alternative locations in which to stage the concert , but following improvements to both on and off @-@ site safety Jarre eventually won conditional approval on 28 September to stage two separate performances , on the 8th and 9 October . 
 The floating stage on which Jarre and his musicians performed was built on top of four large barges . Large purpose @-@ built display screens were built , and one of the buildings to be used as a backdrop was painted white . One large mirror ball being transported to the event fell onto the roadside , causing a degree of confusion as some people mistook it for a fallen satellite . World War II searchlights were installed , to illuminate the sky and surrounding architecture . Along with thousands in the surrounding streets and parks , 200 @,@ 000 people watched Jarre and guests such as guitarist Hank Marvin perform in less than ideal conditions . Inclement weather had threatened to break the stage from its moorings , putting paid to the original plan to float the stage across the Royal Victoria Dock . Wind speeds were so high that television cameras were blown over . On the second evening the audience , which included Diana , Princess of Wales , was soaked by rain and wind . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1990 Jarre released En Attendant Cousteau ( Waiting for Cousteau ) , inspired by the French oceanographer Jacques @-@ Yves Cousteau . On Bastille Day 1990 he performed a concert at La Défense in Paris , attended by a record @-@ breaking audience of about two million people , again beating his earlier world record . He later promoted a concert near the Pyramids of Teotihuacan in Mexico , to be held during the solar eclipse of 11 July 1991 . However , with only weeks to go , important equipment had not arrived and the sinking in the Atlantic Ocean of a cargo ship containing the purpose @-@ built pyramidal stage and other technical equipment made staging the concert impossible . Jarre 's disappointment was such that he " could not cope with Mexican food for two years " . About two years later he released Chronologie , an album which was largely influenced by the techno @-@ music scene . From a technical standpoint the album is a reversion to a concept seen in Jarre 's Oxygène / Équinoxe period , where a grandiose overture precedes more rhythmic sections . The album features Jarre 's traditional collection of instruments like the ARP 2600 and Minimoog , as well as newer synthesisers such as the Roland JD @-@ 800 and the Kurzweil <unk> . 
 In the state of mind I did Chronologie , it 's quite close to what I did for Oxygène , using a lot of the old synthesizers of the ' 70s , like the Moog synthesizer — which I consider to be the Stradivarius of electronic music — mixed with the digital sound and the beat of the dance scene of the ' 90s . In a sense , Chronologie is a kind of mixture between the sounds of the ' 70s and the sounds of the ' 90s . 
 Chronologie was performed at a series of 16 performances across Europe called Europe in Concert . These were on a smaller scale than his previous concerts , featuring a miniature skyline , laser imaging and fireworks . Locations included Lausanne , Mont St Michel , London , Manchester , Barcelona , Seville and the Versailles Palace near Paris . A concert was also held in Hong Kong in March 1994 , to mark the opening of the city 's new stadium . Jarre performed many of his most well @-@ known hits at the Concert for Tolerance on Bastille Day in 1995 , celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations . The Eiffel Tower was specially lit for the occasion , prompting the installation of a more permanent display . The following December he created the website " A Space for Tolerance " , which featured music from En Attendant Cousteau , played while the user browsed a variety of " visual worlds " . 
 In 1997 Jarre returned to the analogue synthesisers of the 1970s with Oxygène 7 – 13 , dedicated to his mentor at the GRM , Pierre Schaeffer , who had died two years before . Eschewing digital techniques developed in the 1980s , in an interview for The Daily Telegraph he said : 
 The excitement of being able to work on sounds in a tactile , manual , almost sensual way is what drew me to electronic music in the first place ... The lack of limitations is very dangerous . It is like the difference for a painter of getting four tubes with four main colours or being in front of a computer with two million colours . You have to scan the two million colours and when you arrive to the last one you have obviously forgotten the first one . In the Eighties we became archivists and everything became rather cold as a result . 
 In September that year he set his fourth record for the largest ever outdoor concert audience with a performance at the Moscow State University , celebrating the 850th anniversary of Moscow . The event was viewed by an audience of about 3 @.@ 5 million . The funeral of Diana , Princess of Wales , had taken place on the same day , and the Frenchman therefore dedicated " Souvenir of China " to her memory , before observing a minute 's silence . Another large scale concert followed on 31 December 1999 , in the Egyptian desert near Giza . The Twelve Dreams of the Sun celebrated the new millennium and offered a preview of his next album , Métamorphoses . The show featured performances from more than 1 @,@ 000 local artists and musicians , and was based on ancient Egyptian mythology about the journey of the sun and its effect upon humanity . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Jarre released his first vocal album , Métamorphoses , in 2000 . It was mixed on an early version of Pro Tools , a digital audio workstation designed to record , edit and play back digital audio . Métamorphoses marks a departure from Jarre 's earlier work . Sound effects used include radio interference from mobile phones , and <unk> , a Macintosh program used to generate lyrics on the track " Love , Love , Love " . Contributors included Laurie Anderson , who had also appeared on Zoolook , Natacha Atlas and Sharon Corr . 
 Looking back , I enjoyed the album , [ Oxygène 7 – 13 ] but after I finished it I knew that I had to make a fresh start . I had to go somewhere completely different . Metamorphoses is like a blank page for me , a new beginning . 
 It was followed first in 2001 by Interior Music , created for use by the audio @-@ visual company Bang & Olufsen , and which did not receive a commercial release , then by 2002 's Sessions 2000 , a set of experimental synth @-@ jazz pieces distinct from his previous work . Sessions was well received by Billboard Magazine , which said " He 's created a deeply nuanced soundscape that invites repeated listening . " A concert in September 2002 at a wind farm near Aalborg in Denmark proved problematic when 22mm of rain fell on the venue , causing long delays for spectators . It also marked a change in direction in Jarre 's live concerts ; from Rendez @-@ vous Houston onwards he had been accompanied by a full complement of live musicians , but at Aalborg he was accompanied only by the <unk> Girls Choir , Francis Rimbert , <unk> Duo and the Aalborg Symphonic Orchestra . 
 In 2003 he released Geometry of Love , commissioned by Jean @-@ Roch as a soundtrack for his ' V.I.P. Room ' nightclub in France . It contains a mix of ' electro @-@ chill ' music , with touches of his more traditional style . In October 2004 he returned to China to open its " Year of France " cultural exchange . Jarre gave two performances , the first at the Meridian Gate of the Forbidden City , and the second in Tiananmen Square . More than 15 @,@ 000 spectators watched the concert at the Meridian Gate , and each concert was transmitted live to television viewers across the country . Jarre collaborated with musician Chen Lin . Accompanying his traditional musical repertoire , 600 projectors shone coloured light and images across various screens and objects . 
 In September 2004 , Jarre released <unk> , both a DVD and a CD in one package . Purportedly the world 's first album released for 5 @.@ 1 systems , with it being fully " constructed " in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound , it contains re @-@ recorded versions of some of his most famous tracks , including tracks from Oxygène and Équinoxe . Accompanying the audio , the DVD features a visual image of Anne <unk> 's eyes , recorded in real time as she listened to the album . Jarre used the minimalist imagery to reinforce the audio content of the DVD . The CD was mixed in super @-@ stereo . 
 In his role of UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador , Jarre performed a concert named Water for Life in Morocco , on 16 December 2006 , to celebrate the year of desertification in the world . The performance was in front of the Erg <unk> Dunes of <unk> , in the Sahara . A free event , it was attended by about 25 @,@ 000 people . Images of water and the environment were projected onto nine vertical screens , held in place by sand which was watered to keep it hard . Several permanent drinking fountains were built on the site , along with a permanent electricity installation . Jarre was accompanied by over 60 Moroccan artists . 
 Jarre released <unk> & Téa on 26 March 2007 . He described the two computer @-@ generated characters in the video clip of the title track as being " like twins " , one female , one male . The album is supposed to describe the different stages of a loving relationship , and explores the idea that the length of such relationships is unpredictable . Its release demonstrated a move away from virtual instruments and computers that Jarre had been using up to that point ; he instead chose to use a simplified range of devices , including several new prototype instruments . The album 's cover was inspired by the David Lynch film Wild at Heart . 
 In August 2007 Jarre signed for EMI France . He released an anniversary package containing a special live recording of his classic work , Oxygène , in 3D DVD , live CD and normal 2D DVD formats in November 2007 , named Oxygène : New Master Recording . A first for Jarre , the album was recorded live , without tape or hard disk playback , with help from Francis Rimbert , Claude <unk> , and Dominique Perrier . The album also contains three extra tracks not found on either the original or remake , which form links between the main movements . Jarre plans to integrate the original analog synthesizers from Oxygène into his next album , and is building a new private recording studio on the outskirts of Paris . In the same year Disques Dreyfus released The Complete Oxygène , containing the original versions of Oxygène and Oxygène 7 – 13 , and remixes of tracks from Oxygène 7 – 13 . 
 … there are several Eminent String Machines that make up one of the main Oxygene string sounds . Having four of us meant I had to multiply the number of instruments , and finding the equipment was quite a headache , especially as I tried , as much as I could , to avoid using instruments produced after Oxygène . There are one or two exceptions but 95 percent of the instruments are of that time . For me it was really important for the radicalism of the process . 
 Jarre performed 10 concerts ( Oxygène Live ) in Paris , from 12 – 26 December 2007 , held in the Théâtre Marigny , a small 1000 @-@ seat theatre in the Champs @-@ Élysées . Later in 2008 Jarre performed several concerts to celebrate the 30th anniversary of Oxygène , in theatres in Europe . Following one such performance at the Royal Albert Hall Jarre met Brian May , who proposed he create a concert in Tenerife for the International Year of Astronomy , but a lack of sponsorship meant that the concert did not take place . 
 In 2009 he was selected as the artistic director of the World Sky Race , and also accepted a role as Goodwill Ambassador for the International Year of Astronomy . In 2009 he started an indoor tour in arenas throughout Europe . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 On 1 March 2010 , Jean Michel Jarre started the second leg of his 2009 – 10 Indoors tour ; on 10 June , he was presented with a Lifetime Achievement Award by Mojo magazine . 
 On 30 May 2011 , Essentials & Rarities , double CD set , was released . This was the last Jarre work to be released by Disques Dreyfus . The Essentials disc is a compilation of some of his most famous works . The Rarities disc includes pieces recorded in the years prior to the release of Oxygène . After this release , Jarre recovered sole intellectual property rights over his work , which had previously been owned by Francis Dreyfus Music . 
 On 1 July 2011 , Jarre performed a large @-@ scale concert in Monaco to celebrate the marriage of Prince Albert and his bride Charlene . During the last quarter of 2011 he concluded a tour schedule that had lasted for almost 3 years . He used the same format for a later concert at Carthage during the city 's 2013 musical festival . 
 In June 2013 , Jarre was elected as president of the Confédération Internationale des Sociétés d ´ Auteurs et Compositeurs ( <unk> ) 
 In Spring 2015 , Jarre released the first music from a new studio album , released in October 2015 , following around four years of work . The album , Electronica 1 : The Time Machine ( working title : E @-@ Project ) , comprises a number of collaborations with a number of other artists . The first of these to be released was the collaboration with <unk> entitled Conquistador , followed by Glory , with M83 . The track was also featured as part of the soundtrack of a short film entitled <unk> . Other collaborations on the album include Zero Gravity , with the late Edgar Froese and Tangerine Dream ( with a remix by Above and Beyond ) ; Vince Clarke for Automatic ( parts 1 and 2 ) ; Armin van Buuren for Stardust , John Carpenter for " A Question Of Blood " . , Little Boots for If .. ! and Pete Townshend for <unk> , Pt . 2 . The album became Jarre 's first album in over 25 years to make the UK Top 10 at # 8 . 
 In 2016 , Electronica 2 : The Heart of Noise was released with 15 more collaborators . Musicians like Pet Shop Boys , Hans Zimmer , Yello and Gary Numan are part of that album . One track ( 8 " Exit " ) includes speech by Edward Snowden . 
 On 11 April 2016 , it was revealed that Jarre is also currently working in collaboration with British virtual band Gorillaz . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jarre is fluent in French and English and has been married three times . He was married to Flore Guillard from 20 January 1975 until 1977 ; their daughter Émilie Charlotte was born in 1975 ( or 1976 ) and became a fashion model . He met his second wife Charlotte Rampling at a dinner party in St Tropez in 1976 . Both were in failing marriages , but they each obtained a divorce ( Rampling was married to New Zealander Bryan <unk> ) . The two married , Jarre gaining custody of his daughter Émilie Charlotte , and Rampling her son Barnaby . Together they have a son , David . 
 In 1995 photographs in Hello ! magazine showed Jarre apparently romantically involved with 31 @-@ year @-@ old secretary Odile <unk> , and in 1996 Jarre and Rampling separated . They divorced in 2002 . He had a brief relationship with Isabelle Adjani , but married French actress Anne <unk> in May 2005 . In November 2010 the couple announced their divorce . 
 Jarre has a half @-@ sister Stéphanie Jarre , from Maurice Jarre 's other marriages . His stepbrother , Kevin Jarre , died in 2011 . Although Maurice and Jean @-@ Michel remained estranged , following Maurice 's death in 2009 Jarre paid tribute to his legacy . Jarre said about his father : 
 My father and I never really achieved a real relationship . We probably saw each other 20 or 25 times in our lifetime . When you are able , at my age , to count the times you have seen your father , it says something ... I think it 's better to have conflict , or , if you have a parent who dies , you grieve , but the feeling of absence is very difficult to fill , and it took me a while to absorb that . 
 = = Large concerts = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 2015 - GQ Man of the Year . 
 An asteroid , <unk> Jarre , has been named in his honour . He is an honorary citizen of Gdansk . 
 = = Discography = = 
 As of 2004 , Jarre had sold an estimated 80 million albums . 
 Studio albums 
 = = Filmography , soundtracks , documentaries = = 
 Jarre composed for movies but he also took part in documentaries . 
 1984 - Le voyage d <unk> ( artistic collaborator ) 
 1997 - Jean Michel Jarre : Oxygene in Moscow ( himself ) 
 2002 - Jean Michel Jarre : Aero ( himself ) 
 2012 - Musique ( s ) électronique ( s ) : documentary of Jérémie Carboni ( Oxygene piece and himself as composer ) 
 = Lactarius deterrimus = 
 Lactarius deterrimus , also known as false saffron milkcap or orange milkcap , is a species of fungus in the family Russulaceae . The fungus produces medium @-@ sized fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) with orangish caps up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) wide that develop green spots in old age or if injured . Its orange @-@ coloured latex stains maroon within 30 minutes . Lactarius deterrimus is a mycorrhizal fungus that associates with Norway spruce and bearberry . The species is distributed in Europe , but has also found in parts of Asia . A visually similar species in the United States and Mexico is not closely related to the European species . Fruit bodies appear between late June and November , usually in spruce forests . Although the fungus is edible — like all Lactarius mushrooms from the section Deliciosi — its taste is often bitter , and it is not highly valued . The fruit bodies are used as source of food for the larvae of several insect species . Lactarius deterrimus can be distinguished from similar Lactarius species by difference in the mycorrhizal host or latex colour . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 Although the fungus is one of the most common in Central Europe , the species was not validly described until 1968 by German mycologist Frieder <unk> . Before this , L. deterrimus was regarded as a variety of L. deliciosus ( L. deliciosus var. piceus , described by Miroslav <unk> in 1946 ) . After Roger Heim and A. Leclair described L. semisanguifluus in 1950 , this fungus was referred to as the latter . L. fennoscandicus was separated from L. deterrimus in 1998 by Annemieke T. Verbeken and Jan <unk> and was classified as a separate species . 
 The epithet of deterrimus is Latin , and was chosen by <unk> to highlight the poor gustatory properties of the mushroom , such as the bitter aftertaste and often heavy maggot infestations . The superlative of " <unk> " ( meaning less good ) means " the worst , the poorest " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " false saffron milkcap " . 
 Several molecular phylogenetic analyses show that L. deterrimus , L. sanguifluus , Lactarius vinosus and L. fennoscandicus form a group of related species , which might include the North American species L. paradoxus and L. <unk> . Although L. deliciosus var. deterrimus qualifies as synonym for L. deterrimus , the families , which had been characterized in North America as Lactarius deliciosus var. deterrimus , are not closely related with the European types . They also seem not to form a monophyletic group . 
 Lactarius deterrimus belongs to the section Deliciosi of the genus Lactarius . According to molecular phylogenetics studies , this section forms a definite phylogenetic group within the milk cap relatives . Deliciosi species mainly have an orange or reddish @-@ coloured latex and taste mild to slightly bitter . They are strict mycorrhizal associates of conifers . The next closest relative of L. deterrimus is L. fennoscandicus . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Macroscopic characteristics = = = 
 The cap is 3 to 10 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) , rarely up to 12 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) wide and more or less centrifugal @-@ shaped and round . It is at early stage convex and furled on the slightly churlish edge , and depressed in the centre and later flat , funnel @-@ shaped depressed . The cap skin is bare , greasy in moist weather and slightly shiny when dry . The cap is tangerine to orange @-@ brown , darker zoned towards the edges and dulls mainly yellow @-@ brown . In old age or after cold or frost it changes the colour more or less to dirty greenish or green @-@ spotted . 
 The dense , bow @-@ like lamellae are pale @-@ orange to pale @-@ ochre and on the stipe basifixed or slightly decurrent . They are brittle and intermixed with shorter lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem ) as well as partly forking near the stem . In old age or in cases of injury they receive initially dark red , later grey green spots . The spore print is pale ochre . 
 The mainly long and cylindrical stipe is reddish orange . It is 4 to 8 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) ( rarely 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) ) long , 1 to 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide and barely <unk> or blotchy . On the basis it is often slightly thickened or pompous and becomes hollow inside . A <unk> circular zones is found on the lamella disposition . 
 The milk is first carrot @-@ red and becomes a maroon colour within 10 to 30 minutes . The brittle and pale @-@ yellowish flesh is often infested with maggots . If cut or injured it becomes , as the milk , first carrot @-@ red , then maroon and within hours dirty green . The fruit body smells harsh , fruit @-@ like and first tastes mild , but then slightly resinous @-@ bitter and nearly spicy or somewhat astringent . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The rotund to ellipsoid spores are 7 @.@ 5 – 10 µm long and 6 – 7 @.@ 6 µm wide . The surface ornamentation extends to 0 @.@ 5 µm high and is mainly from warts and short , wide ridges , which are linked through few fine lines to form an incomplete net ( reticulum ) . The suprahilar area , a distinctly limited zone above the apiculus , is weakly amyloid . Basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored and measure 45 – 60 × 9 @.@ 5 – 12 µm . They are roughly cylindrical to somewhat club @-@ shaped and often have an oil droplet or a granular body . The sterigmata are 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm long . The thin @-@ walled pleurocystidia are sparse , but somewhat common near the gill edge . They are protruded and are 45 – 65 µm long and 5 – 8 µm wide , they are sometimes smaller near the gill edge . Nearly spindle @-@ shaped , they are often straightened or constricted like a string of pearls at the apex . The body is often fine and grained . <unk> are largely present . They are 4 – 6 µm wide and are sometimes protruded , but are often shorter than the basidioles ( basidia in the early developmental stage ) . The basidioles are cylindric to spiral and have an ochre @-@ coloured substance , similar to the <unk> . Near the top they are , however , almost hyaline ( transparent ) . The gill edge is usually sterile and has a few to many cheilocystidia . The thin @-@ walled <unk> are 15 – 25 µm long and 5 – 10 µm wide . They are almost club @-@ shaped or irregularly shaped and transparent , and often contain a granular material . The <unk> are also thin @-@ walled and measure 25 – 50 µm long and 6 – 8 µm wide . They are slightly spindle @-@ shaped and often have a tip resembling a string of pearls ; their interior is hyaline or granular . <unk> are abundant , striking and body is ochre coloured . The cuticle of the cap is an ixocutis , whereby the hyphae are linked in a <unk> matrix , that can swell up in moisture to become heavily slimy . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 The likewise very common Lactarius deliciosus is similar in appearance . Lactarius deterrimus differs basically from the first because its flesh becomes reddish within 10 minutes and in about 30 minutes dark maroon , caused by the discolouration of the milk . The milk of L. deliciosus stays orange or becomes reddish within 30 minutes . Also , the milk of the latter tastes mild , while the milk of the first distinctly bitter . The cap of L. deterrimus changes its colour in old age or if injured distinctly greenish and is common only under spruces , while L. deliciosus is native under pines . 
 Even more similar is the very rare Lactarius semisanguifluus . Its milk also discolours within 5 to 8 minutes to maroon . The cap of older fruit bodies is nearly completely greenish . It is also common under pines . The most similar and also the most closely related fungus is Lactarius fennoscandicus , a boreal to subalpine species . Its cap is distinctly zoned and brown @-@ orange . Sometimes the cap has purple @-@ grey tones . The stem is pale to blunt orange @-@ ochre . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Lactarius deterrimus is mainly distributed in Europe , but the fungus has also found in areas of Asia ( Turkey , India , Pakistan ) . According to recent molecular biologic research , the similar North American species from the United States and Mexico are not closely related to the European species . In Europe , the fungus is especially common in Northern , North @-@ East and Central Europe ; in the UK , it may be found from July through to November . In the south and west it is common in mountainous areas . In the east , its range extends to Russia . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Lactarius deterrimus has traditionally been considered to have a strict mycorrhizal host specificity with Norway spruce . In 2006 , it was reported that the fungus can also form <unk> mycorrhiza with bearberry ( Arctostaphylos <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . <unk> mycorrhizal associations are variants of ectomycorrhiza found in certain plants in the Ericaceae characterised by hyphal coils in epidermal cells . The mycorrhiza formed by L. deterrimus on both bearberry and Norway spruce show typical features such as a hyphal mantle and a Hartig net ; the distinguishing characteristic between the mycorrhizal symbioses with the different hosts is that the hyphae penetrate the epidermal cells of bearberry , although there are also some differences in the form of the Hartig net , branching pattern , and colour . Although bearberry has been shown to form mycorrhiza with a wide range of fungi both in the field and in laboratory experiments , it had never previously been known to form mycorrhiza with fungi thought to be strictly host @-@ specific . <unk> may function as a nurse plant to help re @-@ establish Norway spruce in deforested areas . 
 The species is common in spruce @-@ fir and spruce @-@ moorland forests and in spruce forests and plantations . Together with spruces , the fungus is also common in different European beech and oak @-@ European hornbeam forests , but also on the forest edges , on clearings and in clearcut meadows and even on juniper heathers and in parkland . There are scarcely any habitats where the spruce is common , while the fungus is not found there . The fungus is very common in young spruce forests that are 10 to 20 years old , where it occurs on forest path edges occasionally in masses . 
 The fungus probably favours calcareous soil , although it has been found on nearly every soil type . It appears on sand , peat , limestone soils , <unk> and <unk> . It endures acidic as well as alkaline and low @-@ nutrient to relatively high @-@ nutrient soils . Heavily eutrophic soils are inappropriate for its habitat . 
 The fruit bodies appear from late June to November , but usually from August to October ; overwintered specimens can be found in freezing days up to early February . The fungus prefers the downs and the uplands , but is also not uncommon in lowlands . 
 = = = Fruit body = = = 
 Many fungi can serve as source of food for insect larvae , whereas most insects eat fungi only occasionally . Still , a whole range of insect species specialize on fungi . These animals are mainly beetle larvae , especially hairy fungus beetles ( <unk> ) , rove beetles ( Staphylinidae ) , and true flies ( Diptera ) . Milk caps are especially attractive for true flies , while beetle larvae are comparatively rarer . The most common insects found on the fungus are Mycetophilidae and Phoridae larvae , which populate even the youngest fruit bodies . Also relatively common on mature or overaged fruit bodies are Drosophilidae and <unk> . Species from the section Deliciosi are often infested by Diptera larvae . 
 The following species have been isolated from the fruit bodies of L. deterrimus : 
 Ula sylvatica ( <unk> ) : This very common <unk> were isolated from more than 70 different fungus species , which belong to completely different genera and families . Its larvae spend an unusually long portion of its life cycle in the fruit body , usually three or four weeks . 
 Mycetophila <unk> ( Mycetophilidae ) : The Mycetophilidae cultivates usually in milk caps of the section Deliciosi . 
 Mycetophila <unk> ( Mycetophilidae ) : A rare species first described in 1992 , which is closely related with Mycetophila <unk> and is also common in milk caps . 
 Mycetophila <unk> ( Mycetophilidae ) : Was found in fungi including Lactarius <unk> and Russula <unk> . 
 Culicoides scoticus ( Ceratopogonidae ) : It is one of the most common biting midges found in fungi and been found in over 20 different fungus species . 
 Mydaea corni : This species belongs to the family <unk> and was to date only found in species of Lactarius and Russula . 
 Many different fruit flies have been recorded on L. deterrimus : Drosophila funebris , Drosophila <unk> , Drosophila <unk> and Drosophila <unk> . 
 Psychoda albipennis , Psychoda lobata and <unk> <unk> were isolated from the fruit bodies of the fungus . The larvae of Psychoda lobata are known to develop from a wide range of fungus species from over 30 genera . 
 = = = Parasitism = = = 
 Abnormally developed milk caps infested by the parasitic sac fungus Hypomyces lateritius ( syn . <unk> <unk> ) are occasionally found in summer and autumn . The infested fruit bodies are usually more or less heavily malformed with a harder and more solid flesh than typical fruit bodies , so that they are more resistant to rot and can even survive the winter . They do not create gills ; instead , the cap bottom is covered by an initially soft , white hyphen fungus , also known as a subiculum . Early on the mycelia becomes denser and takes on a white @-@ grey colour . The perithecia are created after about 10 – 14 days . <unk> are fruit bodies of the Hypomyces and other sac fungi , in which the spindle @-@ shaped asci are produced . Besides L. deterrimus , L. deliciosus and L. sanguifluus can become infested , rarely other milk caps . Hypomyces lateritius , H. ochraceus , H. <unk> , H. odoratus , among other Hypomyces species live parasitically on different milk caps and brittlegills as well as on the fruit bodies of species from other genera . 
 = = Importance = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Lactarius deterrimus is an edible mushroom , but is much less appreciated than the similar L. deliciosus . The first tastes slightly bitter and is often infested by maggots . Like L. deliciosus , this fungus is mainly stir @-@ fried in butter or oil ; if it is cooked in water , the flesh becomes very soft . Young fruit bodies can be also pickled , or dried for later use . As the fungus is often heavily infested by maggots , skilled mushroom pickers prefer young fruit bodies . The urine discolours to red if a large amount of milk caps are eaten , but this is entirely harmless and is not evidence for an impairment to health . The red @-@ coloured <unk> compounds , ingested with the mushroom food , are more or less excreted with the urine . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The milk cap 's fruit bodies have a characteristic orange milk juice ( latex ) . The <unk> sesquiterpenes are responsible for the orange colour . Sesquiterpenes are terpenes composed of three isoprene units and therefore have 15 carbon atoms . Sesquiterpenes are widely distributed in nature and are found in plants as well as animals , for example in the juvenile hormone of insects . Plants use sesquiterpenes as a defense compound against insects . According to some studies , sesquiterpenes have antibiotic , <unk> , or <unk> effects . 
 Young , uninjured fruit bodies of L. deterrimus have <unk> in the form of fatty acid dihydroazulene @-@ esters . About 85 % of the yellow @-@ coloured dihydroazulene are esterified with stearic acid and about 15 % with linoleic acid . If the fruit body is injured , the free sesquiterpene – a dihydroazulene alcohol – is released enzymatically . Several products are produced from it through oxidation : the yellow @-@ coloured aldehyde <unk> ( 1 @-@ formyl @-@ 6 , 7 @-@ dihydro @-@ 4 @-@ methyl @-@ 7 @-@ isopropenylazulene ) , the purple @-@ coloured aldehyde <unk> ( 1 @-@ formyl @-@ 4 @-@ methyl @-@ 7 @-@ isopropenylazulene ) , and the blue @-@ coloured alcohol <unk> ( 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 @-@ methyl @-@ 7 @-@ isopropenylazulene ) . The milk is first maroon through mixing with the different colours and discolours green . The dihydroazulene alcohol and <unk> are unstable compounds , which react to form further products . <unk> <unk> particularly slight . 
 = In the Zone = 
 In the Zone is the fourth studio album by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was released on November 12 , 2003 , by JIVE Records . Its music incorporates R & B , dance , house , trip hop , and hip hop styles with instrumentation from guitars , drums , synthesizers , strings , and Middle Eastern musical instruments . Its themes range from love , dancing , empowerment , and in the case of songs such as " Touch of My Hand " , sex and masturbation . Contributions to the album 's production came from a wide range of producers , including Bloodshy & Avant , R. Kelly , <unk> , Moby , Guy Sigsworth and The Matrix . 
 With the conclusion of the Dream Within a Dream Tour in July 2002 and the end of her relationship with Justin Timberlake , Spears planned to take a six @-@ month break from her career ; however , work for In the Zone began later that November . She began writing songs for the album while touring internationally , despite not knowing the direction of the album . She experimented with different producers , trying to find those with whom she had chemistry . The first song recorded was " Touch of My Hand " , which Spears claims set the mood for the album . She co @-@ wrote all but four tracks , and often changed the lyrics to suit herself . Spears stated she was an autobiographical songwriter , although not to the point where she felt self @-@ exploited . She also explained that the sexual nature of In the Zone was subconscious and happened while she was in the process of developing the album . Spears collaborated with artists such as Madonna in " Me Against the Music " and the Ying Yang Twins in " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " . 
 In the Zone received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who complimented its mix of different styles and Spears 's songwriting , but criticized her vocals for being distant and processed . Commercially , In the Zone became an international success , debuting atop of the charts in France and the United States , and peaking inside the top ten in fifteen countries . In the United States , she became the first female artist to have four consecutive number @-@ one albums . In the Zone went on to become the eighth best selling album of 2003 . 
 Four singles were released from the album : " Me Against the Music " , " Toxic " and " Everytime " met international chart success , all peaking at number one in Australia and Ireland and reaching top five positions elsewhere . To promote In the Zone , Spears performed the songs in a number of television appearances and also embarked on The Onyx Hotel Tour . The album and its music videos are largely seen by critics as the end of her transition from teen pop star to a more adult female artist . In 2009 , Amy Schriefer of NPR listed In the Zone as one of The 50 Most Important Recordings of the Decade , calling it " a primer on the sound of pop in the ' 00s " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In November 2001 , Spears released her third album , Britney , which portrayed more adult and provocative themes and featured the lead single " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . The album sold 4 million copies in the United States ; nevertheless , it was viewed as " poor @-@ selling " in comparison to her previous efforts . The following year , her relationship of three years with pop singer Justin Timberlake ended after months of speculation . After the Dream Within a Dream Tour in support of Britney finalized in July 2002 , Spears announced she would take a break from her career for six months . In November 2002 , she revealed that she had started working on her next studio album . She explained , " Well , actually , I just said that I wanted two or three weeks off . [ .... ] And the whole world was like , ' <unk> , [ sic ] she 's gone ... " 
 While in Europe , Spears met with William Orbit and Daft Punk about possible collaborations , and originally confirmed Darkchild and The Neptunes as producers . When asked by The Hollywood Reporter about the direction of the record , Spears responded it was an organic evolution , adding , " It should just happen naturally from the way you feel . [ ... ] Whatever happens , happens " . Additionally , Spears scheduled meet @-@ and @-@ greets with Timbaland and Missy Elliott in an effort to help evolve her sound . Elliott would also enlist in further production work with Nisan Stewart for Spears ' project , however none of the initial material saw the light of day . Fred Durst was asked by Spears ' management to submit material , and he wrote and produced three trip hop tracks that were recorded by Spears in January 2003 . However , after news of an affair between them broke , Durst told JIVE Records he was not going to let them use the songs for the album . In March 2003 , Lauren Christy from The Matrix spoke about the development of the album with MTV News , and likened their work with Spears to Madonna 's Ray of Light . Scott Spock , also from The Matrix , continued comparing her to Madonna , saying , 
 " She 's taking it to the next level in her career . Madonna constantly takes what 's in the club and puts what she does on top of it and makes it mainstream . I think Britney is starting to embrace that concept where she 's looking to work on different stuff , instead of using the same familiar , and applying it to her . [ ... ] I don 't think [ her fans ] will be freaked out or upset . I think they 'll be really into what 's going to happen . " 
 Spears also previewed several songs to <unk> Philippe of MTV in May 2003 , including " Touch of My Hand " , " Brave New Girl " and " Everytime " . Spears commented , " I 've really been able to take my time and have creative control and make [ the new album ] special , special , special . " On August 27 , 2003 , Spears opened the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards performing a medley of " Like a Virgin / Hollywood " with Madonna , Christina Aguilera and Missy Elliott . The performance started with Spears appearing on stage on top of a giant wedding cake while wearing a wedding gown and veil ; she sang the first few lines of " Like a Virgin " before Aguilera appeared from behind the cake and joined her . Madonna then emerged from the cake wearing a black coat and a hat and started singing " Hollywood " before <unk> to kiss Spears and Aguilera on the lips . Missy Elliott came out from a wedding chapel to sing her song " Work It " halfway through the performance . The kiss generated strong reaction from the media . The performance was listed by Blender magazine as one of the twenty @-@ five sexiest music moments on television history . MTV listed the performance as the number @-@ one opening moment in the history of the MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For In the Zone , Spears worked with hit producers such as Bloodshy & Avant , R. Kelly , Diddy , Christopher Stewart , Moby , Guy Sigsworth and The Matrix . She first started writing songs for In the Zone during the Dream Within a Dream Tour . Spears commented about writing while touring , " The only thing that was scary to me is that I didn ’ t know if they were good . [ But ] You can ’ t trust anybody . You have to go with your feelings . " Spears commented that she was an autobiographical songwriter , although not to the point she felt self @-@ exploited . Following the end of the tour , Spears invited her friend and backing vocalist Annet Artani to her home in Los Angeles . They started writing songs at the piano , and shortly after , they traveled to Lake Como in Lombardy , Italy . Among the tracks they worked on was " Everytime " , which Artani confirmed to be written as a response to Justin Timberlake 's " Cry Me a River " , as well as " Shine " , written by Spears about her sister Jamie Lynn , which was left unfinished . Earnest recording of the album began in May 2003 . Spears commented that although she did not know initially what direction she wanted to go with the album , she took time to work with different producers and to find those who she had chemistry with . The first song recorded for In the Zone was " Touch of My Hand " , and Spears said it " really did provide a balance for the rest of the record . We just went from there . " Following the recording sessions for " Everytime " , Spears complimented Sigsworth , saying , " I just basically told him exactly how I wanted the song to sound . And he was so amazing because there 's a lot of producers you tell them things and they don 't get it . And you 're like oh , that 's not the right way . He got it just right . He was amazing . " 
 Christopher Stewart and Penelope Magnet , known collectively as RedZone , presented Spears with the third song they had written and produced , " Pop Culture Whore " . While her management liked the track , she rejected it , telling them the song " sucked " . After bonding with Spears during a night in New York City to " get in her world " , as Magnet explained , it was easier to " actually write and know what she would and wouldn 't say , to know where her real vibe is " . Stewart and Magnet began working on the first version of " Me Against the Music " ; Stewart came up with the track , while Magnet developed the melody on a piano and some of the lyrics . During the recording sessions , Stewart recalls that the studio 's air @-@ conditioning died for three days , but Spears " didn 't complain or anything , and for me that shows she 's where she is for a reason . " While rehearsing for their performance at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , Spears played a finished version of " Me Against the Music " to Madonna . After Madonna commented that she liked the track , Spears asked her to do the song with her . RedZone then handed " Me Against the Music " to Madonna , who arranged and recorded her vocal additions on her own , therefore making the song a duet . Spears , who has been a fan of Madonna for years , was " beyond surprised " when she heard Madonna 's verse . She said " I just asked her to do a little thing , but she really went there . She did a lot of stuff to it . " RedZone were then enlisted to work on several more songs for the album , including co @-@ writing " Early Mornin ' " , recording background vocals for " Outrageous " and producing " The Hook Up " . 
 The Matrix commented that after they presented songs to Spears , she tailored them to suit herself , especially the lyrics . Christy said , " ... she really knows what she wants . She knows if she 's trying something on that doesn 't fit right for her . She 's like , ' No , that 's not me . ' She 's not one to strap on some sort of fake image . " Christy also claimed to be impressed with Spears 's vocal ability during the recording of " Shadow " . Steve Anderson , Lisa Greene and Stephen Lee wrote " Breathe on Me " at Metrophonic Studios in London , England . Before meeting with the other writers , Anderson thought of two concepts for songs specifically for Spears : one he had worked on " for ages " , and " Breathe on Me " , which he drafted on the morning of the sessions . Greene and Lee did not like the first concept , and they wrote " Breathe on Me " with Anderson . The song was produced by Mark Taylor , who kept most of the programming done by Anderson . With Taylor , Spears recorded " Breathe on Me " and " And Then We Kiss " , which did not make the album . Before the album was released , Spears 's manager Larry Rudolph commented that it was important for Spears to continue moving away from a traditional pop sound , citing " I 'm a Slave 4 U " and " Boys " from Britney as departures from her previous music . Barry Weiss , then @-@ president of JIVE Label Group , added , " She has achieved what she set out to achieve , which was to make a mature album that didn 't sound like something she would have done three years while still making a commercial album that has hit singles . [ ... ] It 's the kind of record she should be doing right now , and it came down to her to make it . " In the Zone was recorded at Battery Studios and The Dojo in New York City , 3 : 20 Studios , Decoy Studios , Pacifique Studios , Record Plant and Westlake Audio in Los Angeles , California , The Chocolate Factory , in Chicago , Illinois , Triangle <unk> { sic } Studios in Atlanta , Georgia , Metrophonic Studios and Olympic Studios in London , England , and Murlyn Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . Throughout the beginning of 2003 , Spears started testing tracks by playing them in nightclubs such as Show in New York City . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to Billboard , In the Zone marks a musical departure for Spears . Instead of traditional pop , the album is darker and more dance @-@ oriented . Spears talked about the overall sound of the album with Rolling Stone , saying , " I 'd describe it as trance @-@ y , kind of vibe record — something you could listen to that 's no so song @-@ structured [ ... ] Of course I 'm not doing ' ... Baby One More Time ' and those massive hits anymore . I think this record is where I am at right now in my life . It 's sensual , it 's sexual . I 'm probably writing about that subconsciously because I don 't have that right now . " Amy Schriefer of NPR stated the album is a mix of dance , house , crunk , Diwali beats and hip hop . According to William Shaw of Blender , the main theme of In the Zone is " Spears ’ s awakening to her sexuality as a single woman . " The first single from the album , " Me Against the Music " , features Madonna , but was constructed as a duet after she was added to the track . Spears and Madonna trade lines during the verses , and Madonna sings solo in the bridge . The instrumentation in the song includes influences of hip hop and funk guitars . The song 's lyrics feature Spears and Madonna singing of the pleasures of letting go on the dancefloor , in " I 'm up against the speaker / Trying to take on the music / It 's like a competition " . The second song , " I Got That ( Boom Boom ) " , is an Atlanta @-@ style hip hop track featuring the Ying Yang Twins . 
 " Showdown " has " bubbly " beats and its lyrics , about " fighting and making up with carnal relations " , include the lines " I don ’ t really want to be a tease / But would you undo my zipper , please ? " The fourth track , " Breathe on Me " , was described as the most sensual song of the record . Containing trip hop influences , Spears sings , " Oh , it 's so hot , and I need some air / And boy , don 't stop ' cause I 'm halfway there " and " Just put your lips together and blow . " " Early Mornin ' " depicts Spears looking for men at a club in New York City . The song has a percolating beat and featured subdued vocals from Spears , who purrs and yawns through the track . The nightclub Show is referenced . " Toxic " , which Spears later named as her favorite song from her career , was originally offered to Kylie Minogue . Released as the album 's second single , it contains elements of electropop and bhangra music , and features varied instrumentation , such as drums , synthesizers , high @-@ pitched strings and surf guitars . Lyrically , " Toxic " talks about being addicted to a lover . " Outrageous " , the fourth and final single from the album , is a hip hop @-@ inspired track that according to MTV features Spears " whisper [ ing ] and moan [ ing ] [ ... ] with a snake charmer melody giving the song an exotic feel . " The lyrics talk about materialism and amusement , with the singer referencing in the chorus a number of things that give her pleasure . In " Touch of My Hand " , which Spears felt it was comparable to Janet Jackson 's " That 's the Way Love Goes " ( 1993 ) , she sings in a lower register . The instrumentation contains elements of Middle Eastern music and its lyrics refer to masturbation , " I will be bold / Going to the places where I can be out of control / Don 't want to explain tonight / All the things I try to hide . " 
 The ninth track " The Hook Up " has a reggae feel and features Spears singing in a Jamaican Patois accent . The ballad " Shadow " talks about how reminders of a lover can still linger after he ’ s gone . " Brave New Girl " lyrics talk about a young woman finding her passion and losing inhibitions . Backed by choppy , electro @-@ funk beats , she sings in a bouncy near @-@ rap , " She 's gonna pack her bags , she 's going to find her way , she 's going to get right out of this / She don 't want New York , she don 't want L.A. , she 's going to find that special kiss . " The song incorporates elements of the music of No Doubt , Blondie and Madonna . " Everytime " begins with a piano introduction accompanying Spears 's breathy vocals , which build from soft to strong throughout the song . " Everytime " lyrics are a plea for forgiveness for inadvertently hurting a former lover . In the song , the singer explains she feels unable to continue in lines such as " Everytime I try to fly I fall / Without my wings I feel so small " . During an interview with MTV , Spears said about the song , " It 's about heartbreak , it 's about your first love , your first true love . That 's something all people can relate to , because you all have that first love that you think you 're going to be with the rest of your life . " When asked if " Everytime " was about Timberlake , she responded " I 'll let the song speak for itself . " The Rishi Rich 's Desi Kulcha Remix of " Me Against the Music " removes the original melody of the song and adds a clattering backbeat and Punjabi shouts . In " The Answer " , Spears sings that her lover is the answer to all her needs : " Who can hold me tight , keep me warm through the night ? / Who can wipe my tears when it 's wrong , make it right ? / Who can give me love till I 'm satisfied ? / Who 's the one I need in my life ? " . In " Don 't Hang Up " , she pleads on the phone for her lover to keep her satisfied long @-@ distance . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In the Zone holds a score of 66 out of 100 ( indicating " generally positive reviews " ) based on 13 critical reviews , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . Jason Shawhan of About.com gave a positive review , saying that while the album 's vibe is sexy , the result is a personal statement from Spears . He also added , " T [ here ] ' s another thing about Spears ' new record , as none of her previous albums ever managed to produce any kind of sustained emotional response than the pleasure that comes from a good pop record . I miss Max Martin , for sure , but it feels like Ms. S. has been paying attention to La Ciccone . To put it another way , this is Britney 's True Blue . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said that the album " [ is ] all club @-@ ready , but despite some hints of neo @-@ electro and the Neptunes , it doesn 't quite sound modern — it sounds like cuts from 1993 or Madonna 's Bedtime Stories and Ray of Light . Production @-@ wise , these tracks are not only accomplished but much more varied than any of her previous albums . " Ruth Mitchell of BBC Online called " Early Mornin ' " the best track of the album , but added , " Sadly , her attempts to prove her new @-@ found maturity are what overwhelm and cloud all that is good about In The Zone . " Mim Udovitch of Blender commented , " This I ’ m @-@ coming @-@ out record is an unhesitant move from songs of the heart to songs of the groin [ ... ] No longer a girl , freed from slavery , now fully a woman , she makes a pretty convincing mistress . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly called " Brave New Girl " and " Touch of My Hand " the best and most straightforward moments of the album , but added that " On a CD intended to celebrate her lurch into adulthood , Spears remains distant and submerged . For all her freedom , she 's still finding her way . " 
 Jon Pareles of Rolling Stone said , " [ Spears 's ] voice is so processed , its physicality almost disappears . [ ... ] In the Zone offers strip @-@ club , 1 @-@ 900 sex , accommodating and hollow . Beyond the glittering beats , Spears sounds about as intimate as a blowup doll . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine stated , " Britney 's fourth album , In The Zone , finds the pop tart coming of age with a bold mix of hip @-@ hop and dance music , wiping clean the last traces of her bubblegum @-@ pop past . [ ... ] For the most part , In The Zone is a big , fat , thumping love letter to the dancefloor , which makes Madonna 's involvement [ ... ] even more appropriate . " Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian commented , " Unlike previous Britney albums , In the Zone has no filler and no shoddy cover versions , just 57 varieties of blue @-@ chip hit @-@ factory pop . There is southern hip @-@ hop , deep house , Neptunes @-@ style R & B , the ubiquitous Diwali beat and , most importantly , oodles of Madonna . " Jason King of Vibe deemed it as " A supremely confident dance record that also illustrates Spears 's development as a songwriter . " " Toxic " won Spears her only Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording in 2005 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , In the Zone sold 609 @,@ 000 during its first week of availability in the United States , debuting at the top of the Billboard 200 . The album had the second highest debut sales of 2003 by a female artist ( only behind Alicia Keys 's The Diary of Alicia Keys ) , as well as the fifth highest debut sales of the year . Spears also became the first female artist in Billboard 's history to have four consecutive number @-@ one albums . By its third week , In the Zone had already sold 1 million copies in the country . The album was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on December 16 , 2003 , for shipments of 2 million copies in the United States . It has sold over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies there according to Nielsen SoundScan . In Canada , the album debuted at number two in the Canadian Albums Chart with sales of 31 @,@ 000 units . It was certified three @-@ times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In Australia and New Zealand , In the Zone debuted at number ten and twenty @-@ five in the official charts , respectively . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) indicating shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . The album debuted at number three on the Oricon weekly album chart in Japan , selling around 59 @,@ 128 copies . In Mexico , In the Zone was certified platinum on December 17 , 2003 , by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) for shipments of 150 @,@ 000 copies . The album was also certified platinum in Argentina by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers ( CAPIF ) for shipments of 40 @,@ 000 copies in total . In the Zone debuted at number fourteen on the UK Albums Chart , staying on the chart for forty @-@ three weeks and jumping to its peak of number thirteen on its thirty @-@ fourth week in the chart . It was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . The album also debuted at the top of the charts in France . In April 2004 , it was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for shipments of a million copies in Europe . In the Zone was the eighth best selling album of 2003 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Me Against the Music " was released as the lead single from In the Zone on October 20 , 2003 , by JIVE Records . The label 's choice for the first single was originally " Outrageous " , but Spears convinced them to release " Me Against the Music " . The song received mixed reviews from critics . Some felt it was a strong dance track of the album , while others referred to it as lackluster and disappointing . " Me Against the Music " achieved international success , peaking atop of the charts in countries such as Australia , Denmark , Hungary , Ireland and Spain , as well as the European Hot 100 Singles . It also peaked at number two in Canada , Italy , Norway and the United Kingdom , and inside the top five in many other nations . The song won the " Hot Dance Single of the Year " accolade at the 2004 Billboard Music Awards . In the song 's accompanying music video , Spears chases Madonna inside a nightclub . " Toxic " was released as the album 's second single on January 12 , 2004 . After trying to choose between " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " and " Outrageous " , Spears selected " Toxic " instead . The song received positive reviews from critics . " Toxic " attained worldwide success , reaching the top @-@ five in fifteen countries , while topping the charts in Australia , Canada , Hungary , Norway and the United Kingdom . In the United States , it became her first single to peak inside the top ten in almost four years . The accompanying music video for the song portrays Spears as a secret agent in the search of a vial of green liquid . After she steals it , she enters an apartment and poisons her unfaithful boyfriend . The video also includes interspersed scenes of Spears naked with diamonds over her body . " Toxic " won Spears her first Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording , and its often referred to as one of her defining songs . 
 " Everytime " was the third single released from the album , on May 17 , 2004 . It received positive appreciation from contemporary critics . " Everytime " was a commercial success , peaking inside the top five in most countries , while reaching the top of the charts in Australia , Hungary , Ireland and the United Kingdom . The music video for " Everytime " portrays Spears as a star hounded by paparazzi , who drowns in her bathtub when she starts bleeding from a wound in her head . In the hospital , doctors fail to resuscitate her while a child is born in the next room , implying she <unk> . The original treatment would have had Spears killing herself from a drug overdose , but the plot was removed after it received criticism by several organizations , who perceived it as a glamorization of suicide . " Outrageous " was the fourth and last single from the album , released on July 13 , 2004 . The song was finally chosen as a single after it was selected as the theme song for the 2004 film Catwoman . " Outrageous " received mixed reviews from critics . Some praised its funky sound , noting its influence from Michael and Janet Jackson , while others deemed it as " forgettable " . The song only charted in the United States , entering many of Billboard 's component charts and peaking at number seventy @-@ nine on the Hot 100 . The music video was being shot in New York City in June 2004 , when Spears hurt her knee and had to undergo arthroscopic surgery . The video was canceled , as well as The Onyx Hotel Tour and the feature in the Catwoman soundtrack . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In November 2003 , Barry Weiss spoke to Billboard and said that In the Zone was being promoted in a worldwide level , exhausting areas such as print and electronic media , TV , radio and video to raise awareness of the album 's release . In addition , JIVE worked with lifestyle marketer the <unk> Group to market the album to the gay community . Other broader @-@ based marketing efforts included a tie @-@ in with marketing company <unk> , where after ordering a soda at Sbarro , customers received a cup featuring the artwork and a three @-@ inch disc in the lid featuring " Brave New Girl " and songs by two other artists . In December 2003 , an updated <unk> disc included a remix of " Me Against the Music " without Madonna , as well as songs by fellow JIVE acts Nick Cannon and Bowling for Soup . Regal Theaters also showed a short film that included footage of the making of Spears 's music videos . Two national TV advertising campaigns began on November 1 , 2003 , one with a teaser ad in American comedy show Saturday Night Live and another exclusively on MTV . No sponsored cross @-@ marketing campaigns were planned , as Larry Rudolph explained , " [ This time ] it 's going to be more about the music than about corporate tie @-@ ins . " In terms of international exposure , during a fourth @-@ month period Spears was featured in seven mini TV @-@ specials and more than one @-@ hundred and fifty interviews outside the US . 
 Spears first performed " Me Against the Music " at the 2003 NFL Kickoff Live on September 4 , 2003 at the National Mall . The performance segued into a medley of " ... Baby One More Time " and " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , which included pyrotechnics . On September 14 , 2003 , Spears played a surprise concert at Rain Nightclub in the Palms Casino Resort , and performed " Me Against the Music " , " Breathe on Me " and a medley of " ... Baby One More Time " and " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . On October 18 , 2003 , Spears performed " Me Against the Music " and " Everytime " during the twenty @-@ ninth season of Saturday Night Live . Spears opened the 2003 American Music Awards telecast with a performance of " Me Against the Music " . On November 17 , 2003 , a concert special titled Britney Spears : In the Zone aired in ABC . The following day , she performed " Me Against the Music " and " ( I Got That ) Boom Boom " on the American music show TRL at Times Square . " Me Against the Music " was also performed on American late @-@ night show The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and American morning show Live with Regis and Kelly on November 17 and 24 , 2003 . She performed " Toxic " , " Breathe on Me " and " Me Against the Music " as the headliner of the Jingle Ball on December 8 , 2003 , at the Staples Center . On January 24 , 2004 , Spears opened the 2004 NRJ Music Awards with a performance of " Toxic " . On August 5 , 2004 , Spears performed " Everytime " at the British music chart show Top of the Pops . 
 = = = The Onyx Hotel Tour = = = 
 The Onyx Hotel Tour to promote In the Zone was the fourth concert tour by Britney Spears . A tour to promote the album was announced in December 2003 . Its original name was the In the Zone Tour , but Spears was sued for trademark infringement and banned from using the phrase ' in the zone ' . Spears felt inspired to create a show with a hotel theme which she later mixed with the concept of an onyx stone . The stage , inspired by Broadway musicals , was less elaborate than her previous tours . The setlist was composed mostly by songs from In the Zone as well as some of her past songs reworked with different elements of jazz , blues and Latin percussion . Tour promoter Clear Channel Entertainment marketed the tour to a more adult audience than her previous shows while sponsor MTV highly promoted the tour on TV shows and the network 's website . The tour was divided into seven segments : Check @-@ In , Mystic Lounge , Mystic Garden , The Onyx Zone , Security Cameras , Club and the encore . Check @-@ In displayed performances with dance and advanced in the hotel theme . Mystic Lounge featured an homage to Cabaret and other musicals , while remixing some of Spears 's early hits . Mystic Garden displayed a jungle @-@ inspired stage . The Onyx Zone displayed a ballad performance with acrobats . Security Cameras was the raciest part of the show , with Spears and her dancers emulating different sexual practices . Club displayed a performance with urban influences . The encore consisted of a system malfunction interlude and Spears performed wearing a red ensemble . The tour received mixed reviews from contemporary critics , who praised it for being an entertaining show while criticizing it for looking " more [ like ] a spectacle than an actual concert " . The Onyx Hotel Tour was commercially successful , grossing $ 34 million . In March , Spears suffered a knee injury onstage which forced her to reschedule two shows . In June , Spears fell and hurt her knee again during a music video shoot . She underwent surgery and the remainder of the tour was cancelled . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic commented , " If 2001 's Britney was a transitional album , capturing Spears at the point when she wasn 't a girl and not yet a woman , its 2003 follow @-@ up , In the Zone , is where she has finally completed that journey and turned into Britney , the Adult Woman . " Erlewine compared Spears to her peer Christina Aguilera , explaining that both equated maturity with transparent sexuality and the pounding sounds of nightclubs , but while Aguilera " comes across like a natural @-@ born skank , Britney is the girl next door cutting loose at college , drinking and smoking and dancing and sexing just a little too recklessly , since this is the first time she can indulge herself . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine stated , " For a girl who 's always seemed too sexed @-@ up for her age , In The Zone finds Britney finally filling her britches , so @-@ to @-@ speak . Her little girl coquettishness actually works now — maybe because , at 21 , she 's finally a woman . " Jason King of Vibe said the album showcased a transformed Spears , " no longer a girl , and all the woman any man can handle . " In 2009 , Amy Schriefer of NPR listed the album on The 50 Most Important Recording of the Decade list . Calling it " a primer on the sound of pop in the ' 00s " , she deemed Spears as the ideal vehicle for a futuristic sound , since she was still trying to break away from her teen pop past . Schriefer praised " Toxic " and " Everytime " , and also stated , " While the decade 's history of celebrity obsession , paparazzi voyeurism and conflicted constructions of female sexuality and motherhood are written on Spears ' body , the decade 's history of impeccably crafted pop is written on her body of work . " 
 Julie Andsager in Sex in consumer culture ( 2006 ) said that the music videos from In the Zone presented a different Spears , and that although the album was intended to target the gay market , the videos were clearly designed for heterosexual men . Andsager suggested that Spears took cues more directly from sexual fantasies , and that the use of sanitized images of attractive young women posed in sexual ways ( lesbian chic ) serves two audiences : primarily , it sought to fulfill heterosexual fantasies , but as a secondary function , it may also serve young women as a source of instruction in attracting males . From a marketing perspective , the fantasy @-@ fulfillment purpose of the album was apparent not only on the videos , but also in the kiss between Spears at Madonna at the Video Music Awards . Finally , Andsager explained that " [ Spears ] has , perhaps , taken her sexuality to its extreme — for network television , at least — at the age of 22 " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 ^ [ b ] signifies a vocal producer . 
 ^ [ c ] signifies a remixer . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Back to Basics : Live and Down Under = 
 Back to Basics : Live and Down Under is the fourth video album by American singer @-@ songwriter Christina Aguilera . It premiered on television on January 26 , 2008 on VH1 , and was released on DVD on February 4 , 2008 , by RCA Records . The DVD included material from recordings from two of Aguilera ’ s concerts during her Back to Basics Tour in Adelaide on July 17 and 18 , 2007 . Behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage is included with video from the concerts . 
 Upon its release , Back to Basics : Live and Down Under garnered positive views from music critics as well as attained chart success in a number of countries , peaking at number one on the DVD charts of Belgium ( Flanders ) and the United Kingdom . In the United States , the DVD debuted atop the chart with first @-@ week sales of 18 @,@ 437 copies . It achieved double platinum certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and gold certification by Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 To support Back to Basics ( 2006 ) , Aguilera embarked on the worldwide concert Back to Basics Tour . The tour received mixed to positive reviews from music critics ; The Georgia Straight 's Mike Usinger praised Aguilera 's vocals as " insanely powerful , " while Dave Simpson from The Guardian criticized the setlist as " confusing . " The show in Adelaide , Australia on July 17 and 18 , 2007 was filmed and was released as a DVD . 
 On January 26 , 2008 , Back to Basics : Live and Down Under made it premiere on VH1 at 10 PM . The DVD was released officially on February 4 , 2008 in the United Kingdom . The next day , it was released in Canada and the United States . In Germany , it was released on February 8 , 2008 . It was released on February 11 in France , and on February 16 in Australia . The DVD features old @-@ school style materials such as trapeze artists , circus jugglers , and cabaret dancing . It also includes behind @-@ the @-@ scene interviews with dancers , musicians , stylists , Aguilera 's husband Jordan Bratman and the singer herself . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon its release , Back to Basics : Live and Down Under garnered mainly positive feedback from music critics . Jake Meaney for PopMatters gave it a seven out of ten stars rating , commenting it " huge and overwhelming , deeply soulful and expressive , if sometimes a bit <unk> melismatic " . Clayton Perry from the online website Blogcritics provided a positive review , writing that it " is more than a simple presentation of song and dance ; the show , by all measures , is a Broadway @-@ caliber production " . The New York Times was also impressed toward the video release , writing that it is " at the top of her already speaker @-@ blowing vocal range " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On February 25 , 2008 , the DVD debuted and peaked at number 2 on the ARIA Music DVD Chart , where it remained its peak for two weeks . On the Austrian Music DVD Chart , it debuted at number 7 on the issue chart dated February 22 , 2008 . The following week , it fell to number 8 . The DVD reached its peak at number 6 on March 14 , 2008 . In the Wallonia region of Belgium , Live and Down Under made its first chart appearance at number 10 on February 16 , 2008 . It subsequently peaked at number 8 the following week . In the Flanders region , the DVD peaked atop the chart on March 1 , 2008 after two weeks charting within the top 10 . 
 In New Zealand , it peaked at number 7 on the RIANZ DVD Chart and remained on the top ten for on week . It also peaked at number 6 in Austria , number 4 in Switzerland , number 2 in Dutch , and atop the chart of United Kingdom . In the United States , Back to Basics : Live and Down Under debuted at number one on the Billboard Top Music Videos chart on February 23 , 2008 with first @-@ week sales of 18 @,@ 437 copies . It fell to number 3 the following week . On March 8 , 2008 , the DVD fell to number 4 . 
 The DVD was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 50 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for exceeding shipments of 30 @,@ 000 copies in Australia . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from DVD liner notes 
 = = = Bonus content = = = 
 " Dancers " 
 " Wardrobe : Simone <unk> " 
 " Hair & Make @-@ Up : Stephen <unk> " 
 " Musicians " 
 " Background Vocalists " 
 " Musical Director : Rob Lewis " 
 " Jordan Bratman " 
 " Christina Aguilera " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Christina Aguilera – vocals , primary artist , creative director 
 Hamish Hamilton – director 
 Sasha Allen , Erika Jerry – background vocals 
 Irving Azoff , Kelly Perkins , Harry Sandler – management 
 Errol Cooney – guitar 
 Ethan Farmer – bass 
 Irene Fukunaga – executive assistant 
 Miguel <unk> – saxophone 
 James <unk> – photography 
 Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> – photo courtesy 
 Rob Lewis – music direction 
 Peter Mokran – mixing 
 Raymond " <unk> " Monteiro – trumpet 
 Garret Smith – trombone 
 Eric Weaver – assistant 
 Chris <unk> – design 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Meteor ( 1890 ) = 
 SMS Meteor was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the lead ship of her class . She had one sister ship , Comet . She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard . Her keel was laid in 1888 ; she was launched in January 1890 , and completed in May 1891 . Her career was limited due to poor handling and excessive vibration ; she remained on active service only until 1895 . She was used as a harbor guard ship from 1904 to 1911 , after which she became a barracks ship in Kiel . Meteor was sold for scrap in 1919 and subsequently dismantled . 
 = = Design = = 
 Meteor was 79 @.@ 86 meters ( 262 @.@ 0 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 56 m ( 31 @.@ 4 ft ) and a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 68 m ( 12 @.@ 1 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 078 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 061 long tons ; 1 @,@ 188 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and a range of approximately 960 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 780 km ; 1 @,@ 100 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . Meteor had a crew of 7 officers and 108 enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns placed in single pivot mounts , two side @-@ by @-@ side forward , and two side @-@ by @-@ side aft . The guns were supplied with between 462 and 680 rounds of ammunition . Meteor also carried three 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes , one mounted submerged in the bow and the other two in deck @-@ mounted launchers on the broadside . She was protected with a 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick deck , along with 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) of steel armor plating for the conning tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Meteor was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1888 , and launched on 20 January 1890 . Fitting @-@ out work then commenced , and was completed by 19 May 1891 , when she was commissioned into the German fleet . Meteor served with the fleet only briefly ; this was due to her poor handling and excessive vibration at high speed . In 1893 , she was assigned as the dispatch vessel for the I Division of the Maneuver Squadron , which was composed of the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . 
 By 1895 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line service and used for fishery protection . This duty lasted only a year , after which she was placed out of service . In 1899 , she was reclassified as a light cruiser , along with her sister ship Comet , though both vessels remained out of service . Meteor was used as a harbor guard ship starting on 3 May 1904 . On 24 June 1911 , she was stricken from the naval register and used as a barracks ship in Kiel . She served in this capacity through World War I. After the German defeat , the ship was sold for scrapping in 1919 . Meteor thereafter was broken up in Rendsburg . 
 = Anglo @-@ Italian Cup = 
 The Anglo @-@ Italian Cup ( also known as the Anglo @-@ Italian Inter @-@ League Clubs Competition and from 1976 – 86 as the Alitalia Challenge Cup , Talbot Challenge Cup or Gigi Peronace Memorial ) is a defunct European football competition . 
 The competition was played intermittently between 1970 and 1996 between clubs from England and Italy . It was founded by Gigi Peronace , following the two @-@ team Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup in 1969 . The initial Anglo @-@ Italian Cup was played as an annual tournament from 1970 to 1973 . The first final was abandoned early due to violence , with Swindon Town declared the winners . During its time the tournament had a reputation for violence between fans , but it returned as a semi @-@ professional tournament from 1976 before it was abolished again in 1986 . 
 In 1992 , the Anglo @-@ Italian Cup was re @-@ established as a professional cup for second tier clubs – it replaced the English Full Members Cup . The Italian representatives were Serie B teams . This version of the Cup ran for four seasons , until 1996 , before being discontinued due to fixture congestion . The trophy was a 22 @-@ inch ( 56 cm ) high gold loving cup mounted on a wooden plinth . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Professional era = = = 
 From 1967 , a place in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup was awarded to the Football League Cup winners , but that season 's winners , Queens Park Rangers , could not take up their place because UEFA did not at that time allow third @-@ tier teams to compete in the Fairs Cup . When the same situation arose two years later with Swindon Town , a two @-@ legged match against that year 's Coppa Italia winners , A.S. Roma , was organised by way of compensation . Following the popularity of that event , dubbed the Anglo @-@ Italian League Cup , and as a way to generate income to pay players ' wages during the extended close season caused by the 1970 FIFA World Cup , the first Anglo @-@ Italian Cup was inaugurated in 1970 . 
 For the first competition there were six English teams and six Italian teams . These teams were split into three groups consisting of two English and two Italian teams each , with two points being awarded for a win , one point for a draw , and a point for each goal scored . The final was contested between the best team from each country , and Swindon played Napoli at the Stadio San Paolo on 28 May 1970 . Swindon were 3 – 0 up after 63 minutes , when violence started to break out . The match had to be abandoned after 79 minutes , with Swindon being declared as the first winners of the tournament . 
 In 1971 , the second edition of the tournament , Blackpool and Bologna were the two nations ' best @-@ ranked teams and contested the final at the Stadio Renato Dall 'Ara on 12 June 1971 . Prior to the match , tournament organiser Gigi Peronace stressed that it was imperative for an Italian club to win back the trophy . After 90 minutes the score was 1 – 1 and the match went into extra @-@ time , during which Micky Burns scored the winning goal for Blackpool . 
 Blackpool qualified for the final again in 1972 , but were unsuccessful in their defence of the title , with Roma winning 3 – 1 . In 1973 , points were no longer awarded for each goal scored , and Newcastle United went on to win the final 2 – 1 against Fiorentina at the Stadio Artemio Franchi on 3 June 1973 . Due to lack of interest the tournament did not continue , and it was not until 1976 that it re @-@ emerged as a semi @-@ professional competition . 
 = = = Semi @-@ professional era = = = 
 In March 1976 , the Anglo @-@ Italian Cup was re @-@ introduced as a semi @-@ professional tournament , with six entrants from each country . Wimbledon and Monza reached the final , with Monza winning the final 1 – 0 , making them unbeaten for the tournament . For the next two years Bath City were the English finalists but they lost to Lecco in 1977 , and Udinese in 1978 , when the tournament was renamed the Alitalia Challenge Cup . 
 In 1979 , each country had four entrants and Sutton United defeated Italian finalists Chieti 2 – 1 to become the first and only English winners of the competition during its time as a semi @-@ professional competition . Attempting to defend their title the following year , Sutton United reached the final but were defeated by Triestina . 
 In 1981 , the tournament was called the Talbot Challenge Cup and Modena were the winners . The following year the tournament was renamed the Gigi Peronace Memorial , after the man who organised the tournament , and reduced to four teams . The new format consisted of two Anglo @-@ Italian semi @-@ finals , which meant the final was not necessarily contested by an English and an Italian team . That year , Modena successfully defended their title in a final against Sutton United , who were the last English team to reach the final of the semi @-@ professional tournament . 
 From 1983 to 1986 , the finals were all @-@ Italian contests , and after the 1986 instalment the tournament was discontinued . 
 = = = Professional tournament again = = = 
 The competition was re @-@ established in 1992 – 93 as a replacement for the Full Members Cup . It was a professional tournament for teams competing in the second tier of football — the newly renamed First Division in England and Serie B in Italy . 
 The new version of the tournament began with preliminary rounds – 24 English teams competed in 8 groups of three teams . Each team played the others once , and the eight group winners progressed to the main competition . 
 The main competition consisted of two groups , each with four English , and four Italian teams . Each team would play four group games – against every team in its group from the other nation . Then , the top team in each group from each nation competed in semi @-@ finals : an all @-@ English semi @-@ final , and an all @-@ Italian semi @-@ final . The final was a single match played at Wembley . 
 In the 1992 – 93 tournament , Derby County lost the final 3 – 1 to Cremonese . Brescia won the final in 1994 against Notts County , but Notts County reached the final again in 1995 and defeated Ascoli 2 – 1 . The last instalment of the competition was held in 1995 – 96 , and Genoa triumphed 5 – 2 over Port Vale in the final on 17 March 1996 . The competition was abandoned in 1996 because the two leagues could not agree on dates for fixtures , and due to increasing violence at matches . 
 = = Participants = = 
 For the original professional tournament in the 1970s , the English entrants were either First Division or Second Division sides . ( The First Division sides had generally finished in the lower half of the table , while the Second Division sides were generally mid @-@ table or better . ) With the exception of Bari and Como in 1973 , all Italian teams playing in the 1970s tournament had just competed in the previous Serie A season . The Italian clubs were often mid @-@ table or higher finishers who had sometimes also qualified for the European competitions . 
 When the competition was revived in the 1990s , for the first two seasons all English sides playing in the First Division ( 2nd level ) participated , but in the last two tournaments only 8 English teams played . In 1994 / 95 , two of the clubs relegated from the Premiership were joined by six teams that had just missed out on promotion . For 1995 / 96 , only one relegated Premiership team competed – most of the remaining teams had finished in mid @-@ table or lower table in the previous First Division campaign , and Birmingham City had just been promoted from Division Two . 
 The Italian participants in the revived 1990s tournament were the four teams that had just been relegated from Serie A and the four teams that had finished highest but not been promoted in Serie B. The exception to this was Verona , who were relegated in 1991 / 92 , but did not play in the 1992 / 93 cup . 
 = = = Table of participants and performance by season = = = 
 Key 
 Won tournament ; runner @-@ up ; lost in semi @-@ final ( English or Italian final ) ; lost in quarter @-@ final ( English or Italian semi @-@ final ) ; eliminated in group stage ; eliminated in preliminary qualifying . 
 = Old Bridge , Pontypridd = 
 The Old Bridge ( Welsh : Yr Hen Bont ) , which is now also known as the William Edwards Bridge or Pontypridd Bridge , was originally known as the New Bridge or Newbridge , it is an arched single @-@ span footbridge that spans the River Taff at Pontypridd in Wales . The bridge was built by William Edwards and was completed in 1756 . The bridge now has statutory protection as a scheduled ancient monument and is grade I listed . 
 = = Pontypridd = = 
 In the early 18th century Pontypridd , then known as Pont @-@ y @-@ tŷ @-@ pridd ( The bridge of the earthen house ) , was a tiny hamlet . Pont @-@ y @-@ tŷ @-@ pridd took its name from the original bridge of the same name , however very little is known of that ancient ford with stepping stones , which ran alongside the current Old Bridge , and was used only when the river ran low . Possibly in 1744 or after the bridge was built , Pont @-@ y @-@ tŷ @-@ pridd became known as Newbridge or New Bridge after the William Edwards ' Bridge . By 1856 , Newbridge had been renamed Pontypridd . 
 In 1746 when William Edwards was just 27 years of age , he was commissioned by the Hundreds of Miskin and Caerphilly to build a three @-@ arch bridge across the River Taff . For this he was paid the sum of GB £ 500 , on condition that he would maintain it for seven years . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = The first bridge = = = 
 The first bridge to be constructed was a three @-@ arch stone bridge , which was built in 1746 . It was destroyed by a heavy storm which caused the River Taff to flood about two years later . A large amount of debris came down the river , which then become trapped against the two abutments supporting the bridge . The weight and force of the debris ultimately destroyed the bridge , which was then swept away down the river . 
 = = = The second bridge = = = 
 After the destruction of the first bridge over the fast flowing River Taff , William Edwards decided to design a much more radical 140 ft ( 43 m ) single @-@ arch bridge that would eliminate the possibility of debris destroying the bridge due to the flooding of the River Taff . The second bridge was built from 1748 , however two reports differ as to what actually happened during this second attempt to build the bridge . Thomas Morgan , contemporary of Edwards , said that " … when he ( William Edwards ) had almost finished the arch ; the centre timber work gave way and all fell to the bottom . " However , The National Library of Wales have a contemporary works known as the <unk> manuscript which says that , " Just after the first single arch was finished and before the centre was struck , a flood came and carried all away . " It is not clear which one of these two accounts is the accurate one , however it is clear that Edwards ' latest attempted to build a bridge cross the River Taff had yet again ended in failure . 
 = = = The third bridge = = = 
 The single @-@ arch bridge was rebuilt and was actually finished . It stood for a period of about six weeks before again it collapsed because the new bridge was not balanced , which forced the keystone out , which once again caused the bridge to collapse . In the Theory of Arches and Pontypridd , it states that " the weight of the bridge was either too great on the haunches or too little on the crown . " At this stage Edwards was either encouraged or forced to try again with extra money being provided to cover his losses for the earlier attempts . 
 = = = The fourth bridge = = = 
 The final design of the bridge included three cylindrical voids ( holes ) of 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) , 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) and 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 6 ft ) on each side on the bridge . This reduced the weight and pressure on the crown and the bridge is still in operation today , however it can only be used by pedestrians . The Theory of Arches and Pontypridd , states that as a bridge , the bridge was a failure , as it was " only eleven feet wide between the parapets and so steep that wagons had to use a ' chain and drag ' to descend from the crown . " 
 The 140 ft Old Bridge surpassed the 130 ft ( 40 m ) Old Walton Bridge as the longest single @-@ span bridge in Great Britain and remained the longest bridge for another 40 years . It was also one of the few bridges in Europe , and indeed worldwide , whose span exceeded the 40 m mark . 
 The whole project ( including the three failed attempts ) cost the architect a total of £ 1 @,@ 153 18s . 2d . ( approximately £ 1 @,@ 153 @.@ 91 ) , and consequently he made a loss of over £ 600 . It was reported that Edwards ' attempts to build the bridge over the River Taff left him in a considerable amount of debt and Thomas Morgan reported that " … the mason was considerably in debt and greatly discouraged . But the Lords Talbot and Windsor , who have estates in the neighbourhood pitied his case , and being willing to encourage such an enterprising genius , most generously promoted a subscription among the gentry in those parts . " 
 = = Subsequent history = = 
 The problem with the Old Bridge was that it was so steep that it made it very difficult to get horse carts to go across it . By 1857 , a new bridge , the Victoria Bridge , was built next to the Old Bridge , which was paid for by the people of Pontypridd . The Victoria Bridge is a three @-@ arch bridge , that was built by Thomas Jenkins , this overcame many of the problems with the steepness of the Old Bridge . 
 Since the bridge was opened in 1756 , it has become the subject for many landscape artists , including Richard Wilson and Turner . 
 The Old Bridge is now a scheduled monument and is also depicted in two emblems of local rugby union teams ; Pontypridd RFC and Cilfynydd RFC . Artist Lulu Quinn was commissioned by Rhondda Cynon Taf County Borough Council to illuminate the Old Bridge as part of a regeneration programme for Pontypridd called the Monument Illumination Scheme . Initial tests to illuminate the bridge took place on 19 August 2008 , and the project has subsequently been officially launched after the tests were successful . 
 = = Bridge imagery = = 
 Representations of William Edwards ' Bridge can be seen in local heraldic and civic stationery , including the crest of Pontypridd Rugby Football Club , and Cilfynydd Rugby Football Club . The community @-@ to @-@ community organisation <unk> ( Partnerships Overseas Networking Trust ) , also bases its logo upon the Bridge . Pontypridd High School in Cilfynydd incorporates the bridge design into the school shield , as does Pontypridd Town Council with its logo representing the south Wales Valleys and a section of the Old Bridge in the foreground . Pontypridd Male Voice Choir also incorporates the Old Bridge in the choir logo . 
 = Constantine Lekapenos = 
 Constantine Lekapenos or Lecapenus ( Greek : Κωνσταντίνος <unk> ) was the third son of the Byzantine emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) , and co @-@ emperor from 924 to 945 . With his elder brother Stephen , he deposed Romanos I in December 944 , but was overthrown and exiled by the legitimate emperor Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) a few weeks later . Constantine was exiled to the island of Samothrace , where he was killed while attempting to escape sometime between 946 and 948 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Constantine was one of the youngest sons of Romanos I and his wife Theodora . Theophanes Continuatus mentions him as the youngest son of the imperial couple , while the 11th @-@ century chronicler George Kedrenos mentions him as the third of four known sons . His older brothers were Christopher Lekapenos ( co @-@ emperor 921 – 931 ) and Stephen Lekapenos ( co @-@ emperor 924 @-@ 945 ) . It is unclear if Theophylact ( Patriarch of Constantinople in 933 – 956 ) was his younger brother or slightly older than he was . His sisters included Helena , who married Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos ( r . 913 – 959 ) , and Agatha , who married Romanos Argyros . He probably also had at least two unnamed sisters , known only because of their marriages to the <unk> Romanos Mosele and Romanos <unk> . 
 = = = Reign = = = 
 Romanos Lekapenos had risen to power in 919 , when he had managed to appoint himself regent over the young Constantine VII and marry his daughter Helena to him . Within a year , he successively rose from basileopator to Caesar , and was eventually crowned senior emperor on 17 December 920 . To consolidate his hold on power , and with a view of supplanting the ruling Macedonian dynasty with his own family , he raised his eldest son Christopher to co @-@ emperor in May 921 , while Stephen and Constantine were proclaimed co @-@ emperors on 25 December 924 . 
 Following Christopher 's early death in 931 , and given Constantine VII 's de facto sidelining , Stephen and Constantine assumed an increased prominence , although formally they still ranked after their brother @-@ in @-@ law in the college of emperors . In 939 , Constantine married his first wife Helena , a daughter of the patrikios Adrian , an Armenian . 
 Symeon Magister records the death of Helena on 14 January 940 , and on 2 February of the same year , Constantine married his second wife , Theophano Mamas . Constantine had a son , named Romanos , but it is not recorded by which of his two wives . This Romanos was castrated in 945 , after the Lekapenoi lost power , to prevent him from claiming the Byzantine throne . He nevertheless pursued a career in the court , eventually reaching the rank of patrikios and the post of Eparch of Constantinople . 
 Stephen and Constantine Lekapenos came to the fore in 943 , when they opposed a dynastic marriage for their nephew , Romanos II . Their father wanted to have his eldest surviving grandson married to Euphrosyne , a daughter of his successful general John Kourkouas . Although such a union would effectively cement the loyalty of the army , it would also strengthen the position of the legitimate Macedonian line , represented by Romanos II and his father Constantine VII , over the imperial claims of Romanos 's own sons . Predictably , Stephen and Constantine opposed this decision , and prevailed upon their father , who was by this time ill and old , to dismiss Kourkouas in the autumn of 944 . Romanos II instead married Bertha , an illegitimate daughter of Hugh of Arles , King of Italy , who changed her name to Eudokia after her marriage . 
 With Romanos I approaching the end of his life , the matter of his succession became urgent . In 943 , Romanos drafted a will which would leave Constantine VII as the senior emperor following his death . This greatly upset his two sons , who feared that their brother @-@ in @-@ law would have them deposed and force them to take monastic vows . Motivated , in the opinion of Steven Runciman , partially by self @-@ preservation and partially from genuine ambition , they started planning to seize power through a coup d 'état , with Stephen apparently the ringleader and Constantine a rather reluctant partner . 
 Their fellow conspirators included Marianos Argyros , the protospatharios Basil Peteinos , Manuel Kourtikes , the strategos Diogenes , <unk> , and Philip . Kedrenos , however , considers Peteinos to have served as an agent of Constantine VII among the conspirators . On 20 December 944 , the conspirators set their plans in motion . The two brothers smuggled their supporters in the Great Palace of Constantinople during the midday break in palace activities . They then led their men into the chamber of Romanos I , where they easily captured the " ill old man " . They were able to transport him to the nearest harbour and from there to Prote , one of the Princes ' Islands and a popular place of exile . There , Romanos agreed to take monastic vows and retire from the throne . 
 Having managed to quietly depose their father , the brothers now had to deal with Constantine VII . Unfortunately for them , rumours soon spread around Constantinople , to the effect that , following Romanos 's deposition , Constantine VII 's life was in danger . Before long , crowds gathered before the palace , demanding to see their emperor in person . The contemporary Lombard historian Liutprand of Cremona notes that the ambassadors and envoys from Amalfi , Gaeta , Rome , and Provence present in the capital also supported Constantine VII . Stephen and his brother had to succumb to the inevitable , recognizing their brother @-@ in @-@ law as the senior emperor . 
 The new triumvirate lasted for about 40 days . The three emperors soon appointed new leaders for the military services . Bardas Phokas the Elder was appointed as the new Domestic of the Schools , and Constantine Gongyles as head of the Byzantine navy . Stephen and his brother managed to reward their fellow conspirators . Peteinos became patrikios and Great <unk> , Argyros was appointed Count of the Stable , Kourtikes a patrikios and droungarios of the Watch . 
 On 26 January 945 , however , at the urging of their sister , the Augusta Helena , another coup removed the two Lekapenoi from power under the accusation that they attempted to poison Constantine VII , and restored the sole imperial authority to the latter . 
 = = = Exile and death = = = 
 Initially , the two brothers were sent to Prote . The Byzantine chroniclers have their father welcoming them by quoting a passage from the Book of Isaiah , specifically Chapter 1 @.@ 2 : " Hear , O heavens , and give ear , O earth ; for Jehovah hath spoken : I have nourished and brought up children , and they have rebelled against me . " Liutprand of Cremona , however , gives a slightly different account , having Romanos I receive his sons with bitter sarcasm , thanking them for not neglecting him and begging them to excuse the monks for their ignorance on how to properly receive emperors . 
 Constantine was soon transported to Tenedos , and then to Samothrace . He was ultimately killed while attempting to escape the island . The exact date is unknown , but since Theophanes Continuatus claims that the exiled Romanos I saw a nightmare featuring his son 's descent to Hell at the time of Constantine 's death , it can be placed between 946 and Romanos 's own death in 948 . 
 = Streptococcal pharyngitis = 
 Streptococcal pharyngitis , also known as strep throat , is an infection of the back of the throat including the tonsils caused by group A streptococcus . Common symptoms include fever , sore throat , red tonsils , and enlarged lymph nodes in the neck . A headache , and nausea or vomiting may also occur . Some develop a sandpaper @-@ like rash which is known as scarlet fever . Symptoms typically begin one to three days after exposure and last seven to ten days . 
 Strep throat is spread by respiratory droplets from an infected person . It may be spread directly or by touching something that has droplets on it and then touching the mouth , nose , or eyes . Some people may carry the bacteria without symptoms . It may also be spread by skin infected with group A strep . The diagnosis is made based on the results of a rapid antigen detection test or throat culture in those who have symptoms . 
 Prevention is by washing hands and not sharing eating utensils . There is no vaccine for the disease . Treatment with antibiotics is only recommended in those with a confirmed diagnosis . Those infected should stay away from other people for at least 24 hours after starting treatment . Pain can be treated with paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) and non @-@ steroidal antiinflammatory drugs ( NSAIDS ) such as ibuprofen . 
 Strep throat is a common bacterial infection in children . It is the cause of 15 – 40 % of sore throats among children and 5 – 15 % among adults . Cases are more common in late winter and early spring . Potential complications include rheumatic fever and peritonsillar abscess . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The typical symptoms of streptococcal pharyngitis are a sore throat , fever of greater than 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) , tonsillar exudates ( pus on the tonsils ) , and large cervical lymph nodes . 
 Other symptoms include : headache , nausea and vomiting , abdominal pain , muscle pain , or a <unk> rash or palatal petechiae , the latter being an uncommon but highly specific finding . 
 Symptoms typically begin one to three days after exposure and last seven to ten days . 
 Strep throat is unlikely when any of the symptoms of red eyes , hoarseness , runny nose , or mouth ulcers are present . It is also unlikely when there is no fever . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Strep throat is caused by group A beta @-@ hemolytic streptococcus ( GAS or S. pyogenes ) . Other bacteria such as non – group A beta @-@ hemolytic streptococci and <unk> may also cause pharyngitis . It is spread by direct , close contact with an infected person ; thus crowding , as may be found in the military and schools , increases the rate of transmission . Dried bacteria in dust are not infectious , although moist bacteria on toothbrushes or similar items can persist for up to fifteen days . Contaminated food can result in outbreaks , but this is rare . Of children with no signs or symptoms , 12 % carry GAS in their pharynx , and , after treatment , approximately 15 % of those remain positive , and are true " carriers " . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 A number of scoring systems exist to help with diagnosis ; however , their use is controversial due to insufficient accuracy . The modified <unk> criteria are a set of five criteria ; the total score indicates the probability of a streptococcal infection . 
 One point is given for each of the criteria : 
 Absence of a cough 
 Swollen and tender cervical lymph nodes 
 Temperature > 38 @.@ 0 ° C ( 100 @.@ 4 ° F ) 
 <unk> exudate or swelling 
 Age less than 15 ( a point is subtracted if age > 44 ) 
 A score of one may indicated no treatment or culture is needed , or it may indicate the need to perform further testing if other high risk factors exist , such as a family member having the disease . 
 The Infectious Disease Society of America recommends against empirical treatment and considers antibiotics only appropriate when given after a positive test . Testing is not needed in children under three as both group A strep and rheumatic fever are rare , unless a child has a sibling with the disease . 
 = = = Laboratory testing = = = 
 A throat culture is the gold standard for the diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis , with a sensitivity of 90 – 95 % . A rapid strep test ( also called rapid antigen detection testing or RADT ) may also be used . While the rapid strep test is quicker , it has a lower sensitivity ( 70 % ) and statistically equal specificity ( 98 % ) as a throat culture . In areas of the world where rheumatic fever is uncommon , a negative rapid strep test is sufficient to rule out the disease . 
 A positive throat culture or RADT in association with symptoms establishes a positive diagnosis in those in which the diagnosis is in doubt . In adults , a negative RADT is sufficient to rule out the diagnosis . However , in children a throat culture is recommended to confirm the result . Asymptomatic individuals should not be routinely tested with a throat culture or RADT because a certain percentage of the population persistently " carries " the streptococcal bacteria in their throat without any harmful results . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 As the symptoms of streptococcal pharyngitis overlap with other conditions , it can be difficult to make the diagnosis clinically . Coughing , nasal discharge , diarrhea , and red , irritated eyes in addition to fever and sore throat are more indicative of a viral sore throat than of strep throat . The presence of marked lymph node enlargement along with sore throat , fever , and tonsillar enlargement may also occur in infectious mononucleosis . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 <unk> may be a reasonable preventive measure in those with frequent throat infections ( more than three a year ) . However , the benefits are small and episodes typically lessen in time regardless of measures taken . Recurrent episodes of pharyngitis which test positive for GAS may also represent a person who is a chronic carrier of GAS who is getting recurrent viral infections . Treating people who have been exposed but who are without symptoms is not recommended . Treating people who are carriers of GAS is not recommended as the risk of spread and complications is low . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Untreated streptococcal pharyngitis usually resolves within a few days . Treatment with antibiotics shortens the duration of the acute illness by about 16 hours . The primary reason for treatment with antibiotics is to reduce the risk of complications such as rheumatic fever and retropharyngeal abscesses ; antibiotics are effective if given within 9 days of the onset of symptoms . 
 = = = Analgesics = = = 
 Analgesics such as non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) and paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) help significantly in the management of pain associated with strep throat . <unk> lidocaine may also be useful . While steroids may help with the pain , they are not routinely recommended . Aspirin may be used in adults but is not recommended in children due to the risk of Reye 's syndrome . 
 = = = Antibiotics = = = 
 The antibiotic of choice in the United States for streptococcal pharyngitis is penicillin V , due to safety , cost , and effectiveness . Amoxicillin is preferred in Europe . In India , where the risk of rheumatic fever is higher , intramuscular benzathine penicillin G is the first choice for treatment . 
 Appropriate antibiotics decrease the average 3 – 5 day duration of symptoms by about one day , and also reduce <unk> . They are primarily prescribed to reduce rare complications such as rheumatic fever and peritonsillar abscess . The arguments in favour of antibiotic treatment should be balanced by the consideration of possible side effects , and it is reasonable to suggest that no antimicrobial treatment be given to healthy adults who have adverse reactions to medication . Antibiotics are prescribed for strep throat at a higher rate than would be expected from its prevalence . 
 <unk> and other macrolides or clindamycin are recommended for people with severe penicillin allergies . First @-@ generation cephalosporins may be used in those with less severe allergies and some evidence supports cephalosporins as superior to penicillin . Streptococcal infections may also lead to acute glomerulonephritis ; however , the incidence of this side effect is not reduced by the use of antibiotics . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The symptoms of strep throat usually improve within three to five days , irrespective of treatment . Treatment with antibiotics reduces the risk of complications and transmission ; children may return to school 24 hours after antibiotics are administered . The risk of complications in adults is low . In children , acute rheumatic fever is rare in most of the developed world . It is , however , the leading cause of acquired heart disease in India , sub @-@ Saharan Africa and some parts of Australia . 
 Complications arising from streptococcal throat infections include : 
 The economic cost of the disease in the United States in children is approximately $ 350 million annually . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 <unk> , the broader category into which Streptococcal pharyngitis falls , is diagnosed in 11 million people annually in the United States . It is the cause of 15 – 40 % of sore throats among children and 5 – 15 % in adults . Cases usually occur in late winter and early spring . 
 = Typhoon Rammasun ( 2002 ) = 
 Typhoon Rammasun , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Florita , was the first of four typhoons to contribute to heavy rainfall and deadly flooding in the Philippines in July 2002 . The fifth tropical cyclone of the 2002 Pacific typhoon season , Rammasun developed around the same time as Typhoon Chataan , only further to the west . The storm tracked northwestward toward Taiwan , and on July 2 it attained its peak intensity with winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Rammasun turned northward , passing east of Taiwan and China . In Taiwan , the outer rainbands dropped rainfall that alleviated drought conditions . In China , the rainfall occurred after previously wet conditions , resulting in additional flooding , although damage was less than expected ; there was about $ 85 million in crop and fishery damage in one province . 
 After affecting Taiwan and China , Rammasun began weakening due to an approaching trough , which turned the typhoon northeastward . It passed over the Japanese island of Miyako @-@ jima and also produced strong winds in Okinawa . About 10 @,@ 000 houses lost power on the island , and high surf killed two sailors . On the Japanese mainland , there was light crop damage and one serious injury . After weakening to a tropical storm , Rammasun passed just west of the South Korean island of Cheju @-@ do , killing one person from high waves . The storm crossed the country , killing three others and leaving $ 9 @.@ 5 million in damage . High rains also affected North Korea and Primorsky Krai in the Russian Far East . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Toward the end of June , the monsoon trough extended across the western North Pacific Ocean just north of the equator , spawning two tropical disturbances . The easternmost one eventually developed into Typhoon Chataan , and the western disturbance persisted to the east of Palau with an associated area of convection . The system gradually organized , developing a weak circulation after wind shear steadily decreased . Early on June 28 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression near Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . At the same time , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) declared the system as Tropical Depression Florita , and a few hours later the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated advisories on Tropical Depression 09W . 
 After forming , the depression tracked northwestward , influenced by a ridge to the northeast , although it briefly turned to the northeast due to an increase in westerly winds ; however , its northwest motion quickly resumed . A trough over the Philippine Sea increased outflow over the depression , and the convection became better organized . Early on June 29 , the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Rammasun . While moving northwestward , the circulation initially remained broad and disorganized , located east of the cycling convection . However , Rammasun steadily intensified , and an eye developed on July 1 . That day , the JMA and the JTWC upgraded the storm to a typhoon about 930 km ( 575 mi ) east of Luzon in the Philippines . The typhoon continued strengthening , developing concentric eyewalls with well @-@ defined rainbands . At 1500 UTC on July 2 , the JMA estimated peak 10 minute sustained winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Early on July 3 , the JTWC estimated 1 minute sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) about 350 km ( 220 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Okinawa , or 510 km ( 315 mi ) southeast of Taiwan . 
 While at peak intensity , Rammasun turned northward , steered around the subtropical ridge to its east , and early on July 3 it struck the Japanese island of Miyako @-@ jima . A stationary trough over China weakened the convection on the western periphery of the typhoon , and the eye gradually became less organized . On July 4 , Rammasun began weakening , and by 0000 UTC on July 5 it was located about 280 km ( 175 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Shanghai as a minimal typhoon . Shortly thereafter , Rammasun weakened to tropical <unk> status . An approaching trough caused the storm to accelerate to the northeast , which weakened the convection and left the circulation exposed . Around 2200 UTC on July 5 , Rammasun made landfall in South Korea , near <unk> or about 70 km ( 45 mi ) northwest of the country ’ s capital of Seoul . The JTWC estimated that the landfall intensity was around 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . The storm quickly crossed the country , and although the JTWC considered Rammasun dissipated early on July 6 over the country , the JMA continued tracking the storm toward the northeast , declaring the storm extratropical at 1200 UTC that day . Early on July 8 , the JMA reported that the remnants of Rammasun dissipated to the south of Vladivostok . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Rammasun moved away from the Philippines , it enhanced the monsoon and produced rainfall and flooding . Several landslides were reported , and more than 3 @,@ 000 people had to evacuate . Subsequent storms also enhanced the monsoon , and combined with the effects from Typhoon Chataan , Severe Tropical Storm Nakri , and Typhoon Halong , there were 85 deaths , with 45 people injured in the Philippines . The combined damage in the country totaled $ 10 @.@ 3 million ( ₱ 522 million 2002 PHP ) . 
 Before the typhoon affected Taiwan , residents in Taipei prepared sand bags , and President Chen Shui @-@ bian ordered the military to be on standby to assist in the storm 's aftermath . Taiwan 's Central Weather Bureau issued an offshore typhoon warning on July 2 , prompting officials to cancel ferry service and restrict water activities in Kenting National Park . After an extended drought that resulted in water restrictions for two months , the typhoon dropped rainfall across the country . In Miaoli County , Rammasun dropped 681 mm ( 26 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall , the highest total on the island . The rains caused landslides in two villages , although damage was minor . On July 4 , the water restrictions were removed island @-@ wide , with the exception of Taipei ; the city 's restriction was removed a day later after determining that the Feitsui Dam and the Shihmen Dam reached levels approaching their full capacity . 
 In contrast to the previously dry conditions on Taiwan , eastern China was experiencing above @-@ normal rainfall , and many reservoirs were near capacity when Rammasun was approaching the region . While paralleling the eastern coast of China , Rammasun dropped heavy rainfall that reached 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) in Ningbo , and wind gusts peaked at 165 km / h ( 102 mph ) in eastern Zhejiang . Officials canceled 200 flights either departing or arriving from Shanghai Pudong International Airport . High winds destroyed a migrant worker village in Shanghai , killing five people . The winds damaged a building that was under construction , injuring 44 people . A woman was killed in Chongming when winds knocked a wall onto her . Rammasun downed trees and caused power outages in the region , and storm flooding forced over 2 @,@ 700 people to evacuate . High winds left about $ 85 million in agriculture and aquaculture damage in Zhejiang ; however , damage was less than expected due to the storm remaining offshore . 
 Striking the Japanese island of Miyako @-@ jima , the typhoon produced peak wind gusts of 169 km / h ( 105 mph ) while in the eyewall , with sustained winds of 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) . Similarly strong winds were reported near Okinawa , reaching 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) . High seas from the typhoon killed two United States Navy sailors . In Okinawa , Rammasun left about 10 @,@ 000 houses without power . Two people were injured in the country , one of them severely . A station in Miyazaki Prefecture on the Japanese island of Kyushu reported the highest rainfall associated with Rammasun , with a total of 290 mm ( 11 in ) . One house in the country was damaged due to the typhoon , and there was at least one report of a landslide . Crop damage in the country totaled $ 4 @.@ 4 million ( ¥ 896 million 2002 JPY ) . The threat of the storm prompted officials to cancel 61 airplane flights . 
 Typhoon Rammasun passed a short distance west of Cheju @-@ do , an island offshore South Korea , dropping more than 300 mm ( 12 in ) of rainfall . High surf killed one person on the island , and officials restricted access to <unk> mountain and all parks . Seven boats were damaged , and many roads on the island were flooded . Before Rammasun struck the South Korean mainland , airline officials canceled 167 flights . There were three deaths on the mainland , including one boy who drowned in floodwaters . Damage in the country totaled $ 9 @.@ 5 million , much of it property damage ; there was also damage to the rice crop . Rainfall extended into neighboring North Korea , damaging rice and maize . Later , Rammasun brought the average monthly rainfall in only two days in portions of Primorsky Krai , causing flooding along roads and riverways . 
 = Truthiness = 
 Truthiness is a quality characterizing a " truth " that a person making an argument or assertion claims to know intuitively " from the gut " or because it " feels right " without regard to evidence , logic , intellectual examination , or facts . 
 American television comedian Stephen Colbert coined the word in this meaning as the subject of a segment called " The Wørd " during the pilot episode of his political satire program The Colbert Report on October 17 , 2005 . By using this as part of his routine , Colbert satirized the misuse of appeal to emotion and " gut feeling " as a rhetorical device in contemporaneous socio @-@ political discourse . He particularly applied it to U.S. President George W. Bush 's nomination of Harriet Miers to the Supreme Court and the decision to invade Iraq in 2003 . Colbert later ascribed truthiness to other institutions and organizations , including Wikipedia . Colbert has sometimes used a Dog Latin version of the term , " <unk> " . For example , in Colbert 's " Operation Iraqi Stephen : Going Commando " the word " <unk> " can be seen on the banner above the eagle on the operation 's seal . 
 Truthiness , although a " stunt word " , was named Word of the Year for 2005 by the American Dialect Society and for 2006 by Merriam @-@ Webster . Linguist and OED consultant Benjamin Zimmer pointed out that the word truthiness already had a history in literature and appears in the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) , as a derivation of truthy , and The Century Dictionary , both of which indicate it as rare or dialectal , and to be defined more straightforwardly as " truthfulness , faithfulness " . Responding to claims , Colbert explained the origin of his word as : " Truthiness is a word I pulled right out of my <unk> " . 
 = = Use by Stephen Colbert = = 
 Stephen Colbert , portraying his character Dr. Stephen T. Colbert , chose the word truthiness just moments before taping the premiere episode of The Colbert Report on October 17 , 2005 , after deciding that the originally scripted word – " truth " – was not absolutely ridiculous enough . " We 're not talking about truth , we 're talking about something that seems like truth – the truth we want to exist " , he explained . He introduced his definition in the first segment of the episode , saying : " Now I 'm sure some of the ' word police ' , the ' <unk> ' over at Webster 's are gonna say , ' Hey , that 's not a word ' . Well , anybody who knows me knows I 'm no fan of dictionaries or reference books . They 're elitist . Constantly telling us what is or isn 't true . Or what did or didn 't happen . " 
 When asked in an out @-@ of @-@ character interview with The Onion 's A.V. Club for his views on " the ' truthiness ' imbroglio that 's tearing our country apart " , Colbert elaborated on the critique he intended to convey with the word : 
 Truthiness is tearing apart our country , and I don 't mean the argument over who came up with the word ... 
 It used to be , everyone was entitled to their own opinion , but not their own facts . But that 's not the case anymore . Facts matter not at all . Perception is everything . It 's certainty . People love the President [ George W. Bush ] because he 's certain of his choices as a leader , even if the facts that back him up don 't seem to exist . It 's the fact that he 's certain that is very appealing to a certain section of the country . I really feel a dichotomy in the American populace . What is important ? What you want to be true , or what is true ? ... 
 Truthiness is ' What I say is right , and [ nothing ] anyone else says could possibly be true . ' It 's not only that I feel it to be true , but that I feel it to be true . There 's not only an emotional quality , but there 's a selfish quality . 
 During an interview on December 8 , 2006 , with Charlie Rose , Colbert stated : 
 I was thinking of the idea of passion and emotion and certainty over information . And what you feel in your gut , as I said in the first Wørd we did , which was sort of a thesis statement of the whole show – however long it lasts – is that sentence , that one word , that 's more important to , I think , the public at large , and not just the people who provide it in prime @-@ time cable , than information . 
 On his April 2 , 2009 episode of the Colbert Report , Colbert added an addendum to the definition : a word so straight that it drives men wild . 
 = = Coverage by news media = = 
 After Colbert 's introduction of truthiness , it quickly became widely used and recognized . Six days after , CNN 's Reliable Sources featured a discussion of The Colbert Report by host Howard Kurtz , who played a clip of Colbert 's definition . On the same day , ABC 's Nightline also reported on truthiness , prompting Colbert to respond by saying : " You know what was missing from that piece ? Me . Stephen Colbert . But I 'm not surprised . Nightline 's on opposite me ... " 
 Within a few months of its introduction by Colbert , truthiness was discussed in The New York Times , The Washington Post , USA Weekly , the San Francisco Chronicle , the Chicago Tribune , Newsweek , CNN , MSNBC , Fox News , the Associated Press , Editor & Publisher , Salon , The Huffington Post , Chicago Reader , CNET , and on ABC 's Nightline , CBS 's 60 Minutes , and The Oprah Winfrey Show . 
 The February 13 , 2006 , issue of Newsweek featured an article on The Colbert Report titled " The Truthiness Teller " , recounting the career of the word truthiness since its popularization by Colbert . 
 = = = The New York Times coverage and usage = = = 
 In its October 25 , 2005 , issue , eight days after the premiere episode of the Report , The New York Times ran its third article on The Colbert Report , " Bringing Out the Absurdity of the News " . The article specifically discussed the segment on " truthiness " , although the Times misreported the word as " <unk> " . In its November 1 , 2005 issue , the Times ran a correction . On the next episode of the Report , Colbert took the Times to task for the error , pointing out , ironically , that " <unk> " is " not even a word " . 
 In its December 25 , 2005 , issue , The New York Times again discussed " truthiness " , this time as one of nine words that had captured the year 's zeitgeist , in an article titled " 2005 : In a Word ; Truthiness " by Jacques Steinberg . In crediting truthiness , Steinberg said , " the pundit who probably drew the most attention in 2005 was only playing one on TV : Stephen Colbert " . 
 In the January 22 , 2006 issue , columnist Frank Rich used the term seven times , with credit to Colbert , in a column titled " Truthiness 101 : From Frey to Alito " , to discuss Republican portrayals of several issues ( including the Samuel Alito nomination , the Bush administration 's response to Hurricane Katrina , and Jack Murtha 's Vietnam War record ) . Rich emphasized the extent to which the word had quickly become a cultural fixture , writing , " The mock Comedy Central pundit Stephen Colbert 's slinging of the word ' truthiness ' caught on instantaneously last year precisely because we live in the age of truthiness . " Editor & Publisher reported on Rich 's use of " truthiness " in his column , saying he " tackled the growing trend to ' truthiness , ' as opposed to truth , in the U.S. " 
 The New York Times published two letters on the 2006 White House Correspondents ' Dinner , where Stephen Colbert was the featured guest , in its May 3 , 2006 edition , under the headline " Truthiness and Power " . 
 Frank Rich referenced truthiness again in The New York Times in 2008 , describing the strategy of John McCain 's presidential campaign as being " to envelop the entire presidential race in a thick fog of truthiness " , Rich explained that the campaign was based on truthiness because " McCain , Sarah Palin and their surrogates keep repeating the same lies over and over not just to smear their opponents and not just to mask their own record . Their larger aim is to construct a bogus alternative reality so relentless it can overwhelm any haphazard journalistic stabs at puncturing it . " Rich also noted , " You know the press is impotent at unmasking this truthiness when the hardest @-@ hitting interrogation McCain has yet faced on television came on ' The View ' . Barbara Walters and Joy Behar called him on several falsehoods , including his endlessly repeated fantasy that Palin opposed earmarks for Alaska . Behar used the word ' lies ' to his face . " 
 = = Widespread recognition = = 
 Usage of " truthiness " continued to proliferate in media , politics , and public consciousness . On January 5 , 2006 , etymology professor Anatoly Liberman began an hour @-@ long program on public radio by discussing truthiness and predicting that it would be included in dictionaries in the next year or two . His prediction seemed to be on track when , the next day , the American Dialect Society announced that " truthiness " was its 2005 Word of the Year , and the website of the Macmillan English Dictionary featured truthiness as its Word of the Week a few weeks later . Truthiness was also selected by The New York Times as one of nine words that captured the spirit of 2005 . Global Language Monitor , which tracks trends in languages , named truthiness the top television buzzword of 2006 , and another term Colbert coined with reference to truthiness , <unk> , as another of the top ten television buzzwords of 2006 , the first time two words from the same show have made the list . 
 The word was listed in the annual " Banished Word List " released by a committee at Lake Superior State University in Sault Ste . Marie , Michigan in 2007 . The list included " truthiness " among other overused terms , such as " awesome " celebrity couple portmanteaus such as " Brangelina " , and " <unk> " . In response , on January 8 , 2007 Colbert stated that Lake Superior State University was an " attention @-@ seeking second @-@ tier state university " . The 2008 List of Banished Words restored " truthiness " to formal usage , in response to the 2007 @-@ 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . 
 = = = American Dialect Society 's Word of the Year = = = 
 On January 6 , 2006 , the American Dialect Society announced that " truthiness " was selected as its 2005 Word of the Year . The Society described its rationale as follows : 
 In its 16th annual words of the year vote , the American Dialect Society voted truthiness as the word of the year . First heard on The Colbert Report , a satirical mock news show on the Comedy Central television channel , truthiness refers to the quality of preferring concepts or facts one wishes or believes to be true , rather than concepts or facts known to be true . As Stephen Colbert put it , " I don 't trust books . They 're all fact , no heart . " 
 = = = Merriam @-@ Webster 's Word of the Year = = = 
 On December 10 , 2006 the Merriam @-@ Webster Dictionary announced that " truthiness " was selected as its 2006 Word of the Year on Merriam @-@ Webster 's Words of the Year , based on a reader poll , by a 5 – 1 margin over the second @-@ place word google . " We 're at a point where what constitutes truth is a question on a lot of people 's minds , and truth has become up for grabs " , said Merriam @-@ Webster president John Morse . " ' Truthiness ' is a playful way for us to think about a very important issue . " However , despite winning Word of the Year , the word does not appear in the 2006 edition of the Merriam @-@ Webster English Dictionary . In response to this omission , during " The Wørd " segment on December 12 , 2006 Colbert issued a new page 1344 for the tenth edition of the Merriam Webster dictionary that featured " truthiness " . To make room for the definition of " truthiness " , including a portrait of Colbert , the definition for the word " try " was removed with Colbert stating " Sorry , try . Maybe you should have tried harder . " He also sarcastically told viewers to " not " download the new page and " not " glue it in the new dictionary in libraries and schools . 
 = = = The New York Times crossword puzzle = = = 
 In the June 14 , 2008 edition of The New York Times , the word was featured as 1 @-@ across in the crossword puzzle . Colbert mentioned this during the last segment on the June 18 episode of The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , and declared himself the " King of the Crossword " . 
 = = = BBC " portrait of the decade " = = = 
 In December 2009 , the BBC online magazine asked its readers to nominate suggestions of things to be included on a poster which would represent important events in the 2000s ( decade ) , divided into five different categories : " People " , " Words " , " News " , " Objects " and " Culture " . Suggestions were sent in and a panel of five independent experts shortened each category to what they saw as the 20 most important . Among the nominations selected in the " Words " category was " Truthiness " . As a result , the word " Truthiness " appeared in the poster . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 In 2012 , a study examining truthiness was carried out by PhD student <unk> Newman of Victoria University of Wellington . The experiments showed that people are more likely to believe that a claim is true regardless of evidence when a decorative photograph appears alongside it . 
 = = Use in political and social commentary = = 
 = = = Kitty Genovese case retrospective = = = 
 As noted by Jesse Singal in an April 5 , 2016 piece " How the False Story of Kitty Genovese ’ s Murder Went Viral " in New York Magazine upon the death of Kitty Genovese 's murderer , the entire escalation of a myth surrounding the murder , alleging that 38 people had been silent witnesses allowing a vicious death to proceed in front of them , was attributable to the myth 's appeal to " truthiness " ( grounded in fear - of insecurity and lack of community spirit ) over full investigation into actual truth : 
 " Today , of course , there is exponentially more news coverage than there was in 1964 — not to mention exponentially more attempts to slot attention @-@ getting events into simple , truthy stories about human nature . The gap between the famous version of the Genovese story and the true one , then , is worth remembering , if only as a check on our natural tendency to hear a story and then nod along and say , ' Of course that ’ s what happened ! ' ” 
 = = = James Frey controversy = = = 
 The Chicago Tribune published an editorial in its January 16 , 2006 issue titled " The Truthiness Hurts " , crediting the rise of truthiness as serendipitously providing an apt description of the Oprah Book Club controversy over James Frey 's fictionalized " memoir " , A Million Little Pieces . Truthiness was also used to describe the controversy over the factual accuracy of Frey 's book by USA Today in its January 15 , 2006 issue , by several other publications including The New York Times , and by the television news program Nightline on its October 23 and January 26 editions . 
 Oprah Winfrey also discussed truthiness with Frank Rich on her show , in reference to the Frey controversy and the column " Truthiness 101 " Rich had recently published in The New York Times . They also mentioned Colbert 's role in making the word " truthiness " . 
 On January 27 , MSNBC ran a commentary titled " Oprah strikes a blow for truthiness : Do facts really matter ? Ask Winfrey , James Frey or Stephen Colbert " , making the case that Winfrey 's about @-@ face on Frey 's book was a " small ( and belated ) but bold nudge back out of the proud halls of truthiness " , but also opportunistic and too little too late . 
 = = = In the Canadian Parliament = = = 
 In 2006 , Liberal Party of Canada leadership contender Ken Dryden used truthiness as an extensive theme in a speech in the House of Commons . The speech dealt critically with the Harper government 's Universal Child Care Plan . Dryden defined truthiness as " something that is spoken as if true that one wants others to believe is true , that said often enough with enough voices orchestrated in behind it , might even sound true , but is not true . " 
 The transcript of all debates in the House ( Hansard ) is made available in both official languages ; the translators into French chose to render " truthiness " as <unk> vérité ( " false truth " ) . 
 = = = Alleged snubbing by the Associated Press , and Colbert 's response = = = 
 The Associated Press reported on the American Dialect Society 's selection of truthiness as the Word of the Year , including the following comments by one of the voting linguists : 
 Michael Adams , a professor at North Carolina State University who specializes in <unk> , said " truthiness " means " truthy , not <unk> " . " The national argument right now is , one , ' Who 's got the truth ? ' and , two , ' Who 's got the facts ? ' " he said . " Until we can manage to get the two of them back together again , we 're not going to make much progress . " 
 On each of the first four episodes of the Report after the selection of truthiness as Word of the Year , Colbert lamented that news reports neglected to acknowledge him as the source of the word . On the first of these episodes , he added Michael Adams to his " On Notice " board , and Associated Press reporter Heather Clark , the author of the article , to his " Dead to Me " board . On the third of these episodes , he ranked the AP at the top of the " Threat @-@ Down " , one of few entries ever to gain the number one spot in place of bears . On the following episode he called Adams and asked for an apology . Though Adams never apologized , Colbert " accepted " his " apology " , but failed to take him " off notice " . 
 = = = = Associated Press response to Colbert = = = = 
 On January 13 , the first day after the four @-@ day run of criticism of the AP on the Report , the AP ran a story about The Colbert Report being upset about being snubbed by the AP , in an article titled " Colbert : AP the biggest threat to America " . As he has in the past , Colbert remained in character in an interview for the story , and used it to further the political satire of truthiness ; excerpts of the story are : 
 " When an AP story about the designation sent coast to coast failed to mention Colbert , he began a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek crusade , not unlike the kind his muse Bill O 'Reilly might lead in all seriousness . " 
 " ' It 's a sin of omission ... ' Stephen Colbert told the AP on Thursday ... ' It 's like Shakespeare still being alive and not asking him what Hamlet is about , ' he said . " 
 " The Oxford English Dictionary has a definition for ' truthy ' dating back to the 1800s .... ' The fact that they looked it up in a book just shows that they don 't get the idea of truthiness at all , ' Stephen Colbert said Thursday . ' You don 't look up truthiness in a book , you look it up in your gut . ' " 
 " Though slight , the difference of Colbert 's definition and the OED 's is essential . It 's not your typical truth , but , as The New York Times wrote , ' a summation of what [ Colbert ] sees as the guiding ethos of the loudest commentators on Fox News , MSNBC and CNN . ' " 
 " Colbert , who referred on his program to the AP omission as a ' journalistic travesty , ' said Thursday that it was similar to the much @-@ criticized weapons of mass destruction reporting leading up to the Iraq War . ' Except , ' he said , ' people got hurt this time . ' " 
 On January 14 , Clark herself responded in an article titled " Exclusive ' News ' — I 'm dead to Stephen Colbert " . She furthered the rise of " truthiness " in published English in conceding , " Truthiness be told , I never had seen The Colbert Report until my name graced its ' Dead to Me ' board this week ... But I will say that I watched Colbert 's show for the first time ... It was funny . And that 's not just truthy . That 's a fact . " 
 = = = Arianna Huffington = = = 
 On January 31 , 2006 , Arianna Huffington used truthiness in The Huffington Post . Huffington later appeared as a guest on the March 1 , 2006 , episode of The Colbert Report . She challenged Colbert on his claim that he had invented the word truthiness . During the interview , Colbert declared , " I 'm not a truthiness fanatic ; I 'm truthiness ' father . " Huffington corrected him , citing Wikipedia , that he had merely " popularized " the term . Regarding her source , Colbert responded : " Fuck them ! " 
 = = = President George W. Bush = = = 
 At the 2006 White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner , Colbert , the featured guest , described President Bush 's thought processes using the definition of truthiness . Editor and Publisher used " truthiness " to describe Colbert 's criticism of Bush , in an article published the same day titled " Colbert <unk> Bush at White House Correspondents Dinner — President Not Amused ? " E & P reported that the " blistering comedy ' tribute ' to President Bush ... left George and Laura Bush unsmiling at its close " and that many people at the dinner " looked a little uncomfortable at times , perhaps feeling the material was a little too biting — or too much speaking ' truthiness ' to power " . E & P reported a few days later that its coverage of Colbert at the dinner drew " possibly its highest one @-@ day traffic total ever " , and published a letter to the editor asserting that " Colbert brought truth wrapped in truthiness " . On the same weekend , The Washington Post and others also reported on the event . Six months later , in a column titled " Throw The Truthiness Bums Out " , The New York Times columnist Frank Rich called Colbert 's after @-@ dinner speech a " cultural primary " and christened it the " defining moment " of the United States ' 2006 midterm elections . 
 = = = Charles Krauthammer = = = 
 Conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer brought the term up in a discussion about President Obama on the show Fox News All @-@ Stars in June 2010 , saying : 
 What we see here is conditional truthiness . When the administration needs to say , oh , we knew how bad it was , it says it , and when it needs to say we had no idea how bad it was , it says it . It depends when it needs it ; it 'll invent a new truth . 
 = = = Cato Institute amicus brief = = = 
 In 2014 , the Cato Institute filed an amicus brief to the United States Supreme Court co @-@ authored by humorist P.J. O 'Rourke and legal scholar Ilya Shapiro in the Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus free speech case . The brief included an extended discussion of the role of truthiness in American political discourse : 
 In modern times , " truthiness " — a " truth " asserted " from the gut " or because it " feels right , " without regard to evidence or logic — is also a key part of political discourse . It is difficult to imagine life without it , and our political discourse is weakened by Orwellian laws that try to prohibit it . 
 After all , where would we be without the knowledge that Democrats are pinko @-@ communist flag @-@ burners who want to tax churches and use the money to fund abortions so they can use the fetal stem cells to create pot @-@ smoking lesbian ATF agents who will steal all the guns and invite the UN to take over America ? Voters have to decide whether we 'd be better off electing Republicans , those hateful , assault @-@ weapon @-@ wielding maniacs who believe that George Washington and Jesus Christ incorporated the nation after a Gettysburg reenactment and that the only thing wrong with the death penalty is that it isn 't administered quickly enough to secular @-@ humanist professors of Chicano studies . 
 = = " <unk> " = = 
 In a 2015 article in the American Economic Review " Papers and Proceedings " , the economist Paul Romer decried " <unk> in the Theory of Economic Growth " . Romer claims that mathematics is progressive in economics when it is rigorous and when the mathematical variables have a clear relationship to actual and plausibly measurable aspects of the economy . He writes that in growth theory today , both aspects are frequently missing and that the resulting use of mathematics is merely <unk> . 
 = TM and Cult Mania = 
 TM and Cult Mania is a non @-@ fiction book that examines assertions made by the Transcendental Meditation movement ( TM ) . The book is authored by Michael Persinger , Normand Carrey and Lynn Suess and published in 1980 by Christopher Publishing House . Persinger is a neurophysiologist and has worked out of Laurentian University . He trained as a psychologist and focused on the impacts of religious experience . Carrey is a medical doctor who specialized in psychiatry . He focused his studies into child psychiatry with research at Dalhousie University , and has taught physicians in a psychiatry residency program in the field of family therapy . Suess assisted Persinger in researching effects of geological phenomena on unidentified flying object sightings in Washington ; the two conducted similar research in Toronto and Ottawa . 
 TM and Cult Mania analyzes the efficacy or lack thereof of the TM meditation process , concluding that it is , " no more effective than many other meditation techniques " . The authors write that , " Transcendental Meditation has achieved international recognition through commercial exploitation " and " poor scientific procedures " . The book notes that physiological changes observed due to partaking in TM methodology are very small . Persinger , Carrey , and Suess conclude in TM and Cult Mania , " science has been used as a sham for propaganda by the TM movement . " 
 A positive capsule review in the Los Angeles Times noted that the authors use logic to point out transparencies in the assertions of Transcendental Meditation . John Horgan , in his book Rational Mysticism , questions Persinger 's neutrality and says that in his book he treats religious beliefs and spiritual practices as mental illness . 
 = = Authors = = 
 Michael Persinger is a neurophysiologist who has worked at Laurentian University in Greater Sudbury , Ontario , Canada . He trained as a psychologist and focused on the impacts of religious experience . Persinger is the author of the book Neuropsychological Basis of Human Belief , and since its publication he has researched and examined the physiological and neurological causes of religious belief systems . Normand Carrey received education as a medical doctor and specialized in psychiatry . He became a child psychiatrist , and worked out of Dalhousie University in Halifax , Canada . Carrey has conducted studies into psychological resilience , and has taught physicians in a psychiatry residency program in the field of family therapy . He has worked in the field of adolescent psychiatry at <unk> Health Centre . Lynn Suess assisted Persinger in 1980 , in researching geological phenomena which may have affected unidentified flying object sightings in Washington . Suess and Persinger performed similar research in Toronto and Ottawa . 
 = = Contents = = 
 TM and Cult Mania takes a look at the assertions made by the Transcendental Meditation movement and analyzes them from a scientific perspective . The book acknowledges that those who practice the Transcendental Meditation technique feel relaxed and experience an increase in creativity . According to the book , the physiological effects reported by the scientific studies on Transcendental Meditation are relatively small from a scientific perspective and " no more effective than many other meditation techniques " . Transcendental Meditation is seen as most noteworthy due to its ability to manipulate stress and expectancy . 
 " Transcendental Meditation has achieved international recognition through commercial exploitation " and " poor scientific procedures " , write the authors . The book notes , " Frankly , the reported effects of TM upon human behavior are trivial . Considering the alleged potency of the TM procedure , the changes in physiological and behavioral measures are conspicuously minute . " TM and Cult Mania comes to the conclusion that , " science has been used as a sham for propaganda by the TM movement . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 A capsule review of the book for the Los Angeles Times , Phil Freshman commented , " Using hard logic and crackling humor , a trio of Canadian laboratory researchers cogently deflates Transcendental Meditation ; they spotlight transparencies in its claims and warn of its latent hazards to those in wobbly mental health . " In his book Rational Mysticism , author John Horgan comments that although Persinger says he 's neutral toward religious belief , he 's more biased than other <unk> and that his two books " cast religious belief and spiritual practices in a psychopathological light " . 
 = Ride Me to Hell = 
 " Ride Me to Hell " is the third episode of the second season of the American animated television series Ugly Americans , and the seventeenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on July 14 , 2011 . In the episode , Grimes is outraged by the unsatisfying ending of his favorite television series , and Mark helps him unravel his attachment to the series while uncovering several deep @-@ seated memories . Meanwhile , Callie is expected to take over as the leader of Hell from her father , but is unwilling to do so . 
 The episode was written by Mike Rowe and directed by Aaron Augenblick and series creator Devin Clark . While the series ' first season mainly referenced horror films , " Ride Me to Hell " pays homage to 1970s cop shows . Clark used Grimes unleashing his memories from the 1970s as an opportunity to parody cop shows such as CHiPs and Starsky and Hutch . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Ride Me to Hell " was watched by 814 @,@ 000 viewers in its original airing , a slight drop in total viewership when compared to previous episodes . The episode received positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Frank Grimes ' favorite television series , Dishonorable Discharge , ends after six seasons and it is revealed that the entire series was just an angel 's dream . Grimes is outraged and determined to change the ending . Later , Mark Lilly tells his girlfriend , the half @-@ demon Callie Maggotbone , that he has not seen his father since his sixth birthday . Mark 's roommate , the zombie Randall , is touched by this and decides to document Mark 's journey to find his father , so that he can become a Hollywood director . Mark is assigned by Twayne Boneraper to investigate Grimes , who has been busting people who enjoyed the ending of Dishonorable Discharge . He and Randall ( who documents everything with his video camera ) ride along with Grimes . In a memory sequence of Grimes ' , it is revealed that he was a real cop in the 1970s and worked with an undercover expert named Jimmy . He was dishonorably discharged from the force and repressed all of his memories of being a cop . Mark figures that this is why he is so angry with the ending of the series , and takes him through his past by using the same car Grimes and his partner Jimmy had . In the car , Grimes has a memory sequence again and drives to Hollywood . 
 Meanwhile , Aldermach Maggotbone is ready to hand over his title as the leader of Hell to his daughter , Callie . However , Callie does not want to take over his job . A competition is held to choose which one will overtake the title and Callie tries to lose every challenge , but Twayne makes sure that she wins each time . At the studio where Dishonorable Discharge was filmed , Grimes forces some bystanders to act in his ending of the series , which reveals the memory Grimes had repressed : While trying to take down Aldermach when he became the new leader of Hell , Grimes accidentally killed a disguised Jimmy . In present time , Mark , Grimes and Randall head back to New York to sabotage the new ceremony . At the ceremony , Aldermach unexpectedly chooses to give the <unk> ( a big snake one has to swallow to become the leader of Hell ) to his secretary , Cathy , to spare Callie from getting the job . Just as Cathy is about to receive the snake , Grimes crashes the car into the church and shoots her . It is then revealed that she is really Grimes ' old partner Jimmy , who had worked undercover in Hell for 35 years . Embarrassed , Grimes begins to repress his memories again , which Mark believes is for the best . The episode ends with an angel waking up , suggesting that the episode was her dream . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ride Me to Hell " was written by Mike Rowe and directed by Aaron Augenblick and series creator Devin Clark . Screenwriter and executive producer Daniel Powell said that the episode explores " a little bit more " about Mark 's background , particularly that his father left him when he was younger , and that it " sort of informs why he became a social worker " . Unlike the series ' first season , which paid homage mainly to horror films , season two referenced a variety of genres . In an interview with Matt Barone of the magazine Complex , Clark used " Ride Me to Hell " as an example that the season " taps into a little bit beyond the horror culture " . He referred it to as " one of our big episodes " and stated that it references contemporary shows with " unsatisfied endings " , such as Monk and Lost . In the episode , Grimes unleashes memories of being a cop in the 1970s , which Clark saw as an opportunity to make fun of 1970s cop shows , such as CHiPs and Starsky and Hutch . He said , " It 's always a fun opportunity to see what other worlds I can pull from , even beyond horror . We had some really fun opportunities this season to pull from old ' 70s cop shows . ... So , it 's fun for me just to step out and try lots of different styles and looks . I 'm excited for whatever the writers throw at me , thematically . It 's just a new opportunity to try something different . " " Ride Me to Hell " was the fifth episode to be produced for the second season . In addition to the regular cast , the episode features appearances by recurring guest voice actors Pete Holmes , Julie Klausner and Mike O 'Gorman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode originally aired in the United States on Comedy Central on July 14 , 2011 . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 814 @,@ 000 viewers and acquired a 0 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode slightly dropped in terms of total viewership from the previous episode , " Callie and Her Sister " , which was watched by 980 @,@ 000 viewers . " Ride Me to Hell " received a positive review from Ology 's Josh Harrison , who commented that it " successfully redeemed " the character Grimes , who was his least @-@ favorite character up until this episode . Harrison wrote , " I 'm thrilled to see Grimes shine in his starring role . Admittedly this episode was a bit light on isolated funny incidents ... but Randall 's director @-@ speak was a solid <unk> , and I 'm always happy to see more demon politics . " Harrison graded the episode 8 @.@ 7 out of 10 and remarked that " it was a cut above its predecessors this season , but still a bit shy of the very best UA [ episodes ] " . 
 = Toyota War = 
 The Toyota War is the name commonly given to the last phase of the Chadian – Libyan conflict , which took place in 1987 in Northern Chad and on the Libyan – Chadian border . It takes its name from the Toyota pickup trucks used as <unk> to provide mobility for the Chadian troops as they fought against the Libyans . The 1987 war resulted in a heavy defeat for Libya , which , according to American sources , lost one tenth of its army , with 7 @,@ 500 men killed and US $ 1 @.@ 5 billion worth of military equipment destroyed or captured . Chadian losses were 1 @,@ 000 men killed . 
 The war began with the Libyan occupation of northern Chad in 1983 , when Libya 's leader Muammar Gaddafi , refusing to recognize the legitimacy of the Chadian President Hissène Habré , militarily supported the attempt by the opposition Transitional Government of National Unity ( GUNT ) to overthrow Habré . The plan was foiled by the intervention of France which , first with Operation Manta and later with Operation Epervier , limited Libyan expansion to north of the 16th parallel , in the most arid and sparsely inhabited part of Chad . 
 In 1986 the GUNT rebelled against Gaddafi , stripping Libya of its main cover of legitimacy for its military presence in Chad . Seeing an occasion to unify Chad behind him , Habré ordered his forces to pass the 16th parallel so as to link with the GUNT rebels ( who were fighting the Libyans in Tibesti ) in December . A few weeks later a bigger force struck at Fada , destroying the local Libyan garrison . In three months , combining the methods of guerilla and conventional warfare in a common strategy , Habré was able to retake almost all of northern Chad , and in the following months , inflicted new heavy defeats on the Libyans , until a ceasefire putting an end to the conflict was signed in September . The ceasefire left open the issue of the disputed Aouzou Strip , which was eventually assigned to Chad by the International Court of Justice in 1994 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since 1983 Chad was de facto partitioned , with the northern half controlled by the rebel Transitional Government of National Unity ( GUNT ) headed by Goukouni Oueddei and supported on the ground by Libyan forces , while the south was held by the Western @-@ backed Chadian government guided by Hissène Habré . This partition on 16th parallel ( the so @-@ called Red Line ) into Libyan and French zones of influence was informally recognised by France in 1984 , following an accord between France and Libya to withdraw their forces from Chad . The accord was not respected by Libya , which maintained at least 3 @,@ 000 men stationed in northern Chad . 
 During the period between 1984 and 1986 , in which no major clash took place , Habré greatly strengthened his position thanks to western support and Libya 's failure to respect the Franco @-@ Libyan 1984 agreement . From 1984 onwards , the GUNT also suffered increasing factional tensions , centered on the fight between Goukouni and Acheikh ibn Oumar over the leadership of the organization . Taking advantage of the GUNT 's difficulties , Habré struck a series of accords with smaller rebel factions , which left the GUNT at the beginning of 1986 with only three of the eleven factions that had originally signed the Lagos Accord in 1979 . The remaining factions were Goukouni 's People 's Armed Forces ( FAP ) , Acheikh 's armed branch of the Democratic Revolutionary Council ( CDR ) and that part of the Chadian Armed Forces ( FAT ) which had maintained its loyalty to <unk> Abdelkader Kamougué . 
 = = Forces on the ground = = 
 At the opening of 1987 , the last year of the war , the Libyan expeditionary force was still impressive , comprising 8 @,@ 000 soldiers , 300 tanks , many multiple rocket launchers ( rocket artillery ) and regular artillery pieces , Mi @-@ 24 helicopters and sixty combat aircraft . These forces did not have a unified command , but were divided into an Operational Group South , active in the Tibesti with 2 @,@ 500 men , and an Operational Group East , centered in Faya @-@ Largeau . 
 Apparently formidable , the Libyan military disposition in Chad was marred by serious flaws . The Libyans were prepared for a war in which they would provide ground and air support to their Chadian allies , act as assault infantry , and provide reconnaissance . By 1987 , however , Muammar Gaddafi had lost his allies , exposing Libya 's inadequate knowledge of the area . Libyan garrisons came to resemble isolated and vulnerable islands in the Chadian Sahara . Also important was the low morale among the troops , who were fighting in a foreign country , and the structural disorganization of the Libyan army , which was in part induced by Gaddafi 's fear of a military coup against him . This fear led him to avoid the professionalization of the armed forces . 
 The Libyans had also to deal with the greatly strengthened Chadian National Armed Forces ( FANT ) , which was composed of 10 @,@ 000 highly motivated soldiers , led by experienced and able commanders , such as Idriss Déby , Hassan Djamous and President Hissène Habré himself . And while FANT previously had no air power , limited mobility and few anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ aircraft weapons , by 1987 it could count on the French Air Force to keep Libyan aircraft grounded and , more importantly , to provide 400 highly mobile Toyota pickups equipped with MILAN anti @-@ tank guided missiles . It is these trucks that gave the name " Toyota War " to this last phase of the Chadian @-@ Libyan conflict . 
 = = Libyan expulsion = = 
 Habré selected as the first target for his reconquest of northern Chad the well @-@ fortified Libyan communications base of Fada . It was defended by 2 @,@ 000 Libyans and the bulk of the Democratic Revolutionary Council ( CDR ) militia ( Gaddafi 's closest Chadian allies ) , well @-@ provided with armour and artillery . Hassan Djamous , the thirty @-@ year @-@ old FANT commander @-@ in @-@ chief , pitched about 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 men against Fada 's Libyan garrison . Taking advantage of his army 's superior knowledge of the terrain , which apparently included unknown access points to the base , Djamous avoided a frontal assault and used his forces ' high mobility to surround the Libyan positions and then unleashed his troops , destroying the defending garrison . In the battle , 784 Libyans were killed and 100 tanks destroyed , while only 50 FANT soldiers died . 
 The unexpected defeat stunned Gaddafi , who then reacted on January 4 by recalling to service all of the army reservists . In an act of defiance towards France , he also ordered the bombing of Arada , well south of the 16th parallel . France retaliated with a new airstrike on Ouadi Doum and destroyed their radar system , effectively blinding the Libyan Air Force in Chad for several months . Gaddafi attempted to contain the FANT threat by rushing several new battalions into Chad ( especially to Faya @-@ Largeau and Ouadi Doum ) , including units of the elite Revolutionary Guard . This brought the amount of Libyan forces in the country to a total of 11 @,@ 000 by March . 
 In March 1987 , the main Libyan air base of Ouadi Doum was captured by Chadian forces . Although strongly defended by minefields , 5 @,@ 000 soldiers , tanks , armored vehicles , and aircraft , the Libyans ' base fell to a smaller Chadian attacking force led by Djamous equipped with trucks mounted with machine guns and antitank weapons . Observers estimated that , in the Chadian victories in the first three months of 1987 , more than 3 @,@ 000 Libyan soldiers had been killed , captured , or deserted . Large numbers of tanks , armored personnel carriers , artillery , fixed @-@ wing aircraft , and helicopters were captured or destroyed . In some cases , Libya sent its own aircraft to bomb abandoned Libyan equipment to deny its use to the Chadians . It was reported that , in many cases , Libyan soldiers had been killed while fleeing to avoid battle . At Ouadi Doum , panicked Libyans had suffered high casualties running through their own minefields . 
 The fall of Ouadi Doum was a severe setback for Libya . Deserted by most of their Chadian allies , Libyan forces found themselves isolated in foreign territory , and the loss of the main Libyan air base in Chad prevented Libya from providing close air cover to its troops . In general , the offensive against FANT had exposed the vulnerability of Libya 's heavy armor to a more mobile enemy . On Gaddafi 's orders , a general withdrawal was undertaken from Borkou @-@ Ennedi @-@ Tibesti Prefecture , beginning with Faya @-@ Largeau . The town had served as the main Libyan base during the preceding four years , but was in danger of being encircled . Its garrison of 3 @,@ 000 men , together with the survivors of Ouadi Doum , retired toward the Libyan base at <unk> @-@ as @-@ Sarra , north of the Chadian border . In an attempt to reduce the damage inflicted to his international standing , Gaddafi announced that Libya had won the confrontation , and was now leaving Chad so that the opposition could play its part in fighting Habré . 
 These military actions left Habré in control of Chad and in a position to threaten the expulsion of Libya from the Aouzou Strip , affected the international perception of Libya as a significant regional military power , and cast renewed doubt on the competence and determination of Libyan soldiers , especially in engagements beyond the country 's borders to which they evidently felt no personal commitment . 
 The Toyota War attracted considerable interest in the United States , where the possibility of using Habré to overthrow Gaddafi was given serious consideration . As part of the Reagan Administration 's support for his government , Habré , during a visit to Washington , received a pledge of US $ 32 million worth of aid , including Stinger anti @-@ aircraft missiles . 
 = = Renewed Chadian offensive = = 
 In August 1987 , the encouraged Chadians carried their offensive into the disputed Aouzou Strip , occupying the town of Aouzou following another battle in which the Libyans suffered severe losses in troops and abandoned equipment . In retaliation , Libya intensified its air bombardments of towns in the north , usually from altitudes beyond the range of FANT 's shoulder @-@ fired missiles . Appeals by Habré for French air missions to defend the area against the bombing were rejected , as Aouzou had been retaken against the wishes of French President François Mitterrand . Instead , Mitterrand called for international mediation to settle competing claims to the disputed territory . 
 After a succession of counterattacks , toward the end of August the Libyans finally drove the 400 Chadian soldiers out of the town . This victory – the first by Libyan ground forces since the start of the Toyota War – was apparently achieved through close @-@ range air strikes , which were followed by ground troops advancing cross @-@ country in jeeps , Toyota all @-@ terrain trucks , and light armored vehicles . For the Libyans , who had previously relied on ponderous tracked armour , the assault represented a conversion to the desert warfare tactics developed by FANT . To highlight the victory , Gaddafi flew foreign journalists to the region , so the news of his victory could reach the headlines . 
 Habré quickly reacted to this setback and to the continued bombing of FANT concentrations in northern Chad . On September 5 , 1987 he mounted a surprise raid against the key Libyan air base at Maaten al @-@ Sarra . Reportedly , 1 @,@ 000 Libyans were killed , 300 were captured , and hundreds of others were forced to flee into the surrounding desert . Chad claimed that its troops destroyed about 32 aircraft – including MiG @-@ 21 and MiG @-@ 23 fighters , Su @-@ 22 fighter @-@ bombers , and Mi @-@ 24 helicopters – before the FANT column withdrew to Chadian soil . 
 The attack had been opposed by France , who refused to provide FANT with intelligence and logistical support , causing FANT to suffer considerable losses . The French Defence Minister André Giraud let it be known that " France was not implicated in any way " in the attack and " had not been informed of it " . The American reaction was markedly different , as it had previously supported the attempted reconquest of the Aouzou Strip ; it now welcomed the Chadian raid . 
 = = Ceasefire = = 
 Because of domestic opposition , internal demoralization , and international hostility , Gaddafi assumed a more conciliatory attitude following his defeat . On the other side , Habré also found himself vulnerable , as the French feared that the attack on <unk> as @-@ <unk> was only the first stage of a general offensive into Libya proper , a possibility that France was not disposed to tolerate . As a result , Mitterrand forced Habré to accept the mediation efforts of the Organization of African Unity 's Zambian Chairman , Kenneth Kaunda , which resulted in a ceasefire on September 11 . 
 It was assumed that war would , sooner or later , resume , but in the end the ceasefire violations were relatively minor . Gaddafi announced in May 1988 that he would recognize Habré as President of Chad " as a gift to Africa " , even if Libya refused to leave the disputed Aouzou Strip . On October 3 the two countries resumed diplomatic relations , and another important step was made when the two countries agreed in September 1990 to refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice . On February 3 , 1994 the court ruled in favour of Chad , thus definitively solving the Aouzou controversy by assigning the territory to the southern country . 
 = Grey 's Anatomy = 
 Grey 's Anatomy is an American medical drama television series that premiered on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) as a mid @-@ season replacement on March 27 , 2005 . The series focuses on the fictional lives of surgical interns , residents , and attendings as they gradually evolve into seasoned doctors , while trying to maintain personal lives and relationships . The title is a play on Gray 's Anatomy , a human anatomy textbook by Henry Gray . The show 's premise originated with Shonda Rhimes , who serves as an executive producer , along with Betsy Beers , Mark Gordon , Krista Vernoff , Rob Corn , Mark Wilding , and Allan Heinberg . Although the show is set in Seattle at the fictional Grey @-@ Sloan Memorial Hospital ( Formerly Seattle Grace Mercy @-@ West ) it is primarily filmed in Los Angeles , California . The show was originally titled Complications following the complicated medical procedures and personal lives of the cast . 
 The series was created to be racially diverse , utilizing a color @-@ blind casting technique . It revolves around the title character Dr. Meredith Grey played by Ellen Pompeo . The series ' original cast consisted of nine star billed cast members including Ellen Pompeo , Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl , Justin Chambers , T. R. Knight , Chandra Wilson , James Pickens Jr . , Isaiah Washington and Patrick Dempsey . The cast has undergone major changes throughout the run of the show , with many major cast members leaving and being replaced by several new characters . The series in its twelfth season had a large ensemble of sixteen actors , including four from the original cast . On March 3 , 2016 , ABC renewed Grey 's Anatomy for a thirteenth season , scheduled to premiere on September 22 , 2016 . 
 Grey 's Anatomy is one of the highest @-@ rated dramas in the 18 – 49 demographic . Although the ratings have fallen over the past few seasons , it was once among the overall top 10 shows in the United States . Grey 's Anatomy has been well received by critics , considered an impact on culture , the series has received numerous awards , and has also been included in various critics ' top ten lists . It is the recipient of the 2007 Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series — Drama , and multiple Emmy nominations , including two for Outstanding Drama Series . The show has produced several specials , as well as distributed all seasons to DVD , and released a collection of merchandise . In 2012 , Grey 's Anatomy was named the fifth @-@ highest revenue earning show , in terms of advertising per half @-@ hour . It 's the longest running scripted primetime show currently airing on ABC and the second longest scripted primetime show ever on ABC only behind The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series follows Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , the daughter of an esteemed general surgeon named Ellis Grey , following her acceptance into the residency program at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital . During her tenure as a resident , Grey works alongside fellow doctors Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , and George O 'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) , who each struggle to balance their personal lives with the hectic work and training schedules assigned to them . They are overseen during their internship by Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , a senior resident who works beneath Grey 's love @-@ interest Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , the head of neurosurgery ; Yang 's fiancee Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , the head of cardio ; and Ellis Grey 's ex @-@ lover Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , the Chief of Surgery . The residents are later joined by Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) and April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) , former Mercy @-@ West residents who join Seattle Grace following an administrative merger in the sixth season . Throughout the first six seasons O 'Malley , Burke and Stevens all depart the series which has become very controversial in the media over the life @-@ span of the series . In addition to Shepherd , Webber , and Burke , the surgical wing is primarily supervised by Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) , as head of trauma ; Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , as head of pediatric surgery ; Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , a resident who later becomes head of orthopedics , who left Seattle at the end of the twelfth season ; Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , as head of cardio ; Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , as head of plastics ; Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , as head of OB / GYN , neonatal , and fetal surgery ; Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) , as head of cardio ; and Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) , Derek 's sister who is hired to replace him as head of neuro . Derek is killed in the series ' eleventh season . 
 Later additions to the residency program include Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Meredith 's half @-@ sister . Grey is killed alongside Mark Sloan in the season eight finale ; Leah Murphy ( Tessa Ferrer ) ; Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ) , who departs alongside Yang in the tenth season finale ; Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ) ; Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) , a doctor who begins a romantic relationship with Karev ; Andrew Deluca ( Giacomo <unk> ) , the love @-@ interest of Meredith 's half sister Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) , who also serves as head of cardio ; and Benjamin Warren ( Jason George ) , an anesthesiologist and currently a resident , has to balance his wife Miranda Bailey 's new role as Chief of Surgery with his own desire to succeed . Season twelve sees the arrival of Nathan Riggs ( Martin Henderson ) , while Meredith appointed head of general surgery - a post previously held by her mother . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Shonda Rhimes , the series ' creator , wanted to make a show that she would enjoy watching , and thought it would be interesting to create a show about " smart women competing against one another " . When asked how she decided to develop a medical drama , Rhimes responded : 
 The series was pitched to ABC Entertainment , who gave the green light , and the show was picked up as a mid @-@ season replacement for Boston Legal in the 2005 television season . Francie Calfo , executive vice president of development at ABC Entertainment , commented that ABC was looking for a medical show that was unlike the others airing at the time . She pointed out that " [ m ] <unk> shows are hard , and it was hard trying to figure out where ours could be different . But where everybody else is speeding up their medical shows , [ Rhimes ] found a way to slow it down , so you get to know the characters . There 's definitely a strong female appeal to it . " 
 Rhimes initially conceived Grey 's Anatomy as a statement against racism . She endeavored to create a show that featured a racially diverse cast that allowed viewers to relate to characters regardless of race . While creating characters , as well as writing the first script , the series ' writers had no character descriptions in mind , and hoped to cast the best actor available for each part . Rhimes has explained that if the network did not allow her to create characters this way , she would have been hesitant about moving forward with the series . Female roles in particular were developed as multi @-@ faceted characters . Rhimes offered her insight on this , " I wanted to create a world in which you felt as if you were watching very real women . Most of the women I saw on TV didn 't seem like people I actually knew . They felt like ideas of what women are . They never got to be nasty or competitive or hungry or angry . They were often just the loving wife or the nice friend . But who gets to be the bitch ? Who gets to be the three @-@ dimensional woman ? " 
 Before the series debuted on March 27 , 2005 , there were a few early releases to close friends and family of the producers and actors . The show was scheduled to run in the Boston Legal time slot for four weeks . However , high ratings and viewership led to it holding onto the slot for the remainder of the season . ABC Entertainment President , Steve McPherson , commented on the scheduling change : " Ultimately we decided that , without having adequate lead time or marketing dollars to devote to moving either show so late in the season , we 'd continue to let [ Grey 's Anatomy ] build on its tremendous momentum through May . " The show 's title , Grey 's Anatomy , was devised as a play on words : a reference to both Henry Gray 's medical textbook , Gray 's Anatomy , and the title character Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) . Prior to broadcast , it was announced that the show 's title would change from Grey 's Anatomy to Complications , although ultimately this did not come to pass . 
 = = = Production team = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy is produced by ShondaLand , in association with The Mark Gordon Company , and ABC Studios ( formerly Touchstone Television ) . Rhimes , Betsy Beers , Krista Vernoff , Mark Gordon , Rob Corn , and Mark Wilding have all served as executive producers throughout the course of the series . In subsequent seasons , Steve Mulholland , Kent Hodder , Nancy Bordson , James D. Parriott , and Peter Horton have also been executive producers , with Allan Heinberg joining the show in 2006 in this role . As of season eight , the current executive producers are Rhimes , Beers , Gordon , Vernoff , Corn , Wilding , and Heinberg . 
 Rhimes is the series ' most prolific writer . She often promotes the show by answering fan questions on her Twitter account . Other members of the writing staff are Vernoff , Wilding , Peter Nowalk , Stacy McKee , William Harper , <unk> Clack , Tony Phelan , Joan Rater , and Debora Cahn . From the second through seventh seasons , the writers maintained a blog entitled Grey Matter , where the writer of an episode discussed the motives behind the writing . Directors vary by episode , with Rob Corn directing most frequently , followed by Tom Verica . Horton , Edward Ornelas , and Jessica Yu have also directed a substantial number of episodes . Cast members Chandra Wilson and Kevin McKidd have both directed multiple episodes . 
 Grey 's Anatomy has been edited by Susan Vaill since the show 's inception , and David Greenspan was named an editor in 2006 . Casting directors Linda Lowy and John Brace have been a part of the production team since 2005 . Production design is led by Donald Lee Harris , assisted by art director Brian Harms , and costume design is led by Mimi Melgaard . Working alongside Melgaard , Thomas <unk> supervises costumes , Ellen Vieira is the makeup artist , and <unk> Stevens serves as a hair stylist . The Director of Photography is Herbert Davis . The music coordinator is Danny Lux . Karen Lisa Pike , M.D. is the on @-@ set medical consultant , alongside Linda Klein , a RN . The production staff is part of a Grey 's Anatomy softball team that competes against other television shows , such as CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy used a color @-@ blind casting technique , resulting in a racially diverse ensemble . Each role was cast without the character 's races being pre @-@ determined , keeping Rhimes ' vision of diversity . The production staff began casting with the program 's title character , Meredith Grey , which Rhimes stated was a difficult role to cast . " I kept saying we need a girl like that girl from Moonlight Mile , " said Rhimes , " and after a while , they were like , ' We think we can get that girl from Moonlight Mile . " The next to be cast , Sandra Oh ( Dr. Cristina Yang ) , was initially invited to audition for the character of Bailey , but pressed to read for the role of Cristina instead . Many actors read for the role of Dr. Derek Shepherd , but when Patrick Dempsey read for the part , " he was just perfect " , according to Rhimes . 
 The only character developed with a racial description in mind was Dr. Miranda Bailey , who is portrayed by Chandra Wilson . The character was written as a tiny blonde with curly hair , but when Wilson began speaking , Rhimes reported : " [ Wilson ] is exactly who Miranda is . " James Pickens Jr. was selected to appear as Dr. Richard Webber in the series ' pilot and first season . Katherine Heigl wanted to portray Dr. Izzie Stevens as a brunette , but was requested to retain her natural blonde for the part . Isaiah Washington , who portrayed Dr. Preston Burke , initially read for the role of Shepherd , but was cast as Burke , because the original actor to play Burke had to withdraw . T. R. Knight signed on for the pilot as Dr. George O 'Malley , expecting that the role might be short @-@ lived , because he liked that the character was multi @-@ faceted . Rounding out the season one cast was Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev . 
 The second season marked the introduction of Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) and Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . They were initially cast as recurring characters , but both were given star billing at the opening of the third season . Ramirez was cast after ABC executives offered her a role in the network show of her choice , Dane had previously auditioned unsuccessfully for a role in the pilot episode . Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) also joined the show in season two , after making a guest appearance in season one . In October 2006 , Washington allegedly insulted Knight with a homophobic slur , during an on @-@ set altercation with Dempsey , and ABC terminated Washington 's contract at the end of the third season . Washington also made a guest appearance in season 10 . At the conclusion of the third season , Walsh also departed the show to pursue the Grey 's Anatomy spin @-@ off , Private Practice , but continues to make guest appearances . 
 Chyler Leigh joined the cast as a main character in the fourth season as Dr. Lexie Grey , Lexie had appeared as a guest star in the final two episodes of the third season . On the selection of Leigh for the role of Lexie , Rhimes said : " Chyler stood out ... It felt like she could be Meredith 's sister , but she had a depth that was very interesting . " Dr. Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , who first appeared on Grey 's Anatomy in the second season , became a series regular in the fourth season . Shortly after the announcement that Smith would be a regular member of the cast , Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello , reported that her character , Hahn , would depart from Grey 's Anatomy on November 6 , 2008 . E ! Online 's Kristin Dos Santos asserted that Smith 's dismissal from the show had been forced by the ABC network , as part of an attempt to " de @-@ gay " Grey 's Anatomy , but Rhimes countered these claims , saying that " we did not find that the magic and chemistry with Brooke 's character would sustain in the long run " . 
 Season five introduced actor Kevin McKidd ( Dr. Owen Hunt ) , who was signed as a series regular after originally being cast for a specific story arc . In addition , Jessica Capshaw ( Dr. Arizona Robbins ) was originally introduced for a three episode arc , but received a contract extension until the end of the season and then became a series regular in the sixth season . Knight departed the show at the conclusion of season five , citing an unhappiness with the development and lack of screen time for his character . Directly following Knight 's departure , it was reported by Entertainment Weekly that Heigl had not returned to the set as scheduled after her maternity leave , and it was later confirmed that Heigl would not return to the show at all . 
 Kim Raver , who was cast as recurring character Dr. Teddy Altman in the sixth season , was given star billing later in the season . Sarah Drew ( Dr. April Kepner ) and Jesse Williams ( Dr. Jackson Avery ) , who both made their series debuts as recurring characters in the sixth season , received star billing in the seventh . 
 The six original actors ' contracts expired after season eight , but in May 2012 , Pompeo , Oh , Dempsey , Chambers , Wilson , and Pickens renewed their contracts with the show for another two years . At the conclusion of the eighth season , Leigh 's character departed from the show at Leigh 's request , and with Rhimes ' agreement . Raver 's character was also written out of the show during the season eight finale , and Rhimes stated that Raver was offered a contract renewal , but declined . In July 2012 , Dane confirmed that he was departing the show to pursue other projects ; he made his final appearances in the first two episodes of the ninth season . With the start of season 10 , Camilla Luddington , Jerrika Hinton , Gaius Charles & Tessa Ferrer were introduced to the show as series regulars . They were first introduced to the show in season 9 as new interns . On August 13 , 2013 , Oh announced that the show 's tenth season would be her final season . In March 2014 it was announced that Isaiah Washington , who portrayed Preston Burke in the first three seasons of the show , would make a guest appearance to coincide with the departure of series regular Sandra Oh , his former on @-@ screen love interest . As of March 25 , 2014 , both Charles and Ferrer 's contracts were not renewed for season 11 . On May 2 , 2014 it was announced that , in addition to Pompeo and Dempsey , all original remaining cast members — aside from Sandra Oh — signed two years deals , extending their contracts through seasons 11 and 12 . Despite joining the series in its second season , Sara Ramirez is on the same negotiation schedule as the first season cast and has also inked a new two @-@ year deal . 
 = = = Filming locations and technique = = = 
 Rhimes considered setting the medical drama in her hometown , Chicago , but eventually decided to go with Seattle , to distinguish Grey 's Anatomy from the Chicago – based ER . 
 Fisher Plaza , which is the headquarters building of Fisher Communications and Fisher 's ABC affiliated KOMO radio and television stations in Seattle , is used for some exterior shots of Grey @-@ Sloan Memorial Hospital . In particular , air ambulances land on the KOMO @-@ TV newscopter 's helipad . This suggests the hospital is close to the Space Needle ( which is directly across the street from Fisher Plaza ) , the Seattle Monorail , and other local landmarks . However , the hospital used for most other exterior and a few interior shots is not in Seattle ; these scenes are shot at the VA Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center in North Hills , California . Most scenes are taped at Prospect Studios in Los Feliz , just east of Hollywood , where the Grey 's Anatomy set occupies six sound stages . Some outside scenes are shot at the Warren G. Magnuson Park in Seattle . Several props used are working medical equipment , including the MRI machine . When asked about operating room scenes , Sarah Drew offered this : 
 We work with Bovine organs , which is cow 's organs . The smell is repulsive and makes us all gag . And we use an actual soldering tool to solder the organs . It smells like burning flesh . There 's also a lot of silicone and blood matter , red jello mixed with blood and chicken fat . It 's pretty gross . 
 Costumes are used to differentiate between attending surgeons , who wear navy blue scrubs , and residents , who wear light blue scrubs . The series is filmed with a single @-@ camera setup , as are many dramas . Grey 's Anatomy is often filmed using the " walk and talk " filming technique , popularized on television by series such as St. Elsewhere , ER , and The West Wing . 
 = = Series synopsis = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy follows the lives of surgical interns and residents at the fictional Grey @-@ Sloan Memorial Hospital ( formerly Seattle Grace Hospital , Season 1 – 6 , Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , Season 6 – 9 , and then Grey @-@ Sloan Memorial Hospital , Season 9 – present ) , as they gradually evolve into seasoned doctors , with the help of their competent mentors . Every installment , typically , commences with a voice @-@ over narrative from Meredith Grey or a season regular , foreshadowing the theme of the episode . Each season tends to represent the physicians ' academic year , with each completed year qualifying the residents at a level higher in the surgical field . The season will always end with a finale , typically involving a tragic event such as a death or character departure . Most installments revolve around the doctors ' everyday lives as surgeons , but the show puts an emphasis on their personal , rather than professional , lives . The series sets aside medical ethic concerns to focus on character development and relationships . Although the physicians treat the illnesses of their patients , often through complex surgeries , their primary motivation is customarily praise and competition . 
 The residents initially arrive at the hospital each morning and argue over who will care for a certain patient . A hospital superior is in charge of assigning cases , often translating to tense feelings between the residents and their superiors . Episodes migrate back and forth from the doctors interacting with their patients , and with their co @-@ workers . Once assigned a case , each doctor diagnoses the patient , with the help of his or her attending physician , which usually leads to surgery . The surgeons tend to form personal connections with their patients , with a patient often conveying a message to his or her doctor , which unintentionally relates to the doctor 's private life . The show displays the growth of relationships between the doctors , either friendly or sexual , often stemming to a clash between their personal and professional lives . Emotional scenes are often accompanied by an indie rock background song , something that has become a hallmark of the series . At the conclusion of each episode , one of the characters delivers another voice @-@ over , typically contrasting or following up on their initial one . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The five characters who are first introduced in the series premiere , as surgical interns , are Grey , Karev , O 'Malley , Stevens , and Yang . They are initially mentored by Bailey , a senior resident who becomes the hospital 's Chief Resident , and later an attending general surgeon , in season six . The surgical program is initially headed by the Chief of Surgery , Richard Webber , who has a pre @-@ existing personal relationship with Meredith , having had an affair with her mother when Meredith was a child . In Webber 's employ are attending neurosurgeon Derek Shepherd , dubbed ' McDreamy ' by the residents , and attending cardiothoracic surgeon Preston Burke . Shepherd is introduced as Meredith 's love interest , while Burke begins a relationship with Yang . 
 Introduced in the show 's second season are obstetrician @-@ gynecologist and neonatal surgeon , Addison Montgomery , plastic surgeon Mark Sloan ( nicknamed ' <unk> ' by the interns ) , from New York , and orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres . Montgomery is Shepherd 's wife who arrives in Seattle seeking reconciliation with him , Sloan is Shepherd 's former best friend , who aided the breakdown of his marriage by having an affair with Montgomery , while Torres is introduced as a love @-@ interest , and eventual wife for O 'Malley . The penultimate episode of season three introduces Lexie Grey , Meredith 's half @-@ sister who unexpectedly decides to pursue her internship at Seattle Grace Hospital after her mother 's sudden death , and begins an on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship with Sloan . Burke and Yang , having been engaged , endeavor to plan their wedding , while Montgomery departs the show at the conclusion of the third season , relocating to California , seeking a new life . The season three finale shows Burke 's exit from the show , after leaving Yang at the altar on their wedding day . 
 Grey , Yang , Karev , and Stevens are all promoted to residents , in the season four premiere , while O 'Malley is forced to repeat his internship year , following his failing of the intern exam . Subsequently , Torres and O 'Malley divorce one another , due to him having a sexual affair with Stevens , initially concealing it from Torres . Early in the fourth season , cardiothoracic surgeon Erica Hahn becomes Torres ' love interest . During the fifth season , Hahn departs from the series , and O 'Malley retakes his intern exam , passing , joining his fellow physicians as a resident . Two new characters are introduced , former United States Army trauma surgeon Dr. Owen Hunt , and pediatric surgeon Dr. Arizona Robbins . Hunt becomes a love @-@ interest for Yang , while Robbins becomes a love @-@ interest for Torres . When Stevens is diagnosed with stage four metastatic melanoma , she and Karev wed one another at the conclusion of the fifth season . In addition , Meredith and Shepherd marry , with their vows written on a post @-@ it note . 
 O 'Malley dies in the premiere of the sixth season , due to injuries sustained by being hit by a bus , and Stevens later departs Seattle after being diagnosed with cancer and following a lack of communication between her then husband Karev following the Seattle Grace merger with Mercy West . Several new characters are introduced as Seattle Grace Hospital merges with Mercy West . Residents April Kepner and Jackson Avery both transfer to Seattle Grace Hospital from Mercy West , and the latter entertains a brief relationship with Lexie Grey , until she reunites with Mark Sloan . Subsequently , Teddy Altman is introduced as the new Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery . In the season six finale , a deceased patient 's grieving husband embarks on a shooting spree at the hospital , injuring Karev , Shepherd , and Hunt , and killing residents Charles Percy and Reed Adamson . In the shooting 's emotional reverberations , Hunt and Yang abruptly marry , not wanting to risk separation . Torres and Robbins eventually wed , officiated by Bailey . In season eight , Webber steps down and allocates his job to Hunt . As the final year of residency for Meredith , Yang , Karev , Avery , and Kepner is coming to a close , the doctors are all planning to relocate to different hospitals to pursue their specialty careers . However , all plans are put on hold when several doctors from Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital are engaged in a plane crash , which kills Lexie and endangers Meredith , Shepherd , Yang , Robbins , and Sloan . At the conclusion of the eighth season , Altman is courteously fired by Hunt as she struggles to decide whether or not to take the job as Chief at the United States Army Medical Command ( MEDCOM ) . In the season nine premiere , Sloan dies due to sustained injuries from the plane crash following a brief relapse of temporary health ( the surge ) and the remaining characters work through their post traumatic stress and Arizona Robbins ' loss of limb by way of suing Seattle Grace Mercy West as the hospital was responsible for putting the surgeons on the plane . The season continues with the struggle of the lawsuit and the animosity that it creates within the hospital , Yang and Hunt eventually divorce in order to help the lawsuit . Robbins cheats on Torres with a visiting facial reconstruction specialist . The doctors who were on the plane won the lawsuit , but the pay out bankrupts the hospital . They all club together and buy Seattle Grace Mercy West , with the help of the Harper Avery Foundation , and they become the Board of Directors , once being called the " Grey @-@ Sloan 7 " . One of the changes they implement is renaming the hospital to Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital . Grey 's Anatomy then concluded its 10th season on ABC and saw the departure of one of its major players , Cristina Yang , played by Sandra Oh . Towards the end of the eleventh season , Derek Shepherd witnesses a car accident and pulls over to help the injured , but his car is hit by a truck with him inside as he attempts to leave the scene . He later dies at another hospital following the doctors ' mishandling of his injuries . The season 12 finale saw the departure of one of the show 's longest running characters , Callie Torres , played by Sara Ramirez . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 With the drama 's setting being a hospital , numerous medical personnel appear regularly on the show , as well as several other recurring characters . Joe ( Steven W. Bailey ) , is first shown as the owner of the Emerald City Bar and Grill , across the street from the hospital , which is a common relaxation area for the physicians . Also introduced in the pilot , is the legendary former surgeon , Dr. Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) , Meredith 's Alzheimer 's @-@ stricken mother , who appeared on the show until her death in season three . In the first season , Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) , a nurse who appeared on the show occasionally until getting laid off in the merger with Mercy West , engages in sexual activity with O 'Malley , giving him Syphilis . Serving as an assistant and secretary to the Chief of Surgery , former nurse Patricia ( Robin Pearson Rose ) , has appeared on the show since its debut . Tyler Christian ( Moe Irvin ) , a hospital nurse , makes occasional appearances throughout the series . Within the second season , Bailey becomes pregnant by her husband , Tucker Jones ( Cress Williams ) , who makes frequent appearances on Grey 's Anatomy , until their divorce in season five . While Bailey takes a sabbatical , due to her pregnancy , the cheerful Dr. Sydney Heron ( Kali Rocha ) , fills her position as the resident supervising Grey , Yang , Karev , O 'Malley , and Stevens , and makes occasional appearances until the fifth season . 
 Thatcher and Susan Grey ( Jeff Perry and Mare Winningham ) , Meredith 's estranged father and step @-@ mother , are introduced in season two , with Susan making appearances until her death in season three , and Thatcher continuing to appear on the series . Adele Webber ( Loretta Devine ) , is introduced as Richard 's wife , who eventually acquires Alzheimer 's , in the seventh season , and continued to make appearances until her death in season nine . Introduced as Preston 's mother , Jane Burke ( Diahann Carroll ) makes occasional appearances until the fourth season . Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) , a patient suffering from congestive heart failure , originates as one of Burke 's patients , who goes on to propose to Stevens , after weeks of bonding between the two . Facing death , Stevens cuts Duquette 's left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) , to elevate his position on the United Network for Organ Sharing ( <unk> ) transplant list . This ultimately ends in his death , marking his initial departure from the show , and placing Stevens on disciplinary probation . Initially conceived as a veterinarian hired for Shepherd 's dog , Doc , Dr. Finn Dandridge ( Chris O 'Donnell ) soon becomes a love interest for Meredith , while Shepherd is with Montgomery . Dandridge is included in a multi @-@ episode story arc , consisting of nine episodes , ending when Meredith reunites with Shepherd . 
 In season three , George 's father , Harold O 'Malley ( George Dzundza ) , is diagnosed with cancer and dies , with his wife Louise ( Debra Monk ) and George 's brothers Jerry ( Greg Pitts ) and Ronny ( Tim Griffin ) by his side . Louise goes on to appear occasionally , and was last seen in season eight . A ferryboat accident brings along Rebecca Pope ( Elizabeth Reaser ) , who is initially introduced as a pregnant Jane Doe victim , suffering from Amnesia . Pope eventually embarks on a relationship with Karev , until she is diagnosed with a personality disorder in season four , and makes her final departure . Amidst the crisis of the ferryboat crash , Meredith falls into the water at the disaster site . Although rescued , she goes into cardiac arrest , waking up in what appears to be limbo . Within the limbo , Meredith is entertained by deceased acquaintances Duquette and Dylan Young ( Kyle Chandler ) , who was killed during a bomb crisis in the second season , until eventually being resuscitated . Seeking a cure to her depression , Meredith undergoes therapy sessions with the hospital psychiatrist , Dr. Katharine Wyatt ( Amy Madigan ) , who in addition , serves as a psychiatrist to Hunt . 
 The season four premiere introduces several new interns , to be trained under Meredith , Yang , Karev , Stevens , and eventually O 'Malley . Among them are Dr. Steve Mostow ( Mark Saul ) who continues to make appearances , and Dr. Sadie Harris ( Melissa George ) who formed a friendship with Meredith while the two were in college . Harris is fired in the fifth season , due to not actually having a medical degree , and departs the show immediately after . Meredith and Shepherd 's relationship reaches a toll , and the two separate , leading Shepherd to entertaining a relationship with Rose ( Lauren Stamile ) , a nurse . Rose appears frequently until season five , when Shepherd rekindles his relationship with Meredith . Throughout the fifth season , Stevens experiences full @-@ out hallucinations of Duquette , signaling that she is ill , and once she is lucid , he departs , marking his final appearance . Following the announcement of her relationship with Robbins , Callie 's father Carlos Torres ( Hector Elizondo ) initially contests his daughter 's concurrence in homosexuality , but eventually accepts it , and he reappears several times throughout the series . 
 The hospital 's merging with Mercy West introduces new residents : Dr. Reed Adamson ( Nora Zehetner ) and Dr. Charles Percy ( Robert Baker ) , but the two are both murdered in the season six finale . Also introduced in the sixth season is Dr. Ben Warren ( Jason George ) , an anesthesiologist and eventual husband to Dr. Miranda Bailey , as well as Sloan Riley ( Leven Rambin ) , Dr. Mark Sloan 's estranged daughter who seeks kinship with him . Dr. Lucy Fields ( Rachael Taylor ) , an obstetrician @-@ gynecologist , is introduced in the seventh season , and serves as a love interest for Dr. Alex Karev , until eventually relocating to pursue a career in Africa . Robbins receives a grant to aid children in Malawi , which leads to a falling out between her and Torres . While in Malawi , Robbins is replaced by Dr. Robert Stark ( Peter MacNicol ) , a pediatric surgeon with an interest in Dr. April Kepner , who appears occasionally until season eight . Following the breakdown of Dr. Torres ' relationship with Dr. Robbins , Dr. Sloan and Dr. Torres unite , and she becomes pregnant . Torres ' relationship with Robbins is subsequently mended , and the couple endeavors to raise their new daughter , Sofia <unk> Sloan Torres , with the help of Dr. Sloan . Shepherd and Meredith also become new parents , with their adoption of Zola , a baby girl from Malawi . Conceived as a patient with a tumor condition who later develops diabetes , Henry Burton ( Scott Foley ) befriends Dr. Altman and eventually joins her in marriage only to get treated using her medical insurance , until he dies while undergoing heart surgery . 
 In the season nine premiere , interns Dr. Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) , Dr. Heather Brooks ( Tina Majorino ) , Dr. Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ) , Dr. Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ) , and Dr. Leah Murphy ( Tessa Ferrer ) are introduced . Steven Culp and William Daniels play Dr. Parker and Dr. Craig Thomas , respectively . Dr. Parker is Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery and Dr. Craig Thomas ( William Daniels ) is an attending cardiothoracic surgeon at Mayo Clinic , where Cristina worked temporarily . Dr. Alana Cahill ( Constance Zimmer ) introduced in the ninth season is appointed to cut costs at the hospital and she eventually decides the best course of action would be to seek out a new buyer until the four crash survivors and Torres on the behalf of Sloan to pool their money together in a bid to purchase the hospital themselves . Kepner starts dating a paramedic named Matthew ( Justin Bruening ) and they form a deep relationship over the course of the ninth ad tenth seasons and she eventually agreed to marry before reconciling with Avery in the middle of the wedding Mathew . Lauren Boswell ( Hilarie Burton ) is introduced as a craniofacial surgeon consulting on a case at Grey Sloan Memorial who showed romantic interested in Arizona and eventually ended up having a one @-@ night stand with her . 
 Dr. Heather Brooks dies in the premier of season ten . She goes to search for Dr. Webber and finds him lying in the basement of the hospital . Trying to save Dr. Webber , she accidentally steps into a puddle and electrocutes herself while hitting her head as she falls . Bailey moves a cancer patient in Webber 's room to force some perspective and make him take the treatment . Also introduced in the tenth season was Dr. Karev 's estranged father Jimmy Evans ( James Remar ) who tries to form a relationship with his son but fails repeatedly and ultimately dies in a botched surgery . The conclusion of season 10 has Cristina leaving Grey Sloan for Dr. Burke 's job overseas while Dr. Ross makes a last @-@ minute decision to follow her in order to study under her . Dr. Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) unknowingly drops a bombshell that she is the adopted love child of Dr. Webber and the late Dr. Grey , which makes for yet another half sister of Dr. Meredith Grey . Also , Dr. Yang leaves her seat on the board to Dr. Karev while Dr. Webber all but promises the seat to Dr. Bailey . Introduced in season eleven is Dr. Nicole Herman ( Geena Davis ) who is Chief of Fetal Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial , she mentors Arizona Robbins in a fetal surgery fellowship , Herman plays in a twelve episode arc before departing after episode fourteen . 
 Season 11 begins with new surgical residents coming to the hospital . Meredith is struggling with the idea that Maggie is actually her half sister because of her mother 's romance with Dr. Weber . Callie and Arizona 's relationship falls through after realising they both want different things at the time . April and Jackson learn heartbreaking news that their baby has a lethal birth defect , where April decides that she will carry the baby till full term no matter the consequences . They end up having a boy , Samuel , who dies shortly after birth . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy has been well received among critics . The show holds an average of 74 % positive score on Rotten Tomatoes and 7 @.@ 7 / 10 score at IMDB site . The A.V. Club gave an insight on both the overwhelming success and lows in the quality of the hit medical drama saying , " The quality arc for the show is all over the place , starting with a steady build in the first season , then skyrocketing into phenomenon in season two , then leveling off and dipping in season three , before having some seriously bumpy moments in seasons four ( interrupted by the writers ’ strike ) and five . The climb begins again in season six " Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly in a review wrote , " I believe the show ’ s best season to date is season 2 . Let me make it clear that I ’ m not saying seasons 3 through 9 were bad . In my opinion , there have only been a few lulls in the show ’ s history , and most of them didn ’ t last a full season . " adding , " I still enjoy the show , and I ’ ll honestly never stop watching . By any standards , Grey ’ s Anatomy has been successful television , ranking highly in the ratings for nine seasons and entering the cultural lexicon via phrases as cloying yet catchy as " McDreamy . " , the show has had its periods of being intensely irritating , and it has had its periods when it seems as if Shonda Rhimes has taken leave of her faculties , but it ’ s also got an amazingly high batting average , particularly with every solid season that passes along in this second act of its run . " The site lauded the show saying , " On average , it ’ s been very good TV , filled with interesting , driven characters who run the gamut of professions within the show ’ s hospital setting . It ’ s been , by turns , a good soap , a good romantic comedy , a good medical drama , and a good interpersonal show about an unexpected workplace family . " 
 The first season received positive reviews which steadily built up , with Gary Levin of USA Today calling Grey 's Anatomy one of the top shows on television . New York Daily News named Grey 's Anatomy a " winner " , whereas Newsday expressed a positive opinion by stating " You simply can 't stop watching . " The Washington Post 's Tom Shales was critical of season one , finding it reminiscent of ER and commenting that : " The show is much more a matter of commercial calculation than an honest attempt to try something fresh and different . " Shortly after its initial airing , the Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan called Grey 's Anatomy the new Friends ; a concluded National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) sitcom following the lives of a group of young adults , that all of its ten @-@ year run in the top @-@ five for viewer ratings . The second season received critical acclaim , top critics like Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the show a " phenomenon " not just TV adding the show was , " one of the best TV shows around " , Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly later during the tenth season called the second " the show ’ s best season to date " however , Kevin Carr of 7M Pictures opined that Grey 's Anatomy is a mere combination of Scrubs , ER , Sex and the City , and The Love Boat . It further garnered positive reviews , Christopher Monfette of IGN Entertainment added : " The second season of this medical drama expertly wove its signature elements of complex relationships , whimsical banter and challenging life @-@ lessons ; all to a montage @-@ fetish , indie @-@ rock soundtrack . " Todd Gilchrist also from IGN called the season " terrific " adding , " Indeed , one of the best currently on television . While it remains to be seen what the creators do with it , now that it 's become an outright event program , the season demonstrates that Rhimes and co. know what to do with the opportunities presented <unk> whether you 're male or female , this is the kind of entertainment that small @-@ screen devotees and folks fed up with television need to see . " 
 The title character of Grey 's Anatomy , Meredith , has received both overwhelmingly positive and weary feedback by critics along the course of the show , with the development of the character garnering praise from majority critics . Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times referring to her as " the heroine of Grey 's Anatomy " . BuddyTV praised the distinct uniqueness in the character calling Meredith an " unconventional heroine " adding , " From the very beginning Meredith Grey has been an unconventional heroine . Neither black nor white but always ... wait for it ... many shades of grey , she has always been , even in her lighter moments , dark and twisty . " When Pompeo did not receive an Emmy nomination for her work as Meredith , Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times suggested that Pompeo , " who has worked very hard and against all narrative odds to make Meredith Grey an interesting character " , should have received a nomination at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , in 2009 . IGN 's Monfette , less impressed , criticized her storyline as " some bizarrely under @-@ developed sub @-@ plot about depression and giving Derek a season 's worth of reconsidering to do . " Robert Rorke of the New York Post was also critical of Meredith 's role in the show , writing : " She used to be the queen of the romantic dilemmas , but lately , she 's been a little dopey , what with the endless ' McDreamy ' soliloquies . " Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV commented that " You gotta love Mer when she 's gloomy . " The development of the character has received praise from critics . Reviewing the first part of the eighth season , TV Fanatic wrote : " this season belongs to Meredith Grey . She is the heart and soul of the show and has been outstanding . This is a character that used to be so dark and twisty and has now grown into a more mature woman . Ellen Pompeo has been at the top of her game this season . " Rick Porter reviewing the episode How to Save a Life from the eleventh season for Zap2it wrote , " Without Meredith , and without one of Pompeo 's strongest performances in her long time on the show , " How to Save a Life " would have run the risk of coming across as a baldly manipulative death episode , the likes of which the show has done several times before . He added . " How to Save a Life " may not be the ideal Emmy @-@ submission episode for Ellen Pompeo , considering Meredith is off screen for more than half of it . But it 's among the best work she 's ever done on the show . " <unk> Samson of BuddyTV lauded the Meredith 's development throughout the series saying , " When one considers how this character has grown over eleven seasons , it really is amazing . Kudos to Ellen Pompeo for her fine work . She 's actually done the impossible , because I actually care what happens to Meredith Grey . " Reviewing the season 12 premiere Sledgehammer critics including Alex Hawkins of the Western Gazette again highlighted Pompeo 's due for an Emmy Award . 
 The majority of the supporting cast of Grey 's Anatomy have been well received as well , with the New York Post 's Rorke deeming Stevens to be " the heart and soul " of Grey 's Anatomy , whereas Eyder Peralta of the Houston Chronicle was critical of her character development , stating : " [ She 's ] the reason I don 't watch Grey 's Anatomy anymore . " Kelli Catana of The Huffington Post named Yang " the best damn character " and deemed " the Meredith / Yang relationship the most true friendship on network television . " Television Without Pity writer Lauren Shotwell claimed Yang is " the only one of these five [ residents ] that regularly acts like an actual doctor " . Analyzing Alex Karev Rachel Simon called him ' Underrated ' , she pointed out that Alex ’ s personal growth never seems to get acknowledged as " Alex has evolved , slowly and realistically , into a genuinely good person whose faults don ’ t miraculously disappear , but take a backseat to much better qualities . " Robert Bianco of USA Today said Dempsey has a " seemingly effortless way of humanizing Derek 's ' dreamy ' appeal with ego and vanity " . and his friendship with Mark Sloan has been well received Victor Balta said " they ’ ve demonstrated an easy chemistry that makes for some of the great comic relief around Seattle Grace Hospital . " While Addison Montgomery was deemed " sassy and bright and interesting . " TV Guide said of Walsh 's stint on Grey 's Anatomy : " She [ Walsh ] adds spice to an already hot show . " ortho surgeon Callie Torres after receiving mixed views earlier was praised for her bisexual storyline and critics further added that the character was anchored by stellar performance by Sara Ramirez .. Lexie Grey initially being criticized became a critics a favorite in the series Keen of The Trades wrote , " Chyler Leigh , does a fantastic job of making the progression feel seamless . Lexie steals the show as one of the best characters on the series . " With the departure of several cast members throughout the seasons , many new characters were added to the drama 's ensemble . McKidd and Capshaw were referred to as " fresh additions " to the series , by Monfette of IGN . In addition , Matt Roush of TV Guide commented : " Hunt / McKidd is the most encouraging thing to happen to Grey 's Anatomy in quite a while . " Matt Mitovich of TV Guide noted that Robbins " quickly established herself as a fan favorite " , describing her as : " a breath of fresh air in the often angsty halls of Seattle Grace . On April Kepner and Jackson Avery Courtney Morrison of TVFanatic wrote " April has grown since her character was introduced . She ’ s no longer much less annoying than she used to be , and she ’ s honest . A girl with principles is a girl you want to do well . " and described her and Avery as " a couple for whom viewers can root " . Speaking of the new cast members , in addition to the remaining original , Robert Bianco from USA Today called them the show 's " best ensemble in years " . 
 Regarding season three , Bill Carter of The New York Times called Grey 's Anatomy " television 's hottest show " , adding : " [ No show ] is expected to challenge Grey 's Anatomy for prime @-@ time pre @-@ eminence . " Contrasting with Carter 's view , Monfette of IGN said that it speedily found itself " mired in the annoying and absurd " , adding : " This third season may very well represent a case of over @-@ writing a concept that has , perhaps tragically , run bone @-@ dry on narrative fuel . " At the conclusion of season three , Entertainment Weekly 's Gregory Kirschling said " the show lacked a defining happy , warm @-@ <unk> moment " , adding that the season " didn 't leave you dying for the [ next ] season premiere " . Speaking of the fourth season , Laura Burrows of IGN said the series became " a little more than mediocre , but less than fantastic " , adding : " This season proved that even strong chemistry and good acting cannot save a show that suffers from the inevitable recycled plot . " 
 In contrast to the moderately negative feedback the third and fourth seasons received , Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said of the fifth season : " Overall , it feels more like the good old days than Grey 's Anatomy has in a long time . " Misha Davenport from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said season five " hits on all the things the show does so well " , adding : " There is romance , heartbreak , humor and a few moments that will move fans to tears . " Brian Lowry of Variety , less impressed , opinionated that the season five displayed the show running out of storylines . Speaking of the sixth season , Bianco of USA Today wrote : " Grey 's has always loved grand gestures . You like them or you don 't ; the only real question is whether the show pulls them off or it doesn 't . This year , it did . " 
 The series has a score of 66 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on five reviews for season seven . In response to the season , Bianco from USA Today commented : " Happily , it now seems to have landed on solid ground . " Also of the seventh season , Entertainment Weekly 's Jennifer Armstrong said : " It 's in the shooting 's emotional reverberations that the show is regenerating after the past few hit @-@ and @-@ miss seasons , " whereas Verne Gay of Newsday commented : " Unfortunately , they 've settled on far @-@ too @-@ easy and facile answers for the most part . " HitFix gave a positive review saying that , " season 7 overall has been one of the show 's strongest ever . " and added , " There was a time when Grey 's Anatomy was this show where I suffered through a lot of stuff that made me cringe to get to those genius melodrama moments it could do so well . Over the last couple of years , it 's evolved into a show that 's much more consistent in tone , where it may not move me as often as it did in the early years but also very rarely makes me question my reasons for watching . " Speaking of season eight , Entertainment Weekly 's Mandi Bierly called it a " so @-@ so season " , and Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter called it " emotional " . Also acknowledging the fan base Verne Gay of Newsday wrote " Grey 's has had a good season and has an intensely loyal fan base to prove it . " regarding the 8th season . 
 The ninth season received more positive reviews , Rob Salem of Toronto Star called it " a solid return to form . " Brad Williams writing for What Culture praised the show 's development over the season saying , " Grey 's Anatomy has developed into a fine example of how a TV show can mature beyond its initial purpose . " calling it " something almost anyone can watch and enjoy . " Praising the friendship between Cristina and Meredith of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " There 's still one good reason to keep watching : Where else can you find such deep friendships between female co @-@ workers " . The tenth season was also marked with praise , Annie Barrett for Entertainment Weekly wrote " There 's true sorrow here along with the passion , which keeps their dynamic so intriguing to me . " Caroline <unk> from The A.V. Club wrote in her review for the 10th season " At its best , Grey 's Anatomy is about everyday bravery , sacrifice , and courage . At its worst , it 's a melodramatic , moralizing soap opera . Both sides are on display as the show heads confidently into its 10th season . " Many sources , including Rachel Simon of Bustle and Nicole <unk> of Wetpaint , claimed that Sandra Oh 's performance during her final season on Grey 's Anatomy is worthy of an Emmy nomination . 
 Bryce Olin of Netflix ranked Grey 's 9th among the 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix stating , " It ’ s a tough call , but based on Grey ’ s casting choices and revolutionary portrayals of female doctors in the series , I ’ m willing to argue that Grey ’ s Anatomy is the best medical drama of all time . Obviously , Shonda Rhimes didn ’ t reinvent the wheel with the series , but there ’ s no denying its popularity . " adding , " I understand its significance in the pop culture sphere . " He also stated that the show could go higher in the ranks with the upcoming season stating , " Apparently , Grey ’ s Anatomy fans are passionate about their show , although it seems like they ’ ve been closeted for the last few years . I ’ d love to move Grey ’ s Anatomy even higher on the ranking , but I ’ ll have wait until the 11th season comes to Netflix . " 
 = = = = Critics ' top ten lists = = = = 
 Critics included Grey 's Anatomy in top ten lists for five of its twelve seasons ; these are listed below in order of rank . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy has been considered an impact on culture by Entertainment Weekly 's executive editor , Lori Majewski , with her writing : " Grey 's Anatomy isn 't just a show , it 's a phenomenon . When [ the ] final shows air , every place in New York City is empty . You could get a table at the best restaurants . " The Daily Beast 's Jace Lacob also considered the show an impact , comparing its success to that of Friends , and calling it a " cultural phenomenon " . Steve Sternberg , a media analyst with Magna Global USA explained that the show appeals to a broad audience , writing : " Roughly 80 percent of households during prime time only have one TV set on . People are looking for shows they can watch with other household members . " Grey 's Anatomy introduced a " mc @-@ labeling " surge , ever since it dubbed Dempsey 's character " McDreamy " . Canadian newspaper the National Post considers this trend a " phenomenon " . 
 Analyzing the show 's impact on culture , <unk> Arnold of Yahoo ! Voices noted that the " mc @-@ labeling " trend has been parodied on other shows including ER and Degrassi : The Next Generation . Mark Lawson of The Guardian has credited Grey 's Anatomy with popularizing the " <unk> " , or musical montage segments . Parodying this , MADtv created a spoof on the show in 2006 , making fun of the series ' emotional scenes including those accompanied by a musical montage . The show 's premise inspired the creation of A Corazón Abierto , a Colombian adaptation of Grey 's Anatomy , which in turn spawned a Mexican version of the same name . A study conducted by the University of Western Sydney revealed that 94 % of 400 polled medical students are regular viewers of Grey 's Anatomy . An additional study conducted by Brian Quick of the University of Illinois indicated that the show 's portrayal of doctors being " smart , good looking , capable , and interesting " , leads viewers to associating real @-@ world doctors to be that way . 
 Grey 's has also been credited to have changed the perception on how good and bad television can be defined , The A.V. Club write , " Since The Sopranos burst onto the scene , we ’ ve too often classified a show as " good " based on how closely it adhered to the dark , violent , male @-@ centric template set out by that particular show . It ’ s time for that to end . At its best , Grey ’ s has been among the very best shows on TV , and at its worst , it ’ s been at least fascinating to watch . To write it off is to unnecessarily narrow the definition of what good TV can be , to limit what the medium is capable of . TV is at its best when it emotionally connects , and even when it seems to be otherwise merrily hurtling off a cliff , Grey ’ s Anatomy is nothing but emotional connection , which is more than other , more consistently better shows can say . " 
 In 2011 , a woman residing in Sheboygan , Wisconsin became unresponsive due to an asthma attack . Unable to wait for an ambulance , her daughter and a friend performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) on her , which they learned from Grey 's Anatomy . Despite this , Resident Karen Zink , M.D. , deemed the show 's portrayal of interns inaccurate , adding : " None of [ the characters ] have bags under their eyes . They all leave the hospital dressed cute , with their hair done and makeup on . That is so far away from the reality of interns . You are just dragging your butt , trying to stay alive . You don 't have time to do your hair . You don 't have time to put on makeup . Every surgical intern has bags under their eyes . " The series placed at No. 66 on Entertainment Weekly 's " New TV Classics " list , and was declared the third highest rated show for the first ten years of the Internet Movie Database ( 2002 – 2012 ) . 
 = = = U.S. television ratings = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy has received high viewership and ratings since its debut . The first four seasons of the program each ranked in the top ten among all viewers , reaching its peak Nielsen ratings in the second season , attracting an average of 19 @.@ 44 million viewers per episode , and ranking at fifth place overall . Following the show 's time @-@ slot being relocated , overall rankings steadily declined , dropping below the top ten in its fifth season . Grey 's Anatomy made its greatest fall from its sixth to seventh season , slipping from seventeenth place to thirty @-@ first . The series is on a steady decline in terms of overall viewership and rankings , yet Grey 's Anatomy still holds value in charts when numbers are pulled from the digital video recorder ( DVR ) . It was the most recorded show between 2007 and 2011 , based on cumulative totals , and has been for several years in a row . 
 The most @-@ watched episode of the series is " It 's the End of the World " , with 37 @.@ 88 million viewers , aided by a lead @-@ in from Super Bowl XL . In 2011 , Grey 's Anatomy was named the fourth @-@ highest revenue earning show of the year , with US $ 2 @.@ 67 million per half hour , behind Desperate Housewives , Two and a Half Men , and American Idol at the top . In 2012 , the show was the fifth @-@ highest revenue earning show of the year , with US $ 2 @.@ 75 million per half hour , behind Glee , Two and a Half Men , The X Factor ( U.S. ) and American Idol . While Grey 's Anatomy is no longer ranked in the top numbers for overall ratings , the show 's ranking in the key 18 – 49 demographic has remained high . As of season eight , the series is the highest @-@ rated drama on television in the target demographic . Below is a table of Grey 's Anatomy 's seasonal rankings in the U.S. television market , based on average total viewers per episode . Each U.S. network television season starts in September and ends in late May , which coincides with the completion of May sweeps . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy has won a number of awards . As of July 2012 , the show has been nominated for twenty @-@ five Primetime Emmy Awards , having been nominated for at least one every year , except in 2010 . At the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2005 , Oh was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009 , and Horton was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series . The following year , at the 58th Primetime Emmy Awards , the series received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series , which they were nominated for again in 2007 . Also in 2006 , Wilson was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009 , and Kyle Chandler was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series . The 58th Ceremony also honored Rhimes and Vernoff , who were both nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . Rhimes , whose career kicked off in 1995 , has since produced yet another ABC series , Scandal , which began on air in 2012 and is continuing into the third season . Beginning in 2005 , Rhimes has been continually nominated for numerous awards , including three Emmy Awards : first in 2006 for a dramatic series and a separate nomination for writing a dramatic series , followed by a third nomination in 2007 for a dramatic series . 
 In 2007 , at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , Heigl won the award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , while Knight was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series . Numerous guest actresses have been nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series , including Burton in 2006 and 2007 , Christina Ricci in 2006 , Reaser in 2007 , Diahann Carroll in 2008 , and Sharon Lawrence in 2009 , but the only actress to have won the award is Devine in 2011 , who was nominated again in 2012 . The show has also been nominated for thirteen Creative Arts Emmy Awards , having won three of them : Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series , Outstanding Makeup for a Single @-@ Camera Series ( Non @-@ Prosthetic ) , and Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie or a Special . 
 The show has received ten Golden Globe Award nominations since its premiere . At the 63rd Golden Globe Awards , in 2006 , the series was nominated for Best Drama Series , Dempsey was nominated for Best Actor in a Drama Series , which he was nominated for again in 2007 , and Oh won the award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Miniseries , or Television Film . The following year , at the 64th Golden Globe Awards , in 2007 , Pompeo was nominated for Best Actress in a Drama Series , and the show won the award for Best Drama Series . At the 65th Golden Globe Awards , in 2008 , Heigl was nominated for Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Miniseries , or Television Film , while the series in whole was nominated for Best Drama Series . 
 The series has won People 's Choice Awards for Best Drama thrice in 2007 , 2013 and 2015 and has been nominated for several other People 's Choice Awards , with nominations received by Oh as well as multiple wins from Dempsey , Pompeo winning in recent years 2013 and 2015 , Heigl , Wilson , Demi Lovato , for guest starring , and the drama in whole for Favorite TV Drama . In 2007 , Rhimes and the female cast were the recipient of the Women in Film Lucy Award , in recognition of the excellence and innovation in the show as a creative work that has enhanced the perception of women through the medium of television . The series has been honored with numerous NAACP Image Award nominations , many having been won , including five awards for Outstanding Drama Series . Grey 's Anatomy has also received several Screen Actors Guild Awards , with nominations received by Dempsey , as well as wins from Oh , Wilson , and the main cast for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy 's first season commenced airing as a mid @-@ season replacement to Boston Legal on March 27 , 2005 and concluded on May 22 , 2005 . The nine @-@ episode season aired on Sundays in the 10 : 00pm EST time slot , following Desperate Housewives . The show was renewed by ABC for a second season , that aired in the same time slot as season one . Premiering on September 25 , 2005 and concluding on May 15 , 2006 , the season consisted of twenty @-@ seven episodes . The first five episodes of the second season were originally scheduled to air during the first , but the network decided to close the first season of Grey 's Anatomy on the same night as Desperate Housewives ' finale . During the second season , Grey 's Anatomy produced two specials recapping the events of recent episodes , narrated by Bailey , entitled " Straight to the Heart " and " Under Pressure " . The show was renewed for a third season , which was relocated to the coveted Thursday 9 : 00pm EST time slot — a slot that the series has held onto since then . Commencing on September 21 , 2006 and ending on May 17 , 2007 , season three consisted of twenty @-@ five episodes . Two more specials were produced during the show 's third season , entitled " Complications of the Heart " and " Every Moment Counts " , which were narrated by Bailey and Morgan , respectively . 
 ABC renewed Grey 's Anatomy for a fourth season , which aired from September 27 , 2007 to May 22 , 2008 , and ultimately consisted of seventeen episodes . The fourth season had a reduced number of episodes , due to the 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike , which caused production to cease from February to April , leaving the show with no writing staff during that time . At the beginning of the fourth season , the show aired its final special entitled " Come Rain or Shine " , created to transition viewers from Grey 's Anatomy to Private Practice , which was narrated by the editors of People magazine . The show received a renewal for a fifth season , which premiered on September 25 , 2008 and concluded on May 14 , 2009 ; consisting of twenty @-@ four episodes . The series was renewed for a sixth season consisting of twenty @-@ four episodes , which commenced on September 24 , 2009 and ended on May 20 , 2010 . During its sixth season , Grey 's Anatomy aired a series of webisodes entitled Seattle Grace : On Call at ABC.com. ABC renewed the show for a seventh season , which premiered on September 23 , 2010 and concluded on May 19 , 2011 ; consisting of twenty @-@ two episodes . Following up with Seattle Grace : On Call , Seattle Grace : Message of Hope aired during the beginning of the seventh season . Also during the seventh season , the series produced a musical episode entitled " Song Beneath the Song " , featuring music that became famous through their use in Grey 's Anatomy . The show received a twenty @-@ four episode eighth season renewal , which commenced on September 22 , 2011 with a two @-@ hour episode , and ended on May 17 , 2012 . Grey 's Anatomy was renewed for a ninth season , which premiered on September 27 , 2012 and ended on May 16 , 2013 . Grey 's Anatomy was renewed for a tenth season on May 10 , 2013 and premiered on September 27 , 2013 with a two @-@ hour episode , and ended on May 15 , 2014 . 
 On May 8 , 2014 , ABC renewed the series for an eleventh season that aired from September 2014 to May 2015 ) . In addition , the show was relocated to the Thursday 8 : 00pm EST time slot . After four seasons outside the top 25 rated shows , Grey 's Anatomy was the number 15 show in the 2013 – 2014 season , the show 's tenth . The show also re @-@ entered the top five shows in the 18 – 49 viewer demographic . 
 On May 7 , 2015 , ABC renewed the series for a twelfth season that premiered on September 24 , 2015 and concluded on May 19 , 2016 . 
 On March 3 , 2016 , ABC renewed Grey 's for a thirteenth season which will air from 2016 to 2017 . 
 = = = Private Practice = = = 
 On February 21 , 2007 , The Wall Street Journal reported that ABC was pursuing a spin @-@ off medical drama television series for Grey 's Anatomy featuring Walsh 's character , Montgomery . Subsequent reports confirmed the decision , stating that an expanded two @-@ hour broadcast of Grey 's Anatomy would serve as a backdoor pilot for the proposed spin @-@ off . The cast of Grey 's Anatomy was reportedly unhappy about the decision , as all hoped the spin @-@ off would have been given to them . Pompeo commented that she felt , as the star , she should have been consulted , and Heigl disclosed that she had hoped for a spin @-@ off for Stevens . The backdoor pilot that aired on May 3 , 2007 sees Montgomery take a leave of absence from Seattle Grace Hospital , to visit her best friend from Los Angeles , Naomi Bennett ( Merrin Dungey , later Audra McDonald ) , a reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist . While in Los Angeles , she meets Bennett 's colleagues at the Oceanside Wellness Center . The two @-@ hour broadcast entitled " The Other Side of This Life " served as the twenty @-@ second and twenty @-@ third episodes of the third season , and was directed by Michael Grossman , according to Variety . The cast included Amy Brenneman , Paul Adelstein , Tim Daly , Taye Diggs , Chris Lowell , and Merrin Dungey . 
 KaDee Strickland 's character , Charlotte King , who would be introduced in the spin @-@ off 's first season premiere , did not appear in the backdoor pilot . Her addition to the main cast was announced on July 11 , 2007 , prior to the commencement of the first season . She did not have to audition for the role , but was cast after a meeting with Rhimes . Also not present in the backdoor pilot was McDonald , due to her character , Naomi Bennett , being portrayed by a different actress , Merrin Dungey . However , on June 29 , 2007 , ABC announced that Dungey would be replaced , with no reason given for the change . The drama was titled Private Practice , and its premiere episode followed the second part of the season debut of Dancing with the Stars , and provided a lead @-@ in to fellow freshman series Dirty Sexy Money . Pushing Daisies , a third new series for the evening , rounded out the lineup as a lead @-@ in to Private Practice . The series ended its run in January 2013 after six seasons . 
 Grey 's Anatomy had three crossover storylines with Private Practice . 
 " Before and After " / " Ex @-@ Life " / " An Honest Mistake " — Addison 's brother Archer is brought to Seattle Grace for surgery , after which Derek asks for help with a pregnant neuro patient . 
 " Blink " / " Another Second Chance " — Addison helps Mark perform an operation on his pregnant daughter . 
 " Have You Seen Me Lately ? " / " You Break My Heart " — Derek 's sister Amelia asks him to perform a risky <unk> surgery . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy episodes appear regularly on ABC in the United States . All episodes are approximately forty @-@ three minutes , and are broadcast in both high @-@ definition and standard . The series ' episodes are also available for download at the iTunes Store in standard and high @-@ definition qualities , and Amazon Video . ABC Video on demand also releases recent episodes of the show for temporary viewing . Recent episodes are also available at ABC 's official Grey 's Anatomy website , and on Hulu and Xfinity . In 2009 , ABC signed a deal allowing Grey 's Anatomy episodes to be streamed on Netflix . Grey 's Anatomy is syndicated on Lifetime , with one hour blocks weekdays at 1 : 00 pm , 2 : 00 pm , and 3 : 00 pm EST . 
 Since its debut , Buena Vista Home Entertainment has released the first eight seasons on DVD to regions 1 , 2 , and 4 . The first season 's DVD , released on February 14 , 2006 , features an alternate title sequence , bloopers , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , audio commentaries , and an extended edition of the pilot episode . Season two 's DVD , released on September 12 , 2006 , which includes extended episodes , an interview with Wilson , deleted scenes , a set tour , a " Q & A " with the cast , and a segment on the creating of special effects . The DVD for the third season was released on September 11 , 2007 , with bonus features including extended episodes , an interview with star Dempsey , audio commentaries , and bloopers . 
 The fourth season 's DVD released on September 9 , 2008 , features an interview with Heigl and Chambers , extended episodes , bloopers , and deleted scenes . Season five 's DVD was released on September 15 , 2009 , and includes unaired scenes , bloopers , and extended episodes . The DVD for season six , released on September 14 , 2010 , features deleted scenes , an extended finale , and bloopers . The seventh season 's DVD , released on September 13 , 2011 , includes an extended edition of the musical episode , bloopers , as well as deleted scenes . In addition , the eighth season 's DVD was released on September 4 , 2012 with several bonus features and deleted scenes . 
 The ninth season 's DVD released on August 27 , 2013 with several bonus features and deleted scenes . The tenth season 's DVD was released on September 2 , 2014 with new several bonus features and deleted scenes . The season was officially released on DVD as a six @-@ disc boxset under the title of Grey 's Anatomy : The Complete Tenth Season – Live For The Moments on September 2 , 2014 and featured an extended episode Do You Know ? and a special feature from Sandra Oh titled " An <unk> Gift " . The eleventh released on DVD as a six @-@ disc box set on August 18 , 2015 with interviews with new series regular Caterina Scorsone and a special feature for Dempsey 's departure How To Say Goodbye Dr. Derek Shepherd . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 ABC has partnered with <unk> and Barco Uniforms to provide branded merchandise through an online store . The products available include shirts , sweatshirts , kitchen @-@ ware , home @-@ ware , and bags , with the Grey 's Anatomy logo on it . Also available are custom unisex scrubs and lab coats in a variety of colors and sizes , designed by Barco . The merchandise released by ABC is available for purchase at the Grey 's Anatomy official website , and US $ 1 from every purchase to Barco 's Nightingales Foundation . 
 Five volumes of the Grey 's Anatomy Original Soundtrack have been released as of 2011 . For the first two seasons , the show 's main title theme was an excerpt from " <unk> in the Rocket " , by British duo Psapp ; it is featured on the first soundtrack album released via ABC 's corporate cousin , Hollywood Records , on September 27 , 2005 . The second soundtrack , featuring songs from the series ' second season , was released on September 12 , 2006 , followed by a third soundtrack with music from the third season . Following the seventh season musical episode " Song Beneath the Song " , " Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event " soundtrack was released , with volume four of the soundtrack released subsequently . 
 In January 2009 , Ubisoft announced that it had signed a licensing agreement with ABC Studios to develop a video game based on Grey 's Anatomy . Designed for the Wii , Nintendo DS , and PC , Grey 's Anatomy : The Video Game was released on March 10 , 2009 . The game allows the player to assume the role of one of the main characters , making decisions for the character 's personal and professional life , and competing in a number of minigames . It has been criticized by reviewers because of the simplicity of the mini @-@ games and voice actors who do not play the same characters on the series , with Jason Ocampo of IGN giving it a 6 @.@ 0 / 10 overall rating . 
 ABC and Nielsen partnered in 2011 to create a Grey 's Anatomy application for Apple 's iPad . The application was designed to allow viewers to participate in polls and learn trivial facts as they watch a live episode . It uses Nielsen 's Media @-@ Sync software to listen for the episode and to post features as the episode progresses . 
 = = International adaptation = = 
 An adaptation named as " <unk> " ( Doctors ) was aired on December 28 , 2006 , in a Turkish Network , Show TV , and it lasted four seasons . 
 In 2010 , " A Corazón Abierto " , an adaptation of the series , was made by the Colombian network RCN TV . 
 = Political history of Mysore and Coorg ( 1565 – 1760 ) = 
 The political history of Mysore and Coorg ( 1565 – 1760 ) is the political history of the contiguous historical regions of Mysore state and Coorg province located on the Deccan Plateau in west @-@ central peninsular India ( Map 1 ) . It begins with the fall of the Hindu Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 and ends just before the rise of Sultan Haidar Ali in 1761 . 
 At the height of the Vijayanagara Empire ( 1350 – 1565 ) , the Mysore and Coorg region was ruled by motley chieftains , or rajas ( " little kings " ) . Each raja had dominion over a small area , and each supplied soldiers and annual tribute for the empire 's needs . Soon after the empire 's fall and the subsequent eastward move of the diminished ruling family , many chieftains , especially in the west , tried to loosen their imperial bonds and expand their realms . Sensing opportunity amidst the new uncertainty , various powers from the north invaded the region intermittently . Among these were the Sultanate of Bijapur to the northwest , the Sultanate of Golconda to the northeast , the fledgling Maratha empire , farther northwest , and the Mughal empire , farther north still . For much of the 17th century the tussles between the little kings and the big powers , and amongst the little kings , resulted in shifting sovereignties , loyalties , and borders . By the turn of the 18th century , the political landscape had become better defined . The northwestern hills were being ruled by the Nayaka rulers of Ikkeri , the southwestern , in the Western Ghats , by the Rajas of Coorg , the southern plains by the Wodeyar rulers of Mysore , all of which were Hindu dynasties ; whereas the eastern and northeastern regions were being ruled by the Muslim Nawabs of Arcot and Sira . Of these , Ikkeri and Coorg were independent , Mysore , although much expanded , was formally a Mughal dependency , and Arcot and Sira , Mughal <unk> ( or provinces ) . 
 The stability , however , was not to last . Mysore 's expansions had been based on unstable alliances . When the alliances began to unravel , as they did during the next half century , political decay set in , presided over inevitably by pageant kings . The Mughal governor , Nawab of Arcot , in a display of the still far @-@ flung reach of a declining Mughal empire , raided the Mysore capital , Seringapatam , to collect unpaid taxes . The neighbouring Raja of Coorg began a war of attrition with Mysore over western territory . Soon , the Maratha empire invaded again and exacted more concessions of territory . In the chaotic last decade of this period , a little @-@ known Muslim cavalryman , Haidar Ali , seized power in Mysore . Under him , in the decades following , Mysore was to expand again . It was to do so prodigiously to match in size southern India itself . It was also to pose the last serious threat to the new rising power on the subcontinent , the English East India Company . 
 A common feature of all large regimes in the region during the period 1565 – 1760 is increased military fiscalism . This mode of creating income for the state consisted of extraction of tribute payments from local chiefs under threat of military action . It differed both from the more <unk> modes of preceding regimes and the more absolutist modes of succeeding ones — the latter achieved through direct tax collection from citizens . Another common feature of these regimes is the fragmentary historiography devoted to them , making broad generalizations difficult . 
 = = <unk> of Vijayanagara , 1565 – 1635 = = 
 The last Hindu empire in South India , the Vijayanagara Empire , was defeated on 23 January 1565 , in the Battle of Talikota by the combined forces of the Muslim states of Bijapur , Golconda , and Ahmadnagar to its north . The battle was fought in Talikota on the doab ( or " tongue " of land ) between the Kistna river and its major left bank tributary , the Bhima , 100 miles ( 160 km ) north of the imperial capital of Vijayanagara ( see Map 2 ) . The invaders later destroyed the capital , and the ruler 's family escaped to Penukonda , 125 miles ( 201 km ) southeast , where they established their new capital . Soon they moved their capital another 175 miles ( 282 km ) east @-@ southeast to Chandragiri , not far from the southeastern coast , and survived there until 1635 , their dwindling empire concentrating its resources on its eastern Tamil and Telugu speaking realms . According to historian Sanjay Subrahmanyam : " ... in the ten years following 1565 , the imperial centre of Vijayanagara effectively ceased to be a power as far as the western reaches of the peninsula were concerned , leaving a vacuum that was eventually filled by Ikkeri and Mysore . " Earlier , in the heyday of their rule , the kings of Vijayanagara had granted tracts of lands throughout their realm to various vassal chiefs on the stipulation that they pay tribute and render military service . The chiefs in the northern regions were supervised directly from the capital . Those in the richer , more distant southern provinces , however , could not be controlled easily and the Vijayanagara emperors were able to collect only part of the annual revenue from them . Overseen by a viceroy — titled Sri Ranga Raya and based in the island town of Seringapatam on the river Kaveri ( also Cauvery ) , some 200 miles ( 320 km ) south of the capital — the southern chiefs bore various formal titles . These included the title Nayaka , assumed by the chiefs of Keladi in the northwestern hills , of <unk> , and Chitaldroog in the north , of Belur in the west , and of <unk> in the centre ; the title Gowda , assumed by the chiefs of Ballapur and of <unk> in the centre , and of <unk> in the east ; and Wodeyar , assumed by the rulers of Mysore , of Kalale and of <unk> in the south . ( See Map 2 . ) 
 The somewhat tenuous hold the Vijayanagara centre had on its southern periphery resulted only partly from the latter 's remoteness . The centralisation imposed by the empire was resisted by the southern chiefs ( sometimes called rajas , or " little kings " ) for moral and political reasons as well ; according to historian Burton Stein : 
 <unk> kings ' , or rajas , never attained the legal independence of an aristocracy from both monarchs and the local people whom they ruled . The sovereign claims of would @-@ be centralizing , South Indian rulers and the resources demanded in the name of that sovereignty diminished the resources which local chieftains used as a kind of royal largess ; thus centralizing demands were opposed on moral as well as on political grounds by even quite modest chiefs . 
 These chiefs came to be called poligars , a British corruption of " <unk> " ( Tamil : holder of " <unk> " or " baronial estate " ) . ( Kannada : " pale " + " <unk> " = <unk> ) . 
 Meanwhile , almost a decade after their victories at Talikota , the Deccan sultanates of Bijapur and Ahmadnagar agreed in 1573 not to interfere in each other 's future conquests by reserving regions to the south for Bijapur . In 1577 , Bijapur forces attacked again and overwhelmed all opposition along the western coast . Easily taking <unk> , a former Vijayanagara stronghold , they attempted next to take Penukonda , the new Vijayanagara capital . ( See Map 3 ) . ) There , however , they were repulsed by an army led by the Vijayanagara ruler 's father @-@ in @-@ law , <unk> Raya , who had traveled north for the engagement from his base in <unk> . For his services , <unk> Raya 's territories within the crumbling empire were vastly expanded , extending westward now up to the Western Ghats , the mountain range running along the southwestern coast of India , and with a new capital in <unk> ( See Map 6 . ) 
 The territories controlled by the other poligars were also changing fast . Some , such as <unk> Gowda of <unk> , expanded theirs by performing services for the Vijayanagara monarch and receiving territorial rewards . In <unk> Gowda 's case , the rewards consisted of a tract of land which , from his base in <unk> , extended west to Hoskote and east to <unk> . Others , such as the Wodeyars of Ummattur and of Mysore ( now Mysore district ) , achieved the same end by ignoring the monarch altogether , and annexing small states in their vicinity . ( See Map 3 . ) Through much of the 16th century , the chiefs of Ummattur in particular had carried on " unceasing aggression " against their neighbors , even in the face of punitive raids by the Vijayanagara armies . In the end , as a compromise , the son of a defeated Ummattur chief was appointed the viceroy at Seringapatam . The Wodeyars of Mysore too were eying surrounding land ; by 1644 , when the Wodeyars unseated the powerful <unk> of Piriyapatna , not only had they become the dominant presence in the southern regions of what later became Mysore state , but the Vijayanagara empire was also on its last legs , having only a year 's life left . ( See Map 6 . ) 
