 = = Bijapur , Marathas , Mughals , 1636 – 1687 = = 
 The Sultans of Bijapur , for their part — some sixty years after their defeat at Penukonda — regrouped and struck again in 1636 . They did so now with the blessing of the Mughal empire of Northern India , whose tributary states they had recently become . They had also the help of a Maratha chieftain of western India , Shahaji Bhonsle , who was on the lookout for rewards of <unk> land in the conquered territories , and whose son , Shivaji Bhonsle was to found the Maratha Empire some 30 years later . In the western @-@ central poligar regions , the Bijapur @-@ Shahji forces achieved only mixed results : The Nayakas of Keladi were decisively defeated , but were able to buy back their lands from their Bijapur invaders . The Bijapur attack on Seringapatam was repulsed in its entirety by the reigning Wodeyar of Mysore , with great losses to the invaders . ( See Map 4 . ) 
 In the east , the Bijapur @-@ Shahji forces had better success ; in 1639 , they took possession of gold @-@ rich Kolar district and soon of Bangalore , a city founded a century earlier by Kempe Gowda I , and to become , two centuries later , a hub of British presence . Next , moving down the Eastern Ghats , the range of mountains rising behind the coastal plains of southeastern India , they captured the historic towns of Vellore and Gingee . Returning north through the east @-@ central <unk> plain ( average elevation 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) ) , they gained possession of the towns of Ballapur , Sira , and the hill fortress of Chitaldroog . ( See Map 4 . ) 
 A new province named <unk> @-@ Bijapur @-@ <unk> , consisting of possessions such as Kolar , Hoskote , Bangalore , and Sira , and situated above ( or westwards of ) the Eastern Ghats range , was soon incorporated into the Sultanate of Bijapur and granted to Shahji as a <unk> , or temporary gift . The possessions below the Ghats , such as Gingee and Vellore became part of another province , named Carnatic @-@ Bijapur @-@ <unk> , whose first governor was none other than Shahji again . When Shahji died in 1664 , his son , Venkoji , from his second wife , who meanwhile had become the ruler of Tanjore farther south , inherited these territories . This twist of fate , however , did not sit well with Shivaji — Shahji 's oldest son , from his first wife — who now led an expedition southwards to claim his fair share . Shivaji 's quick victories resulted in a partition , whereby both the Carnatic @-@ Bijapur provinces became his dominions , and whereas Tanjore was retained by Venkoji . ( See Map 4 . ) 
 The successes of Bijapur and Shivaji were being watched warily by the major imperial presence on the subcontinent , the Mughal Empire in North India . Having become the Mughal emperor in 1659 , <unk> , soon set himself upon destroying the Sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda , the latter famous for its diamond mines , as well as the burgeoning Maratha power of Shivaji . In 1686 , the Mughals took Bijapur and , the following year , Golconda . Before long , fast moving Mughal armies were bearing down on the former Vijayanagara dominions . In 1687 , a new Mughal province ( or <unk> ) was created with capital at Sira . Bangalore , quickly taken by the Mughals from the Marathas , was sold to the Wodeyar of Mysore for 300 @,@ 000 rupees . Qasim Khan was appointed the first Mughal Faujdar Diwan ( literally , " military governor " ) of the Province of Sira . 
 = = Wodeyars of Mysore , 1610 – 1760 = = 
 Although their own histories date the origins of the Wodeyars of Mysore ( also " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , or " <unk> " , and , literally , " chief " ) to 1399 , records of them go back no earlier than the early 16th century , and according to Subrahmanyam 2001 even the late sixteenth or early 17th centuries . These poligars are first mentioned in a Kannada language literary work from the early 16th century . A petty chieftain , Chamaraja ( now Chamaraja III ) , who ruled from 1513 to 1553 over a few villages not far from the Kaveri river , is said to have constructed a small fort and named it , <unk> " Buffalo Town " ) , from which Mysore gets its name . ( See Map 5 . ) Th Wodeyar clan issued its first inscription during the chieftaincy of Timmaraja ( now Timmaraja II ) who ruled from 1553 to 1572 . Towards the end of his rule , he is recorded to have owned 33 villages and fielded an army of 300 men . 
 By the time of the short @-@ lived incumbency of Timmaraja II 's son , Chama Raja IV — who , already well into his 60s , ruled from 1572 to 1576 — the Vijayanagara Empire had been dealt its fatal blow . Before long , Chama Raja IV withheld payment of the annual tribute to the now weakened empire 's viceroy at Seringapatam . The viceroy responded by attempting to arrest Chamaraja IV ; in this , however , he failed , and the taxes remained unpaid . An outright military challenge to the empire would have to await the incumbency of Raja I , Chama Raja IV 's eldest son , who became the Wodeyar in 1574 . Early in 1610 , Raja I captured Seringapatam and , in a matter of days , on 8 February 1610 , moved his capital there . ( See Map 5 . ) During his rule , according to Stein 1987 , his " chiefdom expanded into a major principality " . 
 In 1638 , the reins of power fell into the hands of the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Kanthirava Narasaraja I , who , a few months earlier , had been adopted by the widow of Raja I. Kanthirava was the first <unk> of Mysore to create the symbols of royalty , such as a royal mint , and went on to issue coins named <unk> ( corrupted to " <unk> " ) after himself . These remained a part of Mysore 's " current national money " well into the 18th century . 
 Catholic missionaries , who had arrived in the coastal areas of southern India — the southwestern Malabar coast , the western Kanara coast , and the southeastern Coromandel coast ( also " Carnatic " ) — beginning early in the 16th century , did not start work in land @-@ locked Mysore until half way through the seventeenth . ( See Map 5 ) . The Mysore mission was established in Seringapatam in 1649 by Leonardo Cinnami , an Italian Jesuit from Goa . Expelled a few years later from Mysore on account of opposition in Kanthirava 's court , Cinnami returned , toward the end of Kanthirava 's rule , to establish missions in half a dozen locations . During his second stay Cinnami obtained permission to convert Kanthirava 's subjects to Christianity . He was successful mostly in the eastern regions , later part of the Madras Presidency of British India . According to ( <unk> 1985 , p . 209 ) , " Of a reported 1700 converts in the Mysore mission in the mid @-@ 1660s , a mere quarter were Kannadigas ( Kannada language speakers ) , the rest being Tamil speakers from the western districts of modern @-@ day Tamil Nadu , ... " Married ten times , the ruler died on 31 July 1659 , at the age of 44 . At his funeral , all his surviving wives killed themselves by committing sati on his funeral pyre . 
 After an unremarkable period of rule by short @-@ lived incumbents , in 1672 , Kanthirava 's 27 @-@ year @-@ old grand nephew , Chikka Devaraja , became the new <unk> . During his rule , centralized military power increased to an unprecedented degree for the region . ( See Map 5 and Map 7 . ) Introducing various mandatory taxes on peasant @-@ owned land , Chikka Devaraja , however , exempted his soldiers ' land from these payments . The perceived inequity of this action , the unusually high taxes , and the intrusive nature of his regime , created wide protests which had the support of the wandering Jangama ascetics in the monasteries of the Lingayats , a monotheistic religious order that emphasizes a personal relationship with the Hindu god Shiva . According to Nagaraj 2003 , a slogan of the protests was : 
 Basavanna the Bull tills the forest land ; Devendra gives the rains ; 
 Why should we , the ones who grow crops through hard labor , pay taxes to the king ? 
 The king , resolving upon a " treacherous massacre " , used the stratagem of inviting over 400 monks to a grand feast at the famous Shaiva center of <unk> and , upon its conclusion , presenting them with gifts and directing them to exit one at a time through a narrow lane where they were each strangled and beheaded by waiting royal wrestlers . According to Mark Wilks , quoted in Rice <unk> , " Circular orders had been sent for the destruction , on the same day , of all the <unk> matha ( places of residence and worship ) in his dominions ; and the number reported to have been in consequence destroyed was upwards of seven hundred . " This " sanguinary measure " had the effect of stopping cold all protests to the new taxes . 
 Around this time , 1687 , Chikka Devaraja purchased the city of Bangalore for Rs . 300 @,@ 000 from Qasim Khan , the new Mughal governor of the Province of Sira . Through the latter , Chikka Devaraja " assiduously cultivated an alliance " with Mughal emperor Aurangzeb . He also turned his attention to the regions that were less the objects of Moghul interest . The regions to the southeast below the Eastern Ghats mountains around <unk> and Salem were annexed to Mysore , and , in 1694 , regions in the southwest up to the Baba <unk> mountains on the western edge of the Deccan Plateau , were added . Two years later Chikka Devaraja attacked lands farther south belonging to the Madurai Nayak ( also " Madura " ) and laid a siege of Trichinopoly . ( See Map 7 . ) 
 After the death of Qasim Khan , his Mughal liaison , Chikka Devaraja sent a diplomatic mission to Emperor Aurangzeb at Ahmadnagar with the intention of either renewing his Mughal connections , or seeking Mughal recognition of his southern conquests . In response , in 1700 , it was said , the Mughal emperor sent the Mysore Raja a signet ring " bearing the title Jug Deo Raj ( literally , " lord and king of the world " ) and permission to sit on an ivory throne " and a " <unk> " Sword from his Palace Regalia , with Gold Etching on the Hilt , to be used as a Sword of State by the Mysore Raja , while sitting on the throne . After the return of the mission , Chikka Devaraja reorganized his administration into eighteen departments , in " imitation of what the envoys had seen at the Mughal court " . When the Raja died on 16 November 1704 , his dominions extended from <unk> in the north to <unk> Hills and Anaimalai in the south , and from Coorg in the west to Dharmapuri district in the east . ( See Map 5 and Map 7 . ) During his long reign of 31 years , he had made Mysore a " secure and prosperous state . " 
 However , according to Subrahmanyam 1989 , the polity that Chikka Devaraja left for his son was " at one and the same time a strong and a weak " one . Although it had uniformly expanded in size from the mid @-@ 17th century to the early 18th century , it had done so as a result of alliances that tended to hinder the very stability of the expansions . Some of the southeastern conquests ( such as that of Salem ) , although involving regions that were not of direct interest to the Mughals , were nonetheless the result of alliances with the Mughal governor of Sira and with Venkoji , the Maratha ruler of Tanjore ; the siege of Tiruchirapalli had to be abandoned because the alliance had begun to rupture . ( See Map 7 . ) Similarly , in addition to allegedly receiving a signet ring and a Royal State Sword or Sword of State , a consequence of the diplomatic mission sent to Aurangzeb in 1700 was formal subordination to Mughal authority and a requirement to pay annual taxes ; there is evidence too that the administrative reforms Chikka Devaraja has instituted might have been a direct result of Mughal influence . 
 The early 18th century ushered in the rule of Kanthirava Narasaraja II , who , being both deaf and mute , ruled under the regency of a series of army chiefs ( <unk> ) all of whom hailed from a single family from the village of Kalale in the Nanjangud taluk ( or sub @-@ district ) of Mysore . Upon the ruler 's death in 1714 at the age of 41 , his son , Dodda Krishnaraja I , still two weeks shy of his 12th birthday , succeeded him . 
 Around this time a change had come in the governance of the Mughal Province of Sira to the north and northeast of Mysore . ( See Map 11 . ) In 1713 , the province was split into a <unk> jurisdiction with capital at Arcot and governed by a newly styled Nawab of Arcot , and a <unk> jurisdiction with capital at Sira , and governed by an also newly styled Nawab of Sira . That same year , the military governor of the old province , Sadat @-@ <unk> Khan , was made the new Nawab of Arcot , and another official , Amin Khan , was appointed Nawab of Sira ; Since Mysore remained a formal tributary state of Sira , this division , and the resulting loss of revenue from the rich <unk> plain of Mysore , provoked Sadat @-@ <unk> Khan 's displeasure . In collusion with the rulers of Kadapa , Kurnool , and <unk> and the Maratha Raja of <unk> , he decided to march against Dodda Krishnaraja I. The Nawab of Sira , anxious to preempt the coalition 's action , hit upon a similar plan for reaching the Mysore capital , Seringapatam . In the end , both Nawabs — of Arcot and Sira — settled upon a joint invasion led by the former . Dodda Krishnaraja , for his part , was able to " buy off this formidable confederacy " by offering a tribute of Rs . 10 million ( 10 million ) . Although avoiding bloodshed , the outcome made Mysore vulnerable to similar future claims , which were made successfully two years later by Maratha raiders who appeared in the Mysore capital . The resulting depletion of the Mysore treasury led Mysore to attack and absorb the poligar chiefdom of <unk> to its north . ( See Map 11 . ) 
 Wilks 1811 gave a decidedly negative appraisal of the ruler 's character : 
 Whatever portion of vigour or of wisdom appeared in the conduct of this reign belonged exclusively to the ministers , who secured their own authority by appearing with affected humility to study in all things the inclinations and wishes of the Raja ( ruler ) . ... he ( Dodda Krishnaraja I ) thought himself the greatest and happiest of monarchs , without understanding , or caring to understand , during a reign of nineteen years , the troublesome details through which he was supplied with all that is necessary for animal gratification . 
 According to Rice <unk> , p . 370 , the ruler 's lack of interest in the affairs of state , led two ministers , Devaraja , the army chief ( or <unk> ) , and his cousin , Nanjaraja , who was both the revenue minister ( the <unk> ) and the privy councilor ( <unk> ) , to wield all authority in the kingdom . After Dodda Krishnaraja 's death in 1736 , the ministers appointed " pageant rajas " , and effectively ruled Mysore until the rise of Haidar Ali in 1760 . 
 = = Nayakas of Ikkeri and Kanara trade , 1565 – 1763 = = 
 In the northwestern regions , according to Stein 1987 @,@ 
 an even more impressive chiefly house arose in Vijayanagara times and came to enjoy an extensive sovereignty . These were the Keladi chiefs who later founded the Nayaka kingdom of Ikkeri . At its greatest , the Ikkeri rajas controlled a territory nearly as large as the Vijayanagara heartland , some 20 @,@ 000 square miles , extending about 180 miles south from Goa along the trade @-@ rich Kanara coast . 
 When Vasco da Gama landed in Calicut , on the southwestern Malabar coast of India , in 1498 , the Vijayanagara empire was about to reach its apex . During the 16th century the chieftaincies , or Nayaka principalities , of Keladi ( and later of Ikkeri and Bednur ) were established in the western part of what later became Shimoga district . ( See Map 2 and Map 9 . ) Sadasiva Raya Naik , the first of the Keladi chiefs , was granted permission by the Vijayanagara emperor to administer some towns on the western Kanara coast . In the decade after the fall of the Vijayanagara empire , the Portuguese , who until then had pursued their pepper trade entirely on the Malabar coast farther south , decided as a commercial strategy , to hedge their bets , and commenced purchasing some pepper from the Kanara region . During 1568 – 1569 , they took possession of the coastal towns of Onor ( now <unk> ) , <unk> ( now Basrur ) , and Mangalore and constructed fortresses and factories at each location . ( See Map 1 and Map 8 . ) 
 Onor ( Modern <unk> ) was located on the banks of the <unk> River , two miles ( 3 km ) upstream from the mouth , where the river widened into a lake . Built strategically on a cliff overlooking the river , the Portuguese fort contained homes for thirty casados ( married settlers ) . A natural sandbank kept out the large ocean @-@ going ships , and left the harbour accessible only to small craft . Approximately , 35 miles ( 56 km ) farther upstream , the Portuguese maintained a weighing station at Gersoppa , where they purchased the pepper . During the latter part of the 16th century and the first half of the 17th , Onor became not only the principal port for the export of Kanara pepper , but also the most important Portuguese supply point for pepper in all of Asia . 
 Located some 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of Onor , and a few miles up the <unk> estuary ( now Varahi ) was the town of Barcelore ( now Basrur ) . Building their fortress downstream of the existing Hindu town in order to control any approaches from the sea , the Portuguese provided accommodation for some 30 casados within its walls ; another 35 casados and their families lived in a walled area at a stone 's throw . Barcelore became a busy trading centre which exported rice , local textiles , saltpetre , and iron from the interior regions and imported corals , exotic yard goods and horses . ( See Map 1 and Map 8 . ) 
 Fifty miles south of Barcelore was Mangalore , the last of the Portuguese strongholds in Kanara , situated on the mouth of the Netravati River . There too the Portuguese built a fortress and alongside it a walled town with accommodation for 35 casados families . Both Barcelore and Mangalore became principal ports for the export of rice and during the first half of the 17th century and supplied the many strategic <unk> that were of significance to the Estado da India , the Portuguese Asian empire . These included , Goa , Malacca , Muscat , Mozambique and Mombasa . ( See Map 1 . ) 
 As a ready source of rice , pepper and teak , the Kanara coast was important to the Estado da India . For much of the 16th century , Portuguese had been able to negotiate favorable terms of trade with the weak principalities that constituted the Kanara coast . Towards the end of the century , the Nayaka ruler of Keladi ( and Ikkeri ) , Venkatappa Nayaka ( r . 1592 – 1629 ) , " assumed independence " from the residual Vijayanagara empire . Asserting power , he and his successors , Virabhadra Nayaka ( r . 1629 – 1645 ) and Shivappa Nayaka ( r . 1645 – 1660 ) forced a revision of the previous trade treaties . By the 1630s , the Portuguese had agreed to buy pepper at market rates and the rulers of Ikkeri had been permitted two voyages per year without the purchase of a <unk> ( a pass for Portuguese protection ) as well as annual importation of twelve duty @-@ free horses . 
 With the Bijapur raids threatening the region , Shivappa Nayaka moved the capital once again , this time to Bednur ( later Nagar ) , which was deemed safer . ( See Map 6 . ) Shivappa Nayaka rapidly took possession of a region that extended east to Shimoga , south to <unk> , and west through most of the Kanara coast . When the last king of Vijayanagara sought refuge in his realms , Shivappa Nayaka set him up at Belur and <unk> , and later mounted an unsuccessful siege of Seringapatam on the latter 's behalf . By the 1650s , he had driven the Portuguese out of the three <unk> at Onor , Barcelore , and Mangalore . After his death in 1660 , his successor <unk> Nayaka , however , sent an embassy to Goa for reestablishing the Portuguese trading posts in Kanara . By 1671 a treaty , which was very favorable once again to the Portuguese , had been agreed to . ( See Map 8 and Map 9 . ) 
 Before the treaty could be implemented , <unk> Nayaka died and was succeeded by an infant grandson Basava Nayaka , his succession disputed by the Queen Mother , who favored another claimant , <unk> Nayaka . The 1671 treaty languished amidst the succession struggle until 1678 , when yet another treaty was negotiated with Basava Nayaka who emerged as the victor . Since both parties in the succession struggle had been interested in purchasing European artillery from the Portuguese , the eventual treaty of 1678 was even more favorable to the latter . Under it , Basava agreed to pay 30 @,@ 000 <unk> in Portuguese war @-@ charges for the decade @-@ long conflict with the Dutch ( whom the Nayakas of Ikkeri had supported ) , to provide construction material for the factory at Mangalore , to provide 1 @,@ 500 sacks of clean rice annually , to pay a yearly tribute for Mangalore and Barcelore , to destroy the factories of the Omani Arabs on the Kanara coast , and to allow Catholic churches to be built at a number of locations in Kanara . With the treaty in place , Portuguese power returned to Kanara after an interregnum of almost half a century . The Nayakas of Ikkeri , in their turn , managed to control the region until 1763 , at which time Haidar Ali took possession of it and declared the intention of making a new capital , later called Nagar . ( See Map 9 . ) 
 = = <unk> of Sira , 1689 – 1760 = = 
 A Mughal province , which comprised the Carnatic region south of the Tungabhadra river , and which was to exist for seventy years , was established in 1687 with its capital at Sira ( in Tumkur District ) . ( See Map 10 . ) Known as the Province of Sira ( also Carnatic @-@ <unk> ) , it was composed of seven <unk> ( districts ) : <unk> , <unk> , Sira , Penukonda , Dod @-@ Ballapur , Hoskote , and Kolar ; in addition , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Bednur , Chitaldroog , and Mysore were considered by the Mughals to be tributary states of the province . Qasim Khan ( also , <unk> Khan or Kasim Khan ) was appointed the first Subahdar ( governor ) and Faujdar ( military governor ) of the province in 1689 . Having displayed " energy and success " both in controlling and in developing the province , he died in 1694 , either killed by Maratha raiders from the northwest , or killing himself in disgrace after these raiders seized a treasure under his care . Most <unk> who governed after him were to be replaced in a year or two by a successor . The instability would continue until Dilavar Khan was appointed governor in 1726 , his term lasting until 1756 . In 1757 , Sira was overrun by the Marathas , only to be restored to the Mughals in 1759 . In 1761 future ruler Haidar Ali , whose own father had been the Mughal military governor ( or Faujdar ) of Kolar district in the province , captured Sira , and soon conferred on himself the title of " Nawab of Sira " . However , the defection of his brother five years later caused the province to be lost again to the Marathas , who retained it until Haidar 's son , Tipu Sultan , recaptured it for his father in 1774 . 
 The capital of the province , Sira town , prospered most under Dilavar Khan and expanded in size to accommodate 50 @,@ 000 homes . ( See Map 10 . ) Palaces and public monuments of Sira became models for other future constructions ; both Haidar Ali 's palace in Bangalore and Tipu Sultan 's in Seringapatam , built during the period 1761 – 1799 of their rule , were modeled after Dilavar Khan 's palace in Sira . Likewise , according Rice 1908 , Bangalore 's Lal Bagh as well as Bangalore fort may have been designed after Sira 's Khan Bagh gardens and Sira fort respectively . Sira 's civil servants , however , could not be as readily reproduced ; after Tipu Sultan had succeeded his father as Sultan of Mysore in 1782 , he deported 12 @,@ 000 families , mainly of city officials , from Sira to Shahr Ganjam , a new capital he founded on Seringapatam island . 
 Earlier , in 1689 , after the Moghul armies had overrun the region of the Mysore table @-@ land , twelve <unk> ( or sub @-@ districts ) were annexed to the newly formed province ( subah ) of Sira . The remaining region was allowed to remain under the rule of the poligars , who continued to collect taxes from the cultivators , but were now required to pay annual tribute to the provincial government in Sira . In the annexed regions , in which tax assessment on cultivation was under <unk> or <unk> ( provincial government ) management , an elaborate system of officials collected and managed revenue . Most offices had existed in the region under the previous Bijapur Sultanate administration , and consisted , among others , of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The <unk> " settled accounts " with the village headmen ( or <unk> ) ; the <unk> verified the account @-@ books of the village registrars ( or <unk> ) ; the <unk> entered the official regulations in the village record @-@ books and also explained decrees and regulations to the village governing officers and residents . Lastly , the <unk> prepared the final documents of the " settlement " ( i.e. the assessment and payment of tax ) and promulgated it . 
 Until the mid @-@ 17th century , both <unk> and district ( <unk> ) accounts had been prepared in the language and script of Kannada , the region 's traditional language . However , after the Bijapur invasions , Maratha chieftains came to wield authority in the region and brought in with them various officials who introduced the Marathi language and script into the " public accounts " . The new language even found its way into lands ruled by some poligar chiefs . These chieftains had brought in Marathi @-@ speaking horsemen from the northern Bijapur realms for their newly formed cavalry units and resorted to hiring Maratha accountants for the benefit of these cavalrymen . After the province of Sira was created , the official language of the Moghul empire , Persian , came to be used . 
 = = Rajas of Coorg , mid @-@ 16th century – 1768 = = 
 Although , <unk> , a " royal " genealogy of the rulers of Coorg , written in 1808 , makes no mention of the origin of the lineage , its reading by historian Lewis Rice led him to conclude that the princely line was established by a member of the Ikkeri Nayaka family . Having moved south to the town of <unk> in northern Coorg in the disguise of a wandering Jangama monk , he soon began to attract followers ; then , with their help , or their acquiescence , he took possession of the town , and in such manner came to rule the entire country . ( See Map 11 . ) According to the genealogy , the Coorg rajas who ruled from the mid @-@ 16th century to the mid @-@ 18th century were : 
 By the late 17th @-@ century , the rajas of Coorg had created an " aggressive and independent " state , which became known for its acts of " wanton cruelty " against enemies , and for its " system of terror " directed at its citizens . <unk> Raja , the Coorg ruler from 1633 to 1687 , initially ruled from the town of <unk> , but later moved his capital to Mercara , which he fortified and where he built a palace in 1681 . Early during the rule of his successor , Dodda Virappa ( 1687 – 1736 ) , the army of the neighboring kingdom of Mysore , under the orders of Wodeyar Chikka Devaraja , attacked and seized Piriyapatna , a territory which abutted Coorg ( see Map 11 ) , and which was then being ruled by a kinsman of Dodda Virappa . Buoyed by the victory , the Mysore army soon attacked Coorg itself ; however , it had advanced only a short distance , when , while camping overnight on the plain of <unk> , it was surprised by a Coorg ambush . In the ensuing massacre , the Mysore army lost 15 @,@ 000 men , and the survivors had to beat a hasty retreat . For most of the next two decades , the western reaches of Mysore remained vulnerable to attacks by the Coorg army . In the border district of <unk> , the Coorg and Mysore forces fought to a stalemate and , in the end , had to work out a tax sharing arrangement . 
 In 1724 , major hostilities resumed between Coorg and Mysore . Changing his modus operandi from guerrilla skirmishes in the hilly Coorg jungle to open field warfare , Dodda Virappa , attacked the Mysore army in the plains . Catching it off guard , he took in rapid succession six fortresses from Piriyapatna to <unk> . The resulting loss of revenue , some 600 @,@ 000 gold pagodas , was felt in Mysore , and several months later , in August or September 1724 , a large army was sent from Seringapatam , the Mysore capital , to Coorg . Upon the Mysore army 's arrival in the western region , however , the Coorg forces , returning to guerrilla warfare , retreated into the woods . Emboldened by the lack of resistance , the Mysore forces next mounted an attack on the Coorg hills . There too , they met no resistance . However , a few days into this invasion , the Mysore forces , recalling their ignominious ambush in the 1690s , panicked and retreated during the night . Soon , the Coorg army was attacking the Mysore outposts again . This pattern of back and forth was to continue until the Mysore army was recalled , a few months later , to Seringapatam , leaving the region again vulnerable to the periodic raids of the Coorg army . According to historian Sanjay Subrahmanyam , 
 The entire episode yields a rare insight into one aspect of war in the 18th century : the ( Coorg ) forces , lacking cavalry , with a minimum of firearms , lost every major battle , but won the war by dint of two factors . First , the terrain , and the possibility of retreating periodically into the wooded hillside , favoured them , in contrast to their relatively clumsy opponents . Second , the Mysore army could never maintain a permanent presence in the region , given the fact that the Wodeyar kingdom had several open frontiers . 
 More than a century earlier , Lewis Rice , had written : 
 Dodda Virappa evinced throughout his long and vigorous reign an unconquerable spirit , and though surrounded by powerful neighbours , neither the number nor the strength of this enemies seems to have relaxed his courage or damped his enterprise . He died in 1736 , 78 years old . Two of his wives ascended the funeral pile with the dead body of the Raja . 
 The ruler was succeeded by his grandson , Chikka Virappa , whose unremarkable rule lasted until 1768 , when Coorg was conquered by Haidar Ali , the new sultan of Mysore . 
 = = Assessment : the period and its historiography = = 
 From the mid @-@ 15th century to the mid @-@ 18th century , according to historian Burton Stein , rulers of states in southern India commenced financing wars on a different footing than had their predecessors . To varying degrees , all the rulers of the Mysore and Coorg region — the Vijayanagara emperors , the Wodeyars of Mysore , the Nayakas of Ikkeri , the <unk> of Sira , and the Rajas of Coorg — fall under this category . A similar political system , referred to as " military fiscalism " by French historian Martin Wolfe , took hold in Europe between the 15th and 17th centuries . During this time , according to Wolfe , most regimes in Western Europe emerged from the aristocracy to become absolute monarchies ; they simultaneously reduced their dependence on the aristocracy by expanding the tax base and developing an extensive tax collection structure . In Stein 's words , 
 Previously resistant aristocracies were eventually won over in early modern Europe by being offered state offices and honors and by being protected in their patrimonial wealth , but this was only after monarchies had proven their ability to defeat antiquated feudal forces and had found alternative resources in cities and from trade . 
 In southern India , none of the pre @-@ 1760 regimes were able to achieve the " fiscal absolutism " of their European contemporaries . Local chieftains , who had close ties with their social groups , and who had only recently risen from them , opposed the excessive monetary demands of a more powerful regional ruler . Consequently , the larger states of this period in southern India , were not able to entirely change their mode of creating wealth from one of extracting tribute payments , which were seldom regular , to that of direct collection of taxes by government officials . <unk> tribute under threat of military action , according to Stein , is not true " military fiscalism , " although it is a means of approaching it . This partial or limited military fiscalism began during the Vijayanagara Empire , setting the latter apart from the more " <unk> " regimes that had preceded it , and was a prominent feature of all regimes during the period 1565 – 1760 ; true military fiscalism was not achieved in the region until the rule of Tipu Sultan in the 1780s . 
 Stein 's formulation has been criticized by historian Sanjay Subrahmanyam , in part , on account of the lack of extensive historiography for the period . The 18th @-@ century Wodeyar rulers of Mysore — in contrast to their contemporaries in Rajputana , Central India , Maratha Deccan , and Tanjavur — left little or no record of their administrations . Surveying the historiography , Subrahmanyam , says : 
 A major problem attendant on such generalisations by modern historians concerning pre @-@ 1760 Mysore is , however , the paucity of documentation on this older ' Old Regime ' . 
 The first explicit History of Mysore in English is Historical Sketches of the South of India , in an attempt to trace the History of <unk> ( Wilks 1811 ) , by Mark Wilks . Wilks claimed to have based his history on various Kannada language documents , many of which have not survived . According to Subrahmanyam 1989 , p . 206 , all subsequent histories of Mysore have borrowed heavily from Wilks 's book for their pre @-@ 1760 content . These include , Rice 1897 , Lewis Rice 's well @-@ known Gazetteer and Rao 1948 , C. <unk> Rao 's major revision of the Gazetteer half a century later , and many modern spin @-@ offs of these two works . In Subrahmanyam 's words , " Wilks 's work is an important one therefore , not only for its own sake , but for its having been regurgitated and reproduced time and again with minor variations . " 
 A Wodeyar dynasty genealogy , the <unk> <unk> of <unk> , was composed in Kannada during the period 1710 – 1715 , and was claimed to be based on all the then @-@ extant inscriptions in the region . Another genealogy , Kalale <unk> <unk> , of the <unk> , the near @-@ hereditary chief ministers of Mysore , was composed around the turn of the 19th century . However , neither manuscript provides information about administration , economy or military capability . The ruling dynasty 's origins , especially as expounded in later palace genealogies , are also of doubtful accuracy ; this is , in part , because the Wodeyars , who were reinstated by the British on the Mysore <unk> in 1799 , to preside over a fragile sovereignty , " obsessively " attempted to demonstrate their " unbroken " royal lineage , to bolster their then uncertain status . 
 The earliest manuscript offering clues to governance and military conflict in the pre @-@ 1760 Mysore , seems to be Dias ( Dias 1725 ) , an annual letter written in Portuguese by a Mysore @-@ based Jesuit missionary , Joachim Dias , and addressed to his Provincial superior . After the East India Company 's final 1799 victory over Tipu Sultan , official Company records began to be published as well ; these include East India Company 1800 , a collection of Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars @-@ related correspondence between the Company 's officials in India and Court of Directors in London , and Wilks 1805 , the first report on the new Princely State of Mysore by its resident , Mark Wilks . Around this time , French accounts of the Anglo @-@ Mysore wars appeared as well , and included Michaud 1809 , a history of the wars by Joseph @-@ François Michaud , another Jesuit priest . The first attempt at including a comprehensive history of Mysore in an English language work is Buchanan 1807 , an account of a survey of South India conducted at Lord Richard Wellesley 's request , by Francis Buchanan , a Scottish physician and geographer . By the end of the period of British <unk> of Mysore ( 1831 – 1881 ) , many English language works had begun to appear on a variety of Mysore @-@ related subjects . These included Rice 1879 , a book of English translations of Kannada language inscriptions , and Digby 1878 , William Digby 's two volume critique of British famine policy during the Great Famine of 1876 – 78 , which devastated Mysore for years to come . 
 = Elagabalus = 
 Elagabalus / <unk> / or Heliogabalus ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Latin : Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus ; c . 203 – March 11 , 222 ) , was Roman emperor from 218 to 222 . A member of the Severan dynasty , he was Syrian , the second son of Julia Soaemias and Sextus Varius Marcellus . In his early youth he served as a priest of the god Elagabal in the hometown of his mother 's family , Emesa . As a private citizen , he was probably named Sextus Varius Avitus <unk> . Upon becoming emperor he took the name Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus . He was called Elagabalus only after his death . 
 In 217 , the emperor Caracalla was assassinated and replaced by his Praetorian prefect , Marcus <unk> Macrinus . Caracalla 's maternal aunt , Julia Maesa , successfully instigated a revolt among the Legio III Gallica to have her eldest grandson ( and Caracalla 's cousin ) , Elagabalus , declared emperor in his place . Macrinus was defeated on 8 June 218 at the Battle of Antioch . Elagabalus , barely fourteen years old , became emperor , initiating a reign remembered mainly for sex scandals and religious controversy . 
 Later historians suggest Elagabalus showed a disregard for Roman religious traditions and sexual taboos . He replaced the traditional head of the Roman pantheon , Jupiter , with the deity of whom he was high priest , Elagabalus . He forced leading members of Rome 's government to participate in religious rites celebrating this deity , over which he personally presided . Elagabalus was supposedly " married " as many as five times , lavished favours on male courtiers popularly thought to have been his lovers , and was reported to have prostituted himself in the imperial palace . His behavior estranged the Praetorian Guard , the Senate , and the common people alike . Amidst growing opposition , Elagabalus , just 18 years old , was assassinated and replaced by his cousin Severus Alexander on 11 March 222 , in a plot formulated by his grandmother , Julia Maesa , and carried out by disaffected members of the Praetorian Guard . 
 Elagabalus developed a reputation among his contemporaries for extreme eccentricity , decadence and zealotry . This tradition has persisted , and in writers of the early modern age he suffers one of the worst reputations among Roman emperors . Edward Gibbon , for example , wrote that Elagabalus " abandoned himself to the grossest pleasures and ungoverned fury " . According to Barthold Georg Niebuhr , " The name Elagabalus is branded in history above all others " because of his " unspeakably disgusting life " . 
 = = Family and priesthood = = 
 Elagabalus was born around the year 203 to Sextus Varius Marcellus and Julia Soaemias <unk> . His father was initially a member of the <unk> class , but was later elevated to the rank of senator . His grandmother , Julia Maesa , was the widow of the consul Julius Avitus , the sister of Julia Domna , and the sister @-@ in @-@ law of the emperor Septimius Severus . He had at least one sibling : an unnamed elder brother . His mother , Julia Soaemias , was a cousin of the Roman emperor Caracalla . Other relatives included his aunt Julia <unk> Mamaea and uncle Marcus Julius <unk> Marcianus and among their children , their son Severus Alexander . Elagabalus 's family held hereditary rights to the priesthood of the sun god Elagabal , of whom Elagabalus was the high priest at Emesa ( modern Homs ) in Roman Syria . 
 The deity Elagabalus was initially venerated at Emesa . This form of the god 's name is a Latinized version of the Syrian Ilāh hag @-@ Gabal , which derives from Ilāh ( a Semitic word for " god " ) and <unk> ( an Aramaic word for " mountain " ) , resulting in " the God of the Mountain , " the <unk> manifestation of the deity . The cult of the deity spread to other parts of the Roman Empire in the 2nd century ; a dedication has been found as far away as Woerden ( Netherlands ) , near the Roman limes . The god was later imported and assimilated with the Roman sun god known as Sol <unk> in republican times and as Sol Invictus during the second and third centuries CE . In Greek the sun god is Helios , hence " Heliogabalus " , a hybrid conjunction of " Helios " and " Elagabalus " . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 When the emperor Macrinus came to power , he suppressed the threat against his reign from the family of his assassinated predecessor , Caracalla , by exiling them — Julia Maesa , her two daughters , and her eldest grandson Elagabalus — to their estate at Emesa in Syria . Almost upon arrival in Syria , Maesa began a plot with her advisor and Elagabalus ' tutor Gannys , to overthrow Macrinus and elevate the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Elagabalus to the imperial throne . 
 His mother publicly declared that he was the illegitimate son of Caracalla , therefore due the loyalties of Roman soldiers and senators who had sworn allegiance to Caracalla . After Julia Maesa displayed her wealth to the Third Legion at <unk> they swore allegiance to Elagabalus . At sunrise on 16 May 218 , Publius Valerius Comazon , commander of the legion , declared him emperor . To strengthen his legitimacy through further propaganda , Elagabalus assumed Caracalla 's names , Marcus Aurelius Antoninus . 
 In response Macrinus dispatched his Praetorian prefect <unk> Julianus to the region with a contingent of troops he considered strong enough to crush the rebellion . However , this force soon joined the faction of Elagabalus when , during the battle , they turned on their own commanders . The officers were killed and Julianus ' head was sent back to the emperor . 
 Macrinus now sent letters to the Senate denouncing Elagabalus as the False Antoninus and claiming he was insane . Both consuls and other high @-@ ranking members of Rome 's leadership condemned Elagabalus , and the Senate subsequently declared war on both Elagabalus and Julia Maesa . 
 Macrinus and his son , weakened by the desertion of the Second Legion due to bribes and promises circulated by Julia Maesa , were defeated on 8 June 218 at the Battle of Antioch by troops commanded by Gannys . Macrinus fled toward Italy , disguised as a courier , but was later intercepted near Chalcedon and executed in Cappadocia . His son <unk> , sent for safety to the Parthian court , was captured at Zeugma and also put to death . 
 Elagabalus declared the date of the victory at Antioch to be the beginning of his reign and assumed the imperial titles without prior senatorial approval , which violated tradition but was a common practice among 3rd @-@ century emperors nonetheless . Letters of reconciliation were dispatched to Rome extending amnesty to the Senate and recognizing the laws , while also condemning the administration of Macrinus and his son . 
 The senators responded by acknowledging Elagabalus as emperor and accepting his claim to be the son of Caracalla . Caracalla and Julia Domna were both deified by the Senate , both Julia Maesa and Julia Soaemias were elevated to the rank of Augustae , and the memory of both Macrinus and <unk> was condemned by the Senate . The former commander of the Third Legion , Comazon , was appointed commander of the Praetorian Guard . 
 = = Emperor ( 218 – 222 ) = = 
 Elagabalus and his entourage spent the winter of 218 in Bithynia at Nicomedia , where the emperor 's religious beliefs first presented themselves as a problem . The contemporary historian Cassius Dio suggests that Gannys was in fact killed by the new emperor because he was forcing Elagabalus to live " <unk> and prudently " . To help Romans adjust to the idea of having an oriental priest as emperor , Julia Maesa had a painting of Elagabalus in priestly robes sent to Rome and hung over a statue of the goddess Victoria in the Senate House . This placed senators in the awkward position of having to make offerings to Elagabalus whenever they made offerings to Victoria . 
 The legions were dismayed by his behaviour and quickly came to regret having supported his accession . While Elagabalus was still on his way to Rome , brief revolts broke out by the Fourth Legion at the instigation of Gellius Maximus , and by the Third Legion , which itself had been responsible for the elevation of Elagabalus to the throne , under the command of Senator Verus . The rebellion was quickly put down , and the Third Legion disbanded . 
 When the entourage reached Rome in the autumn of 219 , Comazon and other allies of Julia Maesa and Elagabalus were given powerful and lucrative positions , to the outrage of many senators who did not consider them worthy of such privileges . After his tenure as Praetorian prefect , Comazon would serve as the city prefect of Rome three times , and as consul twice . Elagabalus soon devalued the Roman currency . He decreased the silver purity of the denarius from 58 % to 46 @.@ 5 % — the actual silver weight dropping from 1 @.@ 82 grams to 1 @.@ 41 grams . He also demonetized the <unk> during this period in Rome . 
 Elagabalus tried to have his presumed lover , the charioteer Hierocles , declared Caesar , while another alleged lover , the athlete Aurelius Zoticus , was appointed to the non @-@ administrative but influential position of Master of the Chamber , or <unk> . His offer of amnesty for the Roman upper class was largely honoured , though the jurist Ulpian was exiled . 
 The relationships between Julia Maesa , Julia Soaemias , and Elagabalus were strong at first . His mother and grandmother became the first women to be allowed into the Senate , and both received senatorial titles : Soaemias the established title of <unk> , and Maesa the more unorthodox Mater <unk> et <unk> ( " Mother of the army camp and of the Senate " ) . They held the title of Augusta as well , indicating that they may have been the power behind the throne . Indeed , they held much influence over the young emperor throughout his reign , and can be found on many coins and inscriptions - a rare honor for Roman women . 
 = = = Religious controversy = = = 
 Since the reign of Septimius Severus , sun worship had increased throughout the Empire . Elagabalus saw this as an opportunity to install Elagabal as the chief deity of the Roman pantheon . The god was renamed Deus Sol Invictus , meaning God the Undefeated Sun , and honored above Jupiter . 
 As a token of respect for Roman religion , however , Elagabalus joined either Astarte , Minerva , Urania , or some combination of the three to Elagabal as wife . A union between Elagabal and a traditional goddess would have served to strengthen ties between the new religion and the imperial cult . In fact , there may have been an effort to introduce Elagabal , Urania , and Athena as the new triad of Rome - replacing that of Jupiter , Juno , and Minerva . 
 He stirred further discontent when he himself married the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa , claiming the marriage would produce " godlike children " . This was a flagrant breach of Roman law and tradition , which held that any Vestal found to have engaged in sexual intercourse was to be buried alive . 
 A lavish temple called the Elagabalium was built on the east face of the Palatine Hill to house Elagabal , who was represented by a black conical meteorite from Emesa . Herodian wrote " this stone is worshipped as though it were sent from heaven ; on it there are some small projecting pieces and markings that are pointed out , which the people would like to believe are a rough picture of the sun , because this is how they see them " . 
 In order to become the high priest of his new religion , Elagabalus had himself circumcised . He forced senators to watch while he danced around the altar of Deus Sol Invictus to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals . Each summer solstice he held a festival dedicated to the god , which became popular with the masses because of the free food distributed on such occasions . During this festival , Elagabalus placed the Emesa stone on a chariot adorned with gold and jewels , which he paraded through the city : 
 A six horse chariot carried the divinity , the horses huge and flawlessly white , with expensive gold fittings and rich ornaments . No one held the reins , and no one rode in the chariot ; the vehicle was escorted as if the god himself were the charioteer . Elagabalus ran backward in front of the chariot , facing the god and holding the horses ' reins . He made the whole journey in this reverse fashion , looking up into the face of his god . 
 The most sacred relics from the Roman religion were transferred from their respective shrines to the Elagabalium , including the emblem of the Great Mother , the fire of Vesta , the Shields of the <unk> and the Palladium , so that no other god could be worshipped except in company with Elagabal . 
 = = = Sex / gender controversy = = = 
 The question of Elagabalus ' sexual orientation is complicated and confusing , due in large part to salacious and unreliable sources . Elagabalus married and divorced five women , three of whom are known . His first wife was Julia Cornelia Paula ; the second was the Vestal Virgin Julia Aquilia Severa . 
 Within a year , he abandoned her and married <unk> Aurelia Faustina , a descendant of Marcus Aurelius and the widow of a man recently executed by Elagabalus . He had returned to his second wife Severa by the end of the year . According to Cassius Dio , his most stable relationship seems to have been with his chariot driver , a blond slave from Caria named Hierocles , whom he referred to as his husband . 
 The Augustan History claims that he also married a man named Zoticus , an athlete from Smyrna , in a public ceremony at Rome . Cassius Dio reported that Elagabalus would paint his eyes , <unk> his hair and wear wigs before prostituting himself in taverns , brothels , and even in the imperial palace : 
 Finally , he set aside a room in the palace and there committed his indecencies , always standing nude at the door of the room , as the harlots do , and shaking the curtain which hung from gold rings , while in a soft and melting voice he solicited the passers @-@ by . There were , of course , men who had been specially instructed to play their part . For , as in other matters , so in this business , too , he had numerous agents who sought out those who could best please him by their <unk> . He would collect money from his patrons and give himself airs over his gains ; he would also dispute with his associates in this shameful occupation , claiming that he had more lovers than they and took in more money . 
 Herodian commented that Elagabalus enhanced his natural good looks by the regular application of cosmetics . He was described as having been " delighted to be called the mistress , the wife , the queen of Hierocles " and was reported to have offered vast sums of money to any physician who could equip him with female genitalia . Elagabalus has been characterized by some modern writers as transgender , perhaps transsexual . 
 = = = Fall from power = = = 
 By 221 Elagabalus ' eccentricities , particularly his relationship with Hierocles , increasingly provoked the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard . When Elagabalus ' grandmother Julia Maesa perceived that popular support for the emperor was waning , she decided that he and his mother , who had encouraged his religious practices , had to be replaced . As alternatives , she turned to her other daughter , Julia <unk> Mamaea , and her daughter 's son , the thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Severus Alexander . 
 Prevailing on Elagabalus , she arranged that he appoint his cousin Alexander as his heir and be given the title of Caesar . Alexander shared the consulship with the emperor that year . However , Elagabalus reconsidered this arrangement when he began to suspect that the Praetorian Guard preferred his cousin over himself . 
 Following the failure of various attempts on Alexander 's life , Elagabalus stripped his cousin of his titles , revoked his consulship , and circulated the news that Alexander was near death , in order to see how the Praetorians would react . A riot ensued , and the guard demanded to see Elagabalus and Alexander in the Praetorian camp . 
 = = = = Assassination = = = = 
 The emperor complied and on 11 March 222 he publicly presented his cousin along with his own mother , Julia Soaemias . On their arrival the soldiers started cheering Alexander while ignoring Elagabalus , who ordered the summary arrest and execution of anyone who had taken part in this display of insubordination . In response , members of the Praetorian Guard attacked Elagabalus and his mother : 
 So he made an attempt to flee , and would have got away somewhere by being placed in a chest , had he not been discovered and slain , at the age of 18 . His mother , who embraced him and clung tightly to him , perished with him ; their heads were cut off and their bodies , after being stripped naked , were first dragged all over the city , then the mother 's body was cast aside somewhere or other while his was thrown into the [ Tiber ] . 
 Following his assassination , many associates of Elagabalus were killed or deposed , including his lover Hierocles . His religious edicts were reversed and the stone of Elagabal was sent back to Emesa . Women were again barred from attending meetings of the Senate . The practice of damnatio memoriae — erasing from the public record a disgraced personage formerly of note — was systematically applied in his case . 
 = = = Augustan History = = = 
 The source of many of these stories of Elagabalus 's depravity is the Augustan History ( Historia Augusta ) , which includes controversial claims . The Historia Augusta was most likely written toward the end of the 4th century during the reign of emperor Theodosius I. The life of Elagabalus as described in the Augustan History is of uncertain historical merit . Sections 13 to 17 , relating to the fall of Elagabalus , are less controversial among historians . 
 = = = Cassius Dio = = = 
 Sources often considered more credible than the Augustan History include the contemporary historians Cassius Dio and Herodian . Cassius Dio lived from the second half of the 2nd century until sometime after 229 . Born into a patrician family , he spent the greater part of his life in public service . He was a senator under emperor Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus . Afterwards he served as suffect consul around 205 , and as proconsul in Africa and Pannonia . 
 Severus Alexander held him in high esteem and made him his consul again . His Roman History spans nearly a millennium , from the arrival of Aeneas in Italy until the year 229 . As a contemporary of Elagabalus , Cassius Dio 's account of his reign is generally considered more reliable than the Augustan History , although by his own admission Dio spent the greater part of the relevant period outside of Rome and had to rely on second @-@ hand accounts . 
 Furthermore , the political climate in the aftermath of Elagabalus ' reign , as well as Dio 's own position within the government of Alexander , likely influenced the truth of this part of his history for the worse . Dio regularly refers to Elagabalus as Sardanapalus , partly to distinguish him from his divine namesake , but chiefly to do his part in maintaining the damnatio memoriae and to associate him with another autocrat notorious for a dissolute life . 
 = = = Herodian = = = 
 Another contemporary of Elagabalus was Herodian , who was a minor Roman civil servant who lived from c . 170 until 240 . His work , History of the Roman Empire since Marcus Aurelius , commonly abbreviated as Roman History , is an eyewitness account of the reign of Commodus until the beginning of the reign of Gordian III . His work largely overlaps with Dio 's own Roman History , but both texts seem to be independently consistent with each other . 
 Although Herodian is not deemed as reliable as Cassius Dio , his lack of literary and scholarly pretensions make him less biased than senatorial historians . Herodian is considered the most important source for the religious reforms which took place during the reign of Elagabalus , which have been confirmed by numismatic and archaeological evidence . 
 = = = = Edward Gibbon and later historians = = = = 
 For readers of the modern age , The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire by Edward Gibbon ( 1737 – 94 ) further cemented the scandalous reputation of Elagabalus . Gibbon not only accepted and expressed outrage at the allegations of the ancient historians , but might have added some details of his own ; he is the first historian known to state that Gannys was a eunuch , for example . Gibbon wrote : 
 To confound the order of the season and climate , to sport with the passions and prejudices of his subjects , and to subvert every law of nature and decency , were in the number of his most delicious amusements . A long train of concubines , and a rapid succession of wives , among whom was a vestal virgin , ravished by force from her sacred asylum , were insufficient to satisfy the impotence of his passions . The master of the Roman world affected to copy the manners and dress of the female sex , preferring the distaff to the sceptre , and dishonored the principal dignities of the empire by distributing them among his numerous lovers ; one of whom was publicly invested with the title and authority of the emperor 's , or , as he more properly styled himself , the empress 's husband . It may seem probable , the vices and follies of Elagabalus have been adorned by fancy , and blackened by prejudice . Yet , confining ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the Roman people , and attested by grave and contemporary historians , their inexpressible infamy surpasses that of any other age or country . 
 Two hundred years after the age of Pliny , the use of pure , or even of mixed silks , was confined to the female sex , till the opulent citizens of Rome and the provinces were insensibly familiarized with the example of Elagabalus , the first who , by this effeminate habit , had sullied the dignity of an emperor and a man . 
 Some recent historians argue for a more favourable picture of his life and reign . Martijn <unk> in Images of Elagabalus ( 2008 ; republished as The Crimes of Elagabalus in 2012 ) doubts the reliability of the ancient sources and argues that it was the emperor 's unorthodox religious policies that alienated the power elite of Rome , to the point that his grandmother saw fit to eliminate him and replace him with his cousin . Leonardo de <unk> y Prado , in The Emperor Elagabalus : Fact or Fiction ? ( 2008 ) , is also critical of the ancient historians and speculates that neither religion nor sexuality played a role in the fall of the young emperor , who was simply the loser in a power struggle within the imperial family ; the loyalty of the Praetorian Guards was up for sale , and Julia Maesa had the resources to outmaneuver and <unk> her grandson . According to this version , once Elagabalus , his mother , and his immediate circle had been murdered , a wholesale propaganda war against his memory resulted in a vicious caricature which has persisted to the present , repeated and often embellished by later historians displaying their own prejudices against effeminacy and other vices which Elagabalus had come to epitomize . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Due to the ancient tradition about him , Elagabalus became something of an ( anti- ) hero in the Decadent movement of the late 19th century . He often appears in literature and other creative media as the epitome of a young , amoral aesthete . His life and character have informed or at least inspired many famous works of art , by <unk> , even by contemporary artists . The most notable of these works include : 
 = = = Literature and biographies = = = 
 L 'Agonie ( Agony ) ( 1888 ) , the best known novel by the French writer Jean Lombard , featuring <unk> as the protagonist 
 In 1903 Georges <unk> published what purports to be a faithful biography of the emperor : Héliogabale : <unk> par les historians Grecs et Latins , [ avec ] dix @-@ <unk> <unk> d 'après les monuments original . 
 The previous pair of works inspired the Dutch writer Louis <unk> to produce his novel De Berg van Licht ( The Mountain of Light ) ( 1905 ) , which presents Elagabalus in a sympathetic light . 
 <unk> ( 1892 – 1919 ) , a collection of poems by the German poet Stefan George 
 The Sun God ( 1904 ) , a novel by the English writer Arthur Westcott 
 The Amazing Emperor Heliogabalus ( 1911 ) , a biography by John Stuart Hay 
 Héliogabale ou l <unk> <unk> ( Heliogabalus or The Anarchist Crowned ) ( 1934 ) by Antonin Artaud , combining essay , biography , and fiction 
 Family Favourites ( 1960 ) , a novel by the Anglo @-@ Argentine writer Alfred Duggan in which Heliogabalus is seen through the eyes of a faithful Gaulish bodyguard and depicted as a gentle and charming aesthete , personally lovable but lacking in political skills . 
 Child of the Sun ( 1966 ) , a novel by Lance Horner and Kyle <unk> , better known for writing the novel that inspired the movie Mandingo 
 Super @-@ <unk> ( 1969 ) , a novel by the Italian writer Alberto <unk> 
 Boy Caesar ( 2004 ) , a novel by the English writer Jeremy Reed 
 Le <unk> Héliogabale : <unk> , Prêtre et <unk> ( 2006 ) , by the novelist Emma Locatelli 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 Zygmunt Krasiński . " <unk> " ( 1836 ) , in which Elagabalus is portrayed as a cruel tyrant 
 Mencken , H.L. and Nathan , George Jean . Heliogabalus A Buffoonery in Three Acts . New York : Alfred A. Knopf , 1920 
 de Escobar <unk> , C.H. <unk> : O Sol é a <unk> . Ed . <unk> . Rio de Janeiro , 1980 
 Gilbert , S. Heliogabalus : A Love Story . Toronto , Cabaret Theatre Company , 2002 
 <unk> , Shawn . Elagabalus , Emperor of Rome , 2008 
 <unk> . Heliogabalus , ( 2008 ) 
 = = = Paintings = = = 
 Heliogabalus , High Priest of the Sun ( 1866 ) , by the English decadent Simeon Solomon 
 One of the most notorious incidents laid to his account is immortalized in the 19th @-@ century painting The Roses of Heliogabalus ( 1888 ) , by the Anglo @-@ Dutch academician Sir Lawrence Alma @-@ Tadema . It shows guests at one of his extravagant dinner parties smothered under a mass of " violets and other flowers " dropped from above . 
 Heliogabalus ( 1974 ) , by Anselm Kiefer 
 Antonin Artaud Heliogabalus ( 2010 – 11 ) , by Anselm Kiefer 
 = = = Music = = = 
 <unk> , an opera by Venetian Baroque composer Francesco Cavalli ( 1667 ) 
 <unk> , an opera by French composer <unk> de <unk> ( 1910 ) 
 Heliogabalus imperator ( Emperor Heliogabalus ) , an orchestral work by the German composer Hans Werner Henze ( 1972 ) 
 Artaud , an album by Luis Alberto <unk> ( 1973 ) 
 <unk> , Second album of the Italian @-@ Slovenian experimental band Devil Doll 
 Six Litanies for Heliogabalus , an album by American musician John Zorn ( 2007 ) 
 = = = Dance = = = 
 Héliogabale , a modern dance choreographed by Maurice Béjart 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Héliogabale , a 1909 silent film by the French director André <unk> 
 A Roman Orgy ( Héliogabale , ou L <unk> romaine ) , a 1911 silent short by the French director Louis <unk> 
 Elagabalus is portrayed by Mathew Baynton in the CBBC series Horrible Histories . 
 = = = Vocabulary = = = 
 The Spanish word <unk> means " a person overwhelmed by gluttony " . 
 = = = Secondary material = = = 
 = The French Connection ( ice hockey ) = 
 The French Connection was a line of professional ice hockey forwards who played together for the Buffalo Sabres of the National Hockey League from 1972 until 1979 . The line consisted of Hall of Famer Gilbert Perreault at centre and All @-@ Stars Rick Martin and Rene Robert at left wing and right wing , respectively . All three players were French @-@ Canadian ; Perreault is from Victoriaville , Quebec , Martin was from Verdun , Quebec , and Robert is from Trois @-@ Rivières , Quebec . The name was related both to the origins of the players and the 1971 hit movie entitled The French Connection , based upon the book of the same name . 
 The trio excelled together , with each being named to the Official NHL All @-@ Star Team at least once and to the National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game at least twice while playing together as a unit for seven full seasons . Perreault and Martin were the Buffalo Sabres ' first @-@ round draft picks in the franchise 's first two years , and Robert was acquired late in the franchise 's second season via a spring 1972 trade . The players were named to several National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game teams and dominated the Buffalo scoring statistical leadership during their years together . They led the Sabres to the franchise 's first Stanley Cup Finals appearance and continue to hold many of the franchise 's scoring records . 
 = = History = = 
 Perreault was acquired by the team with their first draft pick of their inaugural season in the 1970 Entry Draft . Martin followed the next year as the team 's first pick in 1971 . Both players were drafted after three seasons with the Montreal Junior Canadiens . Robert was acquired in a trade on March 4 , 1972 , for Eddie Shack . He played twelve games for the Sabres during the 1971 – 72 NHL season . Perreault played his entire 17 @-@ season career with the Sabres . Martin played all but 4 games of his injury @-@ shortened 11 @-@ season career with the Sabres . The trio played together as a line most of the time until the fall of 1979 . On October 5 , 1979 , Scotty Bowman traded Robert to the Colorado Rockies for defenseman John Van <unk> . This ended the French Connection era in Buffalo , but not before the trio became the first three players to accumulate 200 goals in a Sabres uniform . Each player 's jerseys were retired ; Perreault 's # 11 was retired during a ceremony on October 17 , 1990 , and Robert 's # 14 and Martin 's # 7 were retired on November 15 , 1995 . All three numbers hang together from the First Niagara Center under a French Connection banner . 
 In hopes of averting the lean years that troubled most expansion teams , George Imlach , the Sabres first coach and General Manager , attempted to build a high @-@ scoring club to excite the local hockey fans . Perreault was regarded as a smooth skater and tremendous stickhandler . Perreault was chosen to be the franchise player around which a team could be built and succeed . Although Martin and Perreault had played two years together with the Montreal Junior Canadiens ( Perreault even lived with Martin 's family during the 1969 – 70 season ) , they had never played on the same line before being paired in Buffalo . Since Martin was one of the few who could keep up with Perreault as a skater they were paired together after the Sabres drafted Martin . It was very clear during the 1971 – 72 season that Perreault and Martin were a natural pairing . Sabres coach Joe Crozier felt the two just needed a third player who would stay high and check . Sabres coach quickly teamed Robert with Perreault and Martin after the trade . The two players complemented Perreault and became a dynamic combination that dazzled fans . They were dubbed the French Connection by writer Lee Coppola as a reference to the Academy Award @-@ winning film and their heritage via the Buffalo Auditorium message board . The pair played together as a regular line through the 1974 – 75 season . At times , they were split up during the last four seasons . When they played together they often faced the opposition 's top defensive lineups . Since the trio were tremendous skating scoring threats these opponents would concentrate on checking them and staying on top of them . For example , against the Montreal Canadiens Bob Gainey 's line would oppose them . Rick Martin once said about this line " I had Jimmy Roberts between me and my shadow . " 
 Perreault was known as a naturally gifted skater and playmaker who was capable of making an end @-@ to @-@ end rush at any time . His fame was hampered by his own shy personality . His stickhandling and head faking confounded even the best defensive players in the world . Martin was considered the " marksman " of the three who was dangerous with the <unk> and slapshot . Robert was known for his " blinding speed and lethal shot " . He made his mark with the French Connection , as one of the league 's most highly regarded powerplay point men , and on the second line penalty killing unit . He was perhaps the least flashy of the three , but was the most complete . He was the player who checked and worked hard in the corners . 
 Perreault holds numerous club career records ( including regular season games played , goals , assists , points , game @-@ winning goals , 30 @-@ goal seasons , 20 @-@ goal seasons , and shots on goal ) . However , Martin holds the franchise career records for hat tricks , four @-@ goal games , 40 @-@ goal seasons , consecutive 40 @-@ goal seasons , 50 @-@ goal seasons ( tied with Danny Gare ) and consecutive 50 @-@ goal seasons . Although Robert 's name is not as prominent in the record <unk> his 40 @-@ goal and 60 @-@ assist 1974 – 75 NHL season was the club 's first 100 @-@ point season by an individual . During the seven full seasons the trio was together , Perreault led the Sabres in scoring five times and Robert and Martin led the team once each . Martin led the team three times in goals , Perreault twice and Robert once during this time . Perreault led the team in assists four times and Robert did so twice . In addition , the two tied once for the lead in assists . Martin 's 1975 – 76 season with 7 hat tricks continues to be tied with Alexander Mogilny for the franchise single @-@ season record . Martin and Perreault continue to be first and second for rookie season points and goals in franchise history ( records set before the arrival of Robert ) . 
 The trio led the Sabres to the Stanley Cup playoffs every full season they were together , except the 1973 – 74 NHL season when Perreault suffered a broken leg and only played in 55 games . The impact of the combination was obvious as the team began the first full season of the French Connection era with a ten @-@ game unbeaten streak ; the team made the playoffs for the first time in the history of the franchise and the three members of the French Connection were the teams three leading scorers . The team suddenly went unbeaten in their first 21 home games , while setting a record for post 1967 expansion teams by recording a home winning streak of 12 and while going unbeaten in New York state for 25 games including 1 win at the Nassau Coliseum and 3 at the Madison Square Garden . Their first playoff appearance during their first full season together ( 1972 – 3 ) was not only the franchise 's first playoff appearance , but the series also marked history as the only National Hockey League Playoff series with brothers ( Ken Dryden and Dave Dryden ) as opposing goaltenders . In the first game of the series , both goaltenders were chosen as being among the three stars of the game . During the 1974 – 75 NHL season , all members of the trio were selected to play in the National Hockey League All @-@ Star game ; they all finished among the top ten in league scoring , and they led the team to a tie for first place in the regular season standings . 
 Among their postseason highlights was the May 20 , 1975 , game three of the 1975 Stanley Cup Finals . This game , known as the fog game , was memorable because Buffalo Memorial Auditorium had no air conditioning and the arena temperature matched the 90 degree outdoor temperature , which caused fog to shroud the ice surface . During the overtime , play was delayed seven times due to fog on the ice surface at the Buffalo Memorial Auditorium . The players were instructed by Flyer coach Fred Shero and Sabre coach Floyd Smith to shoot whenever possible because of the impaired goaltender vision . Eventually , the French connection combined to score a Martin to Perreault to Robert game @-@ winning goal . This came after the French Connection swarmed Flyer goalie enabling Bill Hajt to knock in a Rick Martin rebound to send the game to overtime . 
 The 1975 – 76 season would also be memorable for the trio and the franchise . On January 4 , 1976 , the Sabres hosted part of the two @-@ team eight @-@ game NHL tour by the opposing the Soviet Wings . The Sabres handed the Russians the first of only two defeats on the tour . The French Connection contributed 4 goals and 5 assists to a 12 @-@ 6 victory . The night marked the worst defeat by a Russian hockey team in international competition . 
 The trio was , and remains , immensely popular in Buffalo , New York , as well as the surrounding Western New York area , and their international popularity and cultural prominence was also evident . They never won a Stanley Cup , but are an important part of hockey history . Rick Martin was the 1977 National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game most valuable player and Perreault scored the game @-@ winning overtime goal in the 1978 NHL All @-@ Star Game at the Buffalo Memorial Auditorium . Perreault was selected to play in nine All @-@ Star games ( 1970 – 71 , 1971 – 72 , 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 , 1976 – 77 , 1977 – 78 , 1978 – 79 , 1979 – 80 , 1983 – 84 ) , Martin was selected to play in seven consecutive All @-@ Star games ( 1971 – 72 through 1977 – 78 ) and Robert was selected to two All @-@ Star games ( 1972 – 73 , 1974 – 75 ) . In addition , Martin was selected as the Official NHL All @-@ Star First Team Left Wing in 1973 – 74 & 1974 – 75 and the Official NHL All @-@ Star Second Team Left Wing in 1975 – 76 & 1976 – 77 . Perreault was selected as the Official NHL All @-@ Star Second Team Center in 1975 – 76 & 1976 – 77 . Rene Robert was selected as the Official NHL All @-@ Star Second Team Right Wing in 1974 – 75 . Perreault earned the Calder Trophy in 1971 and the Lady Byng Trophy in 1973 . All honours for all players were as Buffalo Sabres . All Official NHL All @-@ Star Team selections were earned while the three were teammates . Perreault was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1990 . 
 The line made occasional appearances as members of the Buffalo Sabres Alumni Hockey Team until Martin 's death in March 2011 . Their last appearance together was to introduce Terrence <unk> as the Sabres ' owner on February 24 , 2011 . 
 = = The French Connection years = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = Tropical Depression Two ( 2010 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Two was a short @-@ lived tropical cyclone that impacted portions of Texas and Mexico during the highly active 2010 Atlantic hurricane season . It formed from a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa and crossed the Atlantic Ocean without any development . Upon entering the western Gulf of Mexico , the depression encountered a conducive environment for tropical cyclone development , and was designated Tropical Depression Two at 0600 UTC on July 8 . Intensification into a tropical storm was initially anticipated by the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) , but due to its proximity to land , the depression failed to attain the status . It made landfall on South Padre Island , Texas before degenerating into a remnant low on July 9 , and dissipating the following day . Due to the system 's weak intensity , there were no reports of damage inflicted by winds across Texas or Mexico , although the cyclone did bring minimal rainfall totals to northern Mexico , an area severely affected by Hurricane Alex just one week previous . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Depression Two can be traced back to a disorganized tropical wave that was first noted by the NHC on June 24 as it moved off the western coast of Africa , and into the Atlantic Ocean . Moving towards the west , the wave showed no signs of organization until July 3 as it entered the western Caribbean Sea . During the 24 hours that followed , it continued to coalesce , and the NHC subsequently increased the disturbance 's chance of developing into a tropical cyclone . A defined surface circulation did not form as a result of the wave 's movement over the Yucatan Peninsula , and the system lost organization . The system remained disorganized as it traversed the peninsula and eventually emerged into the Gulf of Mexico on July 7 . Situated over water once more , the wave was able to gradually develop as it moved in a northwesterly direction . Following a reconnaissance mission , the NHC noted in their Tropical Weather Outlook that there was a high chance of the system developing into a tropical cyclone within the next 48 hours . 
 Early on July 8 , additional data from the Hurricane Hunters indicated that the system developed a closed circulation and the NHC classified it as a tropical depression at 0000 UTC , making it the second of the hurricane season . At this time , the system was situated roughly 250 mi ( 400 km ) southeast of Brownsville , Texas . At this time , the depression also attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1005 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) . Tropical Depression Two was anticipated to intensify into a tropical storm before making landfall in Mexico ; however , the depression failed to gain strength before moving inland . Following a reconnaissance mission at 1200 UTC , Hurricane Hunters found winds near tropical storm intensity ; however , land @-@ based observations did not support this and the depression was not classified as a tropical storm . Later that day , the depression made landfall in South Padre Island , Texas at 1515 UTC with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The tropical depression weakened slightly while moving near the Texas @-@ Mexico border , when the NHC discontinued advisories on the system . Although the NHC ceased monitoring Tropical Depression Two , the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ( HPC ) issued advisories until it dissipated early on July 10 , over northern Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Immediately after Tropical Depression Two was classified , a tropical storm warning was issued for the state of Texas , covering the coastline from Baffin Bay to the northern mouth of the Rio Grande . In addition , a tropical storm warning was also issued by the government of Mexico , stretching from Rio San Fernando northward also to the mouth of the Rio Grande . Subsequent coastal flooding and flash flood warnings were issued by local National Weather Service offices in southern and eastern Texas as the NHC predicted 4 to 8 in ( 100 to 200 mm ) of rain , with 10 in ( 250 mm ) locally . Alerts were also issued for the Mexican states of Tamaulipas , Nuevo León and Coahuila , where officials warned people of the potential for heavy rains , flooding , and landslides . The Sistema Nacional de Protección Civil ( National Civil Protection System ) raised a red alert , the highest level on the scale , for portions of Tamaulipas and noted that extreme caution was necessary in areas between Rio San Fernando and the Texas @-@ Mexico border . After Tropical Depression Two made landfall in Texas , all of the tropical storm warnings associated with the storm were discontinued . 
 Upon making landfall along the Texas @-@ Mexico border , the depression produced a storm surge between 2 and 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 and 1 @.@ 22 m ) . Portions of Mustang and Padre Island were flooded by the storm ; however , damage was minimal . Two funnel clouds were reported in relation to the depression — one near Rockport and the other near Victoria . After the NHC issued their final advisory on Tropical Depression Two , the HPC began to monitor the system , recording minimal rainfall across southern and eastern Texas . As Tropical Depression Two dissipated , it moved inland and the HPC 's advisories indicated that much of eastern and southern Texas experienced rainfall of at least 1 in ( 25 mm ) , with the exception of Corpus Christi and Laredo . Rainfall associated with Tropical Depression Two in Texas peaked at 5 @.@ 16 in ( 131 mm ) along the Guadalupe River adjacent to the city of Victoria . Rainfall inside the city of Victoria itself was measured at 4 @.@ 25 in ( 108 mm ) , while the Victoria Regional Airport reported precipitation at Victoria Regional Airport . Tropical Depression Two contributed to localized flooding in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico , adding to the 24 in ( 610 mm ) of rain caused by Hurricane Alex just south of the Rio Grande . Throughout Tamaulipas , Mexico , relatively little rain fell in relation to the depression . Matamoros recorded rainfall for roughly two hours before the system passed through the region . The resulting floods from Alex and the depression caused nearly $ 80 million in losses throughout the region . 
 = 6th Congress of the Workers ' Party of Korea = 
 The 6th Congress of the Workers ' Party of Korea ( WPK ) was held in the February 8 House of Culture in Pyongyang , North Korea , from 10 – 14 October 1980 . The congress is the highest organ of the party , and is stipulated to be held every four years . 3 @,@ 062 delegates represented the party 's membership ; 117 foreign delegates attended the congress , without the right to speak . The congress saw the reappointment of Kim Il @-@ sung as WPK General Secretary and the Presidium of the Politburo established as the highest organ of the party between congresses . 
 At this congress , Kim Il @-@ sung designated his son Kim Jong @-@ il as his successor . The move was criticized by the South Korean media and ruling communist parties of the socialist states in Eastern Europe and Asia because it was considered <unk> . The congress also saw the WPK and North Korea move away from orthodox communism by emphasizing the Juche idea over Marxism – Leninism , giving the party a nationalistic bent . The next party congress was not convened before 2016 , despite party rules that stipulated that a congress had to be held every fifth year . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Little is known about the preparations for the 6th Congress . It was convened a decade after the 5th WPK Congress ( in 1970 ) , outside the party norm of a quadrennial meeting . There was no official reason for its postponement , but it was probably due to the fact that WPK General Secretary Kim Il @-@ sung spent much of the 1970s gathering support ( and creating an independent power base ) for his son and planned successor Kim Jong @-@ il . In addition , a great deal of time was spent restructuring party organizations and functions . The primary reason for the 6th Congress was to formalize Kim Jong @-@ il as Kim Il @-@ sung 's chosen successor . 
 = = Delegates and attendees = = 
 The 6th Congress was attended by 3 @,@ 062 delegates with voting rights and 158 without them ; this marked an increase of 1 @,@ 349 voting and 137 non @-@ voting delegates from the 5th Congress . The increase indicates a growth in membership . The 6th Congress is significant for its large number of delegations : 177 delegations from 118 countries were represented . While communist and workers ' parties customarily invite " fraternal parties " to party congresses , the WPK had taken the unusual step of not inviting foreign delegations to the 1st , 2nd and 5th congresses . Among those invited this time were the Communist Party of China and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . The WPK leadership also invited a number of non @-@ communist parties and organizations to the congress . The official report said that 155 foreign organizations from 105 countries attended the congress , indicating that 22 delegations remained incognito . For unknown reasons , no foreign delegates spoke at the congress . 
 = = The Congress = = 
 The 6th Congress was held at the February 8 House of Culture from 10 – 14 October 1980 , with a recess on 11 October . Compared to its predecessor , the 6th Congress was fairly short . It began with opening addresses by Kim Il @-@ sung , the Executive Bureau , the Secretariat and the Credentials Committee . After the opening remarks , the congress ' agenda was decided : " ( 1 ) Summing up the work of the Party Central Committee ; ( 2 ) Evaluation of the work of the Party Central Auditing Committee ; ( 3 ) Revision of the Party Rules and ( 4 ) Election of the central leading agencies of the Party . " This was followed by a report on the Central Committee 's performance since the 5th Congress . The 6th Congress was adjourned on 11 October , and 12 October began with the election of a committee to draft congressional decisions . Lee <unk> @-@ bin then delivered a report on the work of the Central Auditing Committee since the 5th Congress . The rest of the day was spent discussing the Central Committee report . 13 October was devoted to debates and congratulatory speeches , and on 14 October the congress elected the 6th Central Committee and the 6th Central Auditing Committee . 
 Significant at the 6th Congress was the generational shift within the WPK , with Kim Il @-@ sung planning to formalize the position of Kim Jong @-@ il . 248 members were elected to the 6th Central Committee : 145 full members and 103 candidate members . This was an increase of 76 members from the 5th Central Committee , which had 172 members . The expansion of the Central Committee is a sign of an expanding party , since one Central Committee member represents 10 @,@ 000 party members . Of the 248 members , " 139 ( 60 full members and 79 candidate members ) " were new to the Central Committee . However , compared to previous Central Committees the replacement rate was relatively low ( 41 @.@ 4 % , compared with 72 @.@ 2 % at the 5th Congress ) . Only two members have sat on the Central Committee since the 1st Central Committee : Kim il @-@ sung and Kim Il . The cause of the high Central Committee replacement rate had been intra @-@ party conflict , and the <unk> , South Korean , domestic and Soviet @-@ Korean factions ( as well as ideological opponents of hereditary succession ) had been purged from the Central Committee at previous congresses . Amendments to Party rules changed the name of the Political Committee back to its original name ( the Politburo ) , and created a Presidium within the Politburo to further centralize the power of the ruling elite . 
 Of the 158 delegates with speaking rights , 39 participated in the debates — much @-@ lower participation than at the 5th Congress , in which 98 of 137 delegates with speaking rights participated . All debate participants were Party bureaucrats and technocrats , making it the first congress at which the " revolutionary generation " was not present . 38 topics were debated : twenty @-@ one focused on the economy , ten on politics , five on social and cultural affairs , one on military affairs and one on possible unification with South Korea . Socialist construction , the designated primary task of the party during the 1980s , was the focal point of the discussions . The 6th Congress ended with Kim Il @-@ sung presenting a summary of what had been decided : " ( a ) Shining victory of the Three Revolutions — achievements in ideological , technological and cultural revolutions ; ( b ) Conversion of entire society along the lines of Juche idea ; ( c ) Independent and peaceful reunification of the fatherland ; ( d ) Strengthening of the solidarity with the anti @-@ imperialist self @-@ reliant forces ; ( e ) strengthening of Party work . " 
 = = = 1st plenum = = = 
 The 1st plenum of the 6th Central Committee , to elect the central party leadership , was held immediately after the 6th Congress . 34 members were elected to the 6th Politburo , an increase from 15 in the 5th Politburo . Of these 34 , 19 were full members and 15 candidate members . Five members were elected to the Presidium , and Kim Jong @-@ il was ranked fourth in the hierarchy of the Politburo and the Presidium . The 6th Secretariat was composed of nine members , with Kim Jong @-@ il ranked second . The size of the Secretariat did not change from the 5th Congress , but of its nine members only Kim Il @-@ sung was from the party 's " revolutionary generation " ( 60 % of the members of the 5th Secretariat came from that generation ) . Kim Il @-@ sung and Kim Jung @-@ rin were the only incumbents to be reelected . The elected 6th Central Military Commission ( CMC ) was composed of 19 members , of which Kim Jong @-@ il ranked third ( behind Kim Il @-@ sung and Oh Jin @-@ u ) . This marked the first time in the party 's history that the CMC membership was made public . Kim Il @-@ sung and Kim Jong @-@ il became the only officials with seats in all four bodies : the Presidium , Politburo , Secretariat and CMC . While Kim Jong @-@ il was outranked in the Presidium , Politburo and Secretariat , none of the members who outranked him had positions in other bodies ( except for Oh Jin @-@ ju , second @-@ ranked member of the CMC ) . Below is a list of members ( and their respective rankings ) of the Presidium , full and candidate members of the Politburo , Secretariat and CMC : 
 The 1st plenum saw the " revolutionary generation " retire from their executive posts , surrendering them to the new generation of Kim Jong @-@ il ; however , they still controlled the highest organs of power : the Presidium and the Politburo . The plenum saw the disappearance of Kim Yong @-@ ju ( Kim Il @-@ sung 's brother , considered his chosen successor before Kim Jong @-@ il ) , Kim Dong @-@ gyu , Ryu Jang @-@ sik and Lee Yong @-@ mu from important party positions . The reason for the purge is unknown , but presumably linked to Kim Il @-@ sung 's time @-@ consuming consolidation of his son 's power base . 
 = = Policy decisions = = 
 = = = Kim Jong @-@ il as successor = = = 
 Kim Yong @-@ ju was believed to be Kim Il @-@ sung 's first choice as successor , and his authority increased until he became co @-@ chairman of the North – South Coordination Committee . From late 1972 until the 6th Congress , Kim Yong @-@ ju became an increasingly remote figure within the regime ; at the 6th Congress , he lost his seats in the Politburo and on the Central Committee . However , rumors were confirmed that Kim Il @-@ sung began grooming Kim Jong @-@ il in 1966 . From 1974 until the 6th Congress , Kim Jong @-@ il ( called the " Party centre " by North Korean media ) became the second @-@ most @-@ powerful man in North Korea . 
 The choice of Kim Jong @-@ il as Kim Il @-@ sung 's successor met with considerable criticism . Critics accused Kim Il @-@ sung of creating a dynasty , turning North Korea into a feudal state . An anonymous South Korean critic said , " Hereditary succession of power [ was an ] inevitable consequence of the elder Kim 's irrevocable commitment to the dream of founding a dynasty of his own and of his family " , adding that Kim Jong @-@ il 's rise to power was proof of the " degeneration " of the WPK into a " thoroughly personalized family affair built up around a personality cult . " The Communist Party of the Soviet Union , the Communist Party of China and other ruling parties of socialist states did not approve Kim Jong @-@ il 's appointment as heir apparent . Kim Il @-@ sung 's choice of successor arguably concerned the promotion of revolutionary zeal in the country ( taking into account the negative treatment Joseph Stalin received from his successor ) . 
 = = = Korean unification = = = 
 At the congress , Kim Il @-@ sung stressed the importance of " achieving the goal of the unification of the fatherland which has been the greatest and long @-@ <unk> desire of the whole people is the most important revolutionary task facing the Party " . He warned his audience that if Korea remained divided , it might never be unified again because of relations among the big powers . Kim Il @-@ sung called for the establishment of the " Democratic Confederal Republic of Koryo " ( DCRK ) , a national government of North and South Korea . The DCRK would be ruled by a Supreme Confederal National Congress ( <unk> ) , with an equal number of representatives from North and South Korea . The <unk> representatives would elect a Presidium , which would rule on its behalf . Under this system , South Korea would remain capitalist and North Korea socialist . However , the WPK leadership named three conditions for North Korea to join the DCRK : ( 1 ) Social democratization of South Korea , the ouster of its current ruling class , repeal of the Anti @-@ Communist and National Security Laws and replacement of its military regime by a democratic one representing the will of the people ; ( 2 ) Reducing tensions with the establishment of a truce and a peace agreement ; ( 3 ) Reducing American interference in the region , holding open the possibility of improved relations with the United States if it supported Korean reunification . 
 = = = From communism to nationalism = = = 
 The 6th Congress signified a move away from orthodox communism , with the Juche given primacy over Marxism – Leninism ; in foreign relations , an independent national policy was given primacy over proletarian internationalism . According to political analyst Kim Nam @-@ sik , " They [ changes ] represent a marked departure from the fundamental principles of communism , and a new orientation for the North Korean future in the 1980s . " In contrast to other ruling communist parties in socialist states , democratic centralism in the WPK did not hold the leader ( the WPK General Secretary ) accountable . In many ways it functioned the other way around , with the WPK accountable to the leader . This unusual system is rooted in North Korea 's leader theory . 
 In contrast to other socialist states ( which upheld the orthodox communist belief that the masses are masters of historical development ) , WPK ideology asserts that the masses can only initiate revolutionary change through a leader . While other socialist states often emphasized certain historical figures , due weight was still given to the people . The opposite occurred in North Korea , where the party line was " The great revolutionary task of the working class is pioneered and led to victory by the Leader and completed under the leadership of the Leader only . " From this perspective , the revolutionary task given the working class by the other socialist regimes became the sole responsibility of the leader in North Korea . The leader theory supports one @-@ man leadership , since all important tasks can only be accomplished by a great leader it argues . This ideological outlook may explain why Kim Il @-@ sung appointed his son , Kim Jong @-@ il , as his successor . In North Korea , Kim Il @-@ sung was considered a " Great Leader " with a decisive role ; he was cited by official media as the man who established the WPK and founder of the Juche idea . Because of this , Kim Il @-@ sung was not " elected " WPK General Secretary ; the position was bestowed on him by divine right . 
 While North Korea had already begun to move from a foreign policy based upon proletarian internationalism at the Conference of Party Representatives in 1966 , the WPK leadership had never explicitly broken with proletarian internationalism as it did at the 6th Congress . In theory , a communist party supports policy contributing to the world revolution . Communist regimes rarely lived up to this ideal ; by the 1950s , ideological schisms within the world communist movement made it all but impossible . From 1966 onwards , North Korea strengthened relations with neutral countries in the global Cold War . Proletarian internationalism was replaced with a national , independent foreign policy ; if a socialist and non @-@ socialist country were at war , North Korea could ( in theory ) support the non @-@ socialist country if it benefited North Korea . At the 6th Congress , Kim Il @-@ sung attached more importance to relations with Third World countries than to unity in the socialist camp . While North Korea argues that independence and proletarian internationalism are not exclusive , in orthodox communist theory they are . 
 = Day of the Moon = 
 " Day of the Moon " is the second episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Written by show runner Steven Moffat , and directed by Toby Haynes , the episode was first broadcast on 30 April 2011 on BBC One in the United Kingdom and on BBC America in the United States . The episode is the second of a two @-@ part story that began with " The Impossible Astronaut " . 
 In 1969 America , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) attempts , alongside newlyweds Amy ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) , companion River Song ( Alex Kingston ) and FBI agent Canton Everett Delaware III ( Mark Sheppard ) , to lead the human race into a revolution against the Silence , a race of aliens who cannot be remembered after they are encountered . 
 " The Impossible Astronaut " and " Day of the Moon " were designed to be a darker opener to the series and were partially filmed in the United States , a first for the programme . Moffat was keen on incorporating Area 51 , the moon landing , and President Richard Nixon ( played by Stuart Milligan ) into the plot . The episode received final viewing figures of 7 @.@ 3 million in the UK . It received generally positive reviews from critics , though many worried about the number of questions that had been left unanswered . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the three months since the end of " The Impossible Astronaut " , the Doctor , Amy , Rory and River Song have been attempting to track the Silence , an alien race who cannot be remembered after they are encountered . Ex @-@ FBI agent Canton Delaware , under the ruse of capturing them as criminals , helps to reunite the group inside a special prison at Area 51 containing the TARDIS . Though they do not yet know the name or motive for the aliens , the Doctor 's allies have discovered they exist across the entire planet , and have the ability to place post @-@ hypnotic suggestions in humans they encounter . The Doctor plants a communication device called a <unk> in each of the group 's hands to record audio of meetings with the Silence . As they travel to Kennedy Space Center shortly before the launch of Apollo 11 , Amy tells the Doctor she was mistaken and is not pregnant as she previously had claimed . 
 While the Doctor alters part of the command module of Apollo 11 , Canton and Amy visit a nearby orphanage , hoping to find where the girl in the spacesuit was taken from . Amy discovers a nest of the Silence , and a photograph of her and a baby amongst pictures of the little girl from the space suit . The girl enters with the Silence , and Amy is abducted and taken to their time engine control room . Arriving too late , the Doctor and his allies find Amy 's recording device , through which Rory still can hear Amy 's voice confessing her love for one of the group . Canton is able to shoot and wound one of the creatures , and from it the Doctor discovers the creatures are the Silence , a group he was warned about by several of his foes in his recent adventures . Analysing the now @-@ empty space suit , River realises that the girl possesses incredible strength to have forced her way out of it , and that the suit 's advanced life @-@ support technology would have called the President as the highest authority figure on Earth when the girl got scared . The Doctor realises why the Silence have been controlling humanity — by guiding their technological advances , they have influenced humanity into the Space Race for purposes of building a spacesuit , which must somehow be crucial to their intentions . Meanwhile , Canton interrogates the captured Silent in the Area 51 prison , who mocks humanity for treating him when " ... you should kill us all on sight " . Canton records this using Amy 's mobile phone . 
 The Doctor uses Amy 's communication chip to track her location , and lands the TARDIS in the Silence 's control room five days later . As River and Rory hold the Silence at bay , the Doctor shows them the live broadcast of the moon landing . As they watch , the Doctor uses his modification of the Apollo command module to insert Canton 's recording of the wounded Silent into the footage of the landing . Because of this message , humans will now turn upon the Silence whenever they see them . The group frees Amy and departs in the TARDIS , while River kills all the Silence in the control room . Amy reassures Rory that the man he overheard her speaking of loving through the communication chip was him , not the Doctor . 
 River refuses the Doctor 's offer to travel with him , returning to her Stormcage prison in order to keep a promise . She kisses the Doctor goodbye , and as the Doctor has never kissed her before she deduces that this will be her last kiss with him . In the TARDIS , Amy appears unable to remember seeing her picture in the orphanage and says that she told the Doctor , rather than Rory , when she believed she was pregnant through fears that travelling in the TARDIS might have affected her child 's development . As the trio sets off , the Doctor discreetly uses the TARDIS scanner to attempt to determine if Amy is pregnant . 
 Six months later , a homeless man in New York City comes across the young girl , previously seen in the astronaut 's suit . The girl says she is dying , but can fix it ; before the man 's eyes , she appears to begin regenerating , a trait only applied to Time Lords . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The Silence 's ' time engine ' set was previously used in " The Lodger " . The Doctor describes it as " very <unk> Road " , a reference to the house the ship occupied in that episode . When the Silent reveals his species ' name to the Doctor , the Doctor has flash @-@ backs to " The Eleventh Hour " and " The Vampires of Venice " , the first mentions of the Silence . The " Eye Patch Lady " ( Frances Barber ) appears for the first time in this episode , and makes similar appearances in " The Curse of the Black Spot " and " The Rebel Flesh " before her connection to Amy is revealed in " The Almost People " . The Doctor uses the TARDIS 's scanners to detect Amy 's alternating pregnancy state . The Doctor repeats the scan with the same results in " The Curse of the Black Spot " and " The Rebel Flesh " . 
 The Doctor and Rory discuss both being present at the fall of Rome . As an Auton , Rory guarded the Pandorica from the Roman era to the present day in " The Big Bang " , and the First Doctor indirectly instigated the Great Fire of Rome in The Romans . The Doctor is held captive in Area 51 , which he had visited previously in the Tenth Doctor animated serial Dreamland . 
 = = Production = = 
 Steven Moffat , head writer of the new series , said before broadcast that this would be one of the darkest openers to a series ever done for Doctor Who . Director Toby Haynes believed that the darker episodes like " The Impossible Astronaut " and " Day of the Moon " would allow the series to get into " more dangerous territory . " The creation of the Silence was partly inspired by the figure from the Edvard Munch painting The Scream . Introducing the alien villains became a " big challenge " for the producers ; it would tie in with the loose " silence will fall " arc that carried through the fifth series . Moffat did not wish to end the arc in the previous series , as he felt it would be " more fun " to continue it . Elsewhere in the episode , Delaware was written to be deceptively antagonistic towards the protagonists , which was based on actor Mark Sheppard 's past as villains for his work in American television . Moffat was also keen on the idea of having the Doctor imprisoned with a beard in Area 51 . Smith wore a glued @-@ on beard , which was difficult to peel off . 
 Incorporating Nixon into the plot was accidental ; Moffat wanted to set the story during the moon landing and looked up the United States president during the time . He was initially disappointed that it was such a " rubbish one " and briefly considered using a generic , unnamed president , such as the one seen in " The Sound of Drums " . However , he thought it " didn 't feel right for a story partly about real events " and realized it could be fun to use Nixon . He believed there was something " comically awkward " about him , and it would be interesting for the Doctor to have to work with someone he did not like . The episode makes references to the Watergate scandal and David Frost . 
 Many of the opening scenes of the episode were filmed on location in the United States . The sequence where Delaware chases Amy was shot in the Valley of the Gods in Utah . Gillan found it difficult to run because of the altitude . The scene in which Amy confronts Canton was originally watched by three Silence in the script , but this did not make it to the film version . The sequence where Delaware chases Rory was shot at the Glen Canyon Dam in Arizona . The Dam sequence was the final scene to be shot in the States . " The Impossible Astronaut " and " Day of the Moon " marked the first time that Doctor Who has filmed principal photography footage within the United States . The sequence where Delaware chases River in New York was in fact shot in central Cardiff . A set was later constructed in a studio for the jump sequence , and Kingston was replaced by a stunt woman to perform the jump . The scenes set in Area 51 were filmed in a large disused hangar in South Wales . 
 The Florida orphanage was filmed at the abandoned Troy House in Monmouthshire . To add the effect that a storm is outside the building , the production crew placed rain machines outdoors and flashing lights to simulate lightning . The Silence were portrayed by Marnix van den Broeke and other performers . The masks caused vision difficulties for the performers , who had to be guided by two people when they had to walk . Van den Broeke did not provide the voices of the Silence , as it was replaced during post @-@ production . The control room set used from " The Lodger " was used again for this episode . Moffat wanted the set to be used again , feeling it would be a suitable Silence base . The set was adapted to give it a darker , evil feel . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Day of the Moon " was first broadcast on BBC One on 30 April 2011 at 6 pm and on the same date on BBC America in the United States . Initial overnight ratings showed that the episode had been watched by 5 @.@ 4 million viewers , a decrease of 1 @.@ 1 million from the previous week . The episode received final ratings of 7 @.@ 3 million viewers on BBC One , seventh for the week on that channel . It received an Appreciation Index of 87 , considered " excellent " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was met with generally positive reviews from television critics . Dan Martin of The Guardian praised the episode for its " action , tension , horror and River Song in a business suit , " but felt it " sags a little around the middle . " Martin believed the scenes with Amy and Delaware in the orphanage were the " fear factor " of the episode . He later rated it the fourth best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy stated " after the sensational opening gambit that kicked off the series premiere , it 's perhaps unsurprising that ' Day of the Moon ' starts with a similarly thrilling onslaught of action . " Jeffery was positive towards the nano @-@ recorder , which provided the episode with " a number of unsettling moments in which characters listen back to their own terrified exclamations about the Silents . " However , Jeffery felt the final scenes " expose this episode 's chief flaw — quite simply , too much is left unresolved . " In conclusion , the reviewer stated " While ' The Impossible Astronaut ' aced the set @-@ up , ' Day of the Moon ' falters slightly in providing the resolution . " Jeffery rated the episode four stars out of five . 
 Tom Phillips of Metro stated that " Amy and Canton 's sojourn to the orphanage was not just a high @-@ mark for sheer skin @-@ crawling horror on recent mainstream telly — that image of The Silence nesting on the ceiling like cadaverous bat @-@ people will live on in the nightmares of many , many children — but also genuinely , properly weird . " Dave Golder from SFX thought that although the series was " shaping up to be like no other before it , as the show moves even further away from its traditional series of sequential standalone stories format and more towards Lost style storytelling " , that the episode " is no mere exercise in delayed gratification . You want fun ? You want creepy ? You want action ? You 've got it – all not @-@ so @-@ neatly tied up with a neat bow tie . " Golder went on to state that " once again we 're treated to some outstanding direction , glorious performances , near flawless FX and gorgeous locations ... " Day Of The Moon " is huge fun , effortlessly entertaining , beguilingly bat 's @-@ arse and blessed with a cliffhanger so <unk> unexpected it 's bound to keep viewers hooked " . He gave the episode a rating of four out of five stars . 
 IGN reviewer Matt Risley rated the episode 9 out of 10 , saying it " maintained the thrills , chills and scalp @-@ scratching plot twists of " The Impossible Astronaut " , whilst somehow tweaking its predecessor 's thundering pace into 45 minutes of near @-@ perfectly plotted TV . " When comparing it to " The Impossible Astronaut " , he said it was " scarier , creepier ... and more action packed in every way ... [ and ] also managed to leave things on a suitably epic , mythos @-@ expanding note . " He concluded , " the show as a whole has a brand new energy , and we can 't wait to see where Who goes from here . " 
 Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph was more critical with the episode , stating , " having set up an interesting cliffhanger last week , it was a tad annoying that Steven Moffat did his trick again of taking a swerve with the pre @-@ credits section of this week 's episode , and more supposed shock value with the shootings of Amy and Rory , " but also more annoyed " that what exactly was going on here , and how it was influenced by the events of the previous episode , were never exactly explained , leaving the audience to fill in the blanks . " Fuller believed that the plot and ending " only raised more questions than answers , " believing that the overarching storyline would " require the audience 's concentration over many weeks ; any casual viewer tuning in this week , and I suspect not a few fans , will have been left baffled by the goings @-@ on , " but still felt the episode " was interesting and showed just how , when the writers use their imagination , Doctor Who can tell stories in a way little else on television can . " 
 = Joe Sakic = 
 Joseph Steven Sakic ( / <unk> / ; born July 7 , 1969 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey executive and former player . He played his entire 21 @-@ year National Hockey League ( NHL ) career with the Quebec Nordiques / Colorado Avalanche franchise . Named captain of the team in 1992 ( after serving as a co @-@ captain in 1990 – 91 ) , Sakic is regarded as one of the most capable team leaders in league history and was able to motivate his team to play at a winning level . Sakic led the Avalanche to Stanley Cup titles in 1996 and 2001 , being named the most valuable player of the 1996 playoffs , and honored as the MVP of the NHL in 2001 by the hockey writers and his fellow players . As such , he is one of six Avalanche players in franchise history to participate in both of the team 's Stanley Cup victories . Sakic was also named to play in 13 NHL All @-@ Star Games and selected to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team at centre three times . 
 Over the course of his career , Sakic was one of the most productive forwards in the game , having twice scored 50 goals and earning at least 100 points in six different seasons . His wrist shot , considered one of the best in the NHL , was the source of much of his production as goalies around the league feared this shot . At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 NHL season , he was the eighth all @-@ time points leader in the NHL , as well as 14th in all @-@ time goals and 11th in all @-@ time assists . During the 2002 Winter Olympics , Sakic helped lead Team Canada to its first ice hockey gold medal in 50 years , and was voted as the tournament 's most valuable player . He represented the team in six other international competitions , including the 1998 and 2006 Winter Olympics . 
 Sakic retired from the NHL on July 9 , 2009 , and had his jersey number retired prior to the Avalanche 's 2009 – 10 season opener on October 1 , 2009 , at Pepsi Center . On November 12 , 2012 , Sakic was inducted in the Hockey Hall of Fame , along with Adam Oates , Pavel Bure and Mats Sundin . On April 11 , 2013 , Sakic and 11 others were inducted into the Canada Sports Hall of Fame . He served as executive advisor and alternate governor for the Avalanche , effective at the end of the 2010 – 11 season , and promoted to Executive Vice President of hockey operations on May 10 , 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sakic was born in Burnaby , British Columbia , to Marijan and <unk> Sakic ( originally <unk> , Croatian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , immigrants from Croatia in what was then Yugoslavia . Growing up in Burnaby , he did not learn to speak English well until kindergarten , having been raised with Croatian as his mother tongue . At the age of four , Sakic attended his first NHL game , a match between the Vancouver Canucks and Atlanta Flames ; after watching the game , Sakic decided that he wanted to become a hockey player . As a smaller player , he was forced to use skill rather than size to excel , and modeled himself after his idol , Wayne Gretzky . After showing exceptional promise as a young hockey player in Burnaby , Sakic was referenced as a new Wayne Gretzky in the making . He scored 83 goals and 156 points in only 80 games for Burnaby , while attending school at Burnaby North Secondary Soon after , he was added to the Lethbridge Broncos of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) for the last part of the 1985 – 86 season . 
 During the 1986 – 87 season , the Broncos relocated to Swift Current , Saskatchewan , becoming the Swift Current Broncos . Sakic , playing in his first full season , was named Rookie of the Year of the WHL . He notched 60 goals and 73 assists for 133 points . But while Sakic enjoyed success on the ice , he and his team faced a tragedy on the night of December 30 , 1986 . The Broncos were driving to a game against the Regina Pats , and due to bad weather conditions , the bus crashed after the driver lost control on a patch of black ice outside of Swift Current . While Sakic was unharmed , four of his teammates ( Trent <unk> , Scott Kruger , Chris <unk> and Brent Ruff ) were killed . This incident had a lasting impact on the young Sakic , who declined to talk about the crash throughout his career . The next year , in 1987 – 88 , Sakic was named the WHL Most Valuable Player and Canadian Major Junior Player of the Year . He scored 160 points ( 78 goals , 82 assists ) , tying him with Theoren Fleury of the Moose Jaw Warriors for the WHL scoring title . 
 = = NHL career = = 
 = = = Quebec Nordiques = = = 
 Sakic was drafted 15th overall by the Quebec Nordiques in the 1987 NHL Entry Draft . Rather than make the immediate jump , he told the Nordiques management he would prefer to spend the 1987 – 88 season in Swift Current to prepare for the NHL . He made his NHL debut on October 6 , 1988 , against the Hartford Whalers and registered an assist . His first NHL goal came two days later against goaltender Sean Burke of the New Jersey Devils . During the season , he wore # 88 because his preferred number , # 19 was already taken by a teammate , Alain Côté . While considered a front @-@ runner for the Calder Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year due to his rapid scoring pace , an ankle injury that forced him to miss 10 games in December and the resulting scoring slump helped quash any hopes of winning the award . He would finish his rookie season with 62 points in 70 games . 
 In 1989 – 90 , his second NHL season , Sakic was able to switch his number back to his familiar # 19 ( Alain Côté had retired over the summer ) , and scored 102 points , which was ninth overall in the league . At the start of the next season , 1990 – 91 , he was named co @-@ captain along with Steven Finn ( Sakic was captain for home games , Finn for away games ) and again passed the 100 point mark , improving to 109 points and sixth overall in the league , but would slip during 1991 – 92 to 94 points , partly as a result of missing 11 games . Early on in the season , Sakic showed some of his leadership qualities , even while Mike Hough was serving as captain , as he stood firm in the Eric Lindros holdout issue . With Lindros holding out against the Nordiques , who were one of the worst teams in league , Sakic commented , " We only want players here who have the passion to play the game . I 'm tired of hearing that name . He 's not here and there are a lot of others in this locker room who really care about the game . " Lindros was traded a year later , ending the situation and bringing in a number of quality players , which vastly improved the Nordiques . During their first four seasons with Joe Sakic , the Nordiques finished last place in the Adams Division and last in the entire league for three straight years , from 1989 to 1991 . 
 Starting with the 1992 – 93 season , Sakic became the sole captain of the franchise . Under his leadership , the Nordiques made the playoffs for the first time in six years and set a franchise record for wins and points in the process ( since broken by the 2000 – 01 Colorado Avalanche team ) . Sakic reached the 100 @-@ point plateau , the third time he did so in five years , by scoring 48 goals and 105 points in the regular season , and added another six points in the playoffs . In the shortened 1994 – 95 , after the 1994 – 95 NHL lockout , Sakic was eight points behind Jaromír Jágr for the scoring title with a fourth @-@ place finish , and helped the Nordiques win the division title , their first since the 1985 – 86 season . 
 = = = Colorado Avalanche = = = 
 In May 1995 , the Nordiques announced that the team had been sold and were relocating from Quebec . Before the start of the 1995 – 96 season , the franchise moved to Denver , Colorado , and was renamed the Colorado Avalanche . Sakic led the team to its first Stanley Cup championship , scoring 120 points in 82 regular season games and 34 points in 22 playoff games . He was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the 1996 NHL playoffs . During the run for the Cup , Sakic again proved himself to be an effective team leader . Although his Nordiques had missed the playoffs in five of his first seven years in the NHL , he scored 18 goals , including six game @-@ winners , and 34 points . He was one goal off from the record for goals in a playoff year , and his game @-@ winning goals established a new record . 
 In the 1996 – 97 season , Sakic only played in 65 games due to a lacerated calf , yet still managed to score 74 points as the Avalanche earned their first Presidents ' Trophy and third straight division title . He had another great playoff season with eight goals and 17 assists , and took the Avalanche all the way to the conference finals , where they eventually lost to the Detroit Red Wings in six games . As a free agent during the summer of 1997 , Sakic signed a three @-@ year , $ 21 million offer sheet with the New York Rangers as a restricted free agent . Under the collective bargaining agreement at the time , the Avalanche had one week to match the Rangers ' offer or let go of Sakic . Colorado would match the offer , which instigated a salary raise for many NHL players . 
 Injuries would again limit Sakic 's playing time in the 1997 – 98 season . While playing in his first Olympics with Team Canada , Sakic hurt his knee and was forced to miss 18 games with the Avalanche . In the 64 games he did play in , he still scored 63 points , enough to earn him his seventh All @-@ Star appearance . He finally rebounded from his injury problems in the 1998 – 99 season , finishing fifth in the league in scoring with 41 goals and 96 points in only 73 games . He led the Avalanche all the way to within one game of the Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost to the eventual champion Dallas Stars . After the season ended , Sakic was ranked number 94 on The Hockey News ' list of the 100 Greatest Hockey Players . 
 During the 1999 – 2000 season , Sakic reached several career milestones . Injuries limited him to only 60 games , but he still managed to lead the team in scoring with 81 points . On December 27 , 1999 , against the St. Louis Blues , Sakic earned an assist to become the 56th player in NHL history to reach 1 @,@ 000 career points . Later in the season , on March 23 , 2000 , he scored a hat trick against the Phoenix Coyotes , and became the 59th player to score 400 career goals . It also gave him 1 @,@ 049 points with the Quebec / Colorado franchise , passing Peter Šťastný as the all @-@ time leader on the team . 
 Sakic eclipsed the 100 point mark again in 2000 – 01 , finishing with 118 along with a career best 54 goals , both being second @-@ best in the league . He won the Hart Memorial Trophy , the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy and the Lester B. Pearson Award ( the latter presented to him by former Nordiques mentor Peter Šťastný [ 1 ] ) , while also being a finalist for the Frank J. Selke Trophy . He led the Avalanche to their second Stanley Cup championship , defeating the defending title holders New Jersey Devils in seven games . <unk> , after receiving the Cup from the NHL commissioner , Sakic broke with tradition by not hoisting it first as most captains do , instead passing the Cup straight to Ray Bourque , a player who had waited a record @-@ breaking 22 seasons to win the Stanley Cup . 
 Sakic led the Avalanche in scoring again in the 2001 – 02 season , finishing sixth in the league with 79 points . On March 9 , 2002 , he played in his 1,000th career game . The Avalanche once again reached the Western Conference Finals , but lost to the eventual Cup @-@ winning Detroit Red Wings . The following year , Sakic appeared in only 58 games and finished with just 58 points . He rebounded the following year , finishing third in the league with 87 points . It also marked the first time since the 1993 – 94 season that his team did not win the division title , which was won by the Vancouver Canucks . 
 Following the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , the Avalanche were forced to lose many of their key players in order to stay below the salary cap . Even with the loss of teammates Peter Forsberg and Adam Foote , Sakic still helped the Avalanche get into the playoffs , where they eventually lost to the Anaheim Ducks in the conference semi @-@ finals . In June 2006 , Sakic signed a one @-@ year , $ 5 @.@ 75 million deal to keep him with the Avalanche for the 2006 – 07 season . Upon the retirement of Steve Yzerman a month later , on July 3 , 2006 , Sakic became the League leader for most NHL career points scored among active players . 
 Sakic had another strong season in the 2006 – 07 . He scored his 600th career goal on February 15 , 2007 , against the Calgary Flames , becoming the 17th player in history to reach the milestone and third that year . On the final day of the regular season , he scored his 100th point , reaching the milestone for the sixth time in his career . At the same time , Sakic became the second @-@ oldest NHL player to score 100 points in a season at age 37 , alongside hockey legend Gordie Howe . Despite his efforts as well as a late @-@ season charge , Sakic and the Avalanche missed the playoffs for the first time in 11 years , finishing one point behind the eighth placed Calgary Flames . On May 1 , the NHL announced that Sakic was named as one of the three finalists of the Lady Byng Trophy , but it was eventually awarded to Pavel Datsyuk of the Detroit Red Wings . 
 In April 2007 , Sakic signed on for a 19th NHL season with the Colorado Avalanche , signing a one @-@ year deal for 2007 – 08 . Sakic commented on the deal , saying " at this stage in my career , I prefer to do one @-@ year deals as I evaluate my play year @-@ to @-@ year . " Upon signing Sakic to the deal , Avalanche General Manager François Giguère said , " Joe is the heart of this organization and his leadership and value to this team and especially our young players is unquestioned . " On October 7 , 2007 , he scored a goal and had an assist against the San Jose Sharks , moving past Phil Esposito into eighth place on the NHL career points list with 1 @,@ 591 . Nineteen days later , Sakic scored a goal and assisted Ryan Smyth for an overtime game @-@ winning goal against the Calgary Flames , reaching his <unk> point in the NHL . On December 27 , 2007 , it was announced that Sakic underwent hernia surgery to accelerate the recovery of an injury that had forced him to miss the previous 12 games after a 232 consecutive games played streak . The operation caused him to miss a career @-@ high 38 games . He was activated off of the injured reserve on February 24 and played that night , scoring an assist . On March 22 , 2008 , Sakic recorded his 1,000th career assist against the Edmonton Oilers , becoming the 11th player in NHL history to reach this milestone . 
 On June 21 , 2008 , Sakic had a talk with Colorado General Manager François Giguère and said that he is uncertain with his future with the Avalanche . However , it was announced on August 27 , 2008 , that Sakic decided to sign a one @-@ year contract with the team . Injuries limited Sakic 's playing time in 2008 – 09 . A herniated disk in his back forced him to stop playing in early November , after playing in 15 games , in which Sakic scored 12 points . While at home letting his back heal , Sakic broke three fingers in a snow @-@ blower accident . He announced his retirement on July 9 , 2009 The Avalanche retired his jersey , # 19 , prior to their 2009 – 10 season opener on October 1 , 2009 , with a " C " on the banner to represent his lengthy service as team captain ( having been the only captain of the Avalanche until he retired ) . Sakic was also named the inaugural member of the Avalanche Alumni Association . 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 Sakic was voted into the NHL All @-@ Star Game 13 times and played in 12 of them , serving as a captain for two of them , the last in 2007 . He had at least one point in 11 of them . The only one that he missed entirely was the 1997 All @-@ Star Game , due to an injury . Sakic won the Most Valuable Player award in the 2004 All @-@ Star Game after scoring a hat trick , despite the Western Conference losing the game . He is the all @-@ time assist leader in All @-@ Star Games with 16 assists and is third place in all @-@ time all @-@ star scoring with 22 points , behind Mario Lemieux ( 23 points ) and Wayne Gretzky ( 25 points ) . His best record in an All @-@ Star Game was in 2007 , when he scored four assists for the winning team ; however the MVP award was given to Daniel Brière , who had a goal and four assists . 
 = = International play = = 
 Sakic had an extensive international hockey career , representing Canada at seven international competitions . After being drafted by the Nordiques in 1987 , he went on and helped Canada win the 1988 World Junior Championship . His next tournament was the 1991 World Championships , where Canada won the silver medal and Sakic contributed eleven points in ten games . He tried out for the 1991 Canadian Canada Cup team , but was the first player to be cut , being cited for his weak leg strength . Sakic was bitter about the experience , feeling he was not given a good enough chance to prove himself , and called the whole experience " a complete waste of time . " 
 Sakic 's first successful professional tournament was the 1994 World Championships , where Canada won its first gold medal in the tournament since 1961 . Sakic 's seven points in eight games were a crucial part of the team 's success . During the 1996 World Cup of Hockey , he played only a minor role in Canada 's second @-@ place finish as he scored one goal and two assists in six games . However , the tournament allowed him to showcase that he was indeed a dominant player who had simply been overlooked . 
 Sakic 's first Olympic appearance came in 1998 at Nagano , Japan , after the event allowed NHL players to compete for the first time . Bothered by a knee injury , he only scored three points in four games , as the Canadian squad failed to meet expectations and finished in fourth . Sakic 's second Olympic appearance came in the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City . Led by his strong play , the Canadian team played their way to the gold medal match against Team USA , where Sakic had four points and helped the team win its first gold medal in 50 years . He was later named MVP of the tournament with a cumulative tally of four goals and six assists and became one of the first Canadian members of the Triple Gold Club . Sakic also played a part in Canada 's triumph in the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , where he scored six points in six games . 
 On December 21 , 2005 , Sakic was named captain of Team Canada for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy . Once again , Team Canada was heavily favored and given high expectations , but they failed to medal , finishing seventh overall . Sakic finished the tournament with three points . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 After he retired , Sakic decided to take time off from hockey and spent time with his family . In 2011 , two years after his retirement , Sakic returned to the Avalanche to work in their front office . He was named an executive advisor and alternate governor for the team , effective at the end of the 2010 – 11 season . In his role as an advisor , Sakic would advise the team in hockey @-@ related matters , and as an alternate governor , would represent the team at Board of Governors meetings . 
 On June 26 , 2012 , Sakic was selected to the Hockey Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 12 , 2012 , along with Mats Sundin , Pavel Bure and Adam Oates . Sakic was the only member of his class who won the Stanley Cup during his career . 
 On May 10 , 2013 , the Avalanche promoted Sakic Executive Vice President of Hockey Operations . In this expanded role , Sakic has the final say on all matters regarding hockey personnel . He now shares most of the duties normally held by a general manager with head coach Patrick Roy , who also doubles as vice president of hockey operations . General Manager Greg Sherman remained in his post , but now serves mainly in an advisory role to Roy and Sakic . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sakic and his wife Debbie have three children : son Mitchell , born in 1996 , and fraternal twins ; son Chase and daughter <unk> , born in October 2000 . They met at a local high school while he was playing in Swift Current , and they frequently return to the town during the off @-@ season . Sakic is an avid golfer , and competed in the celebrity Pro Am golf tournament in Lake Tahoe in the summer of 2006 . Each summer , he also hosts his own charity golf tournament which benefits the Food Bank of the Rockies . His charity work , which is estimated to have provided more than seven million meals to poor children and families , has earned an NHL Foundation Player Award in 2007 . 
 Sakic was a fan favourite in his hometown of Burnaby , where a street has been named Joe Sakic Way in his honour . Throughout British Columbia , he is affectionately known as " Burnaby Joe " ; in Colorado , he is known simply as " Super Joe . " His younger brother Brian joined the Swift Current Broncos during Joe 's final season with the team , and later played for the Flint Generals of the United Hockey League . Sakic also has an uncredited role in the movie Happy Gilmore as a " player at hockey tryouts " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 <unk> denotes career high in each statistics . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star games = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 Sakic recorded his 1,000th career point on December 27 , 1999 , against the St. Louis Blues . He became the 11th player to reach 1 @,@ 500 points , doing so on October 25 , 2006 , with an assist against the Washington Capitals , and the sixth to do so with one franchise . Gordie Howe , Wayne Gretzky , Mario Lemieux , Raymond Bourque and Steve Yzerman are the others who have achieved this feat . On March 22 , 2008 , Sakic notched his 1,000th career assist against the Edmonton Oilers on a second period goal scored by Tyler Arnason . 
 Sakic played his 1,000th career game on March 9 , 2002 , against the Los Angeles Kings . His 500th career goal came against the Vancouver Canucks on December 11 , 2002 . In a February 15 , 2007 , game against the Calgary Flames , Sakic scored his 600th career goal . He also earned his 900th assist , the 16th player to do so , against the Flames in a game on March 12 , 2006 . 
 During the final game of the 2006 – 07 season , Sakic scored his 100th point of the year . This made him , at age 37 , the second oldest player in NHL history , after Gordie Howe , to record 100 points in a regular season . He became the longest active tenured captain in the league , with fifteen seasons leading the Nordiques / Avalanche franchise , after the retirement of Steve Yzerman at the conclusion of the 2005 – 06 regular season . On March 22 , 2008 , against the Edmonton Oilers , Sakic recorded the 1,000th assist of his career , the 11th player to do so . The gloves he wore in the game were later sent to the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 Alongside Bobby Clarke , Wayne Gretzky and Mark Messier , Sakic is one of four players to captain his team to a Stanley Cup championship and win the Hart Memorial Trophy in the same year . Sakic is also a member of the Triple Gold Club , a term used in ice hockey to describe players who have won an Olympic Gold medal , a World Championship Gold medal and the Stanley Cup . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 In his 20 @-@ year career with the Nordiques and Avalanche , Sakic has obtained nearly all of the franchise scoring records , including most all @-@ time goals ( 625 ) , assists ( 1 @,@ 016 ) and points ( 1 @,@ 641 ) . He also holds the franchise record for most games played ( 1 @,@ 363 ) , and is on several notable NHL records which are most All @-@ Star game assists ( 16 ) and most playoff overtime goals ( 8 ) . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 Throughout his career , Sakic was one of the top scorers in the league , but in his early years , he was criticized for not leading his team to playoff success . While in Quebec , the Nordiques were one of the worst teams in the league , finishing last in their division five out of the seven years Sakic was with the team , including three straight years of being last overall in the league . After leading the Avalanche to the Stanley Cup in 1996 with his 34 playoff points , Sakic began to be seen as a leader capable of winning , and he was seen as one of the league 's premier players . 
 Though Sakic was a quiet individual , he was able to motivate his team to play at higher levels , which earned him the respect of his peers and executives . The first signs of Sakic 's leadership began to show while still a member of the Swift Current Broncos of the WHL . After the bus crash that killed four of his teammates , Sakic was seen as the leader of the team , acknowledging that the experience changed his outlook on life . Early in his career with the Nordiques ( when Mike Hough was still captain ) , with the team hoping to rebuild around their top draft pick Eric Lindros , and holding onto Lindros ' rights for the season when he refused to sign , Sakic suggested that the team could progress without Lindros saying " We only want players here who have the passion to play the game . I 'm tired of hearing that name . He 's not here and there are a lot of others in this locker room who really care about the game . " Lindros was traded a year later , bringing in a number of quality players , which vastly improved the Nordiques . Sakic 's leadership qualities led him to be courted by other teams , such as in the summer of 1997 , when the New York Rangers offered him a large contract in order to replace departed captain Mark Messier , though the Avalanche ultimately matched the offer and retained Sakic . 
 One of the most defining actions of Sakic 's career was at the conclusion of the 2001 playoffs . Defying the NHL tradition of the captain being the first to skate around with the Stanley Cup , Sakic passed it off to teammate Ray Bourque . Bourque , one of the best defensemen to ever play , had been traded to the Avalanche the year before after spending 21 years with the Boston Bruins and setting the record for most games played without winning the Cup . Sakic 's handing of the Stanley Cup exemplifies his <unk> and how he performs through actions rather than words . 
 When an eye injury forced Steve Yzerman ( who normally wore number 19 for Canada ) to miss the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , Sakic and Joe Thornton both refused the number out of respect for their injured countryman , even though both players each wore the number 19 for their respective NHL clubs and who were now eligible to wear it for Team Canada in Yzerman 's absence . 
 Sakic 's leadership qualities and abilities helped carry the Avalanche in the years since their 2001 Stanley Cup , which saw the team lose key players to retirement and free agency , especially after the 2004 – 05 lockout . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = WHL and CHL = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 All awards taken from NHL.com 
 = Wii = 
 The Wii ( / <unk> / <unk> ) is a home video game console released by Nintendo on November 19 , 2006 . As a seventh @-@ generation console , the Wii competed with Microsoft 's Xbox 360 and Sony 's PlayStation 3 . Nintendo states that its console targets a broader demographic than that of the two others . As of the first quarter of 2012 , the Wii leads its generation over PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in worldwide sales , with more than 101 million units sold ; in December 2009 , the console broke the sales record for a single month in the United States . 
 The Wii introduced the Wii Remote controller , which can be used as a handheld pointing device and which detects movement in three dimensions . Another notable feature of the console is the now defunct WiiConnect24 , which enabled it to receive messages and updates over the Internet while in standby mode . Like other seventh @-@ generation consoles , it features a game download service , called " Virtual Console " , which features emulated games from past systems . 
 It succeeded the GameCube , and early models are fully backward @-@ compatible with all GameCube games and most accessories . Nintendo first spoke of the console at the E3 2004 press conference and later unveiled it at E3 2005 . Nintendo CEO Satoru Iwata revealed a prototype of the controller at the September 2005 Tokyo Game Show . At E3 2006 , the console won the first of several awards . By December 8 , 2006 , it had completed its launch in the four key markets . 
 In late 2011 , Nintendo released a reconfigured model , the " Wii Family Edition " , which lacks Nintendo GameCube compatibility ; this model was not released in Japan . The Wii Mini , Nintendo 's first major console redesign since the compact SNES , succeeded the standard Wii model and was released first in Canada on December 7 , 2012 . The Wii Mini can only play Wii optical discs , as it omits GameCube compatibility and all networking capabilities ; this model was not released in Japan , Australia , or New Zealand . The Wii 's successor , the Wii U , was released on November 18 , 2012 . On October 20 , 2013 , Nintendo confirmed it had discontinued production of the Wii in Japan and Europe , although the Wii Mini is still in production and available in Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 The console was conceived in 2001 , as the Nintendo GameCube was first released . According to an interview with Nintendo game designer Shigeru Miyamoto , the concept involved focusing on a new form of player interaction . " The consensus was that power isn 't everything for a console . Too many powerful consoles can 't coexist . It 's like having only ferocious dinosaurs . They might fight and hasten their own extinction . " 
 In 2003 , game engineers and designers were brought together to develop the concept further . By 2005 the controller interface had taken form , but a public showing at that year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) was canceled . Miyamoto stated that the company " had some troubleshooting to do . So we decided not to reveal the controller and instead we displayed just the console . " Nintendo president Satoru Iwata later unveiled and demonstrated the Wii Remote at the September Tokyo Game Show . 
 The Nintendo DS is said to have influenced the Wii 's design . Designer Ken <unk> Ashida noted , " We had the DS on our minds as we worked on the Wii . We thought about copying the DS 's touch @-@ panel interface and even came up with a prototype . " The idea was eventually rejected because of the notion that the two gaming systems would be identical . Miyamoto also stated , " [ ... ] if the DS had flopped , we might have taken the Wii back to the drawing board . " In June 2011 Nintendo unveiled the prototype of its successor to the Wii , to be known as Wii U. 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The console was known by the code name " Revolution " until April 27 , 2006 , immediately before E3 . 
 Nintendo 's spelling of " Wii " ( with two lower @-@ case " i " characters ) is intended to resemble two people standing side @-@ by @-@ side ( representing players gathering together ) and to represent the Wii Remote and Nunchuk . One reason the company has given for this name choice since the announcement is : 
 Some video game developers and members of the press stated that they preferred " Revolution " over " Wii " . Forbes expressed a fear " that the name would convey a continued sense of ' <unk> ' to the console . " The BBC reported the day after the name was announced that " a long list of puerile jokes , based on the name , " had appeared on the Internet . 
 Nintendo of America 's Vice President of Corporate Affairs Perrin Kaplan defended the choice of " Wii " over " Revolution " and responded to critics of the name , stating " Live with it , sleep with it , eat with it , move along with it and hopefully they 'll arrive at the same place . " Nintendo of America 's president Reggie Fils @-@ Aime acknowledged the initial reaction and further explained the change : 
 Nintendo has stated that the official plural form is " Wii systems " or " Wii consoles . " The Nintendo Style Guide refers to the console as " simply Wii , not Nintendo Wii " , making it the first home console Nintendo has marketed outside Japan without the company name in its trademark . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 On September 14 , 2006 Nintendo announced release information for Japan , North and South America , Oceania , Asia and Europe including dates , prices , and projected unit @-@ distribution figures . It was announced that the majority of the 2006 shipments would be allotted to the Americas , and 33 titles would be available at its launch . The Wii was launched in the United States on November 19 , 2006 for $ 249 @.@ 99 , and was later launched in the United Kingdom on December 8 , 2006 for £ 179 . The United Kingdom experienced a widespread shortage of Wii units in many High @-@ Street and online stores , and was unable to fulfill all pre @-@ orders at its release . The Wii was launched in South Korea on April 26 , 2008 and Taiwan on July 12 , 2008 . 
 = = Software library = = 
 Retail copies of games are supplied on proprietary , DVD @-@ type Wii optical discs , which are packaged in keep cases with instructions . In Europe , the boxes have a triangle at the bottom corner of the paper sleeve @-@ insert side . The triangle is color @-@ coded to identify the region for which the title is intended and which manual languages are included . The console supports regional lockout ( software purchased in a region can be only played on that region 's hardware ) . 
 New games in Nintendo 's flagship franchises ( including The Legend of Zelda , Super Mario , Pokémon , and Metroid ) have been released , in addition to many original titles and third @-@ party @-@ developed games . Nintendo has received third @-@ party support from companies such as Ubisoft , Sega , Square Enix , Activision Blizzard , Electronic Arts and Capcom , with more games being developed for Wii than for the PlayStation 3 or Xbox 360 . Nintendo also launched the New Play Control ! line , a selection of enhanced GameCube games for the Wii featuring updated controls . 
 The Virtual Console service allows Wii owners to play games originally released for the Nintendo Entertainment System , Super Nintendo Entertainment System , Nintendo 64 , Sega 's Mega Drive / Genesis and Sega Mark III / Sega Master System , NEC 's TurboGrafx @-@ 16 / PC Engine , SNK 's Neo Geo console , Commodore 64 and arcade games . Virtual Console games are distributed over broadband Internet via the Wii Shop Channel , and are saved to the Wii internal flash memory or to a removable SD card . Once downloaded , Virtual Console games can be accessed from the Wii Menu ( as individual channels ) or from an SD card via the SD Card Menu . There is also a Wii homebrew community , dedicated to creating and playing content unendorsed by Nintendo . 
 The game development suite Unity can be used to create official Wii games ; however , the developer must be authorized by Nintendo to develop games for the console . Games must also be accepted by Nintendo to be sold . 
 914 @.@ 28 million Wii games have been sold worldwide as of March 31 , 2016 , and 103 titles had surpassed the million @-@ unit mark by March 2011 . The most successful game ( Wii Sports , which comes bundled with the console in most regions ) sold 82 @.@ 78 million copies worldwide by March 2016 , surpassing Super Mario Bros. as the best @-@ selling game of all time . The best @-@ selling unbundled game , Mario Kart Wii , had sold 36 @.@ 75 million units . 
 = = = Launch titles = = = 
 Twenty @-@ one games were announced for launch day in North and South America , with another twelve announced for release later in 2006 . Wii Sports was included with the console bundle in all regions except Japan and South Korea . In contrast to the price of $ 60 quoted for many seventh @-@ generation games in the US , Wii titles cost ( at most ) $ 50 at major US retail stores . 
 Key : 
 NA North America , including Central and South Americas 
 EU Europe 
 JP Japan 
 AUS Australasia 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption was promoted as a launch title , but its release was eventually postponed until August 27 , 2007 in North America . Satoru Iwata also initially wished for Super Smash Bros. Brawl to be released at launch . 
 = = Demographic = = 
 Nintendo has hoped to target a wider demographic with its console than that of others in the seventh generation . At a press conference for the then @-@ upcoming Nintendo DS game Dragon Quest IX : Sentinels of the Starry Skies in December 2006 , Satoru Iwata insisted " We 're not thinking about fighting Sony , but about how many people we can get to play games . The thing we 're thinking about most is not portable systems , consoles , and so forth , but that we want to get new people playing games . " This is reflected in Nintendo 's series of television advertisements in North America ( directed by Academy Award winner Stephen Gaghan ) and its Internet ads . The advertising slogans were " Wii would like to play " and " Experience a new way to play " ; the ads began November 15 , 2006 , and had a total budget of over US $ 200 million for the year . The productions were Nintendo 's first broad @-@ based advertising strategy and included a two @-@ minute video clip showing an assortment of people enjoying the Wii system : urban apartment @-@ dwellers , ranchers , grandparents , and parents with their children . The music in the ads was from the song " Kodo ( Inside the Sun Remix ) " by the Yoshida Brothers . The marketing campaign was successful ; pensioners as old as 103 were reported to be playing the Wii in the United Kingdom . A report by the British newspaper The People also stated that Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom has used the console . 
 = = Hardware = = 
 The Wii is Nintendo 's smallest home console to date ; it measures 44 mm ( 1 @.@ 73 in ) wide , 157 mm ( 6 @.@ 18 in ) tall and 215 @.@ 4 mm ( 8 @.@ 48 in ) deep in its vertical orientation , slightly larger than three DVD cases stacked together . The included stand measures 55 @.@ 4 mm ( 2 @.@ 18 in ) wide , 44 mm ( 1 @.@ 73 in ) tall and 225 @.@ 6 mm ( 8 @.@ 88 in ) deep . The system weighs 1 @.@ 2 kg ( 2 @.@ 7 lb ) , making it the lightest of the three major seventh @-@ generation consoles . The Wii may stand horizontally or vertically . The prefix for the numbering scheme of the system and its parts and accessories is " <unk> " for its code name , " Revolution " . 
 The front of the console features an illuminated slot @-@ loading optical media drive which accepts only 12 cm Wii Optical Discs and 8 cm Nintendo GameCube Game Discs . ( Units sold in South Korea and later revisions do not support GameCube discs . ) The blue light in the disc slot illuminates briefly when the console is turned on , and pulses when new data is received through WiiConnect24 . After the update ( including System Menu 3 @.@ 0 ) , the disc @-@ slot light activates whenever a Wii disc is inserted or ejected . When there is no WiiConnect24 information , the light stays off . The disc @-@ slot light remains off during game play or when using other features . Two USB ports are located at its rear . An SD @-@ card slot is located behind the cover on the front of the console . 
 The Wii launch package includes the console ; a stand to allow the console to be placed vertically ; a round , clear stabilizer for the main stand ; a Wii Remote ; a Nunchuk attachment ; a Sensor Bar ; a removable stand for the bar ; an external power adapter ; two AA batteries ; a composite AV cable with RCA connectors ; a SCART adapter in European countries ( component video and other types of cables are available separately ) ; operation documentation and ( in Europe and the Americas ) a copy of the game Wii Sports . 
 The disc reader of the Wii does not play DVD @-@ Video , DVD @-@ Audio or Compact Discs . A 2006 announcement stated that a new version of the Wii ( capable of DVD @-@ Video playback ) would be released in 2007 ; however , Nintendo delayed its release to focus on meeting demand for the original console . Nintendo 's initial announcement stated that it " requires more than a firmware upgrade " to implement , and the capability could not be made available as an upgrade option for the existing Wii . Despite this assertion , third parties have used Wii homebrew to add DVD playback to unmodified Wii units . The Wii also can be hacked to enable an owner to use the console for activities unintended by the manufacturer . Several brands of <unk> are available for the Wii . 
 Although Nintendo showed the console and the Wii Remote in white , black , silver , lime @-@ green and red before it was released , it was only available in white for its first two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of sales . Black consoles were available in Japan in August 2009 , in Europe in November 2009 and in North America on May 9 , 2010 . A red Wii system bundle was available in Japan on November 11 , 2010 , commemorating the 25th anniversary of Super Mario Bros. The UK version of the limited @-@ edition red Wii was released October 29 , 2010 , preloaded with the original Donkey Kong game . It also featured the Wii Remote Plus , a new version of the controller with integrated Wii Motion Plus technology . The red Wii bundle was released in North America on November 7 , 2010 with New Super Mario Bros. Wii and the Wii Remote Plus . 
 On July 11 , 2007 , Nintendo unveiled the Wii Balance Board at E3 2007 with Wii Fit . It is a wireless balance board accessory for the Wii , with multiple pressure sensors used to measure the user 's center of balance . Namco Bandai produced a mat controller ( a simpler , less @-@ sophisticated competitor to the balance board ) . 
 = = = Wii Remote = = = 
 The Wii Remote is the primary controller for the console . It uses a combination of built @-@ in accelerometers and infrared detection to sense its position in 3D space when pointed at the LEDs in the Sensor Bar . This design allows users to control the game with physical gestures as well as button @-@ presses . The controller connects to the console using Bluetooth with an approximate 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) range , and features rumble and an internal speaker . The Wii Remote can connect to expansion devices through a proprietary port at the base of the controller . The device bundled with the Wii retail package is the Nunchuk unit , which features an accelerometer and a traditional analog stick with two trigger buttons . In addition , an <unk> wrist strap can be used to prevent the player from unintentionally dropping ( or throwing ) the Wii Remote . Nintendo has since offered a stronger strap and the Wii Remote Jacket to provide extra grip and protection . The Wii MotionPlus is another accessory that connects to the Wii Remote to supplement the accelerometer and sensor @-@ bar capabilities , enabling actions to appear on the screen in real time . Further augmenting the remote 's capabilities is the Wii Vitality Sensor , a fingertip pulse oximeter sensor that connects through the Wii Remote . 
 = = = Memory storage = = = 
 The Wii console contains 512 megabytes of internal flash memory , and features an SD card slot for external storage . An SD card can be used for uploading photos and backing up saved game data and downloaded Virtual Console and WiiWare games . To use the SD slot for transferring game saves , an update must be installed . Installation may be initiated from the Wii options menu through an Internet connection , or by inserting a game disc containing the update . Virtual Console data cannot be restored to any system except the unit of origin . An SD card can also be used to create customized in @-@ game music from stored MP3 files ( as first shown in Excite Truck ) and music for the slide @-@ show feature of the Photo Channel . Version 1 @.@ 1 of the Photo Channel removed MP3 playback in favor of AAC support . 
 At the Nintendo Fall Press Conference in October 2008 , Satoru Iwata announced that Wii owners would have the option to download WiiWare and Virtual Console content directly onto an SD card . The option would offer an alternative to " address the console 's insufficient memory storage " . The announcement stated that it would be available in Japan in spring 2009 ; Nintendo made the update available on March 25 . In addition to the previously announced feature , it lets the player load Virtual Console and WiiWare games directly from the SD card . The update allows the use of SDHC cards , increasing the limit on SD card size from 2 GB to 32 GB . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 Nintendo has released few technical details regarding the Wii system , but some key facts have leaked through the press . Although none of these reports has been officially confirmed , they generally indicate that the console is an extension ( or advancement ) of the Nintendo GameCube architecture . Specifically , the analyses report that the Wii is roughly 1 @.@ 5 to 2 times as powerful as its predecessor . Based on specifications , the Wii has been called the least powerful of the major home consoles of its generation . 
 = = = Technical problems = = = 
 The first Wii system software update ( via WiiConnect24 ) caused a small number of launch units to become completely unusable . This forced users to either send their units to Nintendo for repairs ( if they wished to retain their saved data ) or exchange them for free replacements . 
 With the release of dual @-@ layer Wii Optical Discs , Nintendo of America stated that some Wii systems may have difficulty reading the high @-@ density software ( due to a contaminated laser lens ) . Nintendo offers retail lens @-@ cleaning kits and free console repairs for owners who experience this issue . 
 The Wii Remote can lose track of the Wii system it has been set to , requiring that it be reset and <unk> . Nintendo 's support website provides instructions for this process and troubleshooting related issues . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 <unk> Electronics filed a patent @-@ infringement lawsuit against Nintendo over the pointing functionality of the Wii Remote , claiming " loss of reasonable royalties , reduced sales and / or lost profits as a result of the infringing activities " of Nintendo . The law firm Green Welling LLP filed a class action lawsuit against Nintendo for its " defective wrist straps " . A Texas @-@ based company ( Lonestar Inventions ) sued Nintendo , claiming that the company copied one of Lonestar 's patented capacitor designs and used it in the Wii console . 
 <unk> Ltd , a Texas @-@ based firm , filed a lawsuit against Nintendo for patent infringement regarding Nintendo 's controllers . A July 2008 verdict banned Nintendo from selling the Classic Controller in the United States . Following an appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit , on April 22 , 2010 the Federal Circuit Court ruled in Nintendo 's favor . 
 On August 19 , 2008 Hillcrest Laboratories Inc. filed a complaint against Nintendo with the U.S International Trade Commission , alleging that the Wii Remote infringed on three of its patents . A fourth Hillcrest patent ( for graphical interfaces displayed on television screens ) was also allegedly violated . Hillcrest sought a ban on Wii consoles imported to the U.S. On August 24 , 2009 Nintendo and Hillcrest reached a settlement , although the terms were not publicly disclosed . 
 The trademark application for the Wii Remote was initially rejected by the United States Patent and Trademark Office . The USPTO claimed that the word " remote " is commonly used , and therefore should not be trademarked . The USPTO would accept Nintendo 's trademark filing if the company disclaims exclusive rights to the word " remote " in the term . 
 = = Features = = 
 The console has a number of internal features made available from its hardware and firmware components . The hardware allows for <unk> ( via expansion ports ) , while the firmware ( and some software ) can receive periodic updates via the WiiConnect24 service . 
 = = = Wii Menu = = = 
 The Wii Menu interface is designed to emulate television channels . Separate channels are graphically displayed in a grid , and are navigated using the pointer capability of the Wii Remote . Except for the Disc Channel , it is possible to change the arrangement by holding down the A and B buttons to " grab " channels and move them around . There are six primary channels : the Disc Channel , Mii Channel , Photo Channel , Wii Shop Channel , Forecast Channel and News Channel . The latter two were initially unavailable at launch , but were later activated in updates . The Wii + Internet Video Channel was installed in consoles manufactured after September 2008 . Additional channels are available for download from the Wii Shop Channel through WiiWare , and appear with each Virtual Console title ; these include the Everybody Votes Channel , Internet Channel , Check Mii Out Channel and the Nintendo Channel . As of October 18 , 2010 , Wii owners can download the Netflix Channel from the Wii Shop Channel . 
 = = = Backward compatibility = = = 
 Wii consoles with the original design are backward @-@ compatible with all Nintendo GameCube software , Nintendo GameCube Memory Cards and controllers . Software compatibility is achieved by the slot @-@ loading drive 's ability to accept Nintendo GameCube Game Discs . However , redesigned " Family Edition " Wiis and the Wii Mini are not backward @-@ compatible . 
 A Wii console running a GameCube disc is restricted to GameCube functionality , and GameCube controller is required to play GameCube titles . A Nintendo GameCube Memory Card is also necessary to save game progress and content , since the Wii internal flash memory will not save GameCube games . Also , backward compatibility is limited in some areas . For example , online and LAN @-@ enabled features for Nintendo GameCube titles are unavailable on the Wii , since the console lacks serial ports for the Nintendo GameCube Broadband Adapter and Modem Adapter . 
 = = = Nintendo DS connectivity = = = 
 The Wii system supports wireless connectivity with the Nintendo DS without any additional accessories . This connectivity allows the player to use the Nintendo DS microphone and touchscreen as inputs for Wii games . The first game utilizing Nintendo DS @-@ Wii connectivity is Pokémon Battle Revolution . Players with either the Pokémon Diamond or Pearl Nintendo DS games are able to play battles using the Nintendo DS as a controller . Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles : Echoes of Time , released on both Nintendo DS and Wii , features connectivity in which both games can advance simultaneously . Nintendo later released the Nintendo Channel , which allows Wii owners to download game demos or additional data to their Nintendo DS in a process similar to that of a DS Download Station . The console is also able to expand Nintendo DS games . 
 = = = Online connectivity = = = 
 The Wii console connects to the Internet through its built @-@ in 802.11b / g Wi @-@ Fi or through a USB @-@ to @-@ Ethernet adapter ; either method allows players to access the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection service . The service has several features for the console , including the Virtual Console , WiiConnect24 , Internet Channel , Forecast Channel , Everybody Votes Channel , News Channel and the Check Mii Out Channel . The Wii can also communicate ( and connect ) with other Wii systems through a self @-@ generated wireless LAN , enabling local wireless multi @-@ playing on different television sets . Battalion Wars 2 first demonstrated this feature for non @-@ split screen multi @-@ playing between two ( or more ) televisions . 
 On April 9 , 2008 , the BBC announced that its online BBC iPlayer would be available on the Wii via the Internet Channel browser ; however , some users experienced difficulty with the service . On November 18 , 2009 , BBC iPlayer on the Wii was relaunched as the BBC iPlayer Channel , a free download from the Wii Shop Channel ; however , the service is only available to people in the United Kingdom . On December 26 , 2008 , Nintendo announced a new video channel for the Wii . As of October 18 , 2010 , American and Canadian Wii owners can watch Netflix instantly on a channel ( without requiring a disc ) . 
 = = = Parental controls = = = 
 The console features parental controls , which can be used to prohibit younger users from playing games with content unsuitable for their age level . When one attempts to play a Wii or Virtual Console game , it reads the content rating encoded in the game data ; if this rating is greater than the system 's set age level , the game will not load without a password . Parental controls may also restrict Internet access , which blocks the Internet Channel and system @-@ update features . Since the console is restricted to Nintendo GameCube functionality when playing Nintendo GameCube Game Discs , GameCube software is unaffected by Wii parental @-@ control settings . 
 European units primarily use the PEGI rating system , while North American units use the ESRB rating system . The Wii supports the rating systems of many countries , including CERO in Japan , the USK in Germany , the PEGI and BBFC in the United Kingdom , the ACB in Australia and the OFLC in New Zealand . Homebrew developers have reverse @-@ engineered the function which Nintendo uses to recover lost parental @-@ control passwords , creating a simple script to obtain parental @-@ control reset codes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Wii has received mixed reviews . The system was well received after its exhibition at E3 2006 . At the event , Nintendo 's console won the Game Critics Awards for Best of Show and Best Hardware . In the December 2006 issue of Popular Science , the console was named a Grand Award Winner in home entertainment . Spike TV 's Video Games Award cited the Wii 's breakthrough technology . GameSpot chose the console as having the best hardware in its " Best and Worst 2006 " awards . The system was also chosen as one of PC World magazine 's 20 Most Innovative Products of the Year . The console received a Golden Joystick for Innovation of the Year 2007 at the Golden Joystick Awards . In the category of Engineering & Technology for Creation and Implementation of Video Games and Platforms , Nintendo was awarded an Emmy Award for Game Controller Innovation by the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences . In 2009 , IGN named the Wii the 10th greatest console of all time ( out of 25 ) . 
 The Wii 's success caught third @-@ party developers by surprise , leading to apologies for the quality of their early games . In an interview with German news magazine Der Spiegel , Ubisoft 's Yves Guillemot and Alain Corre admitted that they made a mistake in rushing out their launch titles , promising to take future projects more seriously . Take @-@ Two Interactive , which released few games for the Nintendo GameCube , changed its stance towards Nintendo by placing a higher priority on the Wii . 
 At the same time , criticism of the Wii Remote and Wii hardware specifications has surfaced . Former GameSpot editor and <unk> founder Jeff Gerstmann stated that the controller 's speaker produces low @-@ quality sound , while Factor 5 President Julian <unk> criticized the hardware audio as substandard for a console of its generation . UK @-@ based developer Free Radical Design stated that the Wii hardware lacks the power necessary to run the software it scheduled for release on other seventh @-@ generation consoles . Online connectivity of the Wii was also criticized ; Matt Casamassina of IGN compared it to the " entirely unintuitive " service provided for the Nintendo DS . 
 Game designer and The Sims creator Will Wright shared his thoughts on the Wii in the context of the current console generation : " The only next gen system I 've seen is the Wii – the PS3 and the Xbox 360 feel like better versions of the last , but pretty much the same game with incremental improvement . But the Wii feels like a major jump – not that the graphics are more powerful , but that it hits a completely different demographic . " 
 The Wii is seen as more physically demanding than other game consoles . Some Wii players have experienced a form of tennis elbow , known as " <unk> " . A study published in the British Medical Journal stated that Wii players use more energy than they do playing sedentary computer games . While this energy increase may be beneficial to weight management , it was not an adequate replacement for regular exercise . A case study published in the American Physical Therapy Association 's journal , Physical Therapy , focused on use of the Wii for rehabilitation in a teenager with cerebral palsy . It is believed to be the first published research demonstrating physical @-@ therapy benefits from use of the gaming system . Researchers say the system complements traditional techniques through use of simultaneous gaming rehabilitation efforts . In May 2010 the American Heart Association ( AHA ) endorsed the Wii to encourage sedentary people to take the first step toward fitness . The AHA heart icon covers the console and two of its more @-@ active games , Wii Fit Plus and Wii Sports Resort . 
 By 2008 , two years after the Wii 's release , Nintendo acknowledged several limitations and challenges with the system ( such as the perception that the system catered primarily to a " casual " audience and was unpopular among " core " gamers ) . Game designer Shigeru Miyamoto admitted that the lack of support for high definition video output on the Wii and its limited network infrastructure also contributed to the system being regarded separately from its competitors ' systems , the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . 
 An executive for Frontline Studios stated that major publishers were wary of releasing exclusive titles for the Wii , due to the perception that third @-@ party companies were not strongly supported by consumers . In his blog , 1UP.com editor Jeremy Parish stated that Nintendo was the biggest disappointment for him in 2007 . Commenting on the lack of quality third @-@ party support , he stated that " the Wii landscape is bleak . Worse than it was on N64 . Worse than on GameCube ... the resulting third @-@ party content is overwhelmingly bargain @-@ bin trash . " The Globe and Mail and Forbes noted that the Wii had few successful third @-@ party titles compared to its rivals ( due , in part , to its weaker hardware ) . Third @-@ party developers often skipped the Wii instead of making games for all three consoles simultaneously ( " blockbusters like the Call of Duty franchise either never arrive on Nintendo hardware or show up in neutered form " ) . Forbes observed that of the most successful games of 2011 ( The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim , Mass Effect 3 , Portal 2 , L.A. Noire , Battlefield 3 , Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 ) , although all were released for PC , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 , only Modern Warfare 3 received a Wii version which was also the least positively received port of the game . The lack of third @-@ party games may be exacerbated in the future , as Nintendo faces the " dilemma of having fallen out of sync with its rivals in the console cycle " ; Microsoft and Sony would design their consoles to be more powerful than the Wii U. Strong third @-@ party titles are seen as a key sign of a gaming console 's health . 
 The Globe and Mail , in suggesting why Nintendo posted a record loss of $ 926 million for the initial six months of its 2011 – 2012 fiscal year , blamed the Wii 's design for being " short @-@ sighted " . The Wii initially enjoyed phenomenal success because it was inexpensive ( due to its being less sophisticated than its competitors ) and introduced a " gaming gimmick " . However , this approach meant that the Wii 's hardware soon became outdated and could not keep up long @-@ term ( in contrast to more @-@ advanced rivals such as Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , which are expected to continue doing well in 2012 – 2013 ) " as both user desires and surrounding technologies evolved " later in the generation . Furthermore , price cuts and the introduction of motion @-@ sensor controllers for the Xbox 360 and PS3 nullified advantages once held by the Wii . The Globe suggested that there were other reasons for Nintendo 's poor financial performance , including a strong yen and a tepid reception to the Nintendo 3DS handheld as mobile gaming becomes popular on smartphones and tablets ( such as the iPad ) . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 As of March 31 , 2016 , the Wii has sold 101 @.@ 63 million consoles worldwide . 
 Since its launch , monthly sales numbers of the console have generally been higher than its competitors around the globe . According to the NPD Group , the Wii sold more units in the United States than the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 combined in the first half of 2007 . This lead is even larger in the Japanese market , where it currently leads in total sales ( having outsold both consoles by factors of 2 : 1 to 6 : 1 nearly every week from its launch to November 2007 ) . In Australia the Wii broke the record set by the Xbox 360 and became the fastest @-@ selling game console in Australian history . 
 On September 12 , 2007 , the Financial Times reported that the Wii had surpassed the Xbox 360 ( released a year earlier ) and had become market leader in home @-@ console sales for the current generation , based on sales figures from Enterbrain , NPD Group and GfK . This was the first time a Nintendo console led its generation in sales since the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 On July 11 , 2007 , Nintendo warned that the Wii would remain in short supply throughout that calendar year . In December , Reggie Fils @-@ Aime revealed that Nintendo was producing approximately 1 @.@ 8 million Wii consoles each month . Some UK stores still had a shortage of consoles in March 2007 , demand still outpaced supply in the United States in June 2007 , and the console was " selling out almost as quickly as it hits retail shelves " in Canada in April 2008 . In October 2008 Nintendo announced that between October and December the Wii would have its North American supplies increased considerably from 2007 levels , while producing 2 @.@ 4 million Wii units a month worldwide ( compared to 1 @.@ 6 million per month in 2007 ) . 
 In the United States the Wii sold 10 @.@ 9 million units by July 1 , 2008 , making it the leader in current @-@ generation home console sales according to the NPD Group ( and surpassing the Xbox 360 ) . 
 In Japan the Wii surpassed the number of GameCube units sold by January 2008 ; it sold 7 @,@ 526 @,@ 821 units by December 2008 , according to Enterbrain . According to the NPD Group the Wii surpassed the Xbox 360 to become the best @-@ selling " next @-@ generation " home video @-@ game console in Canada ( with 813 @,@ 000 units sold by April 1 , 2008 ) , and was the best @-@ selling home console for 13 of the previous 17 months . According to the NPD Group the Wii had sold a total of 1 @,@ 060 @,@ 000 units in Canada by August 2008 , making it the first current @-@ generation home console to surpass the million @-@ unit mark in that country . In the United Kingdom the Wii leads in current @-@ generation home @-@ console sales with 4 @.@ 9 million units sold as of January 3 , 2009 , according to GfK Chart @-@ Track . On March 25 , 2009 at the Game Developers Conference , Satoru Iwata said that worldwide shipments of Wii had reached 50 million . 
 While Microsoft and Sony have experienced losses producing their consoles in the hopes of making a long @-@ term profit on software sales , Nintendo reportedly has optimized production costs to obtain a significant profit margin with each Wii unit sold . On September 17 , 2007 the Financial Times reported that the direct profit per Wii sold may vary , from $ 13 in Japan to $ 49 in the United States and $ 79 in Europe . On December 2 , 2008 , Forbes reported that Nintendo made a $ 6 operating profit per Wii unit sold . 
 On September 23 , 2009 , Nintendo announced its first price reductions for the console . Nintendo sold more than three million Wii consoles in the U.S. in December 2009 ( setting a regional record for the month and ending nine months of declining sales ) , due to the price cut and software releases such as New Super Mario Bros. Wii . On January 31 , 2010 the Wii became the best @-@ selling home video @-@ game console produced by Nintendo , with sales of over 67 million units ( surpassing those of the original Nintendo Entertainment System ) . Nintendo reported that on Black Friday 2011 over 500 @,@ 000 Wii consoles were sold , making it the most successful Black Friday in company history . 
 = = Other models = = 
 = = = Family Edition = = = 
 The Wii Family Edition variant is identical to the original model , but is designed to sit horizontally ( the vertical feet are still present ; however , the front labels are rotated and a stand is no longer included ) and removes the GameCube controller and memory card ports although the casing under the top cover <unk> has the GameCube controller and memory card ports holes with no ports and no slots . For this reason , the Family Edition variant is incompatible with GameCube games and accessories . The console was announced on August 17 , 2011 and released in Europe and North America in October 2011 . 
 The Wii Family Edition was made available in Europe , bundled with a Wii Remote Plus , Wii Party and Wii Sports . A blue Wii Family Edition was launched to coincide with Black Friday and the release of Mario & Sonic at the London 2012 Olympic Games on November 18 , 2011 and a black Wii Family Edition ( bundled with New Super Mario Bros. Wii and the official soundtrack CD of Super Mario Galaxy ) was released on October 23 , 2011 . In late 2012 Nintendo released a version of the North America black edition , including Wii Sports and Wii Sports Resort games on a single disc instead of the New Super Mario Bros. Wii game and the Super Mario Galaxy soundtrack . 
 = = = Wii Mini = = = 
 The Wii Mini ( stylized as Wii mini ) is a smaller , redesigned Wii with a top @-@ loading disc drive . This model lacks <unk> ( component video / D @-@ Terminal ) , S @-@ Video , RGB SCART output , GameCube compatibility , online connectivity , the SD card slot and Wi @-@ Fi support , and has only one USB port unlike the previous models ' two . The initial release omitted a pack @-@ in game , but Mario Kart Wii was included at no extra charge beginning on September 18 , 2013 in Canada and from launch in the United States . It was released in Canada on December 7 , 2012 with a MSRP of C $ 99 @.@ 99 , in Europe on March 22 , 2013 , and in the United States on November 17 , 2013 . Nintendo uses this console and the Nintendo Selects game series to promote low @-@ cost gaming . The Wii Mini is styled in matte black with a red border , and includes a red Wii Remote Plus and Nunchuk . A composite video / audio cable , wired sensor bar and power adapter are also included . 
 = = Successor = = 
 Nintendo announced the successor to the Wii , Wii U , at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011 . The Wii U features a controller with an embedded touch screen and output 1080p high @-@ definition graphics ; it is fully backward @-@ compatible with Wii games and peripherals for the Wii . The Wii remote , Nunchuk controller and balance board are compatible with Wii U games which include support for them . The Wii U was released on November 18 , 2012 in North America , November 30 , 2012 in Europe and Australia , and December 8 , 2012 in Japan . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the 2011 episode of The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That ! , " <unk> Away " , when Nick is looking for his Yo @-@ Yo , a Wii console is seen at the bottom @-@ right corner of the screen . 
 = Treaty of Butre = 
 The Treaty of Butre between the Netherlands and Ahanta was signed at Butre ( historical spelling : Boutry ) , Dutch Gold Coast on 27 August 1656 . The treaty regulated the jurisdiction of the Netherlands and the Dutch West India Company over the town of Butre and the surrounding country of Upper Ahanta , creating a Dutch protectorate over the area . The treaty lasted until the Dutch departure from the Gold Coast in April 1872 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The country of Ahanta , in what is now the Western Region of the Republic of Ghana , comprised a regional power in the form of a confederacy of chiefdoms which had come in early contact with the European nations settling on the Gold Coast for the purpose of trade . 
 In the middle of the seventeenth century the four European competitors in the area were the Dutch West India Company , Danish Africa Company , Royal Africa Company and the Swedish Africa Company . The Dutch had been active in <unk> and resident in neighboring Axim since 1642 , the Swedish from Butre since 1650 , the Danish since 1658 in Fort <unk> and the English from <unk> . The European powers allied themselves with African states and chiefs in order to gain a sustainable dominance in the area . 
 In their efforts to dislodge the Swedish from Butre , the Dutch struck up different tactical alliances with the chiefdoms of Ahanta and the state of <unk> , a political entity of which little is known . 
 After the Dutch had driven the Swedish out of Butre , the director general of the Dutch West India Company , with headquarters in St. George d <unk> in the central Gold Coast , decided that it would be beneficial to negotiate a treaty with the local political leadership in order to establish a peaceful long @-@ term relationship . The Ahanta leaders found it equally beneficial to enter into such an agreement . The 1656 treaty signalled the definitive switch in European jurisdiction in the area until 1872 . 
 The treaty and the terms of the protectorate turned out to be very stable , most likely in part because the Dutch never had the intention to interfere in the affairs of the Ahanta states . That is , except for the town of Butre , where they built a fort ( Fort <unk> ) . The treaty could be interpreted as a treaty of friendship and cooperation , rather than as a treaty establishing a Dutch protectorate . The Dutch worked in close cooperation with the local chief , who was also second in line in the political leadership of what became known as the Kingdom of Ahanta and had its capital at the nearby seaside town of <unk> . 
 In 1837 the king of Ahanta , <unk> <unk> II ( Badu Bonsu II ) , rebelled against the Dutch government and killed several officers , including acting governor Hendrik <unk> . The Dutch government used the treaty as the basis for military action and an expeditionary force was sent to Ahanta . In the war that followed King <unk> <unk> II was killed . The Dutch reorganised the Ahanta state , after the rebellion , appointing the chief of Butre as regent , keeping the country under close control with an enlarged military and civilian presence . 
 When the Dutch transferred their possessions on the Gold Coast to the British on 6 April 1872 , the treaty of 1656 was still in effect , having regulated political relations between the Dutch and Ahanta for more than 213 years . The treaty was one of the oldest and one of the longest functioning treaties between an African and a European state . 
 With the Dutch possessions , the British took over all legal obligations including the existing treaties and contracts . After the transfer the British started to develop their own policies towards the now united Gold Coast possessions . Ahanta resisted the British take @-@ over , with the result that the British Royal Navy bombed Butre in 1873 to achieve a political submission . In 1874 Britain declared the entire Gold Coast – including Ahanta – a Crown Colony , de jure and de facto ending all former diplomatic and legal obligations . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The treaty is titled " Dedication of Upper Ahanta and Butre " ( <unk> van <unk> ende Boutry ) , which immediately indicates the nature of the contract , namely the establishment of a protectorate . 
 = = = Location and date = = = 
 The treaty was signed by both the Ahanta and the Dutch delegates at Butre on 27 August 1656 and took effect immediately . 
 = = = Contracting partners = = = 
 The contracting parties on the Dutch side were : the Dutch West India Company , for itself , and by way of its director general representing the States General , the sovereign power of the country , for the Republic of the United Netherlands . Signatories were Eduard Man , fiscal , and Adriaan <unk> , commissioner in the service of the Dutch West India Company . 
 The contracting partners on the Ahanta side were <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , " chiefs of the Country Anta " . They were also the signatories of the treaty , together with <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Acha . Harman van <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , " captain of Boutry " are mentioned as additional parties in the treaty , and they ratified the treaty , together with <unk> . 
 = = = Terms = = = 
 Being a dedication , the treaty is rather unilateral in its terms . Ahanta declared that in view of former good relations with the Dutch government established in the past at neighbouring Axim , and in view of the adverse circumstances caused by the war with <unk> , it was decided to invite the Dutch director general at Elmina to come to Butre and " accept possession of that what was offered him " . Ahanta placed itself under the protection of both the States General of the United Netherlands and the Dutch West India Company . This was done on the condition that the Dutch fortified and defended the places under their protection , and kept the Ahanta free from the dangers of war . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Doortmont , Michel R. ; <unk> Smit ( 2007 ) . Sources for the mutual history of Ghana and the Netherlands . An annotated guide to the Dutch archives relating to Ghana and West Africa in the Nationaal <unk> , 1593 @-@ 1960s . Leiden : Brill . ISBN 978 @-@ 90 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 van Dantzig , Albert ( 1981 ) . Forts and castles of Ghana . Accra : <unk> Publishing . ISBN <unk> @-@ 72 @-@ 010 @-@ 6 . 
 Doortmont , Michel R. ; <unk> , Benedetta , eds . ( 2006 ) , The castles of Ghana : Axim , Butre , Anomabu . Historical and architectural research of three Ghanaian forts , <unk> : Associazione Giovanni Secco <unk> . 
 = Stoor worm = 
 The stoor worm , or Mester Stoor Worm , was a gigantic evil sea serpent of Orcadian folklore , capable of contaminating plants and destroying animals and humans with its putrid breath . It is probably an Orkney variant of the Norse Jörmungandr , also known as the Midgard Serpent , or world serpent , and has been described as a sea dragon . 
 The king of one country threatened by the beast 's arrival was advised to offer it a weekly sacrifice of seven virgins . In desperation the king eventually issued a proclamation offering his kingdom , his daughter 's hand in marriage and a magic sword to anyone who could destroy the monster . Assipattle , the youngest son of a local farmer , defeated the creature ; as it died its teeth fell out to become the islands of Orkney , Shetland and the Faroes , and its body became Iceland . 
 Similarities between <unk> 's defeat of the monster and other dragon @-@ slayer tales , including <unk> ' destruction of a sea monster to save Hesione , have been noted by several authors . It has been suggested that tales of this genre evolved during a period of enlightenment , when human sacrifices to bestial divinities were beginning to be suppressed . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name stoor worm may be derived from the Old Norse <unk> @-@ <unk> , an alternative name for Jörmungandr , the world or Midgard Serpent of Norse mythology , Stoor or <unk> was a term used by Scots in the latter part of the 14th century to describe fighting or battles ; it could also be applied to " violent conflicts " of the weather elements . Similar definitions are given by the Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue that covers the period up to the start of the 18th century ; later volumes , when it was published as the Dictionary of the Scots Language and covered from 1700 onwards , include substantial , large and big ; it further indicates it may be akin to the Old Norse <unk> . It shows <unk> as " a monster serpent , a sea @-@ dragon " using Traill Dennison 's tale as the basis for the definition . 
 Mester means master ; it may have been deemed Mester Stoor Worm because it was the " master and father of all <unk> " . In Scotland worm may frequently be applied to a dragon , as it is in northern England according to folklorist Katharine Briggs , a usage that derives from the Saxon and Norse terms . The spelling of the Old English and obsolete variant of the word worm is wyrm , meaning dragon or serpent . Traill Dennison 's definition gives <unk> as " superior " with stoor being " large , powerful , strong or stern " . He describes worm as " any animal of serpent shape " . 
 = = Folk beliefs = = 
 = = = Description and common attributes = = = 
 An inhabitant of the sea , the stoor worm was a mythical serpent @-@ like creature created by malevolent spirits . A gigantic beast with a ferocious appetite , it was able to demolish ships and houses with its prehensile forked tongue it used as a pair of tongs , and even to drag entire hillsides and villages into the sea . Its eyes were like " round lochs , very deep and dark " in the modern retelling , whereas it " glowed and flamed like a ward fire " in Dennison 's long text , which noted in an aside that some accounts stated that the stoor worm had only one eye . 
 According to folklorist Jennifer Westwood , the stoor worm 's head was " like a great mountain " ; its breath was putrid , contaminating plants and destroying any humans or animals with its blast . Traill Dennison reported the serpent 's length was " beyond telling , and reached thousands and thousands of miles in the sea " . Giant sea swells and earthquakes were attributed to the beast yawning , a sign it wanted to be fed rather than of fatigue . Islanders were terrified of the serpent ; it was described by Traill Dennison , who transcribed its story , as " the worst of the nine fearful curses that plague mankind " . A further tale recorded by Traill Dennison gives a brief mention of another stoor worm , described as the progeny of the Orcadian monster , which is killed when it is severed in two by an oversized mythical ship . 
 = = = Sacrificial offerings = = = 
 The king of one country threatened by the imminent arrival of the stoor worm sought the advice of a wise man or <unk> , who suggests that the beast might be appeased if it is fed seven virgins every week . In line with the wise man 's advice , every Saturday the islanders provide a sacrificial offering of seven virgins , who were tied up and placed on the beach for the serpent to sweep into its mouth as it reared its head from the sea . 
 As the regular sacrifices continue the islanders approach the king for help , as they are worried there will soon be no young girls left . The king again asks the advice of the <unk> , who tentatively suggests that the king 's only daughter , Princess Gem @-@ de @-@ lovely , his most prized possession , will have to be offered to the stoor worm to encourage it to leave . During the ten @-@ week period of grace before the princess has to be sacrificed , messengers are despatched to every corner of the realm offering the kingdom , marriage to the princess , and the magic sword the king had inherited from the god Odin . 
 = = = Slaying = = = 
 The number of prospective heroes who come forward as a result of the king 's appeal varies in the telling from 30 to 36 , but they all leave without confronting the monster . The day before the princess is due to be sacrificed , Assipattle , the youngest son of a local farmer and despised by his family , mounts his father 's horse and at dawn arrives on the beach where the creature is just beginning to awaken . After stealing some hot peat and acquiring a small boat , Assipattle is driven by the waves into the stoor worm 's mouth as it starts yawning . The boat is carried down to the depths of the creature 's stomach until it finally comes to rest . Assipattle plunges the still burning peat into the stoor worm 's liver , causing a " fire that blazed like a furnace " . The pain of its burning liver causes the creature to have a fit of retching that carries Assipattle , who has managed to return to his boat , back out of the monster 's mouth . 
 The commotion caused by the stoor worm 's writhing agonies draws a crowd to the beach , and Assipattle lands safely among them . The ferocity of the fire burning in the creature 's liver increases , causing smoke clouds to be expelled from its mouth and nostrils , turning the skies black . The islanders , believing that the world is about to end , clamber up a hillside to watch the final death throes of the creature at a safe distance from the resulting tidal waves and earthquakes . As it dies , the creature 's teeth fall out to become the islands of Orkney , Shetland and the Faroes . The Baltic Sea is created where its tongue falls out , and when the creature finally curls up into a tight knot and dies , its body becomes Iceland . True to his word , once the skies clear and the earth settles , the king relinquishes his kingdom to Assipattle , who marries Princess Gem @-@ de @-@ lovely . As promised , the king also gives Odin 's magic sword to Assipattle . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The stoor worm is likely to be an Orkney variant of the Norse Jörmungandr , or world serpent , also known as the Midgard Serpent . The Orcadian folklorist Marwick highlights the similarity between the method Assipattle used to kill the mythical creature and those recounted in the slaying of the Worm of Linton and the Cnoc na <unk> of Sutherland tales . He also notes that in Bel and the Dragon , the dragon is killed by Daniel using " fat and hair " instead of peat . In Shetland there was a long @-@ standing belief that " away , far out to sea , near the edge of the world , lived a monstrous sea @-@ serpent that took about six hours to draw in his breath , and six hours to let it out " , which Marwick speculates was probably an explanation for the cycle of the tides . 
 Hartland published an analysis of the myths of the Perseus cycle in the last decade of the 19th century with the stated aim to determine " whether it be possible to ascertain what was its primitive form , where it originated , and how it became diffused over the Eastern continent . " He highlighted similarities between Assipattle 's defeat of the stoor worm and <unk> 's rescue of Hesione . When researching the Dartmoor legend of Childe 's Tomb folklorist Theo Brown also drew comparisons between the slaying of the stoor worm and Jonah 's three @-@ day confinement inside a whale . Hartland concluded that tales of this genre were confined to countries beginning to move away from primitive beliefs and possibly evolved " out of the suppression of human sacrifices to divinities in bestial form . " 
 = The Boat Race 2001 = 
 The 147th Boat Race was won by Cambridge by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . It was the first time in the history of the event that the race was stopped and restarted , following a clash of blades . 
 In the reserve race Goldie beat Isis ; Cambridge also won the Women 's race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual competition between the boat clubs of the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2000 race by three lengths , but Cambridge led overall with 76 victories to Oxford 's 69 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Aberdeen Asset Management for the second consecutive year . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) consisted of seven Britons , an American and a Norwegian , while the Cambridge crew ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) was composed of six Britons , a German , an Australian and a British / American . The Cambridge crew weighed , on average , 4 @.@ 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 0 kg ) more than their rivals , while Josh West , Cambridge 's number five , was the tallest rower , at 6 ft 9 in ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) . 
 = = Race = = 
 Boat club presidents Kieran West and Dan Snow met on the banks of the Thames at Putney for the coin toss at soon after noon on 24 March 2001 . Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . While the river was calm , rain began to fall just prior the start of the race . Oxford took an early lead , but both coxes were given warnings by race umpire Rupert Obholzer . A clash of blades ensued , with Cambridge 's bow Colin Swainson losing his oar ; this resulted in Obholzer called for a restart for the first time in the history of the race . Once again , Oxford took the lead and held a two @-@ second lead at Hammersmith Bridge . Although rating the same , Cambridge took the lead , to be ahead by half @-@ a @-@ length at the Surrey bend , and seven seconds ahead by Chiswick Steps . Extending their lead to more than two lengths by Barnes Bridge , Cambridge passed the finishing post in a time of 19 minutes 59 seconds . It was Cambridge 's eighth win in nine races , and took their overall lead to 77 victories to Oxford 's 69 . 
 In the reserve race Goldie beat Isis by six lengths in a time of 19 minutes , 36 seconds . Cambridge also won the Women 's race by three feet . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Race umpire Obholzer stated " I could have disqualified Oxford but both sides were responsible " . Cambridge president and number six West said " Both teams had a good row but we had good rhythm and pushed really hard " , while Oxford president Snow remarked " The Boat Race is not fair ... six months ' work to be screwed by the system . We have got to deal with that " . BBC commentator and former Light Blue president Richard Phelps believed that Cambridge " deserved " the win and that " it was the superior power and application of it that saw Cambridge slowly pull clear of Oxford " . Cambridge coach Robin Williams said " It was a brave , quick decision by the umpire " , while former Dark Blue and Olympic gold medallist Matthew Pinsent suggested the clash was simply a racing incident and that the race could have been allowed to continue . He added : " There is no yellow card offence between a warning and disqualification " . Oxford coach Sean Bowden blamed the defeat on the restart : " We rowed with a lot of courage ... but having to restart after that great first take @-@ off really hurt us . It just put us at a disadvantage from then on " . 
 = Geraldine Ferraro = 
 Geraldine Anne Ferraro ( August 26 , 1935 – March 26 , 2011 ) was an American attorney , a Democratic Party politician , and a member of the United States House of Representatives . In 1984 , she was the first female vice presidential candidate representing a major American political party . 
 Ferraro grew up in New York City and worked as a public school teacher before training as a lawyer . She joined the Queens County District Attorney 's Office in 1974 , heading the new Special Victims Bureau that dealt with sex crimes , child abuse , and domestic violence . In 1978 she was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives , where she rose rapidly in the party hierarchy while focusing on legislation to bring equity for women in the areas of wages , pensions , and retirement plans . In 1984 , former vice president and presidential candidate Walter Mondale , seen as an underdog , selected Ferraro to be his running mate in the upcoming election . Ferraro became the only Italian American to be a major @-@ party national nominee in addition to being the first woman . The positive polling the Mondale @-@ Ferraro ticket received when she joined soon faded , as damaging questions arose about her and her businessman husband 's finances and wealth and her Congressional disclosure statements . In the general election , Mondale and Ferraro were defeated in a landslide by incumbent President Ronald Reagan and Vice President George H. W. Bush . 
 Ferraro ran campaigns for a seat in the United States Senate from New York in 1992 and 1998 , both times starting as the front @-@ runner for her party 's nomination before losing in the primary election . She served as a United States Ambassador to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights from 1993 until 1996 , in the presidential administration of Bill Clinton . She also continued her career as a journalist , author , and businesswoman , and served in the 2008 presidential campaign of Senator Hillary Clinton . Ferraro died on March 26 , 2011 , from multiple myeloma , 12 years after being diagnosed . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Geraldine Ferraro was born on August 26 , 1935 in Newburgh , New York , the daughter of <unk> L. Ferraro ( née <unk> ) , a first @-@ generation Italian American seamstress , and Dominick Ferraro , an Italian immigrant ( from <unk> , Campania ) and owner of two restaurants . She had three brothers born before her , but one died in infancy and another at age three . Ferraro attended the parochial school Mount Saint Mary 's in Newburgh when she was young . Her father died of a heart attack in May 1944 , when she was eight . Ferraro 's mother soon invested and lost the remainder of the family 's money , forcing the family to move to a low @-@ income area in the South Bronx while Ferraro 's mother worked in the garment industry to support them . 
 Ferraro stayed on at Mount Saint Mary 's as a boarder for a while , then briefly attended a parochial school in the South Bronx . Beginning in 1947 , she attended and lived at the parochial Marymount Academy in Tarrytown , New York , using income from a family rental property in Italy and skipping seventh grade . At Marymount Ferraro was a member of the honor society , active in several clubs and sports , voted most likely to succeed , and graduated in 1952 . Her mother was adamant that she get a full education , despite an uncle in the family saying , " Why bother ? She 's pretty . She 's a girl . She 'll get married . " Ferraro attended Marymount Manhattan College with a scholarship while sometimes holding two or three jobs at the same time . During her senior year she began dating John Zaccaro of Forest Hills , Queens , who had graduated from Iona College with a commission in the U.S. Marine Corps . Ferraro received a Bachelor of Arts in English in 1956 ; she was the first woman in her family to gain a college degree . She also passed the city exam to become a licensed school teacher . 
 Ferraro began working as an elementary school teacher in public schools in Astoria , Queens , " because that 's what women were supposed to do . " Unsatisfied , she decided to attend law school ; an admissions officer said to her , " I hope you 're serious , Gerry . You 're taking a man 's place , you know . " She earned a Juris Doctor degree with honors from Fordham University School of Law in 1960 , going to classes at night while continuing to work as a second @-@ grade teacher at schools such as P.S. 57 during the day . Ferraro was one of only two women in her graduating class of 179 . She was admitted to the bar of New York State in March 1961 . 
 = = Family , lawyer , prosecutor = = 
 Ferraro became engaged to Zaccaro in August 1959 and married him on July 16 , 1960 . He became a realtor and businessman . She kept her birth name professionally , as a way to honor her mother for having supported the family after her father 's death , but used his name in parts of her private life . The couple had three children , Donna ( born 1962 ) , John Jr . ( born 1964 ) , and Laura ( born 1966 ) . They lived in Forest Hills Gardens , Queens , and in 1971 , added a vacation house in Saltaire on Fire Island . They would buy a condominium in Saint Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands in 1983 . 
 While raising the children , Ferraro worked part @-@ time as a civil lawyer in her husband 's real estate firm for 13 years . She also occasionally worked for other clients and did some pro bono work for women in family court . She spent time at local Democratic clubs , which allowed her to maintain contacts within the legal profession and become involved in local politics and campaigns . While organizing community opposition to a proposed building , Ferraro met lawyer and Democratic figure Mario Cuomo , who became a political mentor . In 1970 , she was elected president of the Queens County Women 's Bar Association . 
 Ferraro 's first full @-@ time political job came in January 1974 , when she was appointed Assistant District Attorney for Queens County , New York , by her cousin , District Attorney Nicholas Ferraro . At the time , women prosecutors in the city were uncommon . <unk> that she was the beneficiary of nepotism were countered by her being rated as qualified by a screening committee and by her early job performance in the Investigations Bureau . The following year , Ferraro was assigned to the new Special Victims Bureau , which prosecuted cases involving rape , child abuse , spouse abuse , and domestic violence . She was named head of the unit in 1977 , with two other assistant district attorneys assigned to her . In this role , she became a strong advocate for abused children . She was admitted to the U.S. Supreme Court Bar in 1978 . 
 As part of the D.A. office , Ferraro worked long hours , and gained a reputation for being a tough prosecutor but fair in plea negotiations . Although her unit was supposed to turn over cases which were bound for trial to another division , she took an active role in trying some cases herself , and juries were persuaded by her summations . Ferraro was upset to discover that her superior was paying her less than equivalent male colleagues because she was a married woman and already had a husband . Moreover , Ferraro found the nature of the cases she dealt with debilitating ; the work left her " drained and angry " and she developed an ulcer . She grew frustrated that she was unable to deal with root causes , and talked about running for legislative office ; Cuomo , now Secretary of State of New York , suggested the United States Congress . 
 = = House of Representatives = = 
 Ferraro ran for election to the U.S. House of Representatives from New York 's 9th Congressional District in Queens in 1978 , after longtime Democratic incumbent James Delaney announced his retirement . The location for the television series All in the Family , the district , which stretched from Astoria to Ozone Park was known for its ethnic composition and conservative views . In a three @-@ candidate primary race for the Democratic nomination , Ferraro faced two better @-@ known rivals , the party organization candidate , City Councilman Thomas J. Manton and Patrick Deignan . Her main issues were law and order , support for the elderly , and neighborhood preservation . She labeled herself a " ' small c ' conservative " and emphasized that she was not a bleeding @-@ heart liberal ; her campaign slogan was " Finally , A Tough Democrat " . Her Italian heritage also appealed to ethnic residents in the district . She won the three @-@ way primary with 53 percent of the vote , and then captured the general election as well , defeating Republican Alfred A. DelliBovi by a 10 @-@ percentage @-@ point margin in a contest in which dealing with crime was the major issue and personal attacks by DelliBovi were frequent . She had been aided by $ 130 @,@ 000 in campaign loans and donations from her own family , including $ 110 @,@ 000 in loans from Zaccaro , of which only $ 4 @,@ 000 was legal . The source and nature of these transactions were declared illegal by the Federal Election Commission shortly before the primary , causing Ferraro to pay back the loans in October 1978 , via several real estate transactions . In 1979 , the campaign and Zaccaro paid $ 750 in fines for civil violations of election law . 
 Despite being a newcomer to the House , Ferraro made a vivid impression upon arrival and quickly found prominence . She became a protégé of House Speaker Tip O 'Neil , established a rapport with other House Democratic leaders , and rose rapidly in the party hierarchy . She was elected to be the Secretary of the House Democratic Caucus for 1981 – 1983 and again for 1983 – 1985 ; this entitled her to a seat on the influential Steering and Policy Committee . In 1983 , she was named to the powerful House Budget Committee . She also served on the Public Works and Transportation Committee and the Post Office and Civil Service Committee , both of which allowed Ferraro to push through projects to benefit her district . In particular , she assisted the successful effort of the Ridgewood and Glendale neighborhoods to get their ZIP codes changed from Brooklyn to their native Queens . Male colleagues viewed her with respect as someone who was tough and ambitious and in turn she was , as The New York Times later wrote , " comfortable with the boys " . 
 Ferraro was active in Democratic presidential politics as well . She served as one of the deputy chairs for the 1980 Carter @-@ Mondale campaign . Following the election , she served actively on the Hunt Commission that in 1982 , rewrote the Democratic delegate selection rules ; Ferraro was credited as having been the prime agent behind the creation of superdelegates . By 1983 , she was regarded as one of the up @-@ and @-@ coming stars of the party . She was the Chairwoman of the Platform Committee for the 1984 Democratic National Convention , the first woman to hold that position . There she held multiple hearings around the country and further gained in visibility . 
 While in Congress , Ferraro focused much of her legislative attention on equity for women in the areas of wages , pensions , and retirement plans . She was a cosponsor of the 1981 Economic Equity Act . On the House Select Committee on Aging , she concentrated on the problems of elderly women . In 1984 , she championed a pension equity law revision that would improve the benefits of people who left work for long periods and then returned , a typical case for women with families . The Reagan administration , at first lukewarm to the measure , decided to sign it to gain the benefits of its popular appeal . 
 Ferraro also worked on some environmental issues . During 1980 , she tried to prevent the federal government from gaining the power to override local laws on hazardous materials transportation , an effort she continued in subsequent years . In August 1984 , she led passage of a Superfund renewal bill and attacked the Reagan administration 's handling of environmental site cleanups . 
 Ferraro took a congressional trip to Nicaragua at the start of 1984 , where she spoke to the Contras . She decided that the Reagan Administration 's military interventions there and in El Salvador were counterproductive towards reaching U.S. security goals , and that regional negotiations would be better . 
 In all , Ferraro served three two @-@ year terms , being re @-@ elected in 1980 and 1982 . Her vote shares increased to 58 percent and then 73 percent and much of her funding came from political action committees . While Ferraro 's pro @-@ choice views conflicted with those of many of her constituents as well as the Catholic Church to which she belonged , her positions on other social and foreign policy issues were in alignment with the district . She broke with her party in favoring an anti @-@ busing amendment to the Constitution . She supported deployment of the Pershing II missile and the Trident submarine , although she opposed funding for the MX missile , the B @-@ 1B bomber , and the Strategic Defense Initiative . 
 While in the House , Ferraro 's political self @-@ description evolved to " moderate " . In 1982 , she said her experiences as assistant district attorney had changed some of her views : " ... because no matter how concerned I am about spending , I have seen first hand what poverty can do to people 's lives and I just can 't , in good conscience , not do something about it . " For her six years in Congress , Ferraro had an average 78 percent " Liberal Quotient " from Americans for Democratic Action and an average 8 percent rating from the American Conservative Union . The AFL @-@ CIO 's Committee on Political Education gave her an average approval rating of 91 percent . 
 = = 1984 vice @-@ presidential candidacy = = 
 As the 1984 U.S. presidential election primary season neared its end and Walter Mondale became the likely Democratic nominee , the idea of picking a woman as his vice @-@ presidential running mate gained considerable momentum . The National Organization for Women and the National Women 's Political Caucus pushed the notion , as did several top Democratic figures such as Speaker Tip O 'Neill . Women mentioned for the role included Ferraro and Mayor of San Francisco Dianne Feinstein , both of whom were on Mondale 's five @-@ person short list . 
 Mondale selected Ferraro to be his Vice @-@ Presidential candidate on July 12 , 1984 . She stated , " I am absolutely thrilled . " The Mondale campaign hoped that her selection would change a campaign in which he was well behind ; in addition to attracting women , they hoped she could attract ethnic Democrats in the Northeast U.S. who had abandoned their party for Reagan in 1980 . Her personality , variously described as blunt , feisty , spirited , and somewhat saucy , was also viewed as an asset . In turn , Mondale accepted the risk that came with her inexperience . 
 As Ferraro was the first woman to run on a major party national ticket in the U.S. , and the first Italian American , her July 19 nomination at the 1984 Democratic National Convention was one of the most emotional moments of that gathering , with female delegates appearing joyous and proud at the historic occasion . In her acceptance speech , Ferraro said , " The daughter of an immigrant from Italy has been chosen to run for vice president in the new land my father came to love . " Convention attendees were in tears during the speech , not just for its significance for women but for all those who had immigrated to America . The speech was listed as number 56 in American Rhetoric 's Top 100 Speeches of the 20th Century . 
 Ferraro gained immediate , large @-@ scale media attention . At first , journalists focused on her novelty as a woman and her poor family background , and their coverage was overwhelmingly favorable . Nevertheless , Ferraro faced many press questions about her foreign policy inexperience , and responded by discussing her attention to foreign and national security issues in Congress . She faced a threshold of proving competence that other high @-@ level female political figures have had to face , especially those who might become commander @-@ in @-@ chief ; the question " Are you tough enough ? " was often directed to her . Ted Koppel questioned her closely about nuclear strategy and during Meet the Press she was asked , " Do you think that in any way the Soviets might be tempted to try to take advantage of you simply because you are a woman ? " 
 The choice of Ferraro was viewed as a gamble , and pundits were uncertain whether it would result in a net gain or loss of votes for the Mondale campaign . While her choice was popular among Democratic activists , polls immediately after the announcement showed that only 22 percent of women were excited about Ferraro 's selection , versus 18 percent who agreed that it was a " bad idea " . By a three @-@ to @-@ one margin , voters thought that pressure from women 's groups had led to Mondale 's decision rather than his having chosen the best available candidate . Nonetheless , in the days after the convention Ferraro proved an effective campaigner , with a brash and confident style that forcefully criticized the Reagan administration and sometimes almost overshadowed Mondale . Mondale had been 16 points behind Reagan in polls before the pick , and after the convention he pulled even for a short time . 
 By the last week of July , however , questions — due initially to reporting by The New York Times — began about Ferraro 's finances , the finances of her husband , John Zaccaro , and their separately filed tax returns . ( While the Mondale campaign had anticipated some questions , it had only spent 48 hours on vetting Ferraro 's family 's finances . ) This was also the first time the American media had to deal with a national candidate 's husband . Ferraro said she would release both their returns within a month , but maintained she was correct not to have included her husband 's financial holdings on her past annual Congressional disclosure statements . The media also reported on the FEC 's past investigation into Ferraro 's 1978 campaign funds . Although Ferraro and Zaccaro 's finances were often interwoven on paper , with each half partners in Zaccaro 's company , Ferraro had little knowledge of his business , or even how much he was worth . Zaccaro did not understand the greater public exposure that his wife 's new position brought to their family , and resisted releasing his financial information . On August 12 , Ferraro announced that her husband would not in fact be releasing his tax returns , on the grounds that to do so would disadvantage his real estate business and that such a disclosure was voluntary and not part of election law . She joked , " You people who are married to Italian men , you know what it 's like " , angering fellow Italian Americans . 
 The announcement dominated television and newspapers ; Ferraro was besieged by questions regarding the finances as well as criticism for ethnic stereotyping . As she later wrote , " I had created a monster . " Republicans saw her finances as a " genderless " issue that they could attack Ferraro with without creating a backlash , and some Mondale staffers thought Ferraro might have to leave the ticket . The Philadelphia Inquirer went even further in its investigations , seeking to link Zaccaro to organized crime figures , but most publishers avoided this topic and law enforcement officials did not treat the allegations with much seriousness . A week after her previous statement , Ferraro said Zaccaro had changed his mind and would indeed release his tax records , which was done on August 20 . The full statements included notice of payment of some $ 53 @,@ 000 in back federal taxes that she owed due to what was described as an accountant 's error . Ferraro said the statements proved overall that she had nothing to hide and that there had been no financial wrongdoing . The disclosures indicated that Ferraro and her husband were worth nearly $ 4 million , had a full @-@ time maid , and owned a boat and the two vacation homes . Much of their wealth was tied up in real estate rather than being disposable income , but the disclosures hurt Ferraro 's image as a rags @-@ to @-@ riches story . 
 Ferraro 's strong performance at an August 22 press conference covering the final disclosure — where she answered all questions for two hours — effectively ended the issue for the remainder of the campaign , but significant damage had been done . No campaign issue during the entire 1984 presidential campaign received more media attention than Ferraro 's finances . The exposure diminished Ferraro 's rising stardom , removed whatever momentum the Mondale – Ferraro ticket gained out of the convention , and delayed formation of a coherent message for the fall campaign . 
 Sharp criticism from Catholic Church authorities put Ferraro on the defensive during the entire campaign , with abortion opponents frequently protesting her appearances with a level of fervor not usually encountered by pro @-@ choice Catholic male candidates such as Mario Cuomo and Ted Kennedy . In a 1982 briefing for Congress , Ferraro had written that " the Catholic position on abortion is not monolithic and there can be a range of personal and political responses to the issue . " Ferraro was criticized by Cardinal John O 'Connor , the Catholic Archbishop of New York , and James Timlin , the Bishop of Scranton , for misrepresenting the Catholic Church 's position on abortion . After several days of back @-@ and @-@ forth debate in the public media , Ferraro finally conceded that , " the Catholic Church 's position on abortion is monolithic " but went on to say that " But I do believe that there are a lot of Catholics who do not share the view of the Catholic Church " . Ferraro was also criticized for saying that Reagan was not a " good Christian " because , she said , his policies hurt the poor . To defend Ferraro , the pro @-@ choice group Catholics for a Free Choice placed an October 7 , 1984 , full @-@ page ad in The New York Times titled " A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion " . 
 Ferraro drew large crowds on the campaign trail , many of whom wished to see the history @-@ making candidate in person , who often chanted , " Ger @-@ ry ! Ger @-@ ry ! " Mondale and Ferraro rarely touched during their appearances together , to the point that he would not even place his palm on her back when they stood side @-@ by @-@ side ; Ferraro later said this was because anything more and " people were afraid that it would look like , ' Oh , my God , they 're dating . ' " . 
 There was one vice @-@ presidential debate between Congresswoman Ferraro and Vice President George H. W. Bush . Held on October 11 , the result was proclaimed mostly even by the press and historians ; women voters tended to think Ferraro had won , while men , Bush . At it , Ferraro criticized Reagan 's initial refusal to support an extension to the Voting Rights Act . Her experience was questioned at the debate and she was asked how her three terms in Congress stacked up with Bush 's extensive government experience . To one Bush statement she said , " Let me just say first of all , that I almost resent , Vice President Bush , your patronizing attitude that you have to teach me about foreign policy . " She strongly defended her position on abortion , which earned her applause and a respectful reply from her opponent . In the days leading up to the debate , Second Lady of the United States Barbara Bush had publicly referred to Ferraro as " that four @-@ million @-@ dollar — I can 't say it , but it rhymes with ' rich ' . " Barbara Bush soon apologized . Ferraro 's womanhood was consistently discussed during the campaign ; one study found that a quarter of newspaper articles written about her contained gendered language . 
 On October 18 the New York Post accurately reported that her father had been arrested for possession of numbers slips in Newburgh shortly before his death , and inaccurately speculated that something mysterious had been covered up about that death . Ferraro 's mother had never told her about his arrest ; she had been also arrested as an accomplice but released after her husband 's death . The printing of the story led Ferraro to state that Post publisher Rupert Murdoch " does not have the worth to wipe the dirt under [ my mother 's ] shoes . " Throughout , Ferraro kept campaigning , taking on the traditional running mate role of attacking the opposition vigorously . By the end , she had traveled more than Mondale and more than Reagan and Bush combined . 
 On November 6 , Mondale and Ferraro lost the general election in a landslide . They received only 41 percent of the popular vote compared to Reagan and Bush 's 59 percent , and in the Electoral College won only Mondale 's home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia . Ferraro failed to carry her own congressional district , which always tended to vote Republican in presidential races . Ferraro 's presence on the ticket had little measurable effect overall . Reagan captured 55 percent of women voters and about the same share of Catholic voters , the latter being the highest level yet for a Republican presidential candidate . Of the tenth of voters who decided based on the vice @-@ presidential candidates , 54 percent went to Mondale – Ferraro , establishing that Ferraro provided a net gain to the Democrats of 0 @.@ 8 percent . Reagan 's personal appeal and campaign themes of prosperity and " It 's morning again in America " were quite strong , and political observers generally agree that no combination of Democrats could have won the election in 1984 . Mondale himself would later reflect that " I knew that I was in for it with Reagan " and that he had no regrets about choosing Ferraro . 
 After the election , the House Ethics Committee found that Ferraro had technically violated the Ethics in Government Act by failing to report , or reporting incorrectly , details of her family 's finances , and that she should have reported her husband 's holdings on her Congressional disclosure forms . However , the committee concluded that she had acted without " deceptive intent " , and since she was leaving Congress anyway , no action against her was taken . Ferraro said , " I consider myself completely vindicated . " The scrutiny of her husband and his business dealings presaged a trend that women candidates would face in American electoral politics . 
 Ferraro is one of only two U.S. women to run as vice @-@ president on a major party national ticket . The other is Alaska governor Sarah Palin , the 2008 Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee , whose ticket also lost . 
 = = First Senate run and ambassadorship = = 
 Ferraro had relinquished her House seat to run for the vice @-@ presidency . Her new @-@ found fame led to an appearance in a Diet Pepsi commercial in 1985 . She published Ferraro : My Story , an account of the campaign with some of her life leading up to it , in November 1985 . It was a best seller and earned her $ 1 million . She also earned over $ 300 @,@ 000 by giving speeches . She founded the Americans Concerned for Tomorrow political action committee , which focused on getting ten women candidates elected in the 1986 Congressional elections ( eight of whom would be successful ) . Despite the one @-@ sided national loss in 1984 , Ferraro was still viewed as someone with a bright political future . Many expected her to run in the 1986 United States Senate election in New York against first @-@ term Republican incumbent Al D 'Amato , and during 1985 she did Upstate New York groundwork towards that end . A Senate candidacy had been her original plan for her career , before she was named to Mondale 's ticket . But in December 1985 , she said she would not run , due to an ongoing U.S. Justice Department probe on her and her husband 's finances stemming from the 1984 campaign revelations . 
 Members of Ferraro 's family were indeed facing legal issues . Her husband John Zaccaro had pleaded guilty in January 1985 , to fraudulently obtaining bank financing in a real estate transaction and had been sentenced to 150 hours of community service . Then in October 1986 , he was indicted on unrelated felony charges regarding an alleged 1981 bribery of Queens Borough President Donald Manes concerning a cable television contract . A full year later , he was acquitted at trial . The case against him was circumstantial , a key prosecution witness proved unreliable , and the defense did not have to present its own testimony . Ferraro said her husband never would have been charged had she not run for vice president . Meanwhile , in February 1986 , the couple 's son John had been arrested for possession and sale of cocaine . He was convicted , and in June 1988 , sentenced to four months imprisonment ; Ferraro broke down in tears in court relating the stress the episode had placed on her family . Ferraro worked on an unpublished book about the conflicting rights between a free press and being able to have fair trials . Asked in September 1987 , whether she would have accepted the vice @-@ presidential nomination had she known of all the family problems that would follow , she said , " More than once I have sat down and said to myself , oh , God , I wish I had never gone through with it ... I think the candidacy opened a door for women in national politics , and I don 't regret that for one minute . I 'm proud of that . But I just wish it could have been done in a different way . " 
 Ferraro remained active in raising money for Democratic candidates nationwide , especially women candidates . During the 1988 presidential election , Ferraro served as vice chair of the party 's Victory Fund . She also did some commentating for television . Ferraro was a fellow at the Harvard Institute of Politics from 1988 to 1992 , teaching in @-@ demand seminars such as " So You Want to be President ? " She also took care of her mother , who suffered from emphysema for several years before her death in early 1990 . 
 By October 1991 , Ferraro was ready to enter elective politics again , and ran for the Democratic nomination in the 1992 United States Senate election in New York . Her opponents were State Attorney General Robert Abrams , Reverend Al Sharpton , Congressman Robert J. Mrazek , and New York City Comptroller and former Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman . Abrams was considered the early front @-@ runner . The D 'Amato campaign feared facing Ferraro the most among these , as her Italian ancestry , effective debating and stump speech skills , and her staunch pro @-@ choice views would eat into several of D 'Amato 's usual bases of support . Ferraro emphasized her career as a teacher , prosecutor , congresswoman , and mother , and talked about how she was tough on crime . Ferraro drew renewed attacks during the primary campaign from the media and her opponents over Zaccaro 's finances and business relationships . She objected that a male candidate would not receive nearly as much attention regarding his wife 's activities . Ferraro became the front @-@ runner , capitalizing on her star power from 1984 , and using the campaign attacks against her as an explicitly feminist rallying point for women voters . As the primary date neared , her lead began to dwindle under the charges , and she released additional tax returns from the 1980s to try to defray the attacks . 
 Holtzman ran a negative ad accusing Ferraro and Zaccaro of taking more than $ 300 @,@ 000 in rent in the 1980s from a pornographer with ties to organized crime . Ferraro said there had been efforts to oust the man , Robert DiBernardo , after reports of the tenancy originated during her 1984 vice @-@ presidential campaign , but he had remained in the building for three more years . In addition , a report by an investigator for the New York State Organized Crime Task Force found its way to the media via a tip from a Holtzman aide ; it said that Zaccaro had been seen meeting with the DiBernardo in 1985 . Ferraro said in response that those two had never met . 
 The final debates were nasty , and Holtzman in particular constantly attacked Ferraro 's integrity and finances . In an unusual election @-@ eve television broadcast , Ferraro talked about " the ethnic slur that I am somehow or other connected to organized crime . There 's lots of innuendo but no proof . However , it is made plausible because of the fact that I am an Italian @-@ American . This tactic comes from the poisoned well of fear and stereotype ... " On the September 15 , 1992 , primary , Abrams edged out Ferraro by less than a percentage point , winning 37 percent of the vote to 36 percent , with Sharpton and Holtzman well behind . Ferraro did not concede she had lost for two weeks . 
 Abrams spent much of the remainder of the campaign trying to get Ferraro 's endorsement . Ferraro , enraged and bitter after the nature of the primary , ignored Abrams and accepted Bill Clinton 's request to campaign for his presidential bid instead . She was eventually persuaded by state party leaders into giving an unenthusiastic endorsement with just three days to go before the general election , in exchange for an apology by Abrams for the tone of the primary . D 'Amato won the election by a very narrow margin . The Ferraro @-@ Holtzman fighting of the campaign was viewed as a disaster by many feminists , but overall the 1992 U.S. Senate elections saw so many victories that it became known as the " Year of the Woman " . 
 Following the primary loss , Ferraro became a managing partner in the New York office of Keck , Mahin & Cate , a Chicago @-@ based law firm . There she organized the office and spoke with clients , but did not actively practice law and left before the firm fell into difficulties . Ferraro 's second book , a collection of her speeches , was titled Changing History : Women , Power and Politics and was published in 1993 . 
 President Clinton appointed Ferraro as a member of the United States delegation to United Nations Commission on Human Rights in January 1993 . She attended the June 1993 World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna as the alternate U.S. delegate . Then in October 1993 , Clinton promoted her to be United States Ambassador to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , saying that Ferraro had been " a highly effective voice for the human rights of women around the world . " The Clinton administration named Ferraro vice @-@ chair of the U.S. delegation to the landmark September 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing ; in this role she picked a strong team of experts in human rights issues to serve with her . During her stint on the commission , it for the first time condemned anti @-@ Semitism as a human rights violation , and also for the first time prevented China from blocking a motion criticizing its human rights record . Regarding a previous China motion that had failed , Ferraro had told the commission , " Let us do what we were sent here to do — decide important questions of human rights on their merits , not avoid them . " Ferraro held the U.N. position into 1996 . 
 = = Commentator and second Senate run = = 
 In February 1996 , Ferraro joined the high @-@ visibility CNN political talk show Crossfire , as the co @-@ host representing the " from the left " vantage . She kept her brassy , rapid @-@ fire speech and New York accent intact , and her trial experience from her prosecutor days was a good fit for the program 's format . She sparred effectively with " from the right " co @-@ host Pat Buchanan , for whom she developed a personal liking . The show stayed strong in ratings for CNN , and the job was lucrative . She welcomed how the role " keeps me visible [ and ] keeps me extremely well informed on the issues . " 
 At the start of 1998 , Ferraro left Crossfire and ran for the Democratic nomination again in the 1998 United States Senate election in New York . The other candidates were Congressman Charles Schumer and New York City Public Advocate Mark J. Green . She had done no fundraising , out of fear of conflict of interest with her Crossfire job , but was nonetheless immediately perceived as the front @-@ runner . Indeed , December and January polls had her 25 percentage points ahead of Green in the race and even further ahead of Schumer . Unlike the previous campaigns , her family finances never became an issue . However , she lost ground during the summer , with Schumer catching up in the polls by early August and then soon passing her . Schumer , a tireless fundraiser , outspent her by a five @-@ to @-@ one margin , and Ferraro failed to establish a political image current with the times . In the September 15 , 1998 primary , she was beaten soundly by Schumer by a 51 percent to 26 percent margin . Unlike 1992 , the contest was not divisive , and Ferraro and third @-@ place finisher Green endorsed Schumer at a unity breakfast the following day . Schumer would go on to decisively unseat D 'Amato in the general election . 
 The 1998 primary defeat brought an end to Ferraro 's political career . The New York Times wrote at the time : " If Ms. Ferraro 's rise was meteoric , her political career 's denouement was protracted , often agonizing and , at first glance , baffling . " She still retained admirers , though . Anita Perez Ferguson , president of the National Women 's Political Caucus , noted that female New York political figures in the past had been reluctant to enter the state 's notoriously fierce primary races , and said : " This woman has probably been more of an opinion maker than most people sitting for six terms straight in the House of Representatives or Senate . Her attempts , and even her losses , have accomplished far beyond what others have accomplished by winning . " 
 = = Business career , illness and medical activism = = 
 In 1980 , Ferraro co @-@ founded the National Organization of Italian American Women , which sought to support the educational and professional goals of its members and put forward positive role models in order to fight ethnic stereotyping , and was still a distinguished member of its board at the time of her death . Ferraro was connected with many other political and non @-@ profit organizations . She was a board member of the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs , and a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . She became president of the newly established International Institute for Women 's Political Leadership in 1989 . In 1992 , she was on the founding board of Project Vote Smart . By 1993 , she was serving on the Fordham Law School Board of Visitors , as well as on the boards of the National Breast Cancer Research Fund , the New York Easter Seal Society , and the Pension Rights Center , and was one of hundreds of public figures on the Planned Parenthood Federation of America 's Board of Advocates . In 1999 , she joined the board of the Bertarelli Foundation , and in 2003 , the board of the National Women 's Health Resource Center . During the 2000s she was on the board of advisors to the Committee to Free Lori Berenson . 
 Framing a Life : A Family Memoir was published by Ferraro in November 1998 . It depicts the life story of her mother and immigrant grandmother ; it also portrays the rest of her family , and is a memoir of her early life , but includes relatively little about her political career . 
 Ferraro had felt unusually tired at the end of her second senate campaign . In November 1998 , she was diagnosed with multiple myeloma , a form of blood cancer where plasma cells secrete abnormal antibodies known as Bence @-@ Jones proteins , which can cause bones to disintegrate and dump toxic amounts of calcium into the bloodstream . She did not publicly disclose the illness until June 2001 , when she went to Washington to successfully press in Congressional hearings for passage of the <unk> Cancer Research Investment and Education Act . A portion of the Act created the Geraldine Ferraro Cancer Education Program , which directs the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish an education program for patients of blood cancers and the general public . Ferraro became a frequent speaker on the disease , and an avid supporter and honorary board member of the Multiple <unk> Research Foundation . 
 Though initially given only three to five years to live , by virtue of several new drug therapies and a bone marrow transplant in 2005 , she would beat the disease 's Stage 1 survival mean of 62 months by over a factor of two . Her advocacy helped make the new treatments approved and available for others as well . For much of the last decade of her life , Ferraro was not in remission , but the disease was managed by continually adjusting her treatments . 
 Ferraro joined Fox News Channel as a regular political commentator in October 1999 . By 2005 , she was making sporadic appearances on the channel , which continued into 2007 , and beyond . She partnered with Laura Ingraham , starting in December 1999 , in writing the alternate @-@ weeks column " Campaign Countdown " on the 2000 presidential election for The New York Times Syndicate . During the 2000s , Ferraro was an affiliated faculty member at the Georgetown Public Policy Institute . 
 In January 2000 , Ferraro and Lynn Martin — a former Republican Congresswoman and U.S. Secretary of Labor who had played Ferraro in George H. W. Bush 's debate preparations in 1984 — co @-@ founded , and served as co @-@ presidents of , G & L Strategies , a management consulting firm underneath Weber McGinn . Its goal was to advise corporations on how to develop more women leaders and make their workplaces more amenable to female employees . G & L Strategies subsequently became part of Golin Harris International . In June 2003 , Ferraro was made executive vice president and managing director of the public affairs practice of the Global Consulting Group , an international investor relations and corporate communications component of <unk> . There she worked with corporations , non @-@ profit organizations , state governments and political figures . She continued there as a senior advisor working about two days a month . 
 After living for many years in Forest Hills Gardens , Queens , she and her husband moved to Manhattan in 2002 . She republished Ferraro : My Story in 2004 , with a postscript summarizing her life in the twenty years since the campaign . 
 Ferraro was a member of the board of directors of Goodrich Petroleum beginning in August 2003 . She was also a board member for New York Bancorp in the 1990s . 
 Ferraro became a principal in the government relations practice of the Blank Rome law firm in February 2007 , working both in New York and Washington about two days a week in their lobbying and communications activities . As she passed the age of 70 , she was thankful for still being alive , and said " This is about as retired as I get , which is part time , " and that if she fully retired , she would " go nuts " . 
 = = 2008 presidential campaign involvement = = 
 In December 2006 , Ferraro announced her support for Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton . Later , she vowed to help defend Clinton from being " <unk> " in a manner akin to 2004 presidential candidate John Kerry . She assisted with fundraising by assuming an honorary post on the finance committee for Clinton 's 2008 presidential campaign . A heated nomination battle emerged between Clinton and Barack Obama , in which racial dust @-@ ups caused by perceptions of remarks made by campaign surrogates took place . Ferraro became livid when her daughter voted for Obama in a primary , which reflected a generational difference among American women in how they viewed the significance of a woman being elected president . 
 In March 2008 she gave an interview with the Daily Breeze in which she said : " If Obama was a white man , he would not be in this position . And if he was a woman ( of any color ) he would not be in this position . He happens to be very lucky to be who he is . And the country is caught up in the concept . " Ferraro justified the statements by referring to her own run for vice president . Echoing a statement she wrote about herself in 1988 , Ferraro said that " I was talking about historic candidacies and what I started off by saying ( was that ) if you go back to 1984 and look at my historic candidacy , which I had just talked about all these things , in 1984 , if my name was Gerard Ferraro instead of Geraldine Ferraro , I would have never been chosen as a vice @-@ presidential candidate . It had nothing to do with my qualification . " Her comments resonated with some older white women , but generated an immediate backlash elsewhere . There was strong criticism and charges of racism from many supporters of Obama and Obama called them " patently absurd " . Clinton publicly expressed disagreement with Ferraro 's remarks , while Ferraro vehemently denied she was a racist . Again speaking to the Breeze , Ferraro responded to the attacks by saying : " I really think they 're attacking me because I 'm white . How 's that ? " Ferraro resigned from Clinton 's finance committee on March 12 , 2008 , two days after the firestorm began , saying that she didn 't want the Obama camp to use her comments to hurt Clinton 's campaign . 
 Ferraro continued to engage the issue and criticize the Obama campaign via her position as a Fox News Channel contributor . By early April , Ferraro said people were <unk> her with negative comments and trying to get her removed from one of the boards she was on : " This has been the worst three weeks of my life . " Ferraro stated in mid @-@ May 2008 that Clinton had " raised this whole woman candidate thing to a whole different level than when I ran " . She thought Obama had behaved in a sexist manner and that she might not vote for him . 
 During September 2008 , Ferraro gained attention yet again after the announcement of Sarah Palin as the Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee , the first such major party bid for a woman since her own in 1984 . Palin mentioned Ferraro as well as Clinton as forerunners in her introductory appearance . In reaction to the nomination , Ferraro said , " It 's great to be the first , but I don 't want to be the only . And so now it is wonderful to see a woman on a national ticket . " Ferraro speculated that the pick might win Republican presidential nominee John McCain the election , but said that she was supporting Obama now due to his running mate selection of Joe Biden having resolved her concerns about Obama 's lack of experience in certain areas . Ferraro criticized the media 's scrutiny of Palin 's background and family as gender @-@ based and saw parallels with how she was treated by the media during her own run ; a University of Alabama study also found that media framing of Ferraro and Palin was similar and often revolved around their nominations being political gambles . A Newsweek cover story detected a change in how women voters responded to a female vice presidential candidate from Ferraro 's time to Palin 's , but Ferraro correctly predicted that the bounce that McCain received from the Palin pick would dissipate . In a friendly joint retrospective of her 1984 debate with George H. W. Bush , Ferraro said she had had more national issues experience in 1984 than Palin did now , but that it was important that Palin make a good showing in her vice presidential debate so that " little girls [ could ] see someone there who can stand toe to toe with [ Biden ] . " McCain and Palin ended up losing , but regardless of the 1984 or 2008 election result , Ferraro said that " Every time a woman runs , women win . " Ferraro made a joint appearance with Palin on Fox News during the network 's election @-@ night coverage of the 2010 <unk> . 
 = = Final year , death and tributes = = 
 Ferraro continued to battle her cancer , making repeated visits to hospitals during her last year and undergoing difficult procedures . Much of her care took place at Dana @-@ Farber Cancer Institute in Boston , where she also acted as an informal advocate for other patients . She was able to make a joint appearance with Palin on Fox News Channel 's coverage of the November 2010 midterm elections . 
 In March 2011 she went to Massachusetts General Hospital to receive treatment for pain caused by a fracture , a common complication of multiple myeloma . Once there , however , doctors discovered she had come down with pneumonia . Unable to return to her New York home , Ferraro died at Massachusetts General on March 26 , 2011 . In addition to her husband and three children , who were all present , she was survived by eight grandchildren . 
 President Obama said upon her death that " Geraldine will forever be remembered as a trailblazer who broke down barriers for women , and Americans of all backgrounds and walks of life , " and said that his own two daughters would grow up in a more equal country because of what Ferraro had done . Mondale called her " a remarkable woman and a dear human being ... She was a pioneer in our country for justice for women and a more open society . She broke a lot of molds and it 's a better country for what she did . " George H. W. Bush said , " Though we were one @-@ time political opponents , I am happy to say Gerry and I became friends in time – a friendship marked by respect and affection . I admired Gerry in many ways , not the least of which was the dignified and principled manner she blazed new trails for women in politics . " Palin paid tribute to her on Facebook , expressing gratitude for having been able to work with her the year before and saying , " She broke one huge barrier and then went on to break many more . May her example of hard work and dedication to America continue to inspire all women . " Bill and Hillary Clinton said in a statement that , " Gerry Ferraro was one of a kind – tough , brilliant , and never afraid to speak her mind or stand up for what she believed in – a New York icon and a true American original . " 
 A funeral Mass was held for her on March 31 at the Church of St. Vincent Ferrer in New York , the site where Ferraro and Zaccaro had been married and had renewed their vows on their 50th anniversary the year before . Figures from local , state , and national politics were present , and Mondale and both Clintons were among the speakers . She is buried in St. John Cemetery in Middle Village , Queens , within her old congressional district . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Ferraro was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame in 1994 . 
 Ferraro received honorary degrees during the 1980s and early 1990s , from Marymount Manhattan College ( 1982 ) , New York University Law School ( 1984 ) , Hunter College ( 1985 ) , Plattsburgh College ( 1985 ) , College of Boca Raton ( 1989 ) , Virginia State University ( 1989 ) , Muhlenberg College ( 1990 ) , Briarcliffe College for Business ( 1990 ) , and Potsdam College ( 1991 ) . She subsequently received an honorary degree from Case Western Reserve University ( 2003 ) . 
 During her time in Congress , Ferraro received numerous awards from local organizations in Queens . 
 In 2007 , Ferraro received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Sons of Italy Foundation . In 2008 , Ferraro was the initial recipient of the annual Trailblazer Award from the National Conference of Women 's Bar Associations , and received the Edith I. Spivack Award from the New York County Lawyers ' Association . In 2009 , legislation passed the House of Representatives calling for a post office in Long Island City in Queens to be renamed for Ferraro , and in 2010 , the Geraldine A Ferraro Post Office was accordingly rededicated . 
 In the fall of 2013 , P.S. 290 in Maspeth in Queens was renamed the Geraldine A. Ferraro Campus . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 Democratic primary for New York 's 9th congressional district , 1978 
 Geraldine Ferraro – 10 @,@ 254 ( 52 @.@ 98 % ) 
 Thomas J. Manton – 5 @,@ 499 ( 28 @.@ 41 % ) 
 Patrick C. Deignan – 3 @,@ 603 ( 18 @.@ 61 % ) 
 New York 's 9th congressional district , 1978 
 Geraldine Ferraro ( D ) – 51 @,@ 350 ( 54 @.@ 17 % ) 
 Alfred A. DelliBovi ( R , Conservative ) – 42 @,@ 108 ( 44 @.@ 42 % ) 
 Theodore E. Garrison ( Liberal ) – 1 @,@ 329 ( 1 @.@ 40 % ) 
 New York 's 9th congressional district , 1980 
 Geraldine Ferraro ( D ) ( Inc . ) – 63 @,@ 796 ( 58 @.@ 34 % ) 
 Vito P. Battista ( R , Conservative , Right to Life ) – 44 @,@ 473 ( 40 @.@ 67 % ) 
 Gertrude <unk> ( Liberal ) – 1 @,@ 091 ( 1 @.@ 00 % ) 
 New York 's 9th congressional district , 1982 
 Geraldine Ferraro ( D ) ( Inc . ) – 75 @,@ 286 ( 73 @.@ 22 % ) 
 John J. <unk> ( R ) – 20 @,@ 352 ( 19 @.@ 79 % ) 
 Ralph G. Groves ( Conservative ) – 6 @,@ 011 ( 5 @.@ 85 % ) 
 Patricia A. <unk> ( Liberal ) – 1 @,@ 171 ( 1 @.@ 14 % ) 
 1984 Democratic National Convention ( Vice @-@ Presidential tally ) 
 Geraldine Ferraro – 3 @,@ 920 
 Shirley Chisholm – 3 
 United States presidential election , 1984 
 Ronald Reagan / George H. W. Bush ( R ) ( Inc . ) – 54 @,@ 166 @,@ 829 ( 58 @.@ 5 % ) and 525 electoral votes ( 49 states carried ) 
 Walter Mondale / Geraldine Ferraro ( D ) – 37 @,@ 449 @,@ 813 ( 40 @.@ 4 % ) and 13 electoral votes ( 1 state and D.C. carried ) 
 David Bergland / Jim Lewis ( L ) – 227 @,@ 204 ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) and 0 electoral votes 
 Democratic primary for the United States Senate , 1992 
 Robert Abrams – 426 @,@ 904 ( 37 % ) 
 Geraldine Ferraro – 415 @,@ 650 ( 36 % ) 
 Al Sharpton – 166 @,@ 665 ( 14 % ) 
 Elizabeth Holtzman – 144 @,@ 026 ( 12 % ) 
 Democratic primary for the United States Senate , 1998 
 Chuck Schumer – 388 @,@ 701 ( 50 @.@ 83 % ) 
 Geraldine Ferraro – 201 @,@ 625 ( 26 @.@ 37 % ) 
 Mark Green – 145 @,@ 819 ( 19 @.@ 07 % ) 
 Eric Ruano @-@ Melendez – 28 @,@ 493 ( 3 @.@ 73 % ) 
 = Down ( band ) = 
 Down is an American heavy metal supergroup that formed in 1991 in New Orleans , Louisiana . The band 's current lineup consists of vocalist Phil Anselmo ( Pantera ) , guitarist Pepper Keenan ( Corrosion of Conformity ) , guitarist Bobby Landgraf ( Honky ) , bassist Pat Bruders ( <unk> ) , and drummer Jimmy Bower ( Crowbar , Eyehategod , and <unk> Ritual ) . Since their formation , Down has gone on hiatus twice . To date , Down has released five studio albums . The first three were LPs entitled NOLA ( 1995 ) , Down II : A Bustle in Your Hedgerow ( 2002 ) , and Down III : Over the Under ( 2007 ) . In 2008 , the band began working on additional material , which resulted in two EPs entitled Down IV – Part I , released in September 2012 and Down IV – Part II , released in May 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and NOLA ( 1991 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Down formed in 1991 with vocalist / songwriter Phil Anselmo of Pantera , guitarist Pepper Keenan of Corrosion of Conformity , second guitarist Kirk <unk> and bassist Todd Strange of Crowbar , and drummer Jimmy Bower of Eyehategod . All of the band members were longtime friends , and shared interest in bands such as Black Sabbath , Trouble , and Saint Vitus , which would significantly influence the music they made . The band made a three @-@ track demo for underground trading . In an effort to build a fan base , the band would ask heavy metal fans if they had ever " heard of this band , Down " and hand them copies of the tape without telling the person that they were in the band . Eventually , the tape was distributed throughout the United States and Down played a small concert in its hometown . A record executive from Elektra Records was attending the show . When he found out who the members of the band were , he signed Down to a recording contract . 
 Down released its debut album , NOLA , on September 19 , 1995 , debuting at number 55 on the Billboard 200 . AllMusic reviewer David Reamer gave the album a nearly perfect 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , praising the songs " Temptations Wings " , " Stone the Crow " , and " Bury Me in Smoke " . Reamer stated that " this is a landmark album that combines the talents of dedicated rock musicians , and should be included in any collection of heavy metal music . " NOLA was supported by a 13 @-@ date tour , and afterward the band went on hiatus in order to return to their respective bands . 
 = = = A Bustle in Your Hedgerow and Over the Under ( 1999 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , while Down was on hiatus , Strange left the band and was replaced by Pantera bassist Rex Brown . In late November 2001 , Down came back from hiatus to make another record . The band wrote and recorded Down II : A Bustle in Your Hedgerow in 28 " drug and booze induced " days in Philip 's barn called " <unk> 's lair . " The album was released on March 26 , 2002 , but was not received with the same positive reviews as NOLA . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Borivoj Krgin stated , " Down II appears to have been thrown together more haphazardly , with much of the material falling short of the standard set by the Down 's classic debut offering . " Despite poor reviews , the album debuted at number 44 on the Billboard 200 . To support the album , Down toured on the second stage of Ozzfest in 2002 . Afterward , the band once again entered an indefinite hiatus to focus on their respective bands . 
 Newly signed to Warner Bros. Records , Down once again reformed in 2006 . The band wrote an album over the course of a year . The lyrical content of Down III : Over the Under covers subjects such as the breakup of Pantera , the murder of ex @-@ Pantera guitarist Dimebag Darrell , the band 's anger at the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , and Anselmo 's recovery from back surgery and drug addiction . Debuting at number 26 on the Billboard 200 , the album was released on September 25 , 2007 , and received generally positive reviews . Kirk Miller of Decibel Magazine said of the album , " for almost an hour , it 's like the metal world was set right again . " 
 The release of Down III was preceded by a tour with Heaven & Hell and Megadeth . To further support their album , Down headlined a tour starting at the end of September 2007 . 
 On April 22 , 2008 , the BBC Radio 1 Rockshow broadcast a new session of Down recordings featuring alternate versions of " NOD " , " Beneath the Tides " , and " Jail " , along with a cover of " When The Levee Breaks " ( written by Kansas Joe McCoy and his wife Memphis Minnie , and famously covered by Led Zeppelin ) . 
 = = = Diary of a Mad Band ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = 
 On July 24 , 2008 , frontman Phil Anselmo mentioned in a post on the band 's Myspace blog that Down had been " fucking around with some new material " and had " enough material already recorded " — at least six new songs in addition to those that did not make the final cut on Over the Under . Just what or how much will be included on the tentative Down IV is uncertain , but according to Anselmo , there is " definitely enough for an awesome EP , with some surprises within . " 
 Asked in November 2008 what the current status of the new album was , bassist Rex Brown told Billboard.com that Down had been " writing constantly on the road . We still have all these ideas , and we play a lot of new stuff at sound check , just to feel it out . Hopefully , we can get back in the studio in the fall and work on something . " 
 On February 3 , 2009 , Down was announced on <unk> later removed <unk> the lineup for the 2009 Bonnaroo Music Festival in Manchester , Tennessee , a large annual outdoor music festival since 2002 . On February 18 , 2009 , Down was announced in the lineup for the 2009 Roskilde Festival in Denmark . Following these live dates , the band toured the USA and Canada during August and September 2009 . On March 30 , 2009 , Down posted a statement on their message board indicating that they will be back in the studio from October through November writing and recording what will eventually become Down IV . In the summer of 2009 , Down began a US tour without Rex on bass , who had developed acute pancreatitis . 
 On January 27 , 2010 , it was announced that Brown had nearly fully recuperated from his fight with pancreatitis . Down had discussed reconvening in New Orleans sometime after the 2010 Super Bowl to begin work on a new album . With a release date yet to be announced , the new album will be the band 's fourth studio offering . After legal issues with Warner Brothers Records regarding the rights to the music , Down released Diary of a Mad Band : Europe in the Year of VI CD / DVD on October 5 via Roadrunner Records . The title is a reference to Diary of a Madman , an Ozzy Osbourne album . 
 = = = Brown 's departure and EPs ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 In 2011 , Phil Anselmo commented on the future of Down , stating : " Man , there will be a time for Down . Matter of fact we had a meeting this past week , and I know Jimmy 's gotta go do an Eyehategod tour in February . But after that , I think we 're looking to do some shows starting in March . Maybe local around here , maybe even some Mardi Gras gigs . But yeah , last week we sat around and they played me some new stuff they 're working on , and it sounds good . Sounds like it 's got a lot of promise , and really they just need me in the fuckin ' practice room . So all this is going to happen this year . It has to happen . I know there 's a responsibility here . Down has a fanbase and they are very very very loyal . So I don 't want to let those people down . They deserve some new music , we have it . We 've demoed other songs , there 's songs that haven 't even been released that people have never heard , so there 's always Down there . For all you people out there , don 't you stress . We got the Down coming . " 
 On May 11 , 2011 , Down announced on their Facebook page that they " demoed a brand new tune . " Down played at Download Festival on Saturday 11 June 2011 . They played alongside System of a Down , Avenged Sevenfold and Alice Cooper . Rex did not tour with Down during their spring 2011 shows . Crowbar bassist Pat Bruders filled in for Rex during those shows . " Rex is not gonna be with us , " said Keenan . " He 's got things he needs to deal with , and we gave him an ultimatum and he 's trying to work things out . We 've got Pat ( Bruders ) from Crowbar playing bass , and he 's ass @-@ kickin ' in the same way . He plays with his fingers — which is really cool ; he 's got the whole Geezer Butler thing going on . " When asked whether or not Brown was still considered a part of the band , Keenan was hopeful but hesitant : " I don 't know what to really say on that ; he 's not out of the band , but he 's not playing with us live . " On June 22 , 2011 , Jimmy Bower announced that Rex Brown would not be returning to Down , and that Pat Bruders is his replacement . 
 The band spoke on their Facebook page and said they started recording new material on October 20 . On January 16 , 2012 , they revealed track names for the new EP on Facebook . Initially , rumors spread about the possibility of Down releasing four EPs , instead of an album . However , when asked about it in an interview with Scuzz TV , Anselmo said that " It would be too pretentious , we try not to think as far ahead as that , and just go with what we feel at the time . " In the summer of 2013 , Kirk <unk> quit the band and was replaced by Bobby Landgraf . Down IV – Part II was released on May 13 , 2014 . 
 Following Phil 's Nazi salute controversy during the <unk> event in the US , the organizers of <unk> Festival decided to cancel the appearance of the band for the 2016 event . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = = Gallery from Hellfest 2013 = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Extended Plays = = = 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = William McKinley presidential campaign , 1896 = 
 In 1896 , William McKinley was elected President of the United States . McKinley , a Republican and former Governor of Ohio , defeated the joint Democratic and Populist nominee , William Jennings Bryan , as well as minor @-@ party candidates . McKinley 's decisive victory in what is sometimes seen as a realigning election ended a period of close presidential contests , and ushered in an era of dominance for the Republican Party . 
 McKinley was born in 1843 in Niles , Ohio . After service in the Civil War , he became a lawyer and settled in Canton , Ohio . In 1876 , he was elected to Congress and remained there most of the time until 1890 , when he was defeated for re @-@ election in a gerrymandered district . By this time he was considered a likely presidential candidate , especially when elected governor in 1891 and 1893 . McKinley had incautiously co @-@ signed the loans of a friend , and demands for repayment were made on him when his friend went bankrupt in the Panic of 1893 . Personal insolvency would have removed McKinley as a factor in the 1896 campaign , but he was rescued from this by businessmen who supported him , led by his friend and political manager , Mark Hanna . With that obstacle removed , Hanna built McKinley 's campaign organization through 1895 and 1896 . McKinley refused to deal with the eastern bosses such as Thomas Platt and Matthew Quay , and they tried to block his nomination by encouraging state favorite son candidates to run and prevent McKinley from getting a majority of delegate votes , which might force him to make deals on political patronage . Their efforts were in vain , as the large , efficient McKinley organization swept him to a first ballot victory at the 1896 Republican National Convention , with New Jersey 's Garret Hobart as his running mate . 
 McKinley was a noted protectionist , and was confident of winning an election fought on that question . But it was free silver that became the issue of the day , with William Jennings Bryan capturing the Democratic nomination as a foe of the gold standard . Hanna raised millions for a campaign of education with trainloads of pamphlets to convince the voter that free silver would be harmful , and once that had its effect , even more were printed on protectionism . McKinley stayed at home in Canton , Ohio , running a front porch campaign and reaching millions through newspaper coverage of the speeches he gave to organized groups of people who came to see him and hear him address them . This contrasted with Bryan , who toured the nation by rail in his campaign . Supported by the well @-@ to @-@ do , urban dwellers , and prosperous farmers , McKinley won a majority of the popular vote and an easy victory in the Electoral College . McKinley 's <unk> approach to gaining the presidency laid the groundwork for modern campaigns , and he forged an electoral coalition that would keep the Republicans in power most of the time until 1932 . 
 = = Background = = 
 William McKinley was born in Niles , Ohio , in 1843 . He left college to work as a teacher , and enlisted in the Union Army when the American Civil War broke out in 1861 . He served throughout the war , ending it as a brevet major . Afterwards , he attended Albany Law School in New York state , and was admitted to the bar in Ohio . He settled in Canton , Ohio , and after practicing law there , was elected to Congress in 1876 , and except for short periods served there until 1891 . In 1890 , he was defeated for re @-@ election , but was elected governor the following year , serving two two @-@ year terms . 
 In the latter part of the 19th century , Ohio was deemed a crucial battleground state ; taking its electoral votes was thought essential for a Republican to win the White House . One way of , hopefully , assuring victory there was to nominate a son of Ohio . Between 1865 and 1929 , every Republican president who first gained his office by election ( that is , rather than succeeding on the death of his predecessor ) was born in Ohio . Deadlocked Republican conventions in 1876 , 1880 , and 1888 turned to men born in Ohio , and in each case the nominee won the presidency . Thus , any successful Ohio Republican was a plausible president . One of McKinley 's rivals among the Ohio contenders was Governor Joseph B. Foraker , but Foraker 's light dimmed when he was defeated for a third two @-@ year term in 1889 . 
 There were strong factional conflicts inside the Ohio Republican party . One source of bitterness was the 1888 Republican National Convention . Ohio Republicans had endorsed the state 's senior senator , John Sherman , for president . This was Sherman 's third attempt at the Republican nomination ; among his supporters were Cleveland industrialist Mark Hanna , and Governor Foraker , whom Hanna had to that point strongly supported . After repeated balloting , Sherman did not get close to the number of delegate votes needed to nominate , and when rumors swept the convention that the party 's 1884 nominee , former Maine senator James G. Blaine , might enter the race , Foraker expressed willingness to support Blaine . This dealt a serious blow to Sherman 's candidacy by showing division in his home state , and the nomination went to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison , who was Ohio @-@ born and who was elected . McKinley had received some delegate votes , and his action in refusing to consider a candidacy while pledged to support Sherman impressed Mark Hanna . The industrialist was outraged at Foraker and abandoned him . McKinley and Hanna shared similar political views , including support for a tariff to protect and encourage American industry , and in the years following 1888 , Hanna became a strong supporter of McKinley . 
 Revenue from tariffs was then a major source of income for the federal government . There was no federal income tax and tariff debates were passionate ; the 1888 presidential election had them as a major issue . Many Democrats supported a tariff for revenue only , that is , the purpose of tariffs should be to finance government , not to encourage American manufacturers . McKinley disagreed with that and sponsored the McKinley Tariff of 1890 . This act , passed by the Republican @-@ dominated Congress , raised rates on imports to protect American industry . McKinley 's tariff proved unpopular among many people who had to pay the increased prices , and was seen as a reason not only for his defeat for re @-@ election to Congress in 1890 , but for the Republicans losing control of both House and Senate in that year 's midterm elections . Nevertheless , McKinley 's defeat did not , in the end , damage his political prospects , as the Democrats were blamed for gerrymandering him out of his seat . 
 Sometime between 1888 and 1890 , McKinley decided to run for president , but to have a realistic chance of attaining that goal , he needed to regain office . Foraker 's ambition then was the Senate — he planned to challenge Sherman in the legislative election to be held in January 1892 — and he agreed to nominate McKinley for governor at the state convention in Columbus . McKinley was elected , and Sherman narrowly turned back Foraker 's challenge with considerable help from Hanna . 
 Harrison had proven unpopular even in his own party , and by the start of 1892 , McKinley was talked about as a potential presidential candidate . McKinley 's name was not offered in nomination at the 1892 Republican National Convention , where he served as permanent chairman , but some delegates voted for him anyway , and he finished third behind Harrison ( who won a first ballot victory ) and Blaine . Hanna had sought support from delegates , but his and McKinley 's strategy is uncertain , due to lack of surviving documents . According to Hanna biographer William T. Horner , " McKinley 's behavior at the convention supports the idea that he liked the attention but was not ready for a campaign " . According to McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan , many delegates " saw in [ McKinley ] their nominee for 1896 " . 
 = = Gaining the nomination = = 
 = = = Preparing for a run = = = 
 Harrison was defeated in the November 1892 election by former president Grover Cleveland , a Democrat , who returned to the White House in March 1893 . President Harrison left office proclaiming the nation 's prosperity , but in May , amid economic uncertainty that caused many people to convert assets into gold , the stock market crashed , and many firms went bankrupt . The depression that ensued became known as the Panic of 1893 . Among those who became insolvent in 1893 was a McKinley friend , Robert Walker . McKinley had co @-@ signed promissory notes for Walker , and thought the total to be $ 17 @,@ 000 . Walker had deceived McKinley , telling the governor that fresh loans were renewals of old ones , and the total indebtedness , for which McKinley had made himself liable , was over $ 130 @,@ 000 . That sum was beyond McKinley 's means , and he planned to resign and earn the money as a lawyer . He was rescued by Hanna and other wealthy supporters , who raised the money to pay the loans . According to McKinley biographer Kevin Phillips , the governor 's backers " paid off the cosigned notes so that McKinley — by now , the probable next president — did not need to go back to practicing law " . 
 The public sympathized with McKinley for his financial trouble , and he was easily re @-@ elected as governor in late 1893 . At that time , the United States , for all practical purposes , was on the gold standard . Many Democrats , and some Republicans , felt that the gold standard limited economic growth , and supported bimetallism , making silver legal tender , as it had been until the passage of the Coinage Act of 1873 . Doing so would likely be inflationary , permitting holders of silver to deposit bullion at the mints , and receive payment for about twice the silver 's 1896 market value . Many farmers , faced with the long decline in agricultural prices that persisted through the first half of the 1890s , felt that bimetallism would expand the money supply and make it easier to pay their debts . Cleveland was a firm supporter of the gold standard , and believed the massive amounts of silver @-@ backed currency issued pursuant to the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890 had helped crash the economy . In 1893 , he forced through the act 's repeal , outraging western Democrats such as Nebraska Congressman William Jennings Bryan . The Democratic Congress in 1894 passed the Wilson @-@ Gorman Tariff , significantly lowering many rates from the McKinley Tariff of 1890 . The economy did not improve in 1894 , and other Cleveland actions , such as federal intervention to halt the Pullman strike , further split his party , 
 The 1894 election campaign saw the Democrats divided , and the electorate further split by the new People 's Party ( or Populists ) , which had emerged from the agricultural discontent . There were more demands for McKinley to speak than he could possibly fulfill . Campaigning throughout the eastern half of the country on behalf of Republican candidates , and venturing even to New Orleans , in the Democratic Solid South , McKinley spoke to large , enthusiastic crowds as often as 23 times in a day . According to his biographer , Margaret Leech , " McKinley 's fervor was irresistible to his audiences . He was better than a <unk> . He was a vote @-@ getter . The whirlwind campaign of the Governor of Ohio was a sensation of the autumn . " The 1894 elections saw the Democrats suffer the greatest losses by a majority party in congressional history , as the Republicans again took control of both houses . 
 = = = First modern primary campaign = = = 
 The outcome of the 1894 elections made it increasingly likely a Republican would be the next president . At the time , the presidential nominating process started much later than it subsequently would , and McKinley , in quietly organizing his campaign with Hanna 's aid in the early months of 1895 , was alone among the candidates in acting so early . Other potential Republican candidates were former president Harrison , incoming Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed of Maine , Iowa Senator William B. Allison , and several state favorite sons , such as Illinois Senator Shelby Cullom . If former president Harrison entered the race , he would immediately become a major contender , and uncertainty over his status hung over the race in 1895 . At the time , unless there was an incumbent elected Republican president , the nomination was generally not decided until the convention , with state political bosses and delegates exacting a price for their support . A candidate 's efforts to gain the nomination did not begin until shortly before the state delegate conventions in the spring of the election year , where fights over the makeup of the delegation often focused on who would be on it , rather than who delegates would support . McKinley and Hanna decided on a systematic nationwide effort to gain the nomination , what onetime presidential adviser Karl Rove , who penned a book on the 1896 race , called " the first modern primary campaign " . 
 To devote himself full @-@ time to McKinley 's presidential campaign , Hanna in 1895 turned over management of his companies to his brother Leonard , and rented a house in Thomasville , Georgia , expressing a dislike for Cleveland 's winters . He was joined there by William and Ida McKinley in early 1895 . The location was a plausibly nonpolitical vacation spot for McKinley , and also permitted him to meet many southern Republicans , including blacks . Although southern Republicans rarely had local electoral success , they elected a substantial number of delegates to the national convention . McKinley and Hanna hosted many southern Republican leaders in Thomasville , subsidizing those who did not have the money to come , and made many converts . The governor also traveled in the South ; in Savannah at the end of March 1895 , he became the first presidential hopeful in American history to address an audience of blacks when he spoke at an African American church . By the time he left Thomasville , he had gained the support of the majority of likely southern delegates ; Platt wrote mournfully in his autobiography that Hanna " had the South practically solid before some of us awakened " . 
 In giving attention to national affairs , McKinley neglected his home front in Ohio , and when the Republican state convention met in Zanesville in May 1895 , it proved to be controlled by the resurgent Foraker , who sought the Senate seat to be filled by the Ohio General Assembly in January 1896 . That convention endorsed McKinley for president and Foraker for Senate , and nominated Foraker supporters for state and party offices , including Asa Bushnell to succeed McKinley as governor . McKinley realized that it would be risky to have a faction hostile to the presidential candidate within his home state , and sought an alliance , campaigning for Bushnell and for a Republican legislature that would send Foraker to Washington . The voters chose Bushnell and gave the state Republicans a large majority in the legislature . In January 1896 , Foraker was overwhelmingly elected ( to take office in March 1897 ) , and McKinley gained Foraker 's agreement to support him for president , assuring party political peace at home . 
 During 1895 , Hanna journeyed east to meet with the political bosses there , including Pennsylvania Senator Matthew Quay and Thomas C. Platt of New York . He returned to report that the bosses were willing to assure McKinley 's nomination in exchange for a promise to give them control over patronage in their states and a promise in writing that Platt would be Treasury Secretary . McKinley was unwilling to deal , seeking a nomination without strings , and Hanna , though noting that this made his task much harder , undertook to get it . McKinley decided on a theme for his nomination campaign , " The People Against the Bosses " . With Hanna 's aid , McKinley found talented men to run the state organizations , who would in turn find locals to ensure McKinley triumphed at the series of conventions that would elect delegates to the June 1896 Republican convention in St. Louis . Notable among these appointments was Charles G. Dawes in Illinois , a young banker and entrepreneur who had recently moved to Chicago from Nebraska , where he had known Congressman Bryan . In trying to organize Illinois for McKinley , Dawes faced the enmity of the local Republican bosses , who preferred to take a delegation to St. Louis that would support Senator Cullom until the bosses made the right deal . 
 McKinley left office as governor in January 1896 . In February , Harrison made it clear he would not seek a third nomination . Hanna 's operatives immediately organized Harrison 's home state of Indiana for McKinley with a haste the former president privately found unseemly . By early 1896 , the Reed and Allison campaigns were beginning to form themselves , but had little luck in Indiana . McKinley challenged his rivals everywhere except in states , like Iowa , that he deemed had serious candidates like Senator Allison . The favorite son candidacies of Minnesota Senator Cushman K. Davis and former Nebraska senator Charles F. <unk> fell victim to the McKinley forces , well @-@ financed by Hanna , who took their states away from them . McKinley was disliked by the American Protective Association , an anti @-@ Catholic group angered that as governor he had appointed to office members of that faith . Their wide <unk> caused Hanna to act against falsehoods that his candidate was a Catholic . 
 According to historian Stanley Jones in his account of the 1896 campaign , " another feature common to the Reed and Allison campaigns was their failure to make headway against the tide which was running toward McKinley . In fact , both campaigns from the moment they were launched were in retreat . " In March and April 1896 , state conventions in Ohio , Michigan , California , Indiana , and other states elected delegates to the national convention , instructed to vote for McKinley . In New England , McKinley made inroads into Reed 's regional support , as New Hampshire proclaimed no preference between the Speaker and McKinley , and the Vermont convention expressed support for McKinley . The Ohioan was not successful everywhere ; Iowa remained loyally behind Allison , Morton won a majority of the New York delegation , and the bosses were successful in denying McKinley in New Mexico Territory and Oklahoma Territory . The contest was still undetermined going into the April 29 Illinois state convention , with the McKinley forces led by Dawes against the local bosses . McKinley gained most of Illinois ' delegates , giving him a sizable lead , and influencing remaining state conventions to jump on his bandwagon . 
 McKinley remained well ahead when the state conventions concluded , leaving his opponents ' only hope the Republican National Committee ( RNC ) , which would make initial rulings on which delegates would be seated ; there were contested seats or rival delegations in several states , and rulings against McKinley could still deprive him of a first @-@ ballot majority . When the RNC met in mid @-@ June , just prior to the convention , McKinley was easily victorious in almost all cases . 
 = = = Republican convention = = = 
 The 1896 Republican National Convention convened at the Wigwam , a temporary structure in St. Louis , on June 16 . With most credentials battles settled in McKinley 's favor , the roll of delegates drawn up by the RNC heavily favored the Ohioan , though Reed , Allison , Morton and Quay remained in the race . The credentials report served as a test vote , which the McKinley forces won easily . Hanna , who was a delegate from Ohio , was in full control of the convention . 
 Many westerners , including Republicans , were supporters of free silver . McKinley 's advisors had anticipated there would be strong feelings about the currency question , and pressed the candidate for a decision on what the party platform should say on the subject . McKinley had hoped to avoid this issue ; his surrogates had presented him as firmly for the gold standard in the East , where support for that policy was strong . Western supporters , who often favored silver , were told he was sympathetic to the bimetallic cause . In the following years , several McKinley associates , including publisher H. H. Kohlsaat and Wisconsin 's Henry C. Payne , took credit for including an explicit mention of the gold standard in the platform 's currency plank ( for they deemed it vital to the Republican victory in November ) , but it was not inserted in the draft until Hanna consulted with McKinley by telephone . The silver Republicans from the West were led by Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller , who drafted a plank promoting free silver , only to see it voted down in the drafting committee , and in the full Platform Committee . Teller was determined to have the full convention vote on his language , although it was certain he would lose as most Republican delegates favored the gold standard . The debate was held on June 18 . After Teller 's minority report was voted down and the gold plank adopted by an overwhelming majority , 23 delegates , including Teller and his Senate colleagues Frank Cannon of Utah and Fred Dubois of Idaho , walked out of the convention and thus left the Republican Party . Amid a tumultuous scene , an angry Hanna was seen standing on a chair , shouting at the departing men , " Go ! Go ! Go ! " 
 Although Platt desired a recess , Hanna refused , wanting the convention to complete its work that day , and the delegates proceeded to the presidential nomination . McKinley had insisted that Foraker nominate him to demonstrate the unity of the Ohio Republican Party , and after some reluctance by the senator @-@ elect , who feared blame if anything went wrong , Foraker agreed . McKinley was waiting with family and friends at his house in Canton , being kept up to date by telegraph and telephone . He was able to listen to part of Foraker 's speech , and the tremendous reception that met it , over the phone line . McKinley was easily nominated on the first ballot , with Reed his nearest competitor . Canton erupted in celebration , with McKinley making speech after speech to the townsfolk and to those who poured in that day by rail from across Ohio , even from his birthplace of Niles . 
 This left the question of the vice presidential candidate . McKinley had offered the second place on the ticket to Reed , who had refused it . Platt wanted Morton , who had been vice president under Harrison ; the New York governor did not want it , and McKinley did not want him . It was usual at that time for major @-@ party tickets to have one candidate from Ohio or Indiana , and the other from New York , but with that state having supported Morton for the nomination , putting a New Yorker on the ticket would be an unmerited reward . RNC vice chairman Garret Hobart was from Paterson , New Jersey , near to New York City . He was a businessman , lawyer , and former state legislator , and was acceptable to Hanna and other Republican backers while being popular among party activists . Several days before the convention , McKinley chose him as running mate , though no announcement was made . At the convention , Hobart expressed surprise in a letter to his wife , but his selection had been strongly rumored and buttons with his name and McKinley 's seen in St. Louis . Delegates ratified the selection of Hobart , nominating him on the first ballot . 
 = = General election campaign = = 
 = = = Getting an opponent = = = 
 In the days after the Republican convention , McKinley remained in Canton . Hanna had been elected chairman of the RNC during the convention ; he established campaign headquarters in Chicago , in the electorally @-@ crucial Midwest , appointed an executive committee and began to organize the campaign , which as chairman was his responsibility . McKinley oversaw the activities of Hanna and other key managers , and addressed delegations of workers who came to visit him . He met with Hobart , who came to Canton on a brief visit on June 30 , 1896 , and who joined his running mate in speaking to a crowd of visitors . In his speeches , McKinley concentrated on tariffs , which he expected to dominate the campaign , and gave short shrift to the currency question . As McKinley awaited his opponent , he privately commented on the nationwide debate over silver , stating to his Canton crony , Judge William R. Day , " This money matter is unduly prominent . In thirty days you won 't hear anything about it . " The future Secretary of State and Supreme Court justice responded : " In my opinion in thirty days you won 't hear of anything else . " 
 At the time McKinley was nominated , it was not clear who his Democratic rival would be . Cleveland 's opponents within his party had mobilized into an organized effort to take over the Democratic Party and pass a platform supporting free silver . The platform was deemed of highest priority , and only once that fight was won was a candidate for president to be considered . Despite this resolution , several Democrats sought the nomination , with the foremost being former Missouri representative Richard P. Bland and former Iowa governor Horace Boies . Others either seeking or spoken of for the nomination included South Carolina Senator Benjamin Tillman , Senator Joseph C. Blackburn of Kentucky , and former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan . 
 Dawes had known Bryan in Nebraska and predicted that if Bryan got to address the convention , he would use his skills as a speaker to stampede it to a nomination . McKinley and Hanna mocked Dawes , telling him that Bland would be the Democratic choice . The 1896 Democratic National Convention opened in Chicago on July 7 , with the silverites in full control ; they drafted a platform supporting free silver . The final speaker during the debate on the platform was former congressman Bryan , who with Dawes in the gallery delivered a speech decrying the gold standard that to Democrats , according to Phillips , was " messianic — a call to arms " . Dawes deemed his friend 's Cross of Gold speech magnificent , though with " <unk> weak " logic , but it won Bryan the presidential nomination , and Phillips noted that the address " unnerved Midwestern Republicans , mindful of their own distrust of the East , and threw a weighty stone into the quiet pool of June GOP electoral assumptions " . 
 When journalist Murat Halstead telephoned McKinley from Chicago to inform him that Bryan would be nominated , he responded dismissively and hung up the phone . Bryan 's nomination briefly gratified the Republicans , believing that his selection would lead to an easy victory for McKinley . In those days when the presidential campaign did not begin in earnest until September , Hanna had planned a vacation while McKinley anticipated a quiet summer . The Republicans were caught by surprise by the wave of enthusiasm that Bryan 's speech and nomination caused , and scuttled these plans ; as Hanna wrote to McKinley on July 16 , " the Chicago convention has changed everything " . 
 = = = Fundraising and organization = = = 
 Hanna quickly realized that the currency issue struck an emotional chord in many Americans , and decided on a campaign to persuade the voter that " sound money " , the gold standard unless modified by international agreement , was much preferable to bimetallism . Such propaganda would not be cheap , as before the age of mass media , the most effective way of reaching the electorate was through the written word , and through public speakers who would address meetings on behalf of the candidate . This would take money , and Hanna undertook to raise it from his corporate connections . As Hanna began his fundraising efforts in late July , the Populists met in St. Louis . Faced with splitting the silver vote , they chose to endorse Bryan , beginning their dissolution as a party . 
 Large sums had to be spent quickly , and Hanna energetically built a businesslike campaign . Bryan 's surge contributed to a sense of crisis that enabled Hanna to make peace in his party , eventually uniting all behind McKinley with the exception of some Silver Republicans . But as the campaign began operations , and began them on a huge scale , money was short . Hanna initially spent much of his time in New York , where many financiers were based . He faced resistance at first , both because he was not yet widely known on the national scene , and because some <unk> , although appalled at the Democratic position on the currency issue , felt Bryan was so extreme that McKinley was sure to win . Others were disappointed New York Governor Morton was not the presidential nominee , but their support became warmer as they came to know McKinley and Hanna . Reports of Bryan support in the crucial Midwest , and intervention by Hanna 's old schoolmate , John D. Rockefeller ( his Standard Oil gave $ 250 @,@ 000 ) , made executives more willing to listen . After a gloomy August for the campaign 's fundraising , in September , corporate moguls " opened their purse strings to Hanna " . J.P. Morgan gave $ 250 @,@ 000 . Dawes recorded an official figure for fundraising of $ 3 @,@ 570 @,@ 397 @.@ 13 , twice what the Republicans had raised in 1892 , and as much as ten times what Bryan may have had to spend . Dawes ' figure did not include fundraising by state and local committees , nor in @-@ kind donations such as railroad fare discounts , which were heavily subsidized for Republican political travelers . Estimates of what Republicans may have raised in total have ranged as high as $ 16 @.@ 5 million . 
 From his house on North Market Street in Canton , McKinley ran his campaign , with telephone and telegraph at his disposal . Hanna was busy meeting with executives to extract funds , and delegated much of the day @-@ to @-@ day policymaking to others , most prominently Dawes , who was a member of the campaign executive committee and was responsible for distributing much of the money that Hanna raised . Payne was nominally in charge of the Chicago office , but Dawes , a member of the McKinley inner circle , had more influence . Pamphlets were sent from Chicago in carload lots across the country . The campaign spent almost $ 500 @,@ 000 on printing alone , which Stanley Jones , in his account of the 1896 campaign , estimated paid for hundreds of millions of pamphlets . The campaign paid for hundreds of speakers to stump on McKinley 's behalf . Efforts were made to keep expenses down ; Dawes insisted on competitive bidding , and most of his top @-@ level hires were business associates , not political operatives . Others prominent in the Chicago office included Charles Dick , the secretary of the organization and later a senator . 
 = = = Front porch campaign = = = 
 From the moment he was nominated , McKinley was beset by supporters coming to Canton to hail him , hoping to hear him give a political speech . McKinley remained in Canton , available to the public every day but Sunday , continuously from his June nomination until Election Day in November , excepting one trip in July to give previously arranged nonpolitical speeches in Cleveland and at Mount Union College . He also took one weekend of rest in late August . The need to greet and speak to supporters made it difficult for McKinley to get campaign work done ; one political club interrupted his conference with Hobart in late June . McKinley complained that his time was not being well managed . 
 Bryan 's announcement , after gaining the Democratic nomination , that he would undertake a nationwide tour by rail , something then unusual for presidential candidates , put pressure on McKinley to match him . Hanna especially urged his candidate to hit the road . McKinley decided against this , feeling that he could not outdo Bryan , who was a brilliant stump speaker , and that he would be foolish to try . " I might as well put up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete against some professional athlete as go out speaking against Bryan . I have to think when I speak . " . Furthermore , no matter how McKinley traveled , Bryan would upstage him by choosing a less comfortable manner . McKinley was unwilling to compete with Bryan on the Democrat 's terms , and sought to find his own way to reach the people . 
 The front porch campaign that McKinley decided on was a natural extension of the pilgrimages to Canton by McKinley devotees that were already occurring . After a few initial stumbles , things settled into routine by mid @-@ September . While any group could visit McKinley by writing in advance , his campaign arranged for many of them , and they came from towns small and large . If possible , the group 's leader was brought to Canton in advance to confer with McKinley on what each would say ; if not , the group would be met at the Canton railroad station by a McKinley representative , who would discuss what would be said with the group 's leader . There were parades every day in Canton that campaign season , as the groups marched through the bunting @-@ draped streets , escorted by a mounted troop known as the McKinley Home Guards , who saw to it that groups arrived at the McKinley home on a prearranged schedule . There , the group leader would deliver his remarks , and McKinley would deliver a reply often prepared in advance . Afterwards , there might be refreshments or the opportunity to shake hands with McKinley , before the delegation was escorted off for their return journey to the railroad station . If it rained , the meetings took place in one of several indoor venues . 
 Bicycling was the latest craze in the United States in 1896 , and among those who came to salute McKinley was a brigade of bicyclists , who pulled images of McKinley and Hobart behind their vehicles , and performed tricks as they went to see their presidential candidate . The people of Canton joined in enthusiastically , and restaurants and souvenir <unk> expanded their operations . A popular source of keepsakes was the wood of McKinley 's front porch or fence , whittled as supporters listened , and the blades of his lawn , when not trampled underfoot , made later appearances in scrapbooks . In between delegations , McKinley entertained visitors ; future Secretary of State John Hay , a major backer , came to Canton reluctantly , not relishing the crowds , but wrote " he met me at the [ railroad ] station , gave me meat & took me upstairs and talked for two hours as calmly & serenely as if we were summer boarders in Bethlehem , at a loss for means to kill time . I was more struck than ever with his mask . It is a genuine Italian ecclesiastical face of the XVth Century . " 
 With his campaign ill @-@ financed , Bryan was his own greatest asset , and traveled to 27 of the 45 states , logging 18 @,@ 000 miles ( 29 @,@ 000 km ) , and in his estimated 600 speeches reached some 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 listeners . McKinley did not match those numbers , speaking 300 times to 750 @,@ 000 visitors , but in remaining at home , he avoided the fatigue of Bryan 's exhausting tour . The Republican was better able to provide fresh material for the next day 's newspapers without making gaffes ; Bryan made several . According to R. Hal Williams in his book on the 1896 campaign , " The Front Porch Campaign was a remarkable success . " 
 = = = Issues and tactics = = = 
 Bryan 's nomination caused defections and divisions in the Republican party ; many farmers in the Midwest , even in McKinley 's Ohio , found the inflation it was expected free silver would cause to be attractive , as it would make it easier to repay debts . Polls in battleground midwestern states , and word from activists there , showed that Bryan had made deep inroads into Republican support . One survey in August showed that of the midwestern states , only Wisconsin was safe for the Republicans . 
 By early in August , the McKinley campaign had decided upon a strategy : appeal to labor and established farmers . McKinley , on the urgent advice of his advisers , by the middle of that month had decided that the currency question must be addressed immediately , and the campaign machine began the process of generating millions of publications and sending hundreds of speakers into the field . The pamphlets contained quotes or articles from McKinley , members of Congress , and financial experts on why a bimetallic standard would be ruinous to the country . Theodore Roosevelt , then a member of the New York City Police Commission , recalled seeing boxcars full of paper being dispatched when he visited the Chicago headquarters in August . For the benefit of those who did not read English , there were pamphlets in French , Spanish , Portuguese , Yiddish , German , Polish , Norwegian , Italian , Danish , and Dutch . Pre @-@ written articles were sent to periodicals , and the campaign paid for friendly newspapers to be sent to thousands of citizens across the country for the duration . Five million families received McKinley campaign materials on a weekly basis . Among the surrogates sent out on McKinley 's behalf was newspaper editor Warren G. Harding , paid to make speeches across Ohio . The future president made a positive impression and three years later was elected to the Ohio State Senate , beginning his political rise . 
 On his front porch , McKinley urged sound money , though he never ceased to promote protectionism to support American industry . Horner noted , " the campaign effectively linked both gold and protectionism with patriotism . " McKinley felt that he could not campaign entirely on the money issue , as many midwestern Republicans who supported silver considered protection the major issue of the campaign , and would stay with the party if it promoted tariffs . These issues were given different emphases <unk> : in the East and South , the money issue was stressed most strongly , while tariffs were given more attention in the Midwest . McKinley had little support in the mining @-@ dominated Rocky Mountain states , where even most Republicans were for silver and Bryan . On the Pacific coast , where there was strong silver sentiment , but where McKinley had some hope of winning , the tariff was made the major issue . 
 McKinley soothed ruffled feathers of party bigwigs by mail and in person . Though former president Harrison refused to tour , he gave a speech in New York where he railed against free silver , stating , " the first dirty errand that a dirty dollar does is to cheat the workingman " . The public was closely following the campaign , and the Republican efforts had their effect . In September , polls showed the midwestern states leaning Republican , though silver @-@ supporting Iowa was still close . McKinley 's running mate , Hobart , continued to look after his law practice and business interests , and was apparently a major contributor to the Republican campaign . He helped to run the New York office , gave some speeches from his own front porch in Paterson , and in October went on a short campaign tour of New Jersey , though he was a reluctant public speaker . Hobart was much stronger for the gold standard than was McKinley , and made clear his views in his speeches . 
 William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal was hostile to McKinley throughout the campaign ; prior to the Republican convention , Alfred Henry Lewis accused Hanna of acting on behalf of a syndicate , controlling McKinley . During the general election campaign , the Democratic newspapers , especially the papers owned by Hearst , attacked Hanna for his supposed role as McKinley 's political master . These articles and cartoons have contributed to a lasting popular belief that McKinley was not his own man , but that he was effectively owned by the corporations , through Hanna . Homer Davenport 's cartoons for the Hearst papers were especially effective in molding public opinion about Hanna , who was often depicted as " Dollar Mark " , in a suit decorated with dollar signs ( a term for which " dollar mark " was a common alternative ) . McKinley 's 1893 personal financial crisis allowed him to be convincingly depicted as a child , helpless in the hands of businessmen and their mere tool in the 1896 campaign . Hearst and the Journal gave $ 41 @,@ 000 to Bryan 's campaign , one of the largest the Democrats received , but that amount was dwarfed by the sums raised by Hanna . 
 September saw Maine and Vermont go heavily Republican in their state elections , meaning the Northeast was likely safe for McKinley . Early in that month , dissident Democrats , who favored the gold standard and President Cleveland 's policies , formed the National Democratic Party , or Gold Democrats , meeting in Indianapolis . The nomination of Illinois Senator John M. Palmer for president and former Kentucky governor Simon Bolivar Buckner for vice president meant Bryan would have to overcome an electoral split in his party . Hanna applauded the selection , and predicted it would get large numbers of votes . There was no chance Palmer would win the election , and Hanna saw to it that the Gold Democrats were aided with quietly @-@ provided funds . 
 The Midwest was the crucial battleground , and both parties poured in their resources , with Bryan spending most of his time there , as did Hanna . McKinley and Hanna began to sense that the flood of materials and speakers on the silver question had had their effect in the Midwest . Dawes began to slow the flow of pamphlets against silver , and set loose a flood of material favoring McKinley 's tariff policies . Events favored the Republicans : wheat prices rose considerably in the final weeks of the campaign , lessening the enthusiasm of farmers for free silver . The Democrats alleged that Republicans were coercing workers into voting for McKinley on threat of losing their jobs ; Hanna denied it , and offered a reward for evidence , that was not claimed . To Bryan 's outrage , Hanna called for a " Flag Day " for the final Saturday , October 31 , as the campaign again sought to link support for McKinley to patriotism , a theme echoed by the candidate as he addressed his final delegations . Hundreds of thousands marched through the streets of the nation 's cities in honor of the flag ; New York City saw its largest parade since 1865 . Election day was November 3 ; on its eve Hanna and Dawes predicted overwhelming victory . 
 = = Election = = 
 Stanley Jones wrote of the 1896 campaign : 
 For the people it was a campaign of study and analysis , of exhortation and conviction — a campaign of search for economic and political truth . Pamphlets tumbled from the presses , to be snatched up eagerly , to be read , reread , studied , debated , to become guides to economic thought and political action . They were printed and distributed by the million , enough to provide several copies for every man , woman , and child in the country ; but the people clamored for more . Favorite pamphlets became dog @-@ eared , grimy , fell apart as their owners laboriously restudied their arguments and quoted from them in public and private debate . 
 Voters cast their ballots on November 3 , and that evening gathered in cities and around telegraph offices . In places like New York , the results were projected by stereopticon onto the sides of newspaper buildings . The election was considered by many to be the most crucial since 1860 , and large numbers of voters followed the returns all night . McKinley cast his ballot early , going with his brother Abner to the polling place , and met Hanna for lunch . That evening , McKinley sat in his library as the returns came in by telegraph . It was quickly apparent that McKinley was leading , and by midnight he had pencilled the figure " 241 " on a pad , the number of electoral votes of states that were certain , enough for victory . Hanna wired from Cleveland to Canton , " The feeling here beggars description ... I will not attempt bulletins . You are elected to the highest office of the land by a people who always loved and trusted you . " 
 McKinley won the entire Northeast and Midwest , and broke into the border states to win Delaware , Maryland , Kentucky , and West Virginia . He won North Dakota , and came close in South Dakota , Kansas , and in Bryan 's Nebraska . McKinley was also successful in California and Oregon . McKinley won with 7 @.@ 1 million votes to Bryan 's 6 @.@ 5 million , 51 % to 47 % . The electoral vote was not as close : 271 for McKinley to 176 for Bryan . McKinley increased the Republican vote by 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 from Harrison 's defeat in 1892 , though Bryan also increased the Democratic total . 
 Bryan had hoped to sweep the rural vote and make inroads on urban labor , but he was not successful . McKinley became the first Republican candidate to win in New York City , and won in its rival city of Brooklyn as well . He lost only one city with a population of over 45 @,@ 000 in the Midwest , and won many rural counties in crucial states . Although Bryan won all states south of Kentucky and from Texas east , McKinley won most urban centers there . 
 Irish immigrants generally remained loyal to the Democratic Party , but McKinley 's promises of sound money attracted German @-@ Americans who were appalled by Bryan 's inflationary proposals . German @-@ Americans had long been Democratic ; efforts by that party to rebut McKinley , including circulating a statement by Bismarck in support of bimetallism , were ineffective . Many Catholics and recent immigrants favored McKinley because of the dislike the American Protective Association had for him . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Rove saw several reasons for McKinley 's triumph . McKinley campaigned on big issues , the tariff and sound money . The candidate went after Bryan 's strongest issue , silver , arguing that bimetallism would harm Americans and hit the working class hardest . McKinley 's theme was that it was morally wrong to debase the currency ; he linked his stand for sound money with the tariff and with patriotism , appealing to crucial voter blocs who gave McKinley the biggest victory in a presidential election since Grant in 1872 . He reached out to immigrants and urban factory workers , recognizing their importance in a changing America . And to implement these strategies , McKinley , with Hanna 's aid , created a larger , more organized campaign structure than had previously been seen in presidential campaigns . 
 Jones noted , " The Republican Party , under the skillful leadership of McKinley and Hanna , produced a combination of votes which gave it the victory in 1896 and which promised Republican ascendency for many years in the future . " The 1896 presidential race is often considered a realigning election , when there is a major shift in voting patterns , upsetting the political balance . McKinley was supported by middle @-@ class and wealthy voters , urban laborers , and prosperous farmers ; this coalition would keep the Republicans mostly in power until the 1930s . McKinley 's wooing of the Midwest would pay ample dividends in the years to come , as it remained solidly Republican in most years until 1932 . 
 Williams suggested that McKinley 's campaign of education of the voter through speakers and literature brought him victory , but with a cost to the close identification between voters and the political parties that was typical in the 19th century . Voter turnout was almost 80 percent in 1896 , about average for presidential elections in the late 19th century , but then dropped substantially and remained at lower levels as voters , who once participated in rallies and torchlight processions for candidates , were distracted by radio and by professional sports . Nevertheless , later campaigns tried to recapture the magic of 1896 ; Warren G. Harding conducted his own front porch campaign in 1920 , even borrowing the flagpole from McKinley 's old front yard . 
 William D. Harpine , studying McKinley 's rhetoric during the front porch campaign , argued that McKinley 's campaign was in some ways ahead of its time , " even in the age of broadcasting , most candidates for nationwide office embark on a campaign tour . In 1896 , long before the advent of broadcasting , McKinley accomplished the same purpose as a modem candidate , and did so without making a campaign tour . " The visits of the delegations to the McKinley home in Canton constituted a series of media events that McKinley used to get his speeches into the newspapers . In speaking from his front porch , McKinley was not principally addressing the delegations , but the many Americans who would not visit Canton , and who would read the speeches in newspapers . Williams agreed , " the remarkable Front Porch Campaign used modern technology to bring 750 @,@ 000 visitors to his small hometown and dispatched his message nationwide . " 
 Rove , while an advisor to Texas Governor George W. Bush during the 2000 election campaign , often spoke of the parallels he saw between McKinley and his 1896 campaign , and the 2000 election , going so far as to fax copies of books on McKinley . The media took the parallels further than Rove intended , making comparisons between him and Hanna , hinting that Rove controlled Bush like it was said Hanna controlled McKinley . Williams also saw the lasting effect of McKinley 's 1896 campaign , " a new approach to campaigning , the educational or merchandising style , continues to mold campaigns today , as does McKinley 's focus on message , Hanna 's use of money , and Dawes 's reliance on efficiency and education ... more than a century later , Americans and their political leaders can still learn from the events of the 1890s , whose lessons echo down the years today . " 
 Harpine saw McKinley 's personal touch as key to his successful race : 
 McKinley created the impression that he was , in the fashion of pre @-@ Civil War candidates , waiting casually at home for the people to elect him . Yet , McKinley during the summer of 1896 initiated a vigorous , carefully crafted campaign that employed all of the resources available to him to reach and persuade the national voting public ... There was something folksy about campaigning so casually from a modest , middle @-@ class home . When the throngs of voters stepped off the train in Canton , they discovered that McKinley was to all appearances one of them . It was in large part this quality , the ability to project warm personality through these groups to the press , that led to the success of the Front Porch campaign . 
 = = Results = = 
 ( a ) Includes 222 @,@ 583 votes as the People 's nominee . ( b ) Sewall was Bryan 's Democratic running mate . ( c ) Watson was Bryan 's People 's running mate . 
 = Manasollasa = 
 The Manasollāsa , also known as Abhilashitartha Chintamani , is an early 12th @-@ century Sanskrit text composed by the South Indian king Someshvara III of the Kalyani Chalukya dynasty . The text is an encyclopedic work covering topics such as polity , governance , ethics , economics , astronomy , astrology , rhetoric , veterinary medicine , horticulture , perfumes , food , architecture , sports , painting , poetry and music . The text is a valuable source of socio @-@ cultural information on 11th- and 12th @-@ century India . 
 The encyclopedic treatise is structured as five sub @-@ books with a cumulative total of 100 chapters . It is notable for its extensive discussion of arts , particularly music and dance . It is also notable for including chapters on food recipes and festivals , many of which continue to be a part of modern Indian culture . 
 Another medieval era Sanskrit text with the title Mānasollāsa also exists , consisting of devotional praise hymns ( stotra ) , and it is different from the encyclopedic treatise . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 The title Manasollasa ( <unk> ् लास ) is a compound Sanskrit word , consisting of Mana ( <unk> ) or " mind " and <unk> ( <unk> ् लास ) or " rejoicing , delighting " . It means " the joy , <unk> or entertainer of the mind " . Alternatively , the compound word can be broken as Manasa and <unk> , which mean " happiness of mind " . 
 The work is divided into five sub @-@ books suffixed as <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) which means the number twenty , and refers to the 20 chapters in the sub @-@ book . The text , in modern scholarship , is referred by both IAST spellings " Manasollāsa " , and " Mānasollāsa " . 
 The text is also known as the Abhilashitartha Chintamani ( <unk> <unk> ) ( literally , the precious gem that fulfills wish ) . This text title is spelled Manasollāsa , and there is another medieval era Indian text with the title , Mānasollāsa ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् लास ) , written in Stotra ( poetry of praise ) style related to <unk> , very different in its scope , and attributed to Adi Shankara or <unk> . 
 = = Date and author = = 
