 The text was completed in 1129 CE , and the author of the text was Someshvara III . He became the king in 1127 , was part of the Kalyani Chalukya dynasty , and the third king in this dynasty . The year when he succeeded to the throne is approximate , and some scholars state it to be 1125 CE . The author hailed from the medieval Deccan region consisting of large parts of modern Karnataka , Telangana , western Andhra Pradesh and southern Maharashtra . 
 Epigraphical evidence suggests that the dynasty made numerous land grants and financial awards to the causes of Shaivism and monastic scholarship . These monasteries in the Indian peninsula became centers of the study of the Vedas and Hindu philosophies such as the Nyaya school . Someshvara III composed this text in the initial years of his kingship . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Manasollasa encyclopedic treatise was written in Sanskrit in a Kannada language speaking region ( Kannadiga ) . The script of the text is Devanagari . The encyclopedia is in poetic verse style . 
 It is structured into five sub @-@ books and cumulatively contains 100 chapters . The five <unk> ( sub @-@ book of twenties ) are subtitled as <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and the <unk> <unk> . Each chapter deals with a specific topic , ranging from gaining a kingdom , its governance , economics , infrastructure , architecture , medicine , cuisine , ornaments , perfumery and love @-@ games , sports , jewelry , painting , music and dance . A major part of the text is dedicated to music and musical instruments , with 2500 verses dedicated to it . 
 The number of <unk> in this work are : 
 = = Contents = = 
 = = = Kingdom and qualifications of a king : <unk> = = = 
 The <unk> sub @-@ book describes the qualifications of a king and ministers , their duties and moral characteristics that enable the king to rule a stable , prosperous kingdom . 
 The chapter asserts that the king should be truthful , avoid anger , be virtuous and lead by example . The king , ministers and citizens should , states the Manasollasa 's first sub @-@ book , refrain from injury to others , practice self @-@ restraint , generosity , have faith in gods , feed and support the poor and helpless , and be friendly . The king , according to the text , should honour his ancestors and all guests . 
 = = = Governance , economics and political stability : <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The second sub @-@ book <unk> <unk> <unk> is dedicated to governance and economic matters to help a king retain the kingdom . It describes the ministers and their qualifications , the maintenance , equipment and training of an army with a <unk> ( general ) to command the army , the priests and astrologer as advisors to the king , the treasury and methods of taxation . 
 J Duncan M <unk> , a professor of Oriental Laws , states that chapter 2 @.@ 8 of the text discusses three kinds of constitutions and recommends that the king should delegate large responsibilities to their ministers , a system that implied that the kingdom was virtually ruled through the ministers . The Manasollasa gives a significant role to an astrologer in the council of advisors to the king who would forecast the auspicious time to respond to an attack , which Hartmut <unk> , a professor of Indo @-@ European Studies , states proved disastrous during Muslim and foreign invasion of the Deccan peninsula . 
 The delegated form of governance in the existing or acquired provinces is recommended by the text , with the qualification that the province should be ruled by someone born in that province . However , all ministers in immediate vicinity of the king must be born within the long established state . The king , states the text , must watch out and act against bureaucrats and officials who torment his subjects . The text cautions that the king should prevent abuse of his subjects from officials , robbers , enemies , king 's favorites and his own greed . 
 This sub @-@ book also describes various types of <unk> ( taxation ) . In the 4th chapter , it explains the tax collected at port of entry , on goods that arrive at the border . 
 The second sub @-@ book includes chapters on veterinary care of animals such as horses and elephants who served the army . Many veterinary ailments are described , ranging from fever to injury to stomach upsets , and the proper nourishment , care of the animals as well as formulations of medicines are outlined in the verses of chapter 2 @.@ 6 for example . The text also includes the names of over forty herbs used for recipes of veterinary care . 
 = = = Food and entertainment : <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The Manasollasa contains numerous recipes of vegetarian and non @-@ vegetarian cuisines , which according to Mary Ellen Snodgrass , the editor of Encyclopedia of Kitchen History , preceded the cookbook writing history in Europe by a century . While the text is not the first among Indian books to describe fermented foods , it contains a range of cuisines based on fermentation of cereals and <unk> . Among meat dishes , the text does not include the meat of cow , horse , elephant , parrot , peacock or eggs , but describes cuisines based on pork , venison , goat meat , fish among others . 
 The text asserts that fresh water is Amrita ( nectar ) of cuisine , and <unk> ( poison ) otherwise . Someshvara III recommends fresh water from rains ( autumn ) , springs ( summer ) , rivers and lakes ( winter ) for daily use , after it has been filtered with a clean cloth . The text recommends boiling the water before use , and using the water so prepared within a day . For drinking , if boiling is not possible , the text recommends alternate purification method based on <unk> , and then adding a piece of mango , <unk> or <unk> flower or powder of camphor for flavor and delight . The text mentions fresh coconut water , and various drinks called <unk> . 
 The art of preparing wine is described in Manasollasa from grape and sugarcane , with unusual sources being based on brewing of <unk> ( palm ) , <unk> ( coconut ) and <unk> ( date ) . 
 = = = Joy and delight : <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The fourth sub @-@ book of Manasollasa deals with entertainment such as music , dance , songs and competitive sports . The text covers dance and music in exclusive chapters , dedicating far more verses to these two topics than first two sub @-@ books combined . This may reflect the importance of performance arts in 12th @-@ century India , since Someshvara III 's son and successor to the throne king Jagadekamalla II also wrote a famed treatise Sangita @-@ <unk> , literally " crown jewel of music " . 
 The text describes various types of songs and music , instruments and dances along with occasions of their performance . The Tripadi , states the text in chapter 4 @.@ 16 , was performed during harvesting and <unk> season , the Shatpadi was performed by folk story tellers , the Dhavala sung at marriages , while festivals such as Holi were celebrated with Mangala and <unk> genre of songs and music . The <unk> , asserts the text , were songs of meditation . The text also claims Gana ( <unk> ) to be a form of " popular music " , and that Geet that is neither fast nor slow , but contains both high and low notes , where the words and musical meter are equally important to be preferred by spiritual teachers . 
 Rhetoric is discussed in chapter 4 @.@ 17 of Manasollasa . The text dedicates over 450 verses in chapter 4 @.@ 18 to dance and describes various types of dance forms , musical instruments that go with dance performances , and the various occasions when dances were celebrated . The text discusses six types of performers , their characteristics and their roles – Nata ( actor ) , <unk> ( dancer ) , <unk> ( danseuse ) , <unk> ( bard ) , <unk> ( wandering performer ) and <unk> ( acrobat ) . Their body movements ( 6 Anga , 8 <unk> and 6 <unk> ) are explained in the text with their significance . This discussion is similar to that found in Natya Shastra , a Sanskrit text composed around 1st @-@ century BCE . The text thereafter presents the 21 <unk> and 26 Charis of the dance tradition . The discussion on dance movements is compiled by six categories – mimetic ( <unk> ) , delicate ( <unk> ) , vigorous ( <unk> ) , acrobatic ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and graceful ( <unk> ) . 
 The fourth sub @-@ book also describes various sports , such as fishing , dog ( greyhound @-@ type ) racing , horse racing , elephant racing as well as archery , wrestling and athletics . The text also describes some unique team sports , such as a form of Indian polo involving two teams of eight members each . 
 = = = Games , arts and leisure : <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The last sub @-@ book of the text discusses recreation through horticulture and the art of creating gardens , painting , perfumery , architecture and the training and breeding of horses , elephants , <unk> ( a type of quail ) , and other wildlife . A chapter is devoted to the royal sport of hunting deer or other wild game . It deals with 35 different ways of game hunting of deer , in addition to hunting with dogs , falconry and fishing . 
 The garden design , asserts the text , should include rocks and raised mounds of summits , manicured with plants and trees of diverse varieties , artificial ponds and flowing brooks . It describes the arrangement , the soils , the seeds , the distance between different types of plants and trees , the methods of preparing manure , proper fertilizing and maintaining the garden , which plants and trees are best planted first , when to plant others , watering , signs of <unk> and <unk> , weeds , means of protecting the garden and other details . Both public parks and woodland gardens are described by the text , with about forty types of trees recommended for the park in the Vana @-@ <unk> chapter . 
 Other arts and leisure activities described in the fifth sub @-@ book include activities such as garland making and perfumery , wherein the various flowers are arranged in patterns of pleasing colors and one 's that delight the senses . The text lists various types of aromatic woods , such as sandalwood and their qualities . The text describes the art of painting as three types – <unk> ( representational ) , <unk> ( sketch , outline ) and Bhava ( narrative ) . The text includes a recipe for making various types of paints , as well as crayons for drawing , and then recommends the steps in making a drawing . 
 The 12th @-@ century text describes jewelry and make up of women including those applied to their eyelids , lashes , cheeks and forearms , mentioning different styles and colors of Tilak on their foreheads . In jewelry , those for hairdo and earrings are notable . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Manasollasa has been called an important source on socio @-@ cultural history of medieval India , particularly for the history of food , drinks and cuisines and of sports . <unk> Bose , a professor on South Asian studies , describes the text to be of great interest because it is the earliest known text with details on certain dance genre in India . A team consisting of Bruno <unk> , a professor of music and anthropology , has called Manasollasa an enormous treatise with large sections on music , dance and other performance arts . 
 = Operation Barbarossa = 
 Operation Barbarossa ( German : Unternehmen Barbarossa ) was the code name for Nazi Germany 's World War II invasion of the Soviet Union , which began on 22 June 1941 . The operation was driven by Adolf Hitler 's ideological desire to conquer Soviet territory as outlined in his 1925 manifesto Mein Kampf ( " My Struggle " ) . 
 In the two years leading up to the invasion , the two countries signed political and economic pacts for strategic purposes . Nevertheless , on 18 December 1940 , Hitler authorized an invasion of the Soviet Union , with a planned start date of 15 May 1941 . The actual invasion began on 22 June 1941 . Over the course of the operation , about four million soldiers of the Axis powers invaded the Soviet Union along a 2 @,@ 900 @-@ kilometer ( 1 @,@ 800 mi ) front , the largest invasion force in the history of warfare . In addition to troops , the Germans employed some 600 @,@ 000 motor vehicles and between 600 @,@ 000 and 700 @,@ 000 horses . It marked the beginning of the rapid escalation of the war , both geographically and in the formation of the Allied coalition . 
 Operationally , the Germans won resounding victories and occupied some of the most important economic areas of the Soviet Union , mainly in Ukraine , both inflicting and sustaining heavy casualties . Despite their successes , the German offensive stalled on the outskirts of Moscow and was subsequently pushed back by a Soviet counteroffensive . The Red Army repelled the Wehrmacht 's strongest blows and forced Germany into a war of attrition for which it was unprepared . The Germans would never again mount a simultaneous offensive along the entire strategic Soviet @-@ Axis front . The failure of the operation drove Hitler to demand further operations inside the USSR of increasingly limited scope , all of which eventually failed , such as Case Blue and Operation Citadel . 
 The failure of Operation Barbarossa was a turning point in the fortunes of the Third Reich . Most importantly , the operation opened up the Eastern Front , to which more forces were committed than in any other theater of war in world history . The Eastern Front became the site of some of the largest battles , most horrific atrocities , and highest casualties for Soviets and Germans alike , all of which influenced the course of both World War II and the subsequent history of the 20th century . The German forces captured millions of Soviet prisoners who were not granted protections stipulated in the Geneva Conventions . Most of them never returned alive ; Germany deliberately starved the prisoners to death as part of a " Hunger Plan " that aimed to reduce the population of Eastern Europe and then re @-@ populate it with ethnic Germans . Over a million Soviet Jews were murdered by Einsatzgruppen death squads and gassing as part of the Holocaust . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Racial policies of Nazi Germany = = = 
 As early as 1925 , Adolf Hitler vaguely declared in his political manifesto and autobiography Mein Kampf that he would invade the Soviet Union , asserting that the German people needed to secure Lebensraum ( " living space " ) to ensure the survival of Germany for generations to come . On 10 February 1939 , Hitler told his army commanders that the next war would be " purely a war of <unk> ... totally a people 's war , a racial war . " On 23 November , once World War II had already started , Hitler declared that " racial war has broken out and this war shall determine who shall govern Europe , and with it , the world . " Racial policy of Nazi Germany viewed the Soviet Union ( and all of Eastern Europe ) as populated by non @-@ Aryan Untermenschen ( " sub @-@ humans " ) , ruled by " Jewish Bolshevik conspirators " . Hitler claimed in Mein Kampf that Germany 's destiny was to " turn to the East " as it did " six hundred years ago " . Accordingly , it was stated Nazi policy to kill , deport , or enslave the majority of Russian and other Slavic populations and repopulate the land with Germanic peoples , under the Generalplan Ost . The Germans ' belief in their ethnic superiority is discernible in official German records and by pseudoscientific articles in German periodicals at the time , which covered topics such as " how to deal with alien populations " . 
 While older historiography tended to emphasize the notion of a " clean " Wehrmacht , the historian Jürgen Förster notes that " In fact , the military commanders were caught up in the ideological character of the conflict , and involved in its implementation as willing participants . " Before and during the invasion of the Soviet Union , German troops were heavily indoctrinated with anti @-@ Bolshevik , anti @-@ Semitic and anti @-@ Slavic ideology via movies , radio , lectures , books and leaflets . Likening the Soviets to the forces of Genghis Khan , Hitler told Croatian military leader Slavko Kvaternik that the " Mongolian race " threatened Europe . Following the invasion , Wehrmacht officers told their soldiers to target people who were described as " Jewish Bolshevik subhumans " , the " Mongol hordes " , the " Asiatic flood " and the " Red beast " . Nazi propaganda portrayed the war against the Soviet Union as both an ideological war between German National Socialism and Jewish Bolshevism and a racial war between the Germans and the Jewish , Gypsies and Slavic Untermenschen . German army commanders cast the Jews as the major cause behind the " partisan struggle " . The main guideline policy for German troops was " Where there 's a partisan , there 's a Jew , and where there 's a Jew , there 's a partisan , " or " The partisan is where the Jew is . " Many German troops viewed the war in Nazi terms and regarded their Soviet enemies as sub @-@ human . 
 After the war began , the Nazis issued a ban on sexual relations between Germans and foreign slave workers . There were regulations enacted against the Ost @-@ Arbeiter ( " Eastern Workers " ) that included the death penalty for sexual relations with a German person . Heinrich Himmler , in his secret memorandum , Reflections on the Treatment of Peoples of Alien Races in the East , ( dated 25 May 1940 ) outlined the future plans for the non @-@ German populations in the East . Himmler believed the Germanization process in Eastern Europe would be complete when " in the East dwell only men with truly German , Germanic blood " . 
 The Nazi secret plan Generalplan Ost ( " General Plan for the East " ) , which was prepared in 1941 and confirmed in 1942 , called for a " new order of ethnographical relations " in the territories occupied by Nazi Germany in Eastern Europe . The plan envisaged ethnic cleansing , executions and enslavement of the overwhelming majority of the populations of conquered counties with very small differing percentages of the various conquered nations undergoing Germanization , expulsion into the depths of Russia and other fates . The net effect of this plan would be to ensure that the conquered territories would be Germanized . It was divided into two parts : the Kleine <unk> ( " Small Plan " ) , which covered actions to be taken during the war , and the Große <unk> ( " Large Plan " ) , which covered actions to be undertaken after the war was won , and to be implemented gradually over a period of 25 to 30 years . 
 Evidence from a speech given by General Erich Hoepner indicates the disposition of Operation Barbarossa and the Nazi racial plan , as he informed the 4th Panzer Group that the war against the Soviet Union was " an essential part of the German people 's struggle for existence " ( <unk> ) , also referring to the imminent battle as the " old struggle of Germans against Slavs " and even stated , " the struggle must aim at the annihilation of today 's Russia and must therefore be waged with unparalleled harshness . " To Hoepner , the imminent conflict would be " the old battle of the Germanic against the Slav peoples ... the defense of European culture against Moscovite @-@ Asiatic inundation , and the repulse of Jewish Bolshevism ... No adherents of the present Russian @-@ Bolshevik system are to be spared . " Walther von Brauchitsch also told his subordinates that troops should view the war as a " struggle between two different races and [ should ] act with the necessary severity . " Racial motivations were central to Nazi ideology and played a key role in planning for Operation Barbarossa since both Jews and communists were considered equivalent enemies of the Nazi state . Nazi imperialist ambitions were exercised without moral consideration for either group in their ultimate struggle for Lebensraum . In the eyes of the Nazis , the war against the Soviet Union would be a <unk> , a war of annihilation . 
 = = = German @-@ Soviet relations of 1939 – 40 = = = 
 In August 1939 , Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non @-@ aggression pact in Moscow known as the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact shortly before the German invasion of Poland that triggered the outbreak of World War II in Europe . A secret protocol to the pact outlined an agreement between Germany and the Soviet Union on the division of the eastern European border states between their respective " spheres of influence " : the Soviet Union and Germany would partition Poland in the event of an invasion by Germany , and the Soviets would be allowed to overrun the Baltic states and Finland . On 23 August 1939 the rest of the world learned of the pact between the Nazis and the Soviets but were unaware of the provisions to partition Poland . The conclusion of this pact was indeed followed by a Soviet invasion of Poland that led to the annexation of the eastern part of the country . The pact stunned the world because of the parties ' earlier mutual hostility and their conflicting ideologies . As a result of the pact , Germany and the Soviet Union maintained reasonably strong diplomatic relations for two years and fostered an important economic relationship . The countries entered a trade pact in 1940 by which the Soviets received German military equipment and trade goods in exchange for raw materials , such as oil and wheat , to help the Nazis circumvent a British blockade of Germany . 
 Despite the parties ' ostensibly cordial relations , each side was highly suspicious of the other 's intentions . After Germany entered the Axis Pact with Japan and Italy , it began negotiations about a potential Soviet entry into the pact . After two days of negotiations in Berlin from 12 to 14 November 1940 , Germany presented a written proposal for a Soviet entry into the Axis . On 25 November 1940 , the Soviet Union offered a written counter @-@ proposal to join the Axis if Germany would agree to refrain from interference in the Soviet Union 's sphere of influence , but Germany did not respond . As both sides began colliding with each other in Eastern Europe , conflict appeared more likely , although they did sign a border and commercial agreement addressing several open issues in January 1941 . Historian Robert Service avows that Soviet leader Joseph Stalin was convinced that the overall military strength of the USSR was such that he had nothing to fear and anticipated an easy victory should Germany attack ; moreover , Stalin believed that since the Germans were still fighting the British in the west , Hitler would be unlikely to open up a two front war and subsequently delayed the reconstruction of defensive fortifications in the border regions . When German soldiers swam across the Bug River to warn the Red Army of an impending attack , they were treated like enemy agents and shot . Some historians believe that Stalin , despite providing an amicable front to Hitler , did not wish to remain allies with Germany . Rather , Stalin might have had intentions to break off from Germany and proceed with his own campaign against Germany to be followed by one against the rest of Europe . 
 = = = German invasion plans = = = 
 Stalin 's reputation as a brutal dictator contributed both to the Nazis ' justification of their assault and their faith in success ; many competent and experienced military officers were killed in the Great Purge of the 1930s , leaving the Red Army with a relatively inexperienced leadership compared to that of their German counterparts . The Nazis often emphasized the Soviet regime 's brutality when targeting the Slavs with propaganda . They also claimed that the Red Army was preparing to attack the Germans , and their own invasion was thus presented as a pre @-@ emptive strike . 
 In the middle of 1940 , following the rising tension between the Soviet Union and Germany over territories in the Balkans , an eventual invasion of the Soviet Union seemed to Hitler to be the only solution . While no concrete plans were made yet , Hitler told one of his generals in June that the victories in Western Europe finally freed his hands for his important real task : the showdown with Bolshevism . With the successful end to the campaign in France , General Erich Marcks was assigned to the working group drawing up the initial invasion plans of the Soviet Union . The first battle plans were entitled Operation Draft East ( but colloquially it was known as the Marcks Plan ) . His report advocated the A @-@ A line to be the operational objective of any invasion of the Soviet Union . This goal would extend from northern city of Arkhangelsk on the Arctic Sea through Gorky and Rostov to the port city of Astrakhan at the mouth of the Volga on the Caspian Sea . The report concluded that this military border would reduce the threat to Germany ( and the Third Reich ) from attacks by enemy bombers . 
 Although Hitler was warned by his general staff that occupying " Western Russia " would create " more of a drain than a relief for Germany 's economic situation " , he anticipated compensatory benefits , such as the demobilization of entire divisions to relieve the acute labor shortage in German industry ; the exploitation of Ukraine as a reliable and immense source of agricultural products ; the use of forced labor to stimulate Germany 's overall economy ; and the expansion of territory to improve Germany 's efforts to isolate Great Britain . Hitler was convinced that Britain would sue for peace once the Germans triumphed in the Soviet Union . 
 On 5 December 1940 , Hitler received the final military plans for the invasion on which the German High Command had been working since July 1940 under the codename " Operation Otto " . Hitler , however , was dissatisfied with these plans and on 18 December issued Führer Directive 21 , which called for a new battle plan , now codenamed " Operation Barbarossa " . The operation was named after medieval Emperor Frederick Barbarossa of the Holy Roman Empire , a leader of the Third Crusade in the 12th century . The invasion was set for 15 May 1941 , though it was delayed for about 7 weeks in favor of further time for preparation because of the war in the Balkans . 
 According to a 1978 essay by German historian Andreas Hillgruber , the invasion plans drawn up by the German military elite were coloured by hubris stemming from the rapid defeat of France at the hands of the " invincible " Wehrmacht and by ignorance tempered by traditional German stereotypes of Russia as a primitive , backward " Asiatic " country . Red Army soldiers were considered brave and tough , but the officer corps was held in contempt . The leadership of the Wehrmacht paid little attention to politics , culture and the considerable industrial capacity of the Soviet Union , in favour of a very narrow military view . Hillgruber argued that because these assumptions were shared by the entire military elite , Hitler was able to push through with a " war of annihilation " that would be waged in the most inhumane fashion possible with the complicity of " several military leaders " , even though it was quite clear that this would be in violation of all accepted norms of warfare . 
 In autumn 1940 , high @-@ ranking German officials drafted a memorandum on the dangers of an invasion of the Soviet Union . They said Ukraine , Belorussia and the Baltic States would end up as only a further economic burden for Germany . It was argued that the Soviets in their current bureaucratic form were harmless and that the occupation would not benefit Germany . Hitler disagreed with economists about the risks and told his right @-@ hand man Hermann Göring , the chief of the Luftwaffe , that he would no longer listen to misgivings about the economic dangers of a war with Russia . It is speculated that this was passed on to General Georg Thomas , who had produced reports that predicted a net economic drain for Germany in the event of an invasion of the Soviet Union unless its economy was captured intact and the Caucasus oilfields seized in the first blow , and he consequently revised his future report to fit Hitler 's wishes . The Red Army 's ineptitude in the Winter War against Finland in 1939 – 40 convinced Hitler of a quick victory within a few months . He did not anticipate a long campaign lasting into the winter , and therefore adequate preparations , such as the distribution of warm clothing and <unk> of vehicles and lubricants , were not made . 
 Beginning in March 1941 , Göring 's Green Folder laid out details for the disposal of the Soviet economy after conquest . The Hunger Plan outlined how the entire urban population of conquered territories was to be starved to death , thus creating an agricultural surplus to feed Germany and urban space for the German upper class . Nazi policy aimed to destroy the Soviet Union as a political entity in accordance with the geopolitical Lebensraum ideals for the benefit of future generations of the " Nordic master race " . In 1941 , Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg , later appointed Reich Minister of the Occupied Eastern Territories , suggested that conquered Soviet territory should be administered in the following <unk> ( " Reich <unk> " ) : 
 German military planners also researched Napoleon 's failed invasion of Russia . In their calculations , they concluded that there was little danger of a large @-@ scale retreat of the Red Army into the Russian interior , as it could not afford to give up the Baltic states , Ukraine , or the Moscow and Leningrad regions , all of which were vital to the Red Army for supply reasons and would thus have to be defended . Hitler and his generals disagreed on where Germany should focus its energy . Hitler , in many discussions with his generals , repeated his order of " Leningrad first , the Donbass second , Moscow third " ; but he consistently emphasized the destruction of the Red Army over the achievement of specific terrain objectives . Hitler believed Moscow to be of " no great importance " in the defeat of the Soviet Union and instead believed victory would come with the destruction of the Red Army west of the capital , especially west of the Western Dvina and Dnieper rivers , and this pervaded the plan for Barbarossa . This belief later led to disputes between Hitler and several German senior officers , including Heinz Guderian , Gerhard Engel , Fedor von Bock and Franz Halder , who believed the decisive victory could only be delivered at Moscow . Hitler had grown overconfident in his own military judgment as a result of the rapid successes in Western Europe . 
 = = German preparations = = 
 The Germans had begun massing troops near the Soviet border even before the campaign in the Balkans had finished . By the third week of February 1941 , 680 @,@ 000 German soldiers were gathered in assembly areas on the Romanian @-@ Soviet border . In preparation for the attack , Hitler moved more than 3 @.@ 2 million German and about 500 @,@ 000 Axis soldiers to the Soviet border , launched many aerial surveillance missions over Soviet territory , and stockpiled war materiel in the East . 
 Although the Soviet High Command was alarmed by this , Stalin 's belief that the Third Reich was unlikely to attack only two years after signing the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact resulted in a slow Soviet preparation . Since April 1941 , the Germans had begun setting up Operation <unk> to substantiate their claims that Britain was the real target . These simulated preparations in Norway and the English Channel coast included activities such as ship concentrations , reconnaissance flights and training exercises . 
 The postponement of Barbarossa from the initially planned date of 15 May to the actual invasion date of 22 June 1941 ( a 38 @-@ day delay ) occurred for a number of reasons . Most importantly , the Balkans Campaign required a diversion of troops and resources that hampered preparations , and an unusually wet winter kept rivers at full flood until late spring . The full floods could have discouraged an earlier attack , even if it was unlikely to have happened before the end of the Balkans Campaign . 
 The importance of the delay is still debated . William Shirer argued that Hitler 's Balkans Campaign had delayed the commencement of Barbarossa by several weeks and thereby jeopardized it . He cited the deputy chief of the German General Staff in 1941 Friedrich Paulus , who claimed the campaign resulted in a delay of " about five weeks . " This figure is corroborated by both the German Naval War Diary and Gerd von Rundstedt . Antony Beevor names a variety of factors that delayed Barbarossa , including the delay in distributing motor transport , problems with fuel distribution , and the difficulty in establishing forward airfields for the Luftwaffe . 
 The Germans deployed one independent regiment , one separate motorized training brigade and 153 divisions for Barbarossa , which included 104 infantry , 19 panzer and 15 motorized infantry divisions in three army groups , nine security divisions to operate in conquered territories , four divisions in Finland and two divisions as reserve under the direct control of OKH . These were equipped with about 3 @,@ 350 tanks , 7 @,@ 200 artillery pieces , 2 @,@ 770 aircraft ( that amounted to 65 percent of the Luftwaffe ) , about 600 @,@ 000 motor vehicles and 625 @,@ 000 – 700 @,@ 000 horses . Finland slated 14 divisions for the invasion , and Romania offered 13 divisions and eight brigades over the course of Barbarossa . The entire Axis forces , 3 @.@ 8 million personnel , deployed across a front extending from the Arctic Ocean southward to the Black Sea , were all controlled by the OKH and organized into Army Norway , Army Group North , Army Group Center and Army Group South , alongside three <unk> ( air fleets , the air force equivalent of army groups ) that supported the army groups : Luftflotte 1 for North , Luftflotte 2 for Center and Luftflotte 4 for South . 
 Army Norway was to operate in far northern Scandinavia and bordering Soviet territories . Army Group North was to march through the Baltic states into northern Russia , either take or destroy the city of Leningrad and link up with Finnish forces . Army Group Center , the army group equipped with the most armour and air power , was to strike from Poland into Belorussia and the west @-@ central regions of Russia proper , and advance to Smolensk and then Moscow . Army Group South was to strike the heavily populated and agricultural heartland of Ukraine , taking Kiev before continuing eastward over the steppes of southern USSR to the Volga with the aim of controlling the oil @-@ rich Caucasus . Army Group South was deployed in two sections separated by a 198 @-@ mile ( 319 km ) gap . The northern section , which contained the army group 's only panzer group , was in southern Poland right next to Army Group Center , and the southern section was in Romania . 
 The German forces in the rear ( mostly Waffen @-@ SS and Einsatzgruppen units ) were to operate in conquered territories to counter any partisan activity in areas they controlled , as well as to execute captured Soviet political commissars and Jews . On 17 June , Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) chief Reinhard Heydrich briefed around thirty to fifty Einsatzgruppen commanders on " the policy of eliminating Jews in Soviet territories , at least in general terms . " While the Einsatzgruppen were assigned to the Wehrmacht 's units , which provided them with supplies such as gasoline and food , they were controlled by the RSHA . The official plan for Barbarossa assumed that the army groups would be able to advance freely to their primary objectives simultaneously , without spreading thin , once they had won the border battles and destroyed the Red Army 's forces in the border area . 
 = = Soviet preparations = = 
 In 1930 , Mikhail Tukhachevsky , a prominent military theorist in tank warfare in the interwar period and later Marshal of the Soviet Union , forwarded a memo to the Kremlin that lobbied for colossal investment in the resources required for the mass production of weapons , pressing the case for " 40 @,@ 000 aircraft and 50 @,@ 000 tanks " . In the early 1930s , a very modern operational doctrine for the Red Army was developed and promulgated in the 1936 Field Regulations in the form of the Deep Battle Concept . Defense expenditure also grew rapidly from just 12 percent of the gross national product in 1933 to 18 percent by 1940 . 
 However , during Stalin 's Great Purge in the late 1930s , which was still partially ongoing at the start of the war in June 1941 , the officer corps of the Red Army was decimated and their replacements , appointed by Stalin for political reasons , often lacked military competence . Of the five Marshals of the Soviet Union appointed in 1935 , only two survived Stalin 's purge . 15 out of 16 army commanders , 50 out of the 57 corps commanders , 154 out of the 186 divisional commanders and 401 out of 456 colonels were killed , and many other officers were dismissed . In total , about 30 @,@ 000 Red Army personnel were executed . Stalin further underscored his control by reasserting the role of political commissars at the divisional level and below to oversee the political loyalty of the Army to the regime . The commissars held a position equal to that of the commander of the unit they were overseeing . But in spite of efforts to ensure the political subservience of the armed forces , in the wake of Red Army 's poor performance in Poland and in the Winter War , about 80 percent of the officers dismissed during the Great Purge were reinstated by 1941 . Also , between January 1939 and May 1941 , 161 new divisions were activated . Although about 75 percent of all the officers had been in their position for less than one year at the start of the German invasion of 1941 , many of the short tenures can be attributed not only to the purge , but also to the rapid increase in creation of military units . 
 In the Soviet Union , speaking to his generals in December 1940 , Stalin mentioned Hitler 's references to an attack on the Soviet Union in Mein Kampf and Hitler 's belief that the Red Army would need four years to ready itself . Stalin declared " we must be ready much earlier " and " we will try to delay the war for another two years " . As early as August 1940 , British intelligence had received hints of German plans to attack the Soviets only a week after Hitler informally approved the plans for Barbarossa and warned the Soviet Union accordingly . But Stalin 's distrust of the British led him to ignore their warnings in the belief that they were a trick designed to bring the Soviet Union into the war on their side . He had an ill @-@ founded confidence in the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact and suspected the British of trying to spread false rumours in order to trigger a war between Germany and the USSR . In early 1941 , Stalin 's own intelligence services and American intelligence gave regular and repeated warnings of an impending German attack . Soviet spy Richard Sorge also gave Stalin the exact German launch date , but Sorge and other informers had previously given different invasion dates that passed peacefully before the actual invasion . Stalin acknowledged the possibility of an attack in general and therefore made significant preparations , but decided not to run the risk of provoking Hitler . 
 Beginning in July 1940 , the Red Army General Staff developed war plans that identified the Wehrmacht as the most dangerous threat to the Soviet Union , and that in the case of a war with Germany , the Wehrmacht 's main attack would come through the region north of the Pripyat Marshes into Belorussia ; which later proved to be correct . But Stalin disagreed , and in October he authorized the development of new plans that assumed a German attack would focus on the region south of Pripyat Marshes towards the economically vital regions in Ukraine . This became the basis for all subsequent Soviet war plans and the deployment of their armed forces in preparation for the German invasion . 
 In early 1941 Stalin authorized the State Defense Plan 1941 ( DP @-@ 41 ) , which along with the Mobilization Plan 1941 ( MP @-@ 41 ) , called for the deployment of 186 divisions , as the first strategic echelon , in the four military districts of the western Soviet Union that faced the Axis territories ; and the deployment of another 51 divisions along the Dvina and Dnieper rivers as the second strategic echelon under Stavka control , which in the case of a German invasion was tasked to spearhead a Soviet counteroffensive along with the remaining forces of the first echelon . But on 22 June 1941 the first echelon only contained 171 divisions , numbering 2 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 9 million ; and the second strategic echelon contained 57 divisions that were still mobilizing , most of which were still seriously understrength . The second echelon was undetected by German intelligence until days after the invasion commenced , in most cases only when the German ground forces bumped into them . 
 At the start of the invasion , the manpower of the Soviet military force that had been mobilized was 5 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 5 million , and it was still increasing as the Soviet reserve force of 14 million , with at least basic military training , continued to mobilize . The Red Army was dispersed and still preparing when the invasion commenced . Their units were often separated and lacked adequate transportation . 
 The Soviet Union had some 23 @,@ 000 tanks in service , of which about 11 @,@ 000 were in the western military districts that faced the German invasion force . Hitler later declared to some of his generals , " If I had known about the Russian tank strength in 1941 I would not have attacked " . However , maintenance and readiness standards were very poor ; ammunition and radios were in short supply , and many armoured units lacked the trucks for supplies . The most advanced Soviet tank models – the KV @-@ 1 and T @-@ 34 – which were superior to all current German tanks , as well as all designs still in development as of the summer 1941 , were not available in large numbers at the time the invasion commenced . Furthermore , in the autumn of 1939 , the Soviets disbanded their mechanized corps and partly dispersed their tanks to infantry divisions ; but following their observation of the German campaign in France , in late 1940 they began to reorganize most of their armored assets back into mechanized corps with a target strength of 1 @,@ 031 tanks each . But these large armoured formations were unwieldy , and moreover they were spread out in scattered garrisons , with their subordinate divisions up to 100 kilometres apart . Furthermore , the reorganization was still in progress and incomplete when Barbarossa commenced . Soviet tank units were rarely well equipped , and they lacked training and logistical support . Units were sent into combat with no arrangements in place for refueling , ammunition resupply , or personnel replacement . Often , after a single engagement , units were destroyed or rendered ineffective . The Soviet numerical advantage in heavy equipment was thoroughly offset by the superior training and organization of the Wehrmacht . 
 The Soviet Air Force ( VVS ) held the numerical advantage with a total of approximately 19 @,@ 533 aircraft , which made it the largest air force in the world in the summer of 1941 . About 7 @,@ 133 – 9 @,@ 100 of these were deployed in the five western military districts , and an additional 1445 were under Naval control . 
 Historians have debated whether Stalin was planning an invasion of German territory in the summer of 1941 . The debate began in the late 1980s when Viktor Suvorov published a journal article and later the book Icebreaker in which he stated that Stalin had seen the outbreak of war in western Europe as an opportunity to spread communist revolutions throughout the continent , and that the Soviet military was being deployed for an imminent attack at the time of the German invasion . This view had also been advanced by former German generals following the war . Suvorov 's thesis was fully or partially accepted by some historians , including Valeri <unk> , Joachim Hoffmann , Mikhail <unk> and Vladimir <unk> , and attracted public attention in Germany , Israel and Russia . However , it has been strongly rejected by most historians of this period , and Icebreaker is generally considered to be an " anti @-@ Soviet tract " in western countries . David Glantz and Gabriel Gorodetsky wrote books to rebut Suvorov 's arguments , and most historians believe that Stalin was seeking to avoid war in 1941 as he believed that his military was not ready to fight the German forces . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = Invasion = = 
 At around 1 : 00 am on 22 June 1941 , the Soviet military districts in the border area were alerted by NKO Directive No. 1 , which was issued late on night of 21 June . It called on them to " bring all forces to combat readiness , " but to " avoid provocative actions of any kind . " It took up to 2 hours for several of the units subordinate to the Fronts to receive the order of the directive , and the majority did not receive it before the invasion commenced . 
 At around 3 : 15 am on 22 June 1941 , the Axis Powers commenced the invasion of the Soviet Union with the bombing of major cities in Soviet @-@ occupied Poland and an artillery barrage on Red Army defences on the entire front . The heavy air @-@ raids reached as far as Kronstadt near Leningrad , Ismail in Bessarabia , and Sevastopol in the Crimea . Meanwhile , ground troops crossed the border , accompanied in some locales by Lithuanian and Ukrainian fifth columnists . Roughly three million soldiers of the Wehrmacht went into action and faced slightly fewer Soviet troops at the border . 
 At around noon , the news of the invasion was broadcast to the population by Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov : " ... Without a declaration of war , German forces fell on our country , attacked our frontiers in many places ... The Red Army and the whole nation will wage a victorious Patriotic War for our beloved country , for honour , for liberty ... Our cause is just . The enemy will be beaten . Victory will be ours ! " By calling upon the population 's devotion to their nation rather than the Party , Molotov struck a patriotic chord that helped a stunned people absorb the shattering news . Within the first few days of the invasion , the Soviet High Command and Red Army were extensively reorganized so as to place them on the necessary war footing . Stalin did not address the nation about the German invasion until 3 July , when he also called for a " Patriotic War ... of the entire Soviet people " . 
 In Germany , on the morning of 22 June , Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels announced the invasion to the waking nation in a radio broadcast , " At this moment a march is taking place that , for its extent , compares with the greatest the world has ever seen . I have decided today to place the fate and future of the Reich and our people in the hands of our soldiers . May God aid us , especially in this fight ! " Later the same morning , Hitler proclaimed to his colleagues , " Before three months have passed , we shall witness a collapse of Russia , the like of which has never been seen in history . " 
 = = Phase one = = 
 The initial momentum of the German ground and air attack completely destroyed the Soviet organizational command and control within the first few hours , paralyzing every level of command from the infantry platoon to the Soviet High Command in Moscow . Therefore , Moscow failed to grasp the magnitude of the catastrophe that confronted the Soviet forces in the border area . At around 7 : 15 am , Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 2 , which announced the invasion to the Soviet Armed Forces , and called on them to attack Axis forces wherever they had violated the borders and launch air strikes into the border regions of German territory . At around 9 : 15 pm , Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 3 , signed by Marshal Semyon Timoshenko , which now called for a general counteroffensive on the entire front " without any regards for borders " that both men hoped would sweep the enemy from Soviet territory . Timoshenko 's order was not based on a realistic appraisal of the military situation at hand , and it resulted in devastating casualties . 
 = = = Air war = = = 
 Luftwaffe reconnaissance units worked frantically to plot Soviet troop concentration , supply dumps , and airfields , and mark them down for destruction . In contrast , Soviet artillery observers based at the border area had been under the strictest instructions not to open fire on German aircraft prior to the invasion . The Luftwaffe reported to have destroyed 1 @,@ 489 aircraft on the first day of the invasion and over 3 @,@ 100 over the first three days . Hermann Göring , Minister of Aviation and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Luftwaffe , distrusted the reports and ordered the figure checked . Luftwaffe staffs surveyed the wreckage on Soviet airfields , and their original figure proved conservative , as over 2 @,@ 000 Soviet aircraft were estimated to have been destroyed on the first day of the invasion . In reality , Soviet losses were likely higher ; a Soviet archival document recorded the loss of 3 @,@ 922 Soviet aircraft in the first three days against an estimated loss of 78 German aircraft . The Luftwaffe reported the loss of only 35 aircraft on the first day of combat . A document from the German Federal Archives puts the Luftwaffe 's loss at 63 aircraft for the first day . 
 By the end of the first week , the Luftwaffe had achieved air supremacy over the battlefields of all the army groups , but was unable to effect this air dominance over the vast expanse of the western Soviet Union . According to the war diaries of the German High Command , the Luftwaffe by 5 July had lost 491 aircraft with 316 more damaged , leaving it with only about 70 percent of the strength it had at the start of the invasion . 
 = = = Baltic states = = = 
 On 22 June , Army Group North attacked the Soviet Northwestern Front and broke through its 8th and 11th Armies . The Soviets immediately launched a powerful counterattack against the German 4th Panzer Group with the Soviet 3rd and 12th Mechanized Corps , but the Soviet attack was defeated . On 25 June , the 8th and 11th Armies were ordered to withdraw to the Western Dvina River , where it was planned to meetup with the 21st Mechanized Corps and the 22nd and 27th Armies . However , on 26 June , Erich von Manstein 's LVI Panzer Corps reached the river first and secured a bridgehead across it . The Northwestern Front was forced to abandon the river defenses , and on 29 June Stavka ordered the Front to withdraw to the Stalin Line on the approaches to Leningrad . On 2 July , Army Group North began its attack on the Stalin Line with its 4th Panzer Group , and on 8 July captured Pskov , devastating the defenses of the Stalin Line and reaching Leningrad oblast . The 4th Panzer Group had advanced about 450 kilometres ( 280 mi ) since the start of the invasion and was now only about 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) from its primary objective Leningrad . On 9 July it began its attack towards the Soviet defenses along the Luga River in Leningrad oblast . 
 = = = Ukraine and Moldavia = = = 
 The northern section of Army Group South faced the Southwestern Front , which had the largest concentration of Soviet forces , and the southern section faced the Southern Front . In addition , the Pripyat Marshes and the Carpathian Mountains posed a serious challenge to the army group 's northern and southern sections respectively . On 22 June , only the northern section of Army Group South attacked , but the terrain impeded their assault , giving the Soviet defenders ample time to react . The German 1st Panzer Group and 6th Army attacked and broke through the Soviet 5th Army . Starting on the night of 23 June , the Soviet 22nd and 15th Mechanized Corps attacked the flanks of the 1st Panzer Group from north and south respectively . Although intended to be concerted , Soviet tank units were sent in piecemeal due to poor coordination . The 22nd Mechanized Corp ran into the 1st Panzer Army 's III Motorized Corps and was decimated , and its commander killed . The 1st Panzer Group bypassed much of the 15th Mechanized Corps , which engaged the German 6th Army 's <unk> Infantry Division , where it was defeated by antitank fire and Luftwaffe attacks . On 26 June , the Soviets launched another counterattack on the 1st Panzer Group from north and south simultaneously with the 9th , 19th and 8th Mechanized Corps , which altogether fielded 1649 tanks , and supported by the remnants of the 15th Mechanized Corps . The battle lasted for four days , ending in the defeat of the Soviet tank units . On 30 June Stavka ordered the remaining forces of the Southwestern Front to withdraw to the Stalin Line , where it would defend the approaches to Kiev . 
 On 2 July , the southern section of Army Group South – the Romanian 3rd and 4th Armies , alongside the German 11th Army – invaded Soviet Moldavia , which was defended by the Southern Front . Counterattacks by the Front 's 2nd Mechanized Corps and 9th Army were defeated , but on 9 July the Axis advance stalled along the defenses of the Soviet 18th Army between the Prut and Dniester Rivers . 
 = = = Belorussia = = = 
 In the opening hours of the invasion , the Luftwaffe destroyed the Western Front 's air force on the ground , and with the aid of Abwehr and their supporting anti @-@ communist fifth columns operating in the Soviet rear paralyzed the Front 's communication lines , which particularly cut off the Soviet 4th Army headquarters from headquarters above and below it . On the same day , the 2nd Panzer Group crossed the Bug River , broke through the 4th Army , bypassed Brest Fortress , and pressed on towards Minsk , while the 3rd Panzer Group bypassed most of the 3rd Army and pressed on towards Vilnius . Simultaneously , the German 4th and 9th Armies engaged the Western Front forces in the environs of Białystok . On the order of Dmitry Pavlov , the commander of the Western Front , the 6th and 11th Mechanized Corps and the 6th Cavalry Corps launched a strong counterstrike towards Grodno on 24 – 25 June in hopes of destroying the 3rd Panzer Group . However , the 3rd Panzer Group had already moved on , with its forward units reaching Vilnius on the evening of 23 June , and the Western Front 's armoured counterattack instead ran into infantry and antitank fire from the V Army Corps of the German 9th Army , supported by Luftwaffe air attacks . By the night of 25 June , the Soviet counterattack was defeated , and the commander of the 6th Cavalry Corps was captured . The same night , Pavlov ordered all the remnants of the Western Front to withdraw to <unk> towards Minsk . Subsequent counterattacks to buy time for the withdrawal were launched against the German forces , but all of them failed . On 27 June , the 2nd and 3rd Panzer Groups met near Minsk and captured the city the next day , completing the encirclement of almost all of the Western Front in two pockets : one around Białystok and another west of Minsk . The Germans destroyed the Soviet 3rd and 10th Armies while inflicting serious losses on the 4th , 11th and 13th Armies , and reported to have captured 324 @,@ 000 Soviet troops , 3 @,@ 300 tanks , 1 @,@ 800 artillery pieces . On 30 June , Stalin relieved Pavlov of his command , and on 22 July tried and executed him along with many members of his staff on charges of " cowardice " and " criminal incompetence " . 
 A Soviet directive was issued on 29 June to combat the mass panic rampant among the civilians and the armed forces personnel . The order stipulated swift , severe measures against anyone inciting panic or displaying cowardice . The NKVD worked with commissars and military commanders to scour possible withdrawal routes of soldiers retreating without military authorization . Field expedient general courts were established to deal with civilians spreading rumours and military deserters . 
 On 29 June , Hitler , through the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the German Army Walther von Brauchitsch , instructed the commander of Army Group Center Fedor von Bock to halt the advance of his panzers until the infantry formations liquidating the pockets catch up . But the commander of the 2nd Panzer Group Heinz Guderian , with the tacit support of Fedor von Bock and the chief of OKH Franz Halder , ignored the instruction and attacked on eastward towards Bobruisk , albeit reporting the advance as a reconnaissance @-@ in @-@ force . He also personally conducted an aerial inspection of the Minsk @-@ Białystok pocket on 30 June and concluded that his panzer group was not needed to contain it , since Hermann Hoth 's 3rd Panzer Group was already involved in the Minsk pocket . On the same day , some of the infantry corps of the 9th and 4th Armies , having sufficiently liquidated the Białystok pocket , resumed their march eastward to catch up with the panzer groups . On 1 July , Fedor von Bock ordered the panzer groups to resume their full offensive eastward on the morning of 3 July . But Brauchitsch , upholding Hitler 's instruction , and Halder , unwillingly going along with it , opposed Bock 's order . However , Bock insisted on the order by stating that it would be flatly irresponsible to reverse orders already issued . The panzer groups , however , resumed their offensive on 2 July before the infantry formations had sufficiently caught up . 
 = = Phase two = = 
 On 2 July and through the next six days , a rainstorm typical of Belarusian summers slowed the progress of the panzers of Army Group Center , and Soviet defenses stiffened . The delays gave the Soviets time to organize a massive counterattack against Army Group Center . The army group 's ultimate objective was Smolensk , which commanded the road to Moscow . Facing the Germans was an old Soviet defensive line held by six armies . On 6 July , the Soviets attacked the 3rd Panzer Group with 1000 tanks . The Germans defeated this counterattack with overwhelming air superiority . The 2nd Panzer Group crossed the Dnieper River and closed in on Smolensk from the south while the 3rd Panzer Group , after defeating the Soviet counterattack , closed on Smolensk from the north . Trapped between their pincers were three Soviet armies . On 18 July , the Panzer Groups came to within sixteen kilometres of closing the gap , but the trap did not snap shut until 26 July . When the Panzer Groups finally closed the gap , 300 @,@ 000 Red Army soldiers were captured , but 200 @,@ 000 Red Army soldiers escaped to stand between the Germans and Moscow . 
 Four weeks into the campaign , the Germans realized they had grossly underestimated Soviet strength . The German troops had used their initial supplies without attaining the expected strategic freedom of movement . Operations were now slowed down to allow for resupply ; the delay was to be used to adapt strategy to the new situation . Hitler by now had lost faith in battles of encirclement as large numbers of Soviet soldiers had escaped the pincers . He now believed he could defeat the Soviets by economic damage , depriving them of the industrial capacity to continue the war . That meant seizing the industrial center of Kharkov , the Donbass and the oil fields of the Caucasus in the south and the speedy capture of Leningrad , a major center of military production , in the north . 
 Fedor von Bock , the commander of Army Group Center , and almost all the German generals involved in Operation Barbarossa argued vehemently in favor of continuing the all @-@ out drive toward Moscow . Besides the psychological importance of capturing the enemy 's capital , the generals pointed out that Moscow was a major center of arms production , the center of the Soviet communications system and an important transportation hub . More significantly , intelligence reports indicated that the bulk of the Red Army was deployed near Moscow under Semyon Timoshenko for an all @-@ out defense of the capital . But Hitler was adamant , and he issued a direct order to the panzer commander Heinz Guderian — bypassing Guderian 's commanding officer , von Bock — to send Army Group Center 's tanks to the north and south , temporarily halting the drive to Moscow . 
 = = Phase three = = 
 By mid @-@ July , the Germans had advanced within a few kilometers of Kiev below the Pripyat Marshes . The 1st Panzer Group then went south while the 17th Army struck east and trapped three Soviet armies near Uman . As the Germans eliminated the pocket , the tanks turned north and crossed the Dnieper . Meanwhile , the 2nd Panzer Group , diverted from Army Group Center , had crossed the Desna River with 2nd Army on its right flank . The two Panzer armies now trapped four Soviet armies and parts of two others . 
 By August , as the serviceability and the quantity of the Luftwaffe 's inventory steadily reduced due to combat , while demand for air support only increased as the VVS stubbornly resurged , the Luftwaffe found itself struggling to maintain local air superiority in the front lines . Also with the onset of bad weather in October , the Luftwaffe was on several occasions forced to halt nearly all aerial operations . The VVS , although faced with the same weather difficulties , had a clear advantage thanks to the prewar experience with cold @-@ weather flying techniques , and the fact that they were operating from intact airbases and airports . By December , the VVS had matched the Luftwaffe and was even pressing to achieve air supremacy over the battlefields . 
 For its final attack on Leningrad , the 4th Panzer Group was reinforced by tanks from Army Group Center . On 8 August , the Panzers broke through the Soviet defenses . By the end of August , 4th Panzer Group had penetrated to within 48 kilometers of Leningrad . The Finns had pushed southeast on both sides of Lake Ladoga to reach the old Finnish @-@ Soviet frontier . 
 The Germans attacked Leningrad in August 1941 ; in the following three " black months " of 1941 , 400 @,@ 000 residents of the city worked to build the city 's fortifications as fighting continued , while 160 @,@ 000 others joined the ranks of the Red Army . On 7 September , the German 20th Motorized Division seized Shlisselburg , cutting off all land routes to Leningrad . The Germans severed the railroads to Moscow and captured the railroad to Murmansk with Finnish assistance to inaugurate the start of a siege that would last for over two years . 
 At this stage , Hitler ordered the final destruction of Leningrad with no prisoners taken , and on 9 September , Army Group North began the final push . Within ten days it had advanced within 11 kilometers of the city . However , the push over the last 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) proved very slow and casualties mounted . Hitler , now out of patience , ordered that Leningrad should not be stormed , but rather starved into submission . Deprived of its Panzer forces , Army Group Center remained static and was subjected to numerous Soviet counterattacks , in particular the Yelnya Offensive , in which the Germans suffered their first major tactical defeat since their invasion began . These attacks prompted Hitler to concentrate his attention back to Army Group Center and its drive on Moscow . The Germans ordered the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies to break off their Siege of Leningrad and support Army Group Center in its attack on Moscow . 
 Before it could begin , operations in Kiev needed to be finished . Half of Army Group Center had swung to the south in the back of the Kiev position , while Army Group South moved to the north from its Dniepr bridgehead . The encirclement of Soviet forces in Kiev was achieved on 16 September . A savage battle ensued in which the Soviets were hammered with tanks , artillery , and aerial bombardment . After ten days of vicious fighting , the Germans claimed over 600 @,@ 000 Soviet soldiers captured . Actual losses were 452 @,@ 720 men , 3 @,@ 867 artillery pieces and mortars from 43 divisions of the 5th , 21st , 26th , and 37th Soviet Armies . 
 = = Phase four = = 
 After Kiev , the Red Army no longer outnumbered the Germans and there were no more trained reserves directly available . To defend Moscow , Stalin could field 800 @,@ 000 men in 83 divisions , but no more than 25 divisions were fully effective . Operation Typhoon , the drive to Moscow , began on 2 October . In front of Army Group Center was a series of elaborate defense lines , the first centered on Vyazma and the second on Mozhaysk . 
 The first blow took the Soviets completely by surprise when the 2nd Panzer Group , returning from the south , took Oryol , just 121 km ( 75 mi ) south of the Soviet first main defense line . Three days later , the Panzers pushed on to Bryansk , while the 2nd Army attacked from the west . The Soviet 3rd and 13th Armies were now encircled . To the north , the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies attacked Vyazma , trapping the 19th , 20th , 24th and 32nd Armies . Moscow 's first line of defense had been shattered . The pocket eventually yielded over 500 @,@ 000 Soviet prisoners , bringing the tally since the start of the invasion to three million . The Soviets had now only 90 @,@ 000 men and 150 tanks left for the defense of Moscow . 
 The German government now publicly predicted the imminent capture of Moscow and convinced foreign correspondents of a pending Soviet collapse . On 13 October , the 3rd Panzer Group penetrated to within 140 km ( 87 mi ) of the capital . Martial law was declared in Moscow . Almost from the beginning of Operation Typhoon , however , the weather worsened . Temperatures fell while there was a continued rainfall . This turned the unpaved road network into mud and steadily slowed the German advance on Moscow to as little as 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) a day . At the same time , the supply situation for the Germans rapidly deteriorated . On 31 October , the German Army High Command ordered a halt to Operation Typhoon while the armies were reorganized . The pause gave the Soviets , who were in a far better supply situation , time to consolidate their positions and organize formations of newly activated reservists . In little over a month , the Soviets organized eleven new armies that included 30 divisions of Siberian troops . These had been freed from the Soviet Far East after Soviet intelligence assured Stalin that there was no longer a threat from the Japanese . Over 1 @,@ 000 tanks and 1 @,@ 000 aircraft arrived along with the Siberian forces . 
 On 15 November , with the ground hardening due to the cold weather , the Germans once again began the attack on Moscow . Although the troops themselves were now able to advance again , there had been no delay allowed to improve the supply situation . Facing the Germans were the 5th , 16th , 30th , 43rd , 49th , and 50th Soviet armies . The Germans intended to let the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies cross the Moscow Canal and envelop Moscow from the northeast . The 2nd Panzer Group would attack Tula and then close in on Moscow from the south . As the Soviets reacted to the flanks , the 4th Army would attack the center . In two weeks of desperate fighting , lacking sufficient fuel and ammunition , the Germans slowly crept towards Moscow . However , in the south , the 2nd Panzer Group was being blocked . On 22 November , Soviet Siberian units , augmented with the 49th and 50th Soviet Armies , attacked the 2nd Panzer Group and inflicted a shocking defeat on the Germans . The 4th Panzer Group pushed the Soviet 16th Army back , however , and succeeded in crossing the Moscow canal to begin the attempted encirclement of Moscow . 
 On 2 December , part of the 258th Infantry Division advanced to within 24 km ( 15 mi ) of Moscow and could see the spires of the Kremlin , but by then the first blizzards had already begun . A reconnaissance battalion also managed to reach the town of Khimki , only about 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) away from the Soviet capital . It captured the bridge over the Moscow @-@ Volga Canal as well as the railway station , which marked the farthest eastern advance of German forces . But in spite of the progress made , the Wehrmacht was not equipped for winter warfare , and the bitter cold caused severe problems for their guns and equipment . Furthermore , weather conditions grounded the Luftwaffe from conducting any large @-@ scale operations . Newly created Soviet units near Moscow now numbered over 500 @,@ 000 men , and on 5 December , they launched a massive counterattack as part of the Battle of Moscow that pushed the Germans back over 320 km ( 200 mi ) . By late December 1941 , the Germans had lost the Battle for Moscow , and the invasion had cost the German army over 830 @,@ 000 casualties in killed , wounded , captured or missing in action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the failure of the Battle of Moscow , all German plans for a quick defeat of the Soviet Union had to be revised . The Soviet counteroffensives in December 1941 caused heavy casualties on both sides , but ultimately eliminated the German threat to Moscow . 
 In addition to this devastating setback for Germany , the Soviet Union also suffered heavily from the conflict , losing huge tracts of territory , and vast losses in men and material . Despite the rapid relocation of Red Army armaments installations east of the Urals and a dramatic increase of production in 1942 , especially of armour , new aircraft types and artillery , the Wehrmacht was able to mount another large @-@ scale offensive in July 1942 . Hitler , having realized that Germany 's oil supply was " severely depleted , " aimed to capture the oil fields of Baku in an offensive , codenamed Case Blue . Once again , the Germans quickly overran great expanses of Soviet territory , but they failed to achieve their ultimate goals in the wake of their decisive defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad . 
 By 1943 , Soviet armaments production was fully operational and increasingly outproducing the German war economy . The Red Army through steadily more ambitious and tactically sophisticated offensives was able to liberate the areas previously occupied by the German invasion by the summer of 1944 . The war ended with the total defeat and occupation of Nazi Germany in May 1945 . 
 = = = War crimes = = = 
 While the Soviet Union had not signed the Geneva convention , this did not mean their soldiers were entirely exempted from the protection it afforded ; Germany had signed the treaty and was thus obligated to offer Soviet POWs treatment according to its provisions ( as they generally did with other Allied POWs ) . Article 82 of the convention specified that " In case , in time of war , one of the belligerents is not a party to the Convention , its provisions shall nevertheless remain in force as between the belligerents who are parties thereto . " Despite this Hitler called for the battle against the Soviet Union to be a " struggle for existence " and accordingly authorized crimes against Soviet prisoners of war . A Nazi memorandum from 16 July 1941 , recorded by Martin Bormann , quotes Hitler saying , " The giant [ occupied ] area must naturally be pacified as quickly as possible ; this will happen at best if anyone who just looks funny should be shot " . 
 Before the war , Hitler issued the notorious Commissar Order , which called for all Soviet political commissars taken prisoner at the front to be shot immediately without trial . German soldiers both willingly and unwillingly participated in these mass killings . On the eve of the invasion , German soldiers were informed that their battle " demands ruthless and vigorous measures against Bolshevik <unk> , guerrillas , saboteurs , Jews and the complete elimination of all active and passive resistance . " Collective punishment was authorized against partisan attacks ; if a perpetrator could not be quickly identified , then burning villages and mass executions were considered acceptable reprisals . An estimated two million Soviet prisoners of war died of starvation during Barbarossa alone ; nothing was done for their survival . The famished prisoners of war were hardly able to walk by themselves . By the end of the war , 58 percent of all Soviet prisoners of war died in German captivity . 
 Organized crimes against civilians , including women and children , were also carried out on a huge scale by the German police and military forces , as well as the local collaborators . Under the command of the Reich Main Security Office , the Einsatzgruppen killing squads conducted large @-@ scale massacres of Jews and communists in conquered Soviet territories . Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg puts the number of Jews murdered by " mobile killing operations " at 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . The original instructions to kill " Jews in party and state positions " was broadened to include " all male Jews of military age " and was expanded once more to " all male Jews regardless of age . " By the end of July , the Germans were regularly killing women and children . On 18 December 1941 , Himmler and Hitler discussed the " Jewish question " , and Himmler noted the meeting 's result in his appointment book : " To be annihilated as partisans . " According to Christopher Browning , this represented the Nazi decision of " annihilating Jews and solving the so @-@ called ' Jewish question ' under the cover of killing partisans . " In accordance with Nazi policies against " inferior " Asian peoples , Turkmens were also persecuted ; according to a post @-@ war report by Prince Veli <unk> Khan , they were imprisoned in concentration camps in terrible conditions , where those deemed to have " Mongolian " features were murdered daily . Asians were also targeted by the Einsatzgruppen and were the subjects of lethal medical experiments and murder at a " pathological institute " in Kiev . 
 Burning houses suspected of being partisan meeting places and poisoning water wells became common practice for soldiers of the German 9th Army . At Kharkov , the fourth largest city in the Soviet Union , food was provided only to the small number of civilians who worked for the Germans , with the rest designated to slowly starve . Thousands of Soviets were deported to Germany to be used as slave labor . 
 The citizens of Leningrad were subjected to heavy bombardment and a siege that would last 872 days and starve more than a million people to death , of whom approximately 400 @,@ 000 were children below the age of 14 . The German @-@ Finnish blockade cut off access to food , fuel and raw materials , and rations reached a low , for the non @-@ working population , of four ounces ( five thin slices ) of bread and a little watery soup per day . Starving Soviet civilians began to eat their domestic animals , along with hair tonic and Vaseline . Some desperate citizens resorted to cannibalism ; Soviet records list 2 @,@ 000 people arrested for " the use of human meat as food " during the siege , 886 of them during the first winter of 1941 – 42 . The Wehrmacht planned to seal off Leningrad , starve out the population , and then demolish the city entirely . 
 = = = Historical significance = = = 
 Operation Barbarossa was the largest military operation in human history — more men , tanks , guns and aircraft were committed than had ever been deployed before in a single offensive . A total of 75 percent of the entire German military participated . The invasion opened up the Eastern Front of World War II , the largest theater of war during that conflict , and it witnessed titanic clashes of unprecedented violence and destruction for four years that resulted in the deaths of more than 26 million people . More people died fighting on the Eastern Front than in all other fighting across the globe during World War II . 
 = = = Informational notes = = = 
 = = = = Printed = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 Graham <unk> @-@ Smith , John . " European History : Operation Barbarossa " . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 16 May 2015 . ( subscription required ) 
 " <unk> 10 @-@ Day Casualty Reports per Theater of War , 1941 " . World War II Stats . Retrieved 10 May 2013 . 
 " AOK / Ic POW Summary Reports " . World War II Stats . Retrieved 3 April 2015 . 
 " Army vs. NKVD figures " . World War II Stats . Retrieved 3 April 2015 . 
 Davidson , Nick ( producer ) ( 2009 ) . Hitler Strikes East ( television documentary ) . World War II in HD Colour . NM Productions ( for IMG Media ) . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 Knopp , Guido ; <unk> , Jörg ( directors ) ; Renate <unk> ( producer ) ( 1998 ) . General Wilhelm Keitel : The Lackey ( television documentary ) . Hitler 's Warriors . ZDF . Retrieved 24 March 2015 . 
 " Modern History Sourcebook : The Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact , 1939 " . University of Fordham . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 Browning , Christopher . " Evidence for the Implementation of the Final Solution : Electronic Edition " . Holocaust Denial on Trial . Emory University . 
 " Nazi Persecution of Soviet Prisoners of War " . The Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Museum . 20 June 2014 . Retrieved 24 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Anna ( director ) ; Artem <unk> & Aleksey <unk> ( writers ) ; Valeriy Babich , Vlad <unk> , et. al ( producers ) ( 2011 ) . Operation Barbarossa ( television documentary ) . Soviet Storm : World War II in the East . Star Media . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Mikhail Ivanovich . " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> в 1939 – 1941 " ( in Russian ) . Russian Military Library Moscow . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Anna ( director ) ; Artem <unk> & Aleksey <unk> ( writers ) ; Valeriy Babich , Vlad <unk> , et. al ( producers ) ( 2011 ) . Siege of Leningrad ( television documentary ) . Soviet Storm : World War II in the East . Star Media . Retrieved 15 May 2015 . 
 Aitken , Andy , Dave Flitton & James Wignall ( directors ) , Dave Flitton ( series producer ) ; Dave Flitton , Andy Aitken & James Wignall ( writers ) ( 1996 ) . The Battle for Russia ( television documentary ) . Battlefield . PBS . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 Jones , Bill Treharne ( producer ) ; Christopher Andrew ( presenter and co @-@ producer ) ( 1989 ) . The Fatal Attraction of Adolf Hitler ( television documentary ) . BBC . Retrieved 19 March 2015 . 
 = Capture of Le Quesnoy ( 1918 ) = 
 The Capture of Le Quesnoy was an engagement of the First World War that took place on 4 November 1918 as part of the Battle of the Sambre . Elements of the New Zealand Division scaled the fortified walls of the French town of Le Quesnoy and captured it from the defending German garrison 
 Beginning at 5 : 30 am , the New Zealand Rifle Brigade advanced from its starting positions east of the town , aiming to surround it and link up on the far side . By late morning , the linkup had been achieved and other elements of the New Zealand Division moved further west into the Mormal Forest , leaving the Rifle Brigade to capture the town itself . After mopping up outlying outposts , the New Zealanders moved up to the ramparts of the town , but were held back by machine @-@ gun fire . Late in the afternoon , a scouting party located an unguarded section of the walls and the brigade 's 4th Battalion managed to climb the ramparts and move into the town , quickly seizing it . The capture of Le Quesnoy was the last major engagement of the war for the New Zealanders . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By mid @-@ 1918 , the German Army had been fought to a standstill after its Spring Offensive and the Allies had sought to take the initiative . Accordingly , the Hundred Days Offensive began on 8 August , with an attack on Amiens which marked the beginning of a series of advances by the Allies that ultimately ended the war . By late October , the New Zealand Division , commanded by Major General Andrew Russell , along with part of the British Third Army , had advanced to the west of the town of Le Quesnoy . 
 The Battle of the Sambre , which was planned to begin on 4 November , was the next phase of the Allied advance . The battle was to consist of a series of engagements mounted by the British First , Third and Fourth Armies across a 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) front , extending from <unk> to Valenciennes , that were conceptualised to cut off the German line of retreat from the French Army front . IV Corps , with the New Zealand Division and the 37th Division , was to surround Le Quesnoy and its garrison of over 1 @,@ 500 soldiers . The 37th Division was on the southern flank of the New Zealand Division while to its north , 62nd Division , of VI Corps , moved south to shorten the New Zealand front . The New Zealand Division was to extend the front line to and around Le Quesnoy and into the Mormal Forest . 
 = = = Le Quesnoy = = = 
 Positioned on high ground between the <unk> and <unk> Rivers , Le Quesnoy was a medieval town that had been fought over several times in previous centuries . It guarded a natural approach across plains to the north @-@ east and had fortress walls with ramparts designed by Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban , a 17th @-@ century military engineer . A moat surrounded the town and was in fact two distinct ditches , with 20 – 30 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 1 m ) high fortifications , effectively an outer rampart , separating them . The town could be entered by three roads , guarded by gates . Le Quesnoy had a population of 5 @,@ 000 and had been in German hands since August 1914 . The Germans also held the Cambrai railway line to the west of Le Quesnoy , and had a strong presence in the area around the intersection of the Valenciennes – Cambrai railway lines , immediately to the north @-@ west of the town . 
 = = = Plan of attack = = = 
 On 3 November , the New Zealand Division section of the front line was around 2 @,@ 500 yards ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) in length , running southwards from a level crossing on the Valenciennes railway line . It was 400 yards ( 370 m ) from the Cambrai railway , with the ramparts of Le Quesnoy a further 400 yards ( 370 m ) to the east . The front line was manned by the four battalions of the New Zealand Rifle Brigade , commanded by Brigadier General Herbert Hart . 
 The ramparts of Le Quesnoy clearly made a frontal attack undesirable and artillery could not be used on the town , due to the presence of the civilian population . Instead , it was intended that under the cover of a smokescreen , the town be enveloped from the north and south , thereby encircling it . Two New Zealand brigades were to be involved ; Hart 's Rifle Brigade was tasked with the capture of the town , while the 1st Infantry Brigade , under the command of Brigadier General Charles Melvill , was to push into the Mormal Forest . The division 's flanks were held by the 62nd Division and the 37th Division , on the left and right respectively and these formations were to make corresponding movements forward . 
 The capture of Le Quesnoy was to be achieved through a series of advances , covered by artillery , by the battalions of the Rifle Brigade with some of the battalions of 1st Infantry Brigade in support . Beginning from the brigade 's existing positions , the first advance was to involve the 1st , 2nd and 4th Rifle Battalions moving forward to a line defining an arc to the west of Le Quesnoy , including the railway line , which was designated the " Blue Line " . Then the 1st Battalion of the 1st Infantry Brigade would push north @-@ east around the town , while the 3rd Rifle Battalion went to the south @-@ east . The advance westwards would culminate in the establishment of a new front line , designated the " Green Line " to the east of Le Quesnoy , which would be manned by the battalions of 1st Brigade . Once the " Green Line " had been formed , the Rifle Brigade was to move into the town , while the battalions of 1st Brigade were to advance further to the west up to the Mormal Forest . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The covering artillery barrage commenced at 5 : 30 am and three battalions of the Rifle Brigade moved off towards its first objective , the railway line , which established a continuous front west of Le Quesnoy . This was captured by 7 : 29 am . A reserve company moved to the railway line to hold it , while the attacking battalions moved forward . A platoon of the reserve company had to deal with 150 Germans , who were retreating from the advance of the flanking 37th Division and quickly secured their surrender . By 10 : 00 am , the battalions of the Rifle Brigade had surrounded Le Quesnoy and established a new front line 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east of the town . The 1st Infantry Brigade moved off to the Mormal Forest , leaving the Rifle Brigade to complete its planned move into the town . The German garrison , despite being surrounded , did not make any indications of surrender . 
 The 2nd Rifle Battalion probed from the north , while the 3rd Rifle Battalion did the same from the south @-@ east , driving for the Landrecies road which led to one of the entry points into Le Quesnoy . German troops held a bridge on the road in force and were able to keep the New Zealanders at bay in this area . In the north , a small party reached the outer rampart dividing the moat along their stretch of the front . Gunfire from the main ramparts soon drove them off but Lieutenant Colonel Leonard Jardine , commanding the 2nd Rifle Battalion , co @-@ ordinated the movements of his companies , which gradually moved forward . By 4 : 00 pm mortar fire was able to be brought to bear on the main ramparts and this silenced the German machine @-@ guns . 
 In the meantime , the 4th Rifle Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Harold Barrowclough and positioned a distance from the west wall of the ramparts , had carried out scouting expeditions to explore the defences . Gradually , the German posts around the fortifications fell to the attacking platoons of the battalion . As on the northern side of the town , machine @-@ gun fire from the ramparts prevented any further advance . One party reached the outer rampart but became pinned down by gunfire for several hours . By midday , the situation had settled into a temporary stalemate . In the afternoon , some German prisoners of war were sent into the town with an invitation to surrender but this approach was rebuffed , as had been a similar attempt earlier that morning . 
 Second Lieutenant Leslie Averill , the intelligence officer for 4th Rifle Battalion , continued to investigate the defences . He was able to locate a route to a section of the ramparts that appeared unmanned and was not under fire from the defenders . He was ordered by Barrowclough to force an approach . With the benefit of covering mortar fire , Averill and a platoon of the battalion reserve company , managed to cross the moat and found themselves at the inner ramparts . With the aid of a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) ladder supplied by the Divisional Engineers , Averill was able to ascend to the top of the ramparts , closely followed by the platoon commander . With his revolver , Averill fired at two Germans manning a guard post , forcing them to cover , fire and the rest of the platoon joined him . Shortly afterwards , Barrowclough and the rest of the battalion used the ladder and entered the town . At the same time , a party from 2nd Rifle Battalion , seized the gate guarding the road into Le Quesnoy from Valenciennes and began entering the town from the north and the Germans quickly surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Over 2 @,@ 000 Germans were taken prisoner by the division , of whom 711 surrendered in Le Quesnoy . German casualties in the town were 43 killed and 251 men wounded and many more German troops were killed during the advance of the brigade to the ramparts . Four 8 @-@ inch howitzers , forty @-@ two 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns and 26 field guns were captured by the 1st New Zealand Brigade . The New Zealand Division operation on 4 November was its most successful day on the Western Front . Of the 122 New Zealanders who died during the capture of Le Quesnoy , the Rifle Brigade suffered 43 killed and 250 men wounded . Other units of the New Zealand Division involved in the battle lost 79 men killed and about 125 wounded . 
 An advance into the Mormal Forest was continued the next day by the 2nd Infantry Brigade but the capture of Le Quesnoy was the last major engagement of the war for the New Zealand Division . The New Zealanders began withdrawing to the rear area at midnight on 5 November . A few days after the capture of the town , the mayor of Le Quesnoy presented the Rifle Brigade commander , Herbert Hart , with the French flag that was raised over the town on the day it was captured from the Germans . 
 The town retains links to New Zealand , with some streets named for prominent New Zealanders , including Averill . Since 1999 , it has been twinned with Cambridge . A monument commemorating the liberation of Le Quesnoy by the New Zealand Division is set into the rampart wall , near where Averill scaled them . 
 = 2015 Paris – Nice = 
 The 2015 Paris – Nice was the 73rd edition of the Paris – Nice stage race . It took place from 8 to 15 March and was the second race of the 2015 UCI World Tour following the Tour Down Under . The race was a return to the traditional format of Paris − Nice after an unorthodox course in 2014 . It started in Yvelines , west of Paris , with a prologue time trial ; the course then moved south through France with several stages suitable for sprinters . The decisive part of the race began on stage four with a summit finish at the Col de la Croix de Chaubouret ; stage six also had a mountainous route . The race ended after seven days with the climb of Col d 'Eze outside Nice . 
 The 2014 champion , Carlos Betancur ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , chose not to defend his title . The early lead in the race was taken by Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) in the prologue ; he kept the lead until stage three , when Michael Matthews took over the race lead through time bonuses . Stage four was won by Richie Porte ( Team Sky ) , while Kwiatkowski took back the race lead . On stage six , a chaotic stage in rainy conditions , Tony Gallopin ( Lotto – Soudal ) won and took over the race lead , but he was unable to defend his lead on the final @-@ day time trial . Porte , the 2013 champion , won the general classification as well as two stages . Kwiatkowski finished second overall , with Simon Špilak ( Team Katusha ) on the same time in third place . 
 The points classification was won by Matthews , who had four top @-@ ten finishes as well as his stage win . The mountains classification was won by Thomas De Gendt ( Lotto – Soudal ) . Kwiatkowski won the young riders classification as the best rider born after 1 January 1990 . The teams classification was won by Team Sky . 
 = = Teams = = 
 As Paris – Nice is a UCI World Tour event , all 17 UCI WorldTeams were invited automatically and were obliged to send a squad . Three Professional Continental teams received wildcard invitations . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 Paris – Nice overlaps with another UCI WorldTour race , the 2015 Tirreno – Adriatico . In 2015 , the Italian race attracted the main Grand Tour riders , such as Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) and Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) . Only one former Grand Tour champion chose to compete Paris – Nice : Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) . 
 The favourites for the race included the 2013 champion , Richie Porte ( Team Sky ) , the 2011 champion , Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and the 2014 world champion , Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) . Other riders considered to have a chance of victory included Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) , who had just won the Volta ao Algarve , Romain Bardet and Jean @-@ Christophe Péraud ( both AG2R La Mondiale ) , Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Andrew Talansky ( Cannondale – Garmin ) and Rui Costa ( Lampre – Merida ) . 
 Paris – Nice is also raced by many classics riders preparing for the Spring Classics and especially Milan – San Remo , which comes just a few days later . Riders expected to feature on the flatter days included classics specialists such as Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) , John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) , Arnaud Démare ( FDJ ) and Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) and sprinters like Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) and André Greipel ( Lotto – Soudal ) . 
 = = Route = = 
 The previous edition had been an unusual race with no time trials or summit finishes , but the 2015 edition of the race was a return to the traditional form : the race began with a prologue individual time trial near Paris ; this was followed by a series of road stages south through France , including one summit finish ; the race ended with a mountain time trial on Col d 'Eze . The race is known as the " race to the Sun " and is seen as a mini Tour de France , where riders need to be both competent time @-@ trialists and capable of climbing mountains . The key stages were expected to be the summit finish to Col de la Croix de Chaubouret on stage 4 and the concluding time trial on Col d 'Eze . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 8 March 2015 — Maurepas to Maurepas , 6 @.@ 7 km ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) 
 The race began with a prologue individual time trial in the Yvelines department . The 6 @.@ 7 km ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) prologue was flat , with three major turns . The riders included four of the top five of previous year 's world time trial championships in Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) , Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Tom Dumoulin ( Giant – Alpecin ) and Rohan Dennis ( BMC Racing Team ) . 
 The first rider to set off in the race was Daniel <unk> ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) . Dylan van Baarle ( Cannondale – Garmin ) was the leader for a significant period , with a time of 8 ' 04 " . The lead was briefly held by Giacomo Nizzolo ( Trek Factory Racing ) and Tiago Machado ( Team Katusha ) . Their times were beaten by Dennis , who recorded a time of 7 ' 40 " . Dennis held the lead for an hour and a half , until he was beaten by Michał Kwiatkowski by less than a second . Kwiatkowski 's time was enough to beat all the other riders . He therefore took the yellow jersey of the overall leader , as well as the green jersey of the points leader and the white jersey of the best young rider . The absence of categorised climbs meant that no polka @-@ dot jersey was awarded . 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 9 March 2015 — Saint @-@ Rémy @-@ lès @-@ Chevreuse to Contres , 192 km ( 119 @.@ 3 mi ) 
 The first road stage of the race took the riders over an almost entirely flat course 192 km ( 119 @.@ 3 mi ) course south from Saint @-@ Rémy @-@ lès @-@ Chevreuse to Contres . There was one climb in the day 's racing – the Côte de Bel Air – after 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . 
 The first breakaway of the day came from Jonathan Hivert ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) . He attacked alone and took both the mountains points and the victory at the first intermediate sprint . Despite at one point having a lead of nearly four minutes , he sat up and was caught by the peloton . Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) , in eighth place after the prologue , took second place in the intermediate sprint to win two bonus seconds , moving him to ten seconds behind Kwiatkowski , while John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) took a second for finishing third . 
 The next significant move was made by Hivert 's teammate , Anthony Delaplace , who broke away with Thomas Voeckler ( Team Europcar ) . The two remained in the breakaway for most of the rest of the stage , which was raced at a very slow pace . Delaplace and Voeckler had a lead of over six minutes , but the peloton gradually chased them down . With 25 km ( 16 mi ) remaining , they had about a minute 's lead and Voeckler forced an acceleration . Their lead extended to over 1 ' 40 " with 15 km ( 9 mi ) remaining , and they won the final intermediate sprint . Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) took the bonus second for third place . The breakaway still had over 40 seconds ' lead with 5 km ( 3 mi ) remaining , but were caught by the sprinters ' teams 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) from the finish line . 
 Degenkolb was the first rider to start the sprint in a disorganised finale to the stage , but he was not able to maintain his speed and finished outside the top ten . The stage was won by Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) ahead of Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) and Bryan Coquard ( Team Europcar ) . Kwiatkowski therefore maintained his lead in the general , points and youth classifications , while Hivert took the polka dot jersey of the mountains classification . 
 18 km ( 11 mi ) from the end of the stage , Tom Boonen clashed wheels while riding at the back of the peloton . He fell on his shoulder and , after receiving medical attention , abandoned the race with a suspected broken collarbone . That evening , it was announced that , though his collarbone was not broken , he had suffered a dislocation in his shoulder and would miss the Spring Classics season , including his principal targets at Paris – Roubaix and the Tour of Flanders . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 10 March 2015 — <unk> de Beauval – Saint @-@ Aignan to Saint @-@ Amand @-@ Montrond , 172 km ( 106 @.@ 9 mi ) 
 The second road stage was a 172 km ( 106 @.@ 9 mi ) route from the <unk> de Beauval to the town of Saint @-@ Amand @-@ Montrond . The first part of the route was a 127 km ( 79 mi ) route southeast . The riders then entered a finishing circuit ; they first rode the final 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) of the circuit , before doing a complete 45 km ( 28 mi ) lap . The route was again mostly flat , with just one categorised climb . This was the Côte de la Tour and came as part of the finishing circuit . 
 The first breakaway of the day was formed by Arnaud Gerard ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) , who escaped alone and earned a lead of over eight minutes , with the peloton riding slowly behind . Gerard won both intermediate sprints . On the first , Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) took second place to win two bonus seconds . John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) , who had come third and won a one @-@ second bonus in the first sprint , took second place in the second sprint ahead of Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) . 
 The chase was led by Cofidis and Team Europcar and Gerard had less than a minute 's lead at the Côte de la Tour . Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) , Jonathan Hivert ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) and Laurens De Vreese ( Astana ) attacked over the climb , with Hivert winning a point for the mountains classification and maintaining his lead in the competition . The race came back together with approximately 38 km ( 24 mi ) left to race . 
 The following period of racing was relatively calm , without attacks and with Cannondale – Garmin controlling the pace . With 9 @.@ 2 km ( 5 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining , however , Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) attacked and was joined by Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) , Lars Boom ( Astana ) and Matti Breschel ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) . Breschel suffered a puncture and dropped out of the move , but Martin , Thomas and Boom continued their breakaway attempt . Several riders , including Rui Costa ( Lampre – Merida ) , made unsuccessful attempts to bridge across to the leading group . The chase in the main peloton was led by Lotto – Soudal and the leading group was caught with 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining . 
 The first team to move forward in the sprint was Orica – GreenEDGE , with IAM Cycling following soon afterwards . Greg Henderson , however , was the penultimate man in the Lotto – Soudal train ; his lead @-@ out brought André Greipel to a perfect position to open his sprint . Arnaud Démare ( FDJ ) came close , but Greipel was able to win the stage . Degenkolb took third place and , with bonus seconds taken into account , was just two seconds behind Kwiatkowski . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 11 March 2015 — Saint @-@ Amand @-@ Montrond to Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> , 179 km ( 111 mi ) 
 The third stage started where stage two had ended , Saint @-@ Amand @-@ Montrond , and took the riders over a 179 km ( 111 mi ) route to the finish line in Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> . The route started with a 146 @.@ 5 km ( 91 @.@ 0 mi ) route , initially heading south @-@ east before turning north in the final part of the stage . The riders then entered another finishing circuit . They first rode the final 13 km ( 8 mi ) of the circuit , then did an entire 19 @.@ 5 km ( 12 @.@ 1 mi ) lap . There was a short climb and two corners in the final kilometre of the stage . 
 The first break of the day was formed by Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) and Florian Vachon ( Bretagne – Séché Environnement ) after 9 km ( 6 mi ) . Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) and Antoine Duchesne ( Team Europcar ) attempted to bridge across to the leading pair ; Wiggins was first to drop back , while Duchesne was never able to get closer than two minutes to the pair ahead . Bob <unk> ( Trek Factory Racing ) took third place in the first intermediate sprint . At the first mountains sprint , Gilbert crossed the line first to win four points and take the lead of the mountains classification . Following repeated attacks from the peloton behind , Gilbert and Vachon were joined after 74 km ( 46 mi ) by Thomas Voeckler ( Team Europcar ) . Gilbert then won the two other third @-@ category climbs , earning a nine @-@ point lead in the classification . 
 With 50 km ( 31 mi ) remaining , Gilbert , Vachon and Voeckler still had a five @-@ minute lead , with the sprinters ' teams joining Kwiatkowski 's Etixx – Quick @-@ Step team in chasing the breakaway down . With 20 km ( 12 mi ) to race , the lead was cut to 43 seconds , and Gilbert dropped out of the break with 17 km ( 11 mi ) remaining . Vachon was next to drop out of the leading group ; Voeckler was then joined by Paolo Tiralongo ( Astana ) . Voeckler himself then fell back , while Tiralongo was joined by two AG2R La Mondiale riders : Jan Bakelants and Romain Bardet . This group of three riders held a gap of approximately 16 seconds , but were chased down by the peloton . 
 The sprint was led by Orica – GreenEDGE in support of Michael Matthews , for whom the short hill before the finish line was ideal . Lampre – Merida tried and failed to come past them in the final kilometre . With 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) to go , Orica – GreenEDGE still had four riders at the head of the peloton . Matthews was able to hold on for the win , despite a late challenge from Davide Cimolai ( Lampre – Merida ) and Giacomo Nizzolo ( Trek Factory Racing ) . 
 Thanks to the bonus seconds he won on the line , Matthews took over the overall lead in the race , as well as the leadership of the points and young rider classifications . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 12 March 2015 — Varennes @-@ sur @-@ Allier to Col de la Croix de Chaubouret , 204 km ( 126 @.@ 8 mi ) 
 The fourth stage of the race was the longest of the race : a 204 km ( 126 @.@ 8 mi ) route from Varennes @-@ sur @-@ Allier to the Col de la Croix de Chaubouret , the only summit finish in the race . The route was hilly throughout , with two second @-@ category and five third @-@ category climbs before the final ascent . The Col de la Croix de Chaubouret was the highest point in the race at 1 @,@ 201 m ( 3 @,@ 940 ft ) , making this the queen stage of the 2015 Paris – Nice . It was a 10 km ( 6 mi ) climb averaging 6 @.@ 7 % , with some sections at 9 % . 
 The early break was formed by Antoine Duchesne ( Team Europcar ) , Thomas De Gendt ( Lotto – Soudal ) and Chris Anker Sørensen ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) . They earned a lead of more than eight minutes , with De Gendt winning the first seven mountain sprints of the day . This won him enough points to put him in the lead of the mountains classification . Duchesne was dropped on the first second @-@ category climb of the day , the Côte de La <unk> , which came after 152 km ( 94 mi ) . Work in the main peloton from Orica – GreenEDGE had reduced the deficit significantly and , on the <unk> , AG2R La Mondiale drove hard to split the peloton in two . Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) was among the riders temporarily distanced , though his teammates were able to bring him back into the main group . 
 As they crossed the Col de La Gachet with 29 km ( 18 mi ) remaining , De Gendt and Sørensen had two minutes ' lead ; this was reduced to less than a minute 3 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) later at the summit of the penultimate climb of the day , the Côte de la Croix Blanche . Andrew Talansky ( Cannondale – Garmin ) and Majka both suffered mechanical problems around the summit of this climb . Etixx – Quick @-@ Step continued to chase the breakaway down and they were caught with 13 km ( 8 mi ) remaining . 
 At the base of the Col de la Croix de Chaubouret , Team Sky and BMC Racing Team came to the head of the peloton . Sky 's Lars Petter Nordhaug led the peloton through the first 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) of the climb , dropping Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) along the way . Warren Barguil ( Giant – Alpecin ) crashed at the base of the climb ; though he eventually finished the stage , he was unable to return to the main group . After Nordhaug pulled off , his teammate Nicolas Roche took over . His turn at the head of the group caused several riders to be distanced , including Talansky , Majka and Wilco Kelderman ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . 
 With 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining , Roche pulled off and Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) attacked the small group of leaders . He gained a small lead and was joined by Jakob Fuglsang ( Astana ) and Simon Špilak ( Team Katusha ) . Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) and Rubén Fernández ( Movistar Team ) attempted to bridge across , but Fernández , while looking at the group behind , cycled straight into Van Garderen and crashed . Richie Porte ( Team Sky ) covered this move . He was again able to follow as Michał Kwiatkowski attacked . When Kwiatkowski had caught Thomas 's group inside the final one kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) , Porte himself attacked . Thomas , his teammate , was the only rider able to follow him and they finished first and second on the stage . Kwiatkowski finished third , eight seconds behind . 
 With the time bonuses won on the stage , Kwiatkowski was able to re @-@ take the race lead ; he was one second ahead of Porte with Thomas a further two seconds back . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 13 March 2015 — Saint @-@ Étienne to <unk> , 192 @.@ 5 km ( 119 @.@ 6 mi ) 
 The fifth stage of the race was a 192 @.@ 5 km ( 119 @.@ 6 mi ) route that started in Saint @-@ Étienne , travelled south and ended in <unk> . The course began with a first @-@ category climb , the Col de la Republique , but the remainder of the stage was generally flat . Three categorised climbs were located in the second half of the stage ( two third category and one second ) , with the final climb 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 mi ) from the stage finish . The final 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) were uphill . 
 The break was formed on the first @-@ category climb that began the day 's racing . Thomas De Gendt ( Lotto – Soudal ) , who had taken the lead of the mountains classification on stage four , attacked again . He was joined by Andrew Talansky ( Cannondale – Garmin ) , Romain Sicard ( Team Europcar ) , Egor Silin ( Team Katusha ) and Paweł <unk> ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) . De Gendt won the mountain sprint on this climb and on all the other climbs of the day . The group was never allowed more than four minutes ' lead , since Talansky was only 2 ' 51 " behind the leader on general classification . The chase was led by Kwiatkowski 's Etixx – Quick @-@ Step team , who were joined by Cofidis with 60 km ( 37 mi ) remaining . With 20 km ( 12 mi ) remaining and the gap at 1 ' 30 " , Team Sky 's Bradley Wiggins moved to the front of the peloton . After Wiggins had reduced the gap , BMC Racing Team took up the pace @-@ setting . 
 Sicard and <unk> dropped out of the leading group on the final climb and , with less than 5 km ( 3 mi ) remaining and a lead of 25 seconds , an attack from De Gendt distanced Talansky too . Orica – GreenEDGE were now leading the chase behind but , with 3 km ( 2 mi ) left , the leading pair still had a 30 @-@ second lead . With 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) remaining , a final attack from De Gendt dropped Silin . De Gendt attempted to hold on for a solo victory , but he was unable to avoid the sprinters ' teams . As he was caught , Bryan Coquard ( Team Europcar ) opened his sprint . Davide Cimolai ( Lampre – Merida ) , however , was able to come past him in the final metres to take his second win of the year . Coquard finished second , with Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) winning further points for the green jersey by finishing third . 
 The top 10 of the general classification remained unchanged after the stage . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 14 March 2015 — Vence to Nice , 181 @.@ 5 km ( 112 @.@ 8 mi ) 
 The final road stage of the race was a 181 @.@ 5 km ( 112 @.@ 8 mi ) route starting in Vence and ending on the Promenade des Anglais in Nice . The route was mountainous throughout : it included three first @-@ category climbs and three second @-@ category climbs . The summit of the final climb , the Côte de Peille , came with 27 km ( 17 mi ) remaining , as the riders descended into Nice down the Col d 'Èze . The end of the descent came with approximately 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining , with a flat run to the finishing line . 
 A large breakaway escaped in the early part of the stage . This included 31 riders , representing a variety of teams but not Team Sky or Etixx – Quick @-@ Step . Tim Wellens ( Lotto – Soudal ) was the best placed rider on general classification , 1 ' 25 " behind Kwiatkowski ; he was the virtual leader of the race through much of the day . Wellens 's teammate Thomas De Gendt was also in the breakaway : he won the first two climbs of the day to increase his lead in the mountains classification . 
 The first major attacks came with about 60 km ( 37 mi ) remaining : Kwiatkowski attacked with three teammates ( Tony Martin , Julian Alaphilippe and Michał <unk> ) , briefly gaining a lead of half a minute . Team Sky were able to catch them . After the next climb , the Col Saint @-@ Roch , the same four riders attacked , with Tony Gallopin ( Lotto – Soudal ) following . They again gained a half @-@ minute lead , while Sky had just one domestique left to help Porte and Thomas . Etixx – Quick @-@ Step were unable to continue their pressure , however , on the Côte de Peille . Gallopin attacked after sensing that Kwiatkowski was vulnerable . Near the top of the climb , Porte and Thomas caught Kwiatkowski 's group , then attacked them and left them behind . They were joined by several riders , including Simon Špilak ( Team Katusha ) and Jakob Fuglsang ( Astana ) . 
 At the summit of the final climb , therefore , Gallopin had a lead over Porte and Thomas 's group , with Kwiatkowski struggling in another group behind . On the descent , however , Porte and Thomas both crashed in separate incidents ; they were recaptured by Kwiatkowski 's group . ( After the final stage , Porte attributed these crashes to over @-@ inflated tyres . ) Gallopin won the final intermediate sprint and the bonus seconds , ahead of the chasing group that was led by Rui Costa ( Lampre – Merida ) and Fuglsang . Gallopin , however , was able to extend his lead throughout the long descent . He won the stage solo , more than 30 seconds ahead of the first chasing group . Porte and Thomas were over a minute behind , with Kwiatkowski losing an additional two seconds on the finish line . 
 Gallopin , who had been 38 " behind Kwiatkowski , took the race lead . He was now 36 " ahead of Porte , with Kwiatkowski , Thomas , Fuglsang and Costa within six seconds of him . Gallopin said after the stage that , while he hoped to defend his yellow jersey in the final stage time trial on the Col d 'Èze , it would be difficult to stay ahead of Porte . 
 = = = Stage 7 = = = 
 15 March 2015 — Nice to Col d 'Èze , 9 @.@ 6 km ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) 
 The 2015 Paris – Nice concluded with a mountain time trial on the Col d 'Èze . The 9 @.@ 6 km ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) course began in Nice and had an average gradient of 4 @.@ 7 % . The steepest part of the climb came in the early stages : the second kilometre had an average gradient of 8 @.@ 5 % . The intermediate timing point came at the Col des Quatre Chemins , 4 km ( 2 mi ) from the finish . The final 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) towards the summit of Col d 'Èze were contested on a false flat . This time trial is the traditional final stage of Paris – Nice , though it was absent from the 2014 edition . The last time the course was used , in the last stage of the 2013 Paris – Nice , the stage was won by Richie Porte ( Team Sky ) , securing his overall race victory . As is customary in time trial stages , the riders set off in reverse order from where they were ranked in the general classification at the end of the previous stage . The race was held in rainy and windy conditions . 
 The first major news of the day was that Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) , who had won the stage in the 2012 Paris – Nice and who was the reigning world time trial champion , would not start the stage . He had been in 103rd place overnight , more than 56 minutes behind the race leader . 
 The first rider to set off was Stijn Vandenbergh ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , who recorded a time of 23 ' 37 " . Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) completed the course in 22 ' 11 " and led the race for a while . Sérgio Paulinho ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) briefly took over the lead , before he was overtaken by Thomas De Gendt ( Lotto – Soudal ) , whose time was 21 ' 19 " . Rein Taaramäe ( Cofidis ) recorded a better time , but was immediately beaten by the next rider , Andrew Talansky ( Cannondale – Garmin ) . Talansky 's time was 21 ' 00 " ; he led until former world time trial champion Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) became the first rider to complete the course in under 21 minutes . Martin was the leader of the stage until the final few riders completed the course . 
 Simon Špilak ( Team Katusha ) was the first of the general classification contenders to beat Martin ; his time was 20 ' 36 " . This was enough to beat many of the other contenders for the overall classification : Rui Costa ( Lampre – Merida ) , Geraint Thomas ( Team Sky ) and Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) all finished behind Špilak . Porte , in second place overnight , was the only rider able to beat Špilak 's time : Porte was 11 seconds ahead at the intermediate time check and finished the stage 13 seconds ahead . 
 The final rider to set off was the race leader Tony Gallopin ( Lotto – Soudal ) . Gallopin was 36 seconds ahead of Porte overnight and expressed hope that he would be able to defend his lead and take overall victory . Immediately after he set off , however , he was nervous and uncomfortable on his bike . ( Gallopin , like most of the riders , was riding a conventional road bike with aero bars attached . ) At the intermediate time check , he was already 58 seconds behind Porte ; he lost another 41 seconds in the second part of the stage . His time of 22 ' 02 " meant he finished 29th on the stage and lost the yellow jersey . He dropped to sixth place overall . 
 Porte therefore won both the stage and the overall victory in the race , his first general classification victory since he won Paris – Nice in 2013 . Kwiatkowski 's fifth place on the stage was enough to ensure both second place overall ( 30 seconds behind Porte ) and victory in the young rider classification . Špilak finished on the same overall time as Kwiatkowski in third place , with Costa also on the same time in fourth . 
 = = Classification leadership table = = 
 In the 2015 Paris – Nice , four jerseys were awarded . The general classification was calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage . Time bonuses were awarded to the first three finishers on road stages ( stages 1 – 6 ) : the stage winner won a ten @-@ second bonus , with six and four seconds for the second and third riders respectively . Bonus seconds were also awarded to the first three riders at intermediate sprints ( three seconds for the winner of the sprint , two seconds for the rider in second and one second for the rider in third . The leader of the general classification received a yellow jersey . This classification was considered the most important of the 2015 Paris – Nice , and the winner of the classification was considered the winner of the race . 
 The second classification was the points classification . Riders were awarded points for finishing in the top ten in a stage . Unlike in the points classification in the Tour de France , the winners of all stages were awarded the same number of points . Points were also won in intermediate sprints ; three points for crossing the sprint line first , two points for second place , and one for third . The leader of the points classification was awarded a green jersey . 
 There was also a mountains classification , for which points were awarded for reaching the top of a climb before other riders . Each climb was categorised as either first , second , or third @-@ category , with more points available for the more difficult , higher @-@ categorised climbs . For first @-@ category climbs , the top seven riders earned points ; on second @-@ category climbs , five riders won points ; on third @-@ category climbs , only the top three riders earned points . The leadership of the mountains classification was marked by a white jersey with red polka @-@ dots . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . Only riders born after 1 January 1990 were eligible ; the young rider best placed in the general classification was the leader of the young rider classification . 
 There was also a classification for teams , in which the times of the best three cyclists in a team on each stage were added together ; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest cumulative time . 
 = Good Kid , M.A.A.D City = 
 Good Kid , M.A.A.D City ( stylized as good kid , m.A.A.d city ) is the second studio album by American rapper Kendrick Lamar . The album was released on October 22 , 2012 , by Top Dawg Entertainment , Aftermath Entertainment , and was distributed by Interscope Records . The album serves as Lamar 's major label debut , after his signing to Aftermath and Interscope in early 2012 . It was preceded by the release of Kendrick 's debut studio album Section.80 ( 2011 ) , released exclusively through the iTunes Store independently . 
 The album was recorded mostly at several studios in California with producers such as Dr. Dre , Just Blaze , Pharrell Williams , Hit @-@ Boy , Scoop DeVille , Jack Splash and T @-@ Minus , among others . Billed as a " short film by Kendrick Lamar " on the album cover , the concept album follows the story of Lamar 's teenage experiences in the drug @-@ infested streets and gang lifestyle of his native Compton , California . Good Kid , M.A.A.D City received widespread acclaim from critics , who praised its thematic scope and Lamar 's lyrics . Good Kid M.A.A.D City earned Lamar four Grammy Award nominations at the 56th Grammy Awards including Album of the Year . 
 The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 242 @,@ 000 copies in its first week – earning the highest first @-@ week hip hop album sales of 2012 from a male artist , along with the best @-@ selling debut from a male artist of the year . It became Lamar 's first album to enter the UK Albums Chart , peaking at number 16 , and entering the UK R & B Albums Chart at number two . The album was also named to many end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ year lists , often topping them . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in August 2013 . By March 2015 , the album had sold 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 copies domestically , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 The album 's release was supported by five singles – " The Recipe " featuring Dr. Dre , " Swimming Pools ( Drank ) " , " Backseat Freestyle " , " Poetic Justice " featuring Drake and " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " . All five singles received varied chart success . Lamar also went on a world tour between May and August 2013 , featuring the other members of the hip hop collective Black Hippy . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the release and success of his debut studio album Section.80 ( 2011 ) , Lamar signed a major label record deal with Interscope and Dr. Dre 's Aftermath . He told HipHopDX that he did not want to work with high @-@ profile producers , but with those he had established himself with , mainly producers from Top Dawg 's in @-@ house production team <unk> + <unk> . 
 In an interview for XXL , Lamar said that the album would not sound like Section.80 , but will return to his Compton , California roots : " I couldn 't tell you what type of sound or where I 'ma be in the next five years as far as music ... Going back to the neighbourhood and going to different spots , chilling with my <unk> , put me back in that same space where we used to be , bringing back them thoughts , reminiscing how I was feeling . I got myself right back in that mode and I got inspired by that . So this album won 't sound like <unk> Completely nothing like it . " 
 Lamar also said that the album will showcase the influence of his hometown : " The kid that 's trying to escape that influence , trying his best to escape that influence , has always been pulled back in because of circumstances that be " . Before the album 's title was officially revealed , fans had already been calling Lamar 's major label debut Good Kid , Mad City or Good Kid in a Mad City , as it was a nickname of some sort that Lamar had given himself . The album 's title mainly refers to Lamar 's childhood innocence and how the notorious city of Compton , California affected that and his life . After keeping the album title 's acronym concealed , Lamar later revealed M.A.A.D is an acronym with two meanings : " My Angry Adolescence Divided " and more importantly " My Angels on Angel Dust " , with Lamar stating : " That was me . I got laced . The reason why I don 't smoke , and it 's in the album . It 's in the story . It was just me getting my hands on the wrong thing at the wrong time , being oblivious to it . " 
 The cover artwork for Good Kid , M.A.A.D City fits to the concept of the album . The album cover features Kendrick Lamar , two of his uncles , and his grandfather , with the elders ' eyes censored . Though there is no confirmed explanation for why Kendrick chose to do this , he explained that the reason why he had not censored his own eyes was that the story was told through his eyes , and the story is based around his experiences . The uncle who is holding Lamar also is displaying the Crips gang sign with his hand , which also fits the story of the album , and how Kendrick was stuck in a lifestyle of gangs and drugs . The poster above the head of Kendrick features him and his father . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording sessions for the album took place at PatchWerk Recording Studios in Atlanta , Encore Studios in Burbank , <unk> Red Room in Carson , and " At [ Kendrick Lamar 's ] Mama 's Studio " in Los Angeles . Lamar stated Good Kid , M.A.A.D City would sound " nothing " like his previous album , Section.80 : " I couldn 't tell you what type of sound or where I 'ma be in the next five years as far as music , " he said . " It 's a big difference from the next project compared to the last . And that 's what happened with this album . Going back to the neighborhood and going to different spots , chilling with my <unk> , put me back in that same space where we used to be , bringing back them thoughts , reminiscing how I was feeling . I got myself right back in that mode and I got inspired by that . So this album won 't sound like <unk> Completely nothing like it , " he told XXL . The first song Lamar and Dr. Dre ever worked on together was " Compton " , the twelfth track on the album , which serves as the standard edition 's closing track . 
 On August 15 , 2012 , Lady Gaga announced via Twitter , that she had collaborated with Lamar on a song called " <unk> " , for Good Kid , M.A.A.D City , and that it would be released on September 6 , 2012 . However , on August 23 , 2012 , Gaga announced that the song was no longer being released on that date and apologized to fans for the delay . Eventually , it was confirmed that Lady Gaga would not be featured on the album due to timing issues and creative differences . The song was later revealed to be re @-@ titled " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " . On November 8 , 2012 Gaga released the version she was featured on , which had her singing the chorus and a verse . Lamar expressed he was surprised and happy that Gaga released her version of the song , as it showed confidence in their work together . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Good Kid , M.A.A.D City has a low @-@ key , downbeat production , with atmospheric beats and subtle , indistinct hooks . It eschews contemporary hip hop tastes and generally features tight bass measures , subtle background vocals , and light piano . Writers draw comparisons of the music to Outkast 's 1998 album Aquemini . Andrew Nosnitsky of Spin cites the music 's " closest point of reference " as " the cold spaciousness of ATLiens @-@ era Outkast , but as the record progresses , that sound sinks slowly into the fusionist mud of those sprawling and solemn mid @-@ 2000s Roots albums . " Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker finds its use of " smooth " music as a backdrop for " rough " scenarios to be analogous to Dr. Dre 's G @-@ funk during the early 1990s , but adds that " Lamar often sounds like Drake ... whose various dreamy styles have very little to do with the legacy of the West . " Okayplayer 's Marcus Moore writes that its " expansive and brooding " instrumentals eschew " California 's glossy West Coast funk " for a " Dungeon Family aesthetic . " 
 Lyrically , the album chronicles Lamar 's experiences in his native Compton , California and its harsh realities , in a nonlinear narrative . The songs address issues such as economic disenfranchisement , retributive gang violence and downtrodden women , while analyzing their residual effects on individuals and families . Lamar introduces various characters and internal conflicts , including the contrast of his homesickness and love for Compton with the city 's plagued condition . Del F. Cowie of Exclaim ! observes a " transformation " by Lamar 's character " from a boisterous , impressionable , girl @-@ craving teenager to more spiritual , hard @-@ fought adulthood , irrevocably shaped by the neighbourhood and familial bonds of his precarious environment . " Slant Magazine 's Mark Collett writes that Lamar executes the character 's transition by " tempering the hedonistic urges of West Coast hip hop with the self @-@ reflective impulses of the East Coast . " David Amidon of PopMatters views that the album provides a " sort of semi @-@ autobiographical character arc " , while MSN Music 's Robert Christgau writes that Lamar " <unk> " enacts a " rap @-@ versus @-@ real dichotomy " . 
 The album features naturalistic , vérité @-@ like skits that dramatize the characters ' limitations . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times finds them to be a part of the album 's " narrative strategy " , with " prayers and conversations and different voices and recollections and interludes , all in service of one overarching story : Mr. Lamar 's tale of ducking Compton 's rougher corners to find himself artistically . " Pitchfork Media 's Jayson Greene feels that they reinforce the album 's theme of " the grounding power of family " , interpreting " family and faith " to be " the fraying tethers holding Lamar back from the chasm of gang violence that threatens to consume him . " 
 Lamar exhibits a tempered delivery on the album and raps with dense narratives , internal rhyme , double and triple time flow and multiple voices for different characters . Music journalist Jody Rosen characterizes him as " a storyteller , not a braggart or punch @-@ line rapper , setting spiritual yearnings and moral dilemmas against a backdrop of gang violence and police brutality . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 The album 's first single , " The Recipe " , was released on April 3 , 2012 . The song features his mentor , record producer and fellow rapper Dr. Dre and was produced by Scoop DeVille . It peaked at number 38 on Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and at number 3 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . Kendrick shot a video for it featuring Dr. Dre at a mansion in Los Angeles in May 2012 although it was never released . The album 's second single " Swimming Pools ( Drank ) " was released on July 31 , 2012 , as a digital download , while the music video premiered on August 3 , 2012 . The song became a hit , peaking at number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Swimming Pools ( Drank ) " was also certified gold in the United States by the RIAA . 
 The week of the album 's release , " Backseat Freestyle " debuted on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 106 . It was later revealed to be released as the third single in the United Kingdom on January 7 , 2013 . The music video was released on January 2 , 2013 . Lamar 's father appears in the video . The song peaked at number 29 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 " Poetic Justice " was released third single in North America , featuring Drake and production from Scoop DeVille . The song began to impact American rhythmic contemporary radio on January 15 , 2013 . The song has since peaked at number 26 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Poetic Justice " was also certified gold in the United States by the RIAA . 
 On March 9 , 2013 , Kendrick told Rap @-@ Up that his next single off the album would probably be " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " . On March 13 , 2013 , Jay Z 's engineer Young Guru premiered a snippet of the song 's official remix , featuring rapper Jay Z. Lamar called it an accomplishment to have a song with Jay Z featured on it . Shortly after the remix premiered he would confirm that , " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " would be the next single . The full version of the remix was premiered by Funkmaster Flex on March 17 , 2013 . The remix was released as the album 's fourth single to rhythmic contemporary radio on April 9 , 2013 . The song has since peaked at number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video for the original version of the single was released on May 13 , 2013 . Comedian Mike Epps makes a cameo appearance in the video . The same day an extended version of the music video was released featuring a cameo from Juicy J , and a bonus clip of a new song by Schoolboy Q from his own respective major label debut album , <unk> ( 2014 ) . 
 On March 10 , 2015 , Lamar unexpectedly released the Target exclusive edition bonus track , " County Building Blues " , to iTunes as a promotional single . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Before and after the album 's release , Kendrick toured as a supporting act with other various artists such as Drake and Steve Aoki . On May 5 , 2013 , he begun his first headlining tour with the Good Kid , M.A.A.D City World Tour , in West Palm Beach , Florida . The tour consisted of 23 headlining shows , 22 international music festivals , and 15 United States music festivals . The tour ran through August 24 and also featured the other members of Black Hippy on all the US dates . 
 After titling the album " a short film " by Kendrick Lamar , in an interview with GQ he said " he plans on doing a short film to bring his story to life . " He also expressed interest in directing this short film too . Lamar also threw out names like Tristan Wilds to portray him , <unk> P. Henson ( as his mother ) and Rihanna ( as <unk> ) as potential names he 'd want to have if he could choose anybody to work with . On December 23 , 2013 , the music video for the song " Sing About Me " , was released . The video was directed by Darren <unk> . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Good Kid , M.A.A.D City received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 91 , based on 36 reviews . Pitchfork 's Jayson Greene felt that " the miracle of this album is how it ties straightforward rap thrills " to its " weighty material " and narrative . David Amidon of PopMatters felt that the album is simultaneously accessible and substantial , as it can appeal to both underground and mainstream hip hop listeners . Fact magazine 's Joseph Morpurgo called it an autobiographical " triumph of breadth " and a " wide @-@ ranging , far @-@ reaching success " . Sputnikmusic found its reach comparable to Kanye West 's 2010 album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , " but with much subtler shades " . <unk> Cho of XXL called it " one of the most cohesive bodies of work in recent rap memory " and wrote that each song is " both complexly arranged and sonically fitting , foregrounding Kendrick 's vivid lyricism and amazing control of cadence , and awarded it a " perfect XXL " rating . " Jim Carroll of The Irish Times viewed it as an important and entertaining album that is forward thinking , even though it echoes the past era of West Coast hip hop . AllMusic editor David Jeffries characterized the album as " some kind of elevated gangsta rap " and wrote of its subject matter : 
 Besides all the great ideas and life , this journey through the concrete jungle of Compton is worth taking because of the artistic richness , plus the attraction of a whip @-@ smart rapper flying high during his rookie season . Any hesitation about the horror of it all is quickly wiped away by Kendrick 's mix of true talk , open heart , open mind , and extended hand . Add it all up and subtract the hype , and this one is still potent enough to rise to the top of the pile . 
 In a mixed review , Hazel Sheffield of NME asserted that the album " might lack the raw appeal of " Section.80 , " but it 's a big @-@ budget reminder that [ Lamar ] hasn 't forgotten his roots . " Alex Macpherson of The Guardian criticized " Lamar 's depiction of downtrodden women " as " unnecessarily prurient and unconvincing " , but praised his " ability to pull the listener inside the action while retaining an alienated detachment " . Although he observed " some degree of self @-@ indulgence " , Andrew Nosnitsky of Spin found the album 's production " surprisingly cohesive " and commented that Lamar " manages to hold everything together in the midst of such chaos through sheer craftsmanship . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone felt that the album " warrants a place in that storied lineage " of " Seventies blaxploitation soundtracks and Nineties gangsta rap blaxploitation revivals " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune commended Lamar for giving " gangsta tropes ... a twist , or sometimes upend [ ing ] them completely " , and wrote that the album " brims with comedy , complexity and the many voices in Kendrick Lamar 's head . " Robert Christgau from MSN Music felt that its " commitment to drama has musical drawbacks " , but stated , " the atmospheric beats Dr. Dre and his hirelings lay under the raps and choruses establish a musical continuity that shores up a nervous flow that 's just what Lamar 's rhymes need . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Good Kid , M.A.A.D City appeared on several year @-@ end top albums lists by music critics . It was named the best album of 2012 by BBC , Complex , Fact , New York and Pitchfork . The album was also ranked number two by Billboard , the Chicago Tribune , MTV , Spin and Time , number four by Filter , Jon Pareles of The New York Times and Ann Powers of NPR , number five by The Guardian , number six by Rolling Stone and number eight by Entertainment Weekly . In December 2012 , Complex also named Good Kid , M.A.A.D City one of the 25 classic hip hop albums of the previous 10 years . Complex also ranked its album cover as the best of 2012 , while Pitchfork included it on its list of the 20 best album covers of the year . In April 2013 , Vibe placed the album at number 19 on its " The Greatest 50 Albums Since ' 93 " list . 
 In October 2013 , Complex named it the second best hip hop album of the last five years . Also in 2013 , Rolling Stone placed the album at 86 on its " The 100 Best Debut Albums of All Time " list . The album was ranked number two of " The 100 Best Albums of the Decade So Far ( 2010 @-@ 2014 ) " , a list published by Pitchfork in August 2014 and number five of " The 20 Best Albums of the 2010s ( so far ) " , a list published by Billboard in January 2015 . 
 The album was nominated for Top Rap Album at the 2013 Billboard Music Awards and the 2013 American Music Awards . It won the award for Album of the Year at the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards . Good Kid M.A.A.D City earned Lamar five Grammy Award nominations at the 56th Grammy Awards , for Album of The Year , Best Rap Album , Best New Artist , Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for Now Or Never with Mary J. Blige and Best Rap Performance for " Swimming Pools ( Drank ) " . 
 According to Acclaimed Music , a site which aggregates hundreds of critics ' lists from around the world into all @-@ time rankings , the album is the second @-@ most acclaimed of 2012 , and the third @-@ most acclaimed of the 2010s . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 242 @,@ 000 copies . The album also entered the UK Albums Chart at number 16 on October 28 , 2012 , as well as entering at number two on the UK R & B Albums Chart . The album also peaked in the top ten of the album sales charts in Canada , New Zealand and the Netherlands . In its second week it sold 63 @,@ 000 more copies in the United States . Then over the following four weeks it sold 176 @,@ 000 more copies bringing its total sales to 481 @,@ 000 in the United States . On the chart dated November 24 , 2012 , the album peaked on the US Vinyl Albums chart at number three . 
 On August 21 , 2013 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , having shipped and sold one million copies in the United States . As of March 2015 , the album had sold 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 On October 23 , 2012 , after receiving much critical acclaim from the hip hop community , outspoken rapper Shyne took to Twitter to run down on the album , calling it " trash " and the production horrible . West Coast rappers Nipsey <unk> , Schoolboy Q and Game quickly took offense to this , with Game calling Kendrick non @-@ confrontational in that he wouldn 't respond to Shyne . Kendrick responded to Shyne 's comments on October 26 , saying that he is not a sensitive person and was unfazed by his comments . In addition he said Good Kid , M.A.A.D City was not necessarily a " classic " as some have called it , but " classic worthy " if enough time passed . Kendrick also referred to Shyne in his song " The Jig Is Up " saying , " I pray to God this beat good enough for Shyne " . After this Shyne stood by his comments and called Game his " little son " . Game responded with a freestyle calling out Shyne , titled " Cough Up a Lung " . Shyne then responded with his own diss track , towards Game named " Psalms 68 ( Guns & Moses ) " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 ^ [ b ] signifies an additional producer . 
 " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " features background vocals by Anna Wise and additional vocals by JMSN . 
 " Money Trees " features background vocals by Anna Wise . 
 " good kid " features <unk> vocals by Chad Hugo . 
 " m.A.A.d city " features uncredited vocals from Schoolboy Q. 
 " Sing About Me , I 'm Dying of Thirst " features additional vocals by JMSN , Anna Wise and Camille " ill Camille " Davis . 
 " Real " features background vocals by JMSN . 
 Sample credits 
 " Bitch , Don 't Kill My Vibe " contains a sample of " <unk> <unk> " as performed by Boom Clap Bachelors . 
 " Backseat Freestyle " contains a sample of " Yo Soy Cubano " by The <unk> . 
 " The Art of Peer Pressure " contains a sample of " Helt <unk> " as performed by Suspekt . 
 " Money Trees " contains a sample of " Silver Soul " as performed by Beach House . 
 " Poetic Justice " contains a sample of " Any Time , Any Place " as performed by Janet Jackson . 
 " m.A.A.d city " contains a sample of " Don 't Change Your Love " as performed by The Five Stairsteps , " Funky Worm " by Ohio Players and " A Bird In The Hand " by Ice Cube . 
 " Sing About Me , I 'm Dying of Thirst " contains a sample of " Maybe Tomorrow " as performed by Grant Green , " I 'm Glad You 're Mine " by Al Green and " Use Me " by Bill Withers . 
 " Compton " contains a sample of " What 's This World Coming To " as performed by Formula IV . 
 " The Recipe " contains a sample of " Meet the <unk> " as performed by Twin Sister . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Good Kid , M.A.A.D City adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Che Guevara = 
 Ernesto " Che " Guevara ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; June 14 , 1928 – October 9 , 1967 ) , commonly known as El Che or simply Che , was an Argentine Marxist revolutionary , physician , author , guerrilla leader , diplomat , and military theorist . A major figure of the Cuban Revolution , his stylized visage has become a ubiquitous countercultural symbol of rebellion and global insignia in popular culture . 
 As a young medical student , Guevara traveled throughout South America and was radicalized by the poverty , hunger , and disease he witnessed . His burgeoning desire to help overturn what he saw as the capitalist exploitation of Latin America by the United States prompted his involvement in Guatemala 's social reforms under President Jacobo Árbenz , whose eventual CIA @-@ assisted overthrow at the behest of the United Fruit Company solidified Guevara 's political ideology . Later , in Mexico City , he met Raúl and Fidel Castro , joined their 26th of July Movement , and sailed to Cuba aboard the yacht Granma , with the intention of overthrowing U.S.-backed Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . Guevara soon rose to prominence among the insurgents , was promoted to second @-@ in @-@ command , and played a pivotal role in the victorious two @-@ year guerrilla campaign that deposed the Batista regime . 
 Following the Cuban Revolution , Guevara performed a number of key roles in the new government . These included reviewing the appeals and firing squads for those convicted as war criminals during the revolutionary tribunals , instituting agrarian land reform as minister of industries , helping spearhead a successful nationwide literacy campaign , serving as both national bank president and instructional director for Cuba 's armed forces , and traversing the globe as a diplomat on behalf of Cuban socialism . Such positions also allowed him to play a central role in training the militia forces who repelled the Bay of Pigs Invasion and bringing the Soviet nuclear @-@ armed ballistic missiles to Cuba which precipitated the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis . Additionally , he was a prolific writer and diarist , composing a seminal manual on guerrilla warfare , along with a best @-@ selling memoir about his youthful continental motorcycle journey . His experiences and studying of Marxism – Leninism led him to posit that the Third World 's underdevelopment and dependence was an intrinsic result of imperialism , neocolonialism , and monopoly capitalism , with the only remedy being proletarian internationalism and world revolution . Guevara left Cuba in 1965 to foment revolution abroad , first unsuccessfully in Congo @-@ Kinshasa and later in Bolivia , where he was captured by CIA @-@ assisted Bolivian forces and summarily executed . 
 Guevara remains both a revered and reviled historical figure , polarized in the collective imagination in a multitude of biographies , memoirs , essays , documentaries , songs , and films . As a result of his perceived martyrdom , poetic invocations for class struggle , and desire to create the consciousness of a " new man " driven by moral rather than material incentives , he has evolved into a quintessential icon of various leftist @-@ inspired movements . Time magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century , while an Alberto Korda photograph of him , titled Guerrillero Heroico ( shown ) , was cited by the Maryland Institute College of Art as " the most famous photograph in the world . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ernesto Guevara was born to Ernesto Guevara Lynch and his wife , Celia de la Serna y Llosa , on June 14 , 1928 in Rosario , Argentina , the eldest of five children in an aristocratic Argentine family of Spanish ( including Basque and Cantabrian ) and Irish descent . In accordance with the flexibility allowed in Spanish naming customs , his legal name ( Ernesto Guevara ) will sometimes appear with " de la Serna " and / or " Lynch " accompanying it . Referring to Che 's " restless " nature , his father declared " the first thing to note is that in my son 's veins flowed the blood of the Irish rebels " . 
 Very early on in life , <unk> ( as he was then called ) developed an " affinity for the poor " . Growing up in a family with leftist leanings , Guevara was introduced to a wide spectrum of political perspectives even as a boy . His father , a staunch supporter of Republicans from the Spanish Civil War , often hosted many veterans from the conflict in the Guevara home . 
 Despite suffering crippling bouts of acute asthma that were to afflict him throughout his life , he excelled as an athlete , enjoying swimming , football , golf , and shooting ; while also becoming an " untiring " cyclist . He was an avid rugby union player , and played at fly @-@ half for Club Universitario de Buenos Aires . His rugby playing earned him the nickname " <unk> " — a contraction of El <unk> ( raging ) and his mother 's surname , de la Serna — for his aggressive style of play . 
 = = = Intellectual and literary interests = = = 
 Guevara learned chess from his father and began participating in local tournaments by age 12 . During adolescence and throughout his life , he was passionate about poetry , especially that of Pablo Neruda , John Keats , Antonio Machado , Federico García Lorca , Gabriela Mistral , César Vallejo , and Walt Whitman . He could also recite Rudyard Kipling 's " If — " and José Hernández 's Martín Fierro from memory . The Guevara home contained more than 3 @,@ 000 books , which allowed Guevara to be an enthusiastic and eclectic reader , with interests including Karl Marx , William Faulkner , André Gide , Emilio <unk> and Jules Verne . Additionally , he enjoyed the works of Jawaharlal Nehru , Franz Kafka , Albert Camus , Vladimir Lenin , and Jean @-@ Paul Sartre ; as well as Anatole France , Friedrich Engels , H. G. Wells , and Robert Frost . 
 As he grew older , he developed an interest in the Latin American writers Horacio Quiroga , Ciro Alegría , Jorge <unk> , Rubén Darío , and Miguel Asturias . Many of these authors ' ideas he cataloged in his own handwritten notebooks of concepts , definitions , and philosophies of influential intellectuals . These included composing analytical sketches of Buddha and Aristotle , along with examining Bertrand Russell on love and patriotism , Jack London on society , and Nietzsche on the idea of death . Sigmund Freud 's ideas fascinated him as he quoted him on a variety of topics from dreams and libido to narcissism and the Oedipus complex . His favorite subjects in school included philosophy , mathematics , engineering , political science , sociology , history and archaeology . 
 Years later , a February 13 , 1958 , declassified CIA ' biographical and personality report ' would make note of Guevara 's wide range of academic interests and intellect , describing him as " quite well read " while adding that " Che is fairly intellectual for a Latino . " 
 = = = Motorcycle journey = = = 
 In 1948 , Guevara entered the University of Buenos Aires to study medicine . His " hunger to explore the world " led him to intersperse his collegiate pursuits with two long introspective journeys that would fundamentally change the way he viewed himself and the contemporary economic conditions in Latin America . The first expedition in 1950 was a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ kilometer ( 2 @,@ 800 mi ) solo trip through the rural provinces of northern Argentina on a bicycle on which he installed a small engine . This was followed in 1951 by a nine @-@ month , 8 @,@ 000 @-@ kilometer ( 5 @,@ 000 mi ) continental motorcycle trek through most of South America . For the latter , he took a year off from his studies to embark with his friend Alberto Granado , with the final goal of spending a few weeks volunteering at the San Pablo leper colony in Peru , on the banks of the Amazon River . 
 In Chile , Guevara found himself enraged by the working conditions of the miners in Anaconda 's Chuquicamata copper mine and moved by his overnight encounter in the Atacama Desert with a persecuted communist couple who did not even own a blanket , describing them as " the shivering flesh @-@ and @-@ blood victims of capitalist exploitation " . Additionally , on the way to Machu Picchu high in the Andes , he was struck by the crushing poverty of the remote rural areas , where peasant farmers worked small plots of land owned by wealthy landlords . Later on his journey , Guevara was especially impressed by the camaraderie among those living in a leper colony , stating " The highest forms of human solidarity and loyalty arise among such lonely and desperate people . " Guevara used notes taken during this trip to write an account , titled The Motorcycle Diaries , which later became a The New York Times best @-@ seller , and was adapted into a 2004 award @-@ winning film of the same name . 
 The journey took Guevara through Argentina , Chile , Peru , Ecuador , Colombia , Venezuela , Panama , and Miami , Florida , for 20 days , before returning home to Buenos Aires . By the end of the trip , he came to view Latin America not as collection of separate nations , but as a single entity requiring a continent @-@ wide liberation strategy . His conception of a borderless , united Hispanic America sharing a common Latino heritage was a theme that recurred prominently during his later revolutionary activities . Upon returning to Argentina , he completed his studies and received his medical degree in June 1953 , making him officially " Dr. Ernesto Guevara " . 
 Guevara later remarked that through his travels in Latin America , he came in " close contact with poverty , hunger and disease " along with the " inability to treat a child because of lack of money " and " stupefaction provoked by the continual hunger and punishment " that leads a father to " accept the loss of a son as an unimportant accident " . It was these experiences which Guevara cites as convincing him that in order to " help these people " , he needed to leave the realm of medicine , and consider the political arena of armed struggle . 
 = = Guatemala , Árbenz , and United Fruit = = 
 On July 7 , 1953 , Guevara set out again , this time to Bolivia , Peru , Ecuador , Panama , Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Honduras and El Salvador . On December 10 , 1953 , before leaving for Guatemala , Guevara sent an update to his Aunt Beatriz from San José , Costa Rica . In the letter Guevara speaks of traversing through the dominion of the United Fruit Company ; a journey which convinced him that Company 's capitalist system was a terrible one . This affirmed indignation carried the more aggressive tone he adopted in order to frighten his more Conservative relatives , and ends with Guevara swearing on an image of the then recently deceased Joseph Stalin , not to rest until these " octopuses have been vanquished " . Later that month , Guevara arrived in Guatemala where President Jacobo Árbenz Guzmán headed a democratically elected government that , through land reform and other initiatives , was attempting to end the latifundia system . To accomplish this , President Árbenz had enacted a major land reform program , where all uncultivated portions of large land holdings were to be expropriated and redistributed to landless peasants . The biggest land owner , and one most affected by the reforms , was the United Fruit Company , from which the Árbenz government had already taken more than 225 @,@ 000 acres ( 91 @,@ 000 ha ) of uncultivated land . Pleased with the road the nation was heading down , Guevara decided to settle down in Guatemala so as to " perfect himself and accomplish whatever may be necessary in order to become a true revolutionary . " 
 In Guatemala City , Guevara sought out Hilda Gadea Acosta , a Peruvian economist who was well @-@ connected politically as a member of the left @-@ leaning Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana ( APRA , American Popular Revolutionary Alliance ) . She introduced Guevara to a number of high @-@ level officials in the Arbenz government . Guevara then established contact with a group of Cuban exiles linked to Fidel Castro through the July 26 , 1953 , attack on the Moncada Barracks in Santiago de Cuba . During this period , he acquired his famous nickname , due to his frequent use of the Argentine diminutive interjection che , a vocative casual speech filler used to call attention or ascertain comprehension , similarly to both " bro " or the Canadian phrase " eh " . During his time in Guatemala , Guevara was helped by other Central American exiles , one of whom , Helena Leiva de Holst , provided him with food and lodging , discussed her travels to study Marxism in Russia and China , and to whom , Guevara dedicated a poem , " " <unk> al camino " . 
 On May 15 , 1954 , a shipment of Škoda infantry and light artillery weapons was dispatched from Communist Czechoslovakia for the Arbenz Government and arrived in Puerto Barrios . As a result , the United States government — which since 1953 had been tasked by President Eisenhower to remove Arbenz from power in the multifaceted CIA operation code named PBSUCCESS — responded by saturating Guatemala with anti @-@ Arbenz propaganda through radio and dropped leaflets , and began bombing raids using unmarked airplanes . The United States also sponsored a force of several hundred Guatemalan refugees and mercenaries who were headed by Castillo Armas to help remove the Arbenz government . Though the impact of the U.S. actions on subsequent events is debatable , by late June , Arbenz came to the conclusion that resistance against the " giant of the north " was futile and resigned . This allowed Armas and his CIA @-@ assisted forces to march into Guatemala City and establish a military junta , which would twelve days later on July 8 , elect him President . Consequently , the Armas regime then consolidated power by rounding up hundreds of suspected communists and executed hundreds of prisoners , while crushing the previously flourishing labor unions and restoring all of United Fruits previous land holdings . 
 Guevara himself was eager to fight on behalf of Arbenz and joined an armed militia organized by the Communist Youth for that purpose , but frustrated with the group 's inaction , he soon returned to medical duties . Following the coup , he again volunteered to fight , but soon after , Arbenz took refuge in the Mexican Embassy and told his foreign supporters to leave the country . Guevara 's repeated calls to resist were noted by supporters of the coup , and he was marked for murder . After Hilda Gadea was arrested , Guevara sought protection inside the Argentine consulate , where he remained until he received a safe @-@ conduct pass some weeks later and made his way to Mexico . 
 The overthrow of the Arbenz regime and establishment of the right @-@ wing Armas dictatorship cemented Guevara 's view of the United States as an imperialist power that would oppose and attempt to destroy any government that sought to redress the socioeconomic inequality endemic to Latin America and other developing countries . In speaking about the coup , Guevara stated : 
 The last Latin American revolutionary democracy – that of Jacobo Arbenz – failed as a result of the cold premeditated aggression carried out by the United States . Its visible head was the Secretary of State John Foster Dulles , a man who , through a rare coincidence , was also a stockholder and attorney for the United Fruit Company . 
 Guevara 's conviction that Marxism achieved through armed struggle and defended by an armed populace was the only way to rectify such conditions was thus strengthened . Gadea wrote later , " It was Guatemala which finally convinced him of the necessity for armed struggle and for taking the initiative against imperialism . By the time he left , he was sure of this . " 
 = = Mexico City and preparation = = 
 Guevara arrived in Mexico City on 21 September 1954 , and worked in the allergy section of the General Hospital and at the Hospital Infantil de Mexico . In addition he gave lectures on medicine at the Faculty of Medicine in the National Autonomous University of Mexico and worked as a news photographer for Latina News Agency . His first wife Hilda notes in her memoir My Life with Che , that for a while , Guevara considered going to work as a doctor in Africa and that he continued to be deeply troubled by the poverty around him . In one instance , Hilda describes Guevara 's obsession with an elderly washerwoman whom he was treating , remarking that he saw her as " representative of the most forgotten and exploited class " . Hilda later found a poem that Che had dedicated to the old woman , containing " a promise to fight for a better world , for a better life for all the poor and exploited . " 
 During this time he renewed his friendship with <unk> López and the other Cuban exiles whom he had met in Guatemala . In June 1955 , López introduced him to Raúl Castro who subsequently introduced him to his older brother , Fidel Castro , the revolutionary leader who had formed the 26th of July Movement and was now plotting to overthrow the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista . During a long conversation with Fidel on the night of their first meeting , Guevara concluded that the Cuban 's cause was the one for which he had been searching and before daybreak he had signed up as a member of the July 26 Movement . Despite their " contrasting personalities " , from this point on Che and Fidel began to foster what dual biographer Simon Reid @-@ Henry deems a " revolutionary friendship that would change the world " , as a result of their coinciding commitment to anti @-@ imperialism . 
 By this point in Guevara 's life , he deemed that U.S.-controlled conglomerates installed and supported repressive regimes around the world . In this vein , he considered Batista a " U.S. puppet whose strings needed cutting " . Although he planned to be the group 's combat medic , Guevara participated in the military training with the members of the Movement . The key portion of training involved learning hit and run tactics of guerrilla warfare . Guevara and the others underwent arduous 15 @-@ hour marches over mountains , across rivers , and through the dense undergrowth , learning and perfecting the procedures of ambush and quick retreat . From the start Guevara was Alberto Bayo 's " prize student " among those in training , scoring the highest on all of the tests given . At the end of the course , he was called " the best guerrilla of them all " by their instructor , General Bayo . 
 Guevara then married Gadea in Mexico in September 1955 , before embarking on his plan to assist in the liberation of Cuba . 
 = = Cuban Revolution = = 
 = = = Invasion , warfare , and Santa Clara = = = 
 The first step in Castro 's revolutionary plan was an assault on Cuba from Mexico via the Granma , an old , leaky cabin cruiser . They set out for Cuba on November 25 , 1956 . Attacked by Batista 's military soon after landing , many of the 82 men were either killed in the attack or executed upon capture ; only 22 found each other afterwards . During this initial bloody confrontation Guevara laid down his medical supplies and picked up a box of ammunition dropped by a fleeing comrade , proving to be a symbolic moment in Che 's life . 
 Only a small band of revolutionaries survived to re @-@ group as a bedraggled fighting force deep in the Sierra Maestra mountains , where they received support from the urban guerrilla network of Frank País , the 26th of July Movement , and local campesinos . With the group withdrawn to the Sierra , the world wondered whether Castro was alive or dead until early 1957 when the interview by Herbert Matthews appeared in The New York Times . The article presented a lasting , almost mythical image for Castro and the guerrillas . Guevara was not present for the interview , but in the coming months he began to realize the importance of the media in their struggle . Meanwhile , as supplies and morale diminished , and with an allergy to mosquito bites which resulted in agonizing walnut @-@ sized cysts on his body , Guevara considered these " the most painful days of the war " . 
 During Guevara 's time living hidden among the poor subsistence farmers of the Sierra Maestra mountains , he discovered that there were no schools , no electricity , minimal access to healthcare , and more than 40 percent of the adults were illiterate . As the war continued , Guevara became an integral part of the rebel army and " convinced Castro with competence , diplomacy and patience " . Guevara set up factories to make grenades , built ovens to bake bread , taught new recruits about tactics , and organized schools to teach illiterate campesinos to read and write . Moreover , Guevara established health clinics , workshops to teach military tactics , and a newspaper to disseminate information . The man who three years later would be dubbed by Time Magazine : " Castro 's brain " , at this point was promoted by Fidel Castro to Comandante ( commander ) of a second army column . 
 As second in command , Guevara was a harsh disciplinarian who sometimes shot defectors . Deserters were punished as traitors , and Guevara was known to send squads to track those seeking to go AWOL . As a result , Guevara became feared for his brutality and ruthlessness . During the guerrilla campaign , Guevara was also responsible for the sometimes summary execution of a number of men accused of being informers , deserters or spies . In his diaries , Guevara described the first such execution of Eutimio Guerra , a peasant army guide who admitted treason when it was discovered he accepted the promise of ten thousand pesos for repeatedly giving away the rebel 's position for attack by the Cuban air force . Such information also allowed Batista 's army to burn the homes of peasants sympathetic to the revolution . Upon Guerra 's request that they " end his life quickly " , Che stepped forward and shot him in the head , writing " The situation was uncomfortable for the people and for Eutimio so I ended the problem giving him a shot with a .32 pistol in the right side of the brain , with exit orifice in the right temporal [ lobe ] . " His scientific notations and matter @-@ of @-@ fact description , suggested to one biographer a " remarkable detachment to violence " by that point in the war . Later , Guevara published a literary account of the incident , titled " Death of a Traitor " , where he transfigured Eutimio 's betrayal and pre @-@ execution request that the revolution " take care of his children " , into a " revolutionary parable about redemption through sacrifice " . 
 Although he maintained a demanding and harsh disposition , Guevara also viewed his role of commander as one of a teacher , entertaining his men during breaks between engagements with readings from the likes of Robert Louis Stevenson , Cervantes , and Spanish lyric poets . Together with this role , and inspired by José Martí 's principle of " literacy without borders " , Guevara further ensured that his rebel fighters made daily time to teach the uneducated campesinos with whom they lived and fought to read and write , in what Guevara termed the " battle against ignorance " . Tomás Alba , who fought under Guevara 's command , later stated that " Che was loved , in spite of being stern and demanding . We would ( have ) given our life for him . " 
 His commanding officer Fidel Castro has described Guevara as intelligent , daring , and an exemplary leader who " had great moral authority over his troops " . Castro further remarked that Guevara took too many risks , even having a " tendency toward <unk> " . Guevara 's teenage lieutenant , Joel Iglesias , recounts such actions in his diary , noting that Guevara 's behavior in combat even brought admiration from the enemy . On one occasion Iglesias recounts the time he had been wounded in battle , stating " Che ran out to me , defying the bullets , threw me over his shoulder , and got me out of there . The guards didn 't dare fire at him ... later they told me he made a great impression on them when they saw him run out with his pistol stuck in his belt , ignoring the danger , they didn 't dare shoot . " 
 Guevara was instrumental in creating the clandestine radio station Radio Rebelde ( Rebel Radio ) in February 1958 , which broadcast news to the Cuban people with statements by the 26th of July movement , and provided <unk> communication between the growing number of rebel columns across the island . Guevara had apparently been inspired to create the station by observing the effectiveness of CIA supplied radio in Guatemala in ousting the government of Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán . 
 To quell the rebellion , Cuban government troops began executing rebel prisoners on the spot , and regularly rounded up , tortured , and shot civilians as a tactic of intimidation . By March 1958 , the continued atrocities carried out by Batista 's forces led the United States to announce it would stop selling arms to the Cuban government . Then in late July 1958 , Guevara played a critical role in the Battle of Las Mercedes by using his column to halt a force of 1 @,@ 500 men called up by Batista 's General Cantillo in a plan to encircle and destroy Castro 's forces . Years later , Major Larry <unk> of the United States Marine Corps would analyze and describe Che 's tactical appreciation of this battle as " brilliant " . During this time Guevara also became an " expert " at leading hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics against Batista 's army , and then fading back into the countryside before the army could counterattack . 
 As the war extended , Guevara led a new column of fighters dispatched westward for the final push towards Havana . Travelling by foot , Guevara embarked on a difficult 7 @-@ week march only travelling at night to avoid ambush , and often not eating for several days . In the closing days of December 1958 , Guevara 's task was to cut the island in half by taking Las Villas province . In a matter of days he executed a series of " brilliant tactical victories " that gave him control of all but the province 's capital city of Santa Clara . Guevara then directed his " suicide squad " in the attack on Santa Clara , that became the final decisive military victory of the revolution . In the six weeks leading up to the Battle of Santa Clara there were times when his men were completely surrounded , outgunned , and overrun . Che 's eventual victory despite being outnumbered 10 : 1 , remains in the view of some observers a " remarkable tour de force in modern warfare " . 
 Radio Rebelde broadcast the first reports that Guevara 's column had taken Santa Clara on New Year 's Eve 1958 . This contradicted reports by the heavily controlled national news media , which had at one stage reported Guevara 's death during the fighting . At 3 am on January 1 , 1959 , upon learning that his generals were negotiating a separate peace with Guevara , Fulgencio Batista boarded a plane in Havana and fled for the Dominican Republic , along with an amassed " fortune of more than $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 through graft and payoffs " . The following day on January 2 , Guevara entered Havana to take final control of the capital . Fidel Castro took 6 more days to arrive , as he stopped to rally support in several large cities on his way to rolling victoriously into Havana on January 8 , 1959 . The final death toll from the two years of revolutionary fighting was 2 @,@ 000 people . 
 In mid @-@ January 1959 , Guevara went to live at a summer villa in Tarara to recover from a violent asthma attack . While there he started the Tarara Group , a group that debated and formed the new plans for Cuba 's social , political , and economic development . In addition , Che began to write his book Guerrilla Warfare while resting at Tarara . In February , the revolutionary government proclaimed Guevara " a Cuban citizen by birth " in recognition of his role in the triumph . When Hilda Gadea arrived in Cuba in late January , Guevara told her that he was involved with another woman , and the two agreed on a divorce , which was finalized on May 22 . On June 2 , 1959 , he married Aleida March , a Cuban @-@ born member of the 26th of July movement with whom he had been living since late 1958 . Guevara returned to the seaside village of Tarara in June for his honeymoon with Aleida . In total , Guevara would ultimately have five children from his two marriages . 
 = = = La Cabaña , land reform , and literacy = = = 
 The first major political crisis arose over what to do with the captured Batista officials who had been responsible for the worst of the repression . During the rebellion against Batista 's dictatorship , the general command of the rebel army , led by Fidel Castro , introduced into the territories under its control the 19th century penal law commonly known as the Ley de la Sierra ( Law of the Sierra ) . This law included the death penalty for serious crimes , whether perpetrated by the Batista regime or by supporters of the revolution . In 1959 , the revolutionary government extended its application to the whole of the republic and to those it considered war criminals , captured and tried after the revolution . According to the Cuban Ministry of Justice , this latter extension was supported by the majority of the population , and followed the same procedure as those in the Nuremberg Trials held by the Allies after World War II . 
 To implement a portion of this plan , Castro named Guevara commander of the La Cabaña Fortress prison , for a five @-@ month tenure ( January 2 through June 12 , 1959 ) . Guevara was charged with purging the Batista army and consolidating victory by exacting " revolutionary justice " against those considered to be traitors , <unk> ( informants ) or war criminals . Serving in the post as commander of La Cabaña , Guevara reviewed the appeals of those convicted during the revolutionary tribunal process . The tribunals were conducted by 2 – 3 army officers , an assessor , and a respected local citizen . On some occasions the penalty delivered by the tribunal was death by firing squad . Raúl Gómez <unk> , senior legal advisor to the Cuban Ministry of Justice , has argued that the death penalty was justified in order to prevent citizens themselves from taking justice into their own hands , as happened twenty years earlier in the anti @-@ Machado rebellion . Biographers note that in January 1959 , the Cuban public was in a " lynching mood " , and point to a survey at the time showing 93 % public approval for the tribunal process . Moreover , a January 22 , 1959 , Universal Newsreel broadcast in the United States and narrated by Ed Herlihy , featured Fidel Castro asking an estimated one million Cubans whether they approved of the executions , and was met with a roaring " ¡ Si ! " ( yes ) . With thousands of Cubans estimated to have been killed at the hands of Batista 's collaborators , and many of the war criminals sentenced to death accused of torture and physical atrocities , the newly empowered government carried out executions , punctuated by cries from the crowds of " ¡ <unk> ! " ( [ to the ] wall ! ) , which biographer Jorge Castañeda describes as " without respect for due process " . 
 Although there are varying accounts , it is estimated that several hundred people were executed nationwide during this time , with Guevara 's jurisdictional death total at La Cabaña ranging from 55 to 105 ( see reference ) . Conflicting views exist of Guevara 's attitude towards the executions at La Cabaña . Some exiled opposition biographers report that he relished the rituals of the firing squad , and organized them with gusto , while others relate that Guevara pardoned as many prisoners as he could . What is acknowledged by all sides is that Guevara had become a " hardened " man , who had no qualms about the death penalty or summary and collective trials . If the only way to " defend the revolution was to execute its enemies , he would not be swayed by humanitarian or political arguments " . This is further confirmed by a February 5 , 1959 , letter to Luis Paredes López in Buenos Aires where Guevara states unequivocally " The executions by firing squads are not only a necessity for the people of Cuba , but also an imposition of the people . " 
 Along with ensuring " revolutionary justice " , the other key early platform of Guevara 's was establishing agrarian land reform . Almost immediately after the success of the revolution on January 27 , 1959 , Guevara made one of his most significant speeches where he talked about " the social ideas of the rebel army " . During this speech , he declared that the main concern of the new Cuban government was " the social justice that land redistribution brings about " . A few months later on May 17 , 1959 , the Agrarian Reform Law crafted by Guevara went into effect , limiting the size of all farms to 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) . Any holdings over these limits were expropriated by the government and either redistributed to peasants in 67 @-@ acre ( 270 @,@ 000 m2 ) parcels or held as state run communes . The law also stipulated that sugar plantations could not be owned by foreigners . 
 On June 12 , 1959 , Castro sent Guevara out on a three @-@ month tour of 14 mostly Bandung Pact countries ( Morocco , Sudan , Egypt , Syria , Pakistan , India , Sri Lanka , Burma , Thailand , Indonesia , Japan , Yugoslavia , Greece ) and the cities of Singapore and Hong Kong . Sending Guevara away from Havana allowed Castro to appear to be distancing himself from Guevara and his Marxist sympathies , which troubled both the United States and some of Castro 's July 26 Movement members . While in Jakarta , Guevara visited Indonesian president Sukarno to discuss the recent revolution in Indonesia and to establish trade relations between their two nations . Both men quickly bonded , as Sukarno was attracted to Guevara 's energy and his relaxed informal approach ; moreover they shared revolutionary leftist aspirations against western imperialism . Guevara next spent 12 days in Japan ( July 15 – 27 ) , participating in negotiations aimed at expanding Cuba 's trade relations with that nation . During the visit , he refused to visit and lay a wreath at Japan 's Tomb of the Unknown Soldier commemorating soldiers lost during World War II , remarking that the Japanese " imperialists " had " killed millions of Asians " . In its place , Guevara stated that he would instead visit Hiroshima , where the American military had detonated an atom @-@ bomb 14 years earlier . Despite his denunciation of Imperial Japan , Guevara also considered President Truman a " macabre clown " for the bombings , and after visiting Hiroshima and its Peace Memorial Museum , he sent back a postcard to Cuba stating " In order to fight better for peace , one must look at Hiroshima . " 
 Upon Guevara 's return to Cuba in September 1959 , it was evident that Castro now had more political power . The government had begun land seizures included in the agrarian reform law , but was hedging on compensation offers to landowners , instead offering low interest " bonds " , a step which put the United States on alert . At this point the affected wealthy cattlemen of Camagüey mounted a campaign against the land redistributions , and enlisted the newly disaffected rebel leader Huber Matos , who along with the anti @-@ Communist wing of the 26th of July Movement , joined them in denouncing the " Communist encroachment " . During this time Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo was offering assistance to the " Anti @-@ Communist Legion of the Caribbean " which was training in the Dominican Republic . This multi @-@ national force , composed mostly of Spaniards and Cubans , but also of Croatians , Germans , Greeks , and right @-@ wing mercenaries , was plotting to topple Castro 's new regime . 
 Such threats were heightened when , on March 4 , 1960 , two massive explosions ripped through the French freighter La <unk> , which was carrying Belgian munitions from the port of Antwerp , and was docked in Havana Harbor . The blasts killed at least 76 people and injured several hundred , with Guevara personally providing first aid to some of the victims . Cuban leader Fidel Castro immediately accused the CIA of " an act of terrorism " and held a state funeral the following day for the victims of the blast . It was at the memorial service that Alberto Korda took the famous photograph of Guevara , now known as Guerrillero Heroico . 
 These perceived threats prompted Castro to further eliminate " counter @-@ revolutionaries " , and to utilize Guevara to drastically increase the speed of land reform . To implement this plan , a new government agency , the National Institute of Agrarian Reform ( INRA ) , was established to administer the new Agrarian Reform law . INRA quickly became the most important governing body in the nation , with Guevara serving as its head in his capacity as minister of industries . Under Guevara 's command , INRA established its own 100 @,@ 000 person militia , used first to help the government seize control of the expropriated land and supervise its distribution , and later to set up cooperative farms . The land confiscated included 480 @,@ 000 acres ( 190 @,@ 000 ha ) owned by United States corporations . Months later , as retaliation , U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower sharply reduced United States imports of Cuban sugar ( Cuba 's main cash crop ) , thus leading Guevara on July 10 , 1960 , to address over 100 @,@ 000 workers in front of the Presidential Palace at a rally called to denounce United States " economic aggression " . Time magazine reporters who met with Guevara around this time , described him as " <unk> ( ing ) Cuba with icy calculation , vast competence , high intelligence , and a perceptive sense of humor . " 
 Along with land reform , one of the primary areas that Guevara stressed needed national improvement was in the area of literacy . Before 1959 the official literacy rate for Cuba was between 60 – 76 % , with educational access in rural areas and a lack of instructors the main determining factors . As a result , the Cuban government at Guevara 's behest dubbed 1961 the " year of education " , and mobilized over 100 @,@ 000 volunteers into " literacy brigades " , who were then sent out into the countryside to construct schools , train new educators , and teach the predominantly illiterate <unk> ( peasants ) to read and write . Unlike many of Guevara 's later economic initiatives , this campaign was " a remarkable success " . By the completion of the Cuban Literacy Campaign , 707 @,@ 212 adults had been taught to read and write , raising the national literacy rate to 96 % . 
 Accompanying literacy , Guevara was also concerned with establishing universal access to higher education . To accomplish this , the new regime introduced affirmative action to the universities . While announcing this new commitment , Guevara told the gathered faculty and students at the University of Las Villas that the days when education was " a privilege of the white middle class " had ended . " The University " he said , " must paint itself black , mulatto , worker , and peasant . " If it did not , he warned , the people would break down its doors " and paint the University the colors they like . " 
 = = = = Marxist ideological influence = = = = 
 The merit of Marx is that he suddenly produces a qualitative change in the history of social thought . He interprets history , understands its dynamic , predicts the future , but in addition to predicting it ( which would satisfy his scientific obligation ) , he expresses a revolutionary concept : the world must not only be interpreted , it must be transformed . Man ceases to be the slave and tool of his environment and converts himself into the architect of his own destiny . 
 When enacting and advocating Cuban policy , Guevara cited the political philosopher Karl Marx as his ideological inspiration . In defending his political stance , Guevara confidently remarked that " There are truths so evident , so much a part of people 's knowledge , that it is now useless to discuss them . One ought to be Marxist with the same naturalness with which one is ' Newtonian ' in physics , or ' <unk> ' in biology . " According to Guevara , the " practical revolutionaries " of the Cuban Revolution had the goal of " simply fulfill ( ing ) laws foreseen by Marx , the scientist . " Using Marx 's predictions and system of dialectical materialism , Guevara professed that " The laws of Marxism are present in the events of the Cuban Revolution , independently of what its leaders profess or fully know of those laws from a theoretical point of view . " 
 = = = The " New Man " , Bay of Pigs , and missile crisis = = = 
 Man truly achieves his full human condition when he produces without being compelled by the physical necessity of selling himself as a commodity . 
 At this stage , Guevara acquired the additional position of Finance Minister , as well as President of the National Bank . These appointments , combined with his existing position as Minister of Industries , placed Guevara at the zenith of his power , as the " virtual czar " of the Cuban economy . As a consequence of his position at the head of the central bank , it was now Guevara 's duty to sign the Cuban currency , which per custom would bear his signature . Instead of using his full name , he signed the bills solely " Che " . It was through this symbolic act , which horrified many in the Cuban financial sector , that Guevara signaled his distaste for money and the class distinctions it brought about . Guevara 's long time friend Ricardo Rojo later remarked that " the day he signed Che on the bills , ( he ) literally knocked the props from under the widespread belief that money was sacred . " 
 In an effort to eliminate social inequalities , Guevara and Cuba 's new leadership had moved to swiftly transform the political and economic base of the country through nationalizing factories , banks , and businesses , while attempting to ensure affordable housing , healthcare , and employment for all Cubans . However , in order for a genuine transformation of consciousness to take root , Guevara believed that such structural changes would have to be accompanied by a conversion in people 's social relations and values . Believing that the attitudes in Cuba towards race , women , individualism , and manual labor were the product of the island 's outdated past , Guevara urged all individuals to view each other as equals and take on the values of what he termed " el Hombre Nuevo " ( the New Man ) . Guevara hoped his " new man " would ultimately be " selfless and cooperative , obedient and hard working , gender @-@ blind , incorruptible , non @-@ materialistic , and anti @-@ imperialist . " To accomplish this , Guevara emphasized the tenets of Marxism @-@ Leninism , and wanted to use the state to emphasize qualities such as egalitarianism and self @-@ sacrifice , at the same time as " unity , equality , and freedom " became the new maxims . Guevara 's first desired economic goal of the new man , which coincided with his aversion for wealth condensation and economic inequality , was to see a nationwide elimination of material incentives in favor of moral ones . He negatively viewed capitalism as a " contest among wolves " where " one can only win at the cost of others " and thus desired to see the creation of a " new man and woman " . Guevara continually stressed that a socialist economy in itself is not " worth the effort , sacrifice , and risks of war and destruction " if it ends up encouraging " greed and individual ambition at the expense of collective spirit " . A primary goal of Guevara 's thus became to reform " individual consciousness " and values to produce better workers and citizens . In his view , Cuba 's " new man " would be able to overcome the " egotism " and " selfishness " that he loathed and discerned was uniquely characteristic of individuals in capitalist societies . To promote this concept of a " new man " , the government also created a series of party @-@ dominated institutions and mechanisms on all levels of society , which included organizations such as labor groups , youth leagues , women 's groups , community centers , and houses of culture to promote state @-@ sponsored art , music , and literature . In congruence with this , all educational , mass media , and artistic community based facilities were nationalized and utilized to instill the government 's official socialist ideology . In describing this new method of " development " , Guevara stated : 
 There is a great difference between free @-@ enterprise development and revolutionary development . In one of them , wealth is concentrated in the hands of a fortunate few , the friends of the government , the best wheeler @-@ dealers . In the other , wealth is the people 's patrimony . 
 A further integral part of fostering a sense of " unity between the individual and the mass " , Guevara believed , was volunteer work and will . To display this , Guevara " led by example " , working " endlessly at his ministry job , in construction , and even cutting sugar cane " on his day off . He was known for working 36 hours at a stretch , calling meetings after midnight , and eating on the run . Such behavior was emblematic of Guevara 's new program of moral incentives , where each worker was now required to meet a quota and produce a certain quantity of goods . As a replacement for the pay increases abolished by Guevara , workers who exceeded their quota now only received a certificate of commendation , while workers who failed to meet their quotas were given a pay cut . Guevara unapologetically defended his personal philosophy towards motivation and work , stating : 
 This is not a matter of how many pounds of meat one might be able to eat , or how many times a year someone can go to the beach , or how many ornaments from abroad one might be able to buy with his current salary . What really matters is that the individual feels more complete , with much more internal richness and much more responsibility . 
 In the face of a loss of commercial connections with Western states , Guevara tried to replace them with closer commercial relationships with Eastern Bloc states , visiting a number of Marxist states and signing trade agreements with them . At the end of 1960 he visited Czechoslovakia , the Soviet Union , North Korea , Hungary and East Germany and signed , for instance , a trade agreement in East Berlin on December 17 , 1960 . Such agreements helped Cuba 's economy to a certain degree but also had the disadvantage of a growing economic dependency on the Eastern Bloc . It was also in East Germany where Guevara met Tamara Bunke ( later known as " Tania " ) , who was assigned as his interpreter , and who would years later join him , and be killed with him in Bolivia . 
 Whatever the merits or demerits of Guevara 's economic principles , his programs were unsuccessful . Guevara 's program of " moral incentives " for workers caused a rapid drop in productivity and a rapid rise in absenteeism . Decades later , the director of Radio Martí Ernesto Betancourt , an early ally turned Castro @-@ critic and Che 's former deputy , would accuse Guevara of being " ignorant of the most elementary economic principles . " In reference to the collective failings of Guevara 's vision , reporter I.F. Stone who interviewed Guevara twice during this time , remarked that he was " Galahad not Robespierre " , while opining that " in a sense he was , like some early saint , taking refuge in the desert . Only there could the purity of the faith be safeguarded from the unregenerate revisionism of human nature . " 
 On April 17 , 1961 , 1 @,@ 400 U.S.-trained Cuban exiles invaded Cuba during the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Guevara did not play a key role in the fighting , as one day before the invasion a warship carrying Marines faked an invasion off the West Coast of Pinar del Río and drew forces commanded by Guevara to that region . However , historians give him a share of credit for the victory as he was director of instruction for Cuba 's armed forces at the time . Author Tad <unk> in his explanation of the Cuban victory , assigns Guevara partial credit , stating : " The revolutionaries won because Che Guevara , as the head of the Instruction Department of the Revolutionary Armed Forces in charge of the militia training program , had done so well in preparing 200 @,@ 000 men and women for war . " It was also during this deployment that he suffered a bullet grazing to the cheek when his pistol fell out of its holster and accidentally discharged . 
 In August 1961 , during an economic conference of the Organization of American States in Punta del Este , Uruguay , Che Guevara sent a note of " gratitude " to United States President John F. Kennedy through Richard N. Goodwin , Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter @-@ American Affairs . It read " Thanks for Playa Girón ( Bay of Pigs ) . Before the invasion , the revolution was shaky . Now it 's stronger than ever . " In response to United States Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon presenting the Alliance for Progress for ratification by the meeting , Guevara antagonistically attacked the United States claim of being a " democracy " , stating that such a system was not compatible with " financial oligarchy , discrimination against blacks , and outrages by the Ku Klux Klan " . Guevara continued , speaking out against the " persecution " that in his view " drove scientists like Oppenheimer from their posts , deprived the world for years of the marvelous voice of Paul Robeson , and sent the Rosenbergs to their deaths against the protests of a shocked world . " Guevara ended his remarks by insinuating that the United States was not interested in real reforms , sardonically quipping that " U.S. experts never talk about agrarian reform ; they prefer a safe subject , like a better water supply . In short , they seem to prepare the revolution of the toilets . " 
 Guevara , who was practically the architect of the Soviet @-@ Cuban relationship , then played a key role in bringing to Cuba the Soviet nuclear @-@ armed ballistic missiles that precipitated the Cuban Missile Crisis in October 1962 and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . A few weeks after the crisis , during an interview with the British communist newspaper the Daily Worker , Guevara was still fuming over the perceived Soviet betrayal and told correspondent Sam Russell that , if the missiles had been under Cuban control , they would have fired them off . While expounding on the incident later , Guevara reiterated that the cause of socialist liberation against global " imperialist aggression " would ultimately have been worth the possibility of " millions of atomic war victims " . The missile crisis further convinced Guevara that the world 's two superpowers ( the United States and the Soviet Union ) used Cuba as a pawn in their own global strategies . Afterward , he denounced the Soviets almost as frequently as he denounced the Americans . 
 = = International diplomacy = = 
 In December 1964 , Che Guevara had emerged as a " revolutionary statesman of world stature " and thus traveled to New York City as head of the Cuban delegation to speak at the United Nations . On December 11 , 1964 , during Guevara 's hour @-@ long , impassioned address at the UN , he criticized the United Nations ' inability to confront the " brutal policy of apartheid " in South Africa , asking " Can the United Nations do nothing to stop this ? " Guevara then denounced the United States policy towards their black population , stating : 
 Those who kill their own children and discriminate daily against them because of the color of their skin ; those who let the murderers of blacks remain free , protecting them , and furthermore punishing the black population because they demand their legitimate rights as free men — how can those who do this consider themselves guardians of freedom ? 
 An indignant Guevara ended his speech by reciting the Second Declaration of Havana , decreeing Latin America a " family of 200 million brothers who suffer the same miseries " . This " epic " , Guevara declared , would be written by the " hungry Indian masses , peasants without land , exploited workers , and progressive masses " . To Guevara the conflict was a struggle of masses and ideas , which would be carried forth by those " mistreated and scorned by imperialism " who were previously considered " a weak and submissive flock " . With this " flock " , Guevara now asserted , " Yankee monopoly capitalism " now terrifyingly saw their " gravediggers " . It would be during this " hour of vindication " , Guevara pronounced , that the " anonymous mass " would begin to write its own history " with its own blood " and reclaim those " rights that were laughed at by one and all for 500 years " . Guevara closed his remarks to the General Assembly by hypothesizing that this " wave of anger " would " sweep the lands of Latin America " and that the labor masses who " turn the wheel of history " were now , for the first time , " awakening from the long , brutalizing sleep to which they had been subjected " . 
 Guevara later learned there had been two failed attempts on his life by Cuban exiles during his stop at the UN complex . The first from Molly Gonzales , who tried to break through barricades upon his arrival with a seven @-@ inch hunting knife , and later during his address by Guillermo Novo , who fired a timer @-@ initiated bazooka from a boat in the East River at the United Nations Headquarters , but missed and was off target . Afterwards Guevara commented on both incidents , stating that " it is better to be killed by a woman with a knife than by a man with a gun " , while adding with a languid wave of his cigar that the explosion had " given the whole thing more flavor " . 
 While in New York , Guevara appeared on the CBS Sunday news program Face the Nation , and met with a wide range of people , from United States Senator Eugene McCarthy to associates of Malcolm X. The latter expressed his admiration , declaring Guevara " one of the most revolutionary men in this country right now " while reading a statement from him to a crowd at the Audubon Ballroom . 
 On December 17 , Guevara left New York for Paris , France , and from there embarked on a three @-@ month world tour that included visits to the People 's Republic of China , North Korea , the United Arab Republic , Algeria , Ghana , Guinea , Mali , Dahomey , Congo @-@ Brazzaville and Tanzania , with stops in Ireland and Prague . While in Ireland , Guevara embraced his own Irish heritage , celebrating Saint Patrick 's Day in Limerick city . He wrote to his father on this visit , humorously stating " I am in this green Ireland of your ancestors . When they found out , the television [ station ] came to ask me about the Lynch genealogy , but in case they were horse thieves or something like that , I didn 't say much . " 
 During this voyage , he wrote a letter to Carlos Quijano , editor of a Uruguayan weekly , which was later retitled Socialism and Man in Cuba . Outlined in the treatise was Guevara 's summons for the creation of a new consciousness , a new status of work , and a new role of the individual . He also laid out the reasoning behind his anti @-@ capitalist sentiments , stating : 
 The laws of capitalism , blind and invisible to the majority , act upon the individual without his thinking about it . He sees only the vastness of a seemingly infinite horizon before him . That is how it is painted by capitalist propagandists , who purport to draw a lesson from the example of Rockefeller — whether or not it is true — about the possibilities of success . The amount of poverty and suffering required for the emergence of a Rockefeller , and the amount of depravity that the accumulation of a fortune of such magnitude entails , are left out of the picture , and it is not always possible to make the people in general see this . 
 Guevara ended the essay by declaring that " the true revolutionary is guided by a great feeling of love " and beckoning on all revolutionaries to " strive every day so that this love of living humanity will be transformed into acts that serve as examples " , thus becoming " a moving force " . The genesis for Guevara 's assertions relied on the fact that he believed the example of the Cuban Revolution was " something spiritual that would transcend all borders " . 
 = = = Algiers , the Soviets , and China = = = 
 In Algiers , Algeria , on February 24 , 1965 , Guevara made what turned out to be his last public appearance on the international stage when he delivered a speech at an economic seminar on Afro @-@ Asian solidarity . He specified the moral duty of the socialist countries , accusing them of tacit complicity with the exploiting Western countries . He proceeded to outline a number of measures which he said the communist @-@ bloc countries must implement in order to accomplish the defeat of imperialism . Having criticized the Soviet Union ( the primary financial backer of Cuba ) in such a public manner , he returned to Cuba on March 14 to a solemn reception by Fidel and Raúl Castro , Osvaldo Dorticós and Carlos Rafael Rodríguez at the Havana airport . 
 As revealed in his last public speech in Algiers , Guevara had come to view the Northern Hemisphere , led by the U.S. in the West and the Soviet Union in the East , as the exploiter of the Southern Hemisphere . He strongly supported Communist North Vietnam in the Vietnam War , and urged the peoples of other developing countries to take up arms and create " many Vietnams " . Che 's denunciations of the Soviets made him popular among intellectuals and artists of the Western European left who had lost faith in the Soviet Union , while his condemnation of imperialism and call to revolution inspired young radical students in the United States , who were impatient for societal change . 
 Moreover , the coincidence of Guevara 's views with those expounded by the Chinese Communist leadership under Mao Zedong was increasingly problematic for Cuba as the nation 's economy became more and more dependent on the Soviet Union . Since the early days of the Cuban revolution , Guevara had been considered by many an advocate of Maoist strategy in Latin America and the originator of a plan for the rapid industrialization of Cuba that was often compared to China 's " Great Leap Forward " . Castro became weary of Guevara 's opposition to Soviet conditions and recommendations : measures that Castro saw as necessary , but which Guevara described as corrupt and " pre @-@ monopolist " . 
 In Guevara 's private writings from this time ( since released ) , he displays his growing criticism of the Soviet political economy , believing that the Soviets had " forgotten Marx " . This led Guevara to denounce a range of Soviet practices including what he saw as their attempt to " air @-@ brush the inherent violence of class struggle integral to the transition from capitalism to socialism " , their " dangerous " policy of peaceful co @-@ existence with the United States , their failure to push for a " change in consciousness " towards the idea of work , and their attempt to " liberalize " the socialist economy . Guevara wanted the complete elimination of money , interest , commodity production , the market economy , and " mercantile relationships " : all conditions that the Soviets argued would only disappear when world communism was achieved . Disagreeing with this <unk> approach , Guevara criticized the Soviet Manual of Political Economy , correctly predicting that if USSR would not abolish the law of value ( as Guevara desired ) , it would eventually return to capitalism . 
 Two weeks after his Algiers speech and his return to Cuba , Guevara dropped out of public life and then vanished altogether . His whereabouts were a great mystery in Cuba , as he was generally regarded as second in power to Castro himself . His disappearance was variously attributed to the failure of the Cuban industrialization scheme he had advocated while minister of industries , to pressure exerted on Castro by Soviet officials disapproving of Guevara 's pro @-@ Chinese Communist stance on the Sino @-@ Soviet split , and to serious differences between Guevara and the pragmatic Castro regarding Cuba 's economic development and ideological line . Pressed by international speculation regarding Guevara 's fate , Castro stated on June 16 , 1965 , that the people would be informed when Guevara himself wished to let them know . Still , rumors spread both inside and outside Cuba to the missing Guevara 's whereabouts . 
 On October 3 , 1965 , Castro publicly revealed an undated letter purportedly written to him by Guevara around seven months earlier which was later titled Che Guevara 's " farewell letter " . In the letter , Guevara reaffirmed his enduring solidarity with the Cuban Revolution but declared his intention to leave Cuba to fight for the revolutionary cause abroad . Additionally , he resigned from all his positions in the Cuban government and communist party , and renounced his honorary Cuban citizenship . 
 = = Congo = = 
 In early 1965 , Guevara went to Africa to offer his knowledge and experience as a guerrilla to the ongoing conflict in the Congo . According to Algerian President Ahmed Ben Bella , Guevara thought that Africa was imperialism 's weak link and so had enormous revolutionary potential . Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser , who had fraternal relations with Che since his 1959 visit , saw Guevara 's plan to fight in Congo as " unwise " and warned that he would become a " Tarzan " figure , doomed to failure . Despite the warning , Guevara traveled to Congo using the alias Ramón Benítez . He led the Cuban operation in support of the Marxist Simba movement , which had emerged from the ongoing Congo crisis . Guevara , his second @-@ in @-@ command Victor <unk> , and 12 other Cuban <unk> arrived in Congo on April 24 , 1965 and a contingent of approximately 100 Afro @-@ Cubans joined them soon afterward . For a time , they collaborated with guerrilla leader Laurent @-@ Désiré Kabila , who had helped supporters of the overthrown president Patrice Lumumba to lead an unsuccessful revolt months earlier . As an admirer of the late Lumumba , Guevara declared that his " murder should be a lesson for all of us " . Guevara , with limited knowledge of Swahili and the local languages , was assigned a teenage interpreter , Freddy <unk> . Over the course of seven months , <unk> grew to " admire the hard @-@ working Guevara " , who " showed the same respect to black people as he did to whites " . However , Guevara soon became disillusioned with the poor discipline of Kabila 's troops and later dismissed him , stating " nothing leads me to believe he is the man of the hour " . 
 As an additional obstacle , white South African mercenaries , led by Mike Hoare in league with Cuban exiles and the CIA , worked with the Congo National Army to thwart Guevara 's movements from his base camp in the mountains near the village of <unk> on Lake Tanganyika in southeast Congo . They were able to monitor his communications and so pre @-@ empted his attacks and interdicted his supply lines . Although Guevara tried to conceal his presence in Congo , the United States government knew his location and activities . The National Security Agency was intercepting all of his incoming and outgoing transmissions via equipment aboard the USNS Private Jose F. Valdez ( T @-@ AG @-@ 169 ) , a floating listening post that continuously cruised the Indian Ocean off Dar es Salaam for that purpose . 
 Guevara 's aim was to export the revolution by instructing local anti @-@ Mobutu Simba fighters in Marxist ideology and foco theory strategies of guerrilla warfare . In his Congo Diary book , he cites the incompetence , intransigence and infighting among the Congolese rebels as key reasons for the revolt 's failure . Later that year on November 20 , 1965 , suffering from dysentery and acute asthma , and disheartened after seven months of frustration and inactivity , Guevara left Congo with the six Cuban survivors of his 12 @-@ man column . Guevara had planned to send the wounded back to Cuba and fight in Congo alone until his death , as a revolutionary example . But after being urged by his comrades , and two emissaries sent by Castro , at the last moment he reluctantly agreed to leave Africa . During that day and night , Guevara 's forces quietly took down their base camp , burned their huts , and destroyed or threw weapons into Lake Tanganyika that they could not take with them , before crossing the border into Tanzania at night and traveling by land to Dar es Salaam . In speaking about his experience in Congo months later , Guevara concluded that he left rather than fight to the death because : " The human element failed . There is no will to fight . The leaders are corrupt . In a word ... there was nothing to do . " Guevara also declared that " we can 't liberate by ourselves a country that does not want to fight . " A few weeks later , he wrote the preface to the diary he kept during the Congo venture , that began : " This is the history of a failure . " 
 Guevara was reluctant to return to Cuba , because Castro had made public Guevara 's " farewell letter " — a letter intended to only be revealed in the case of his death — wherein he severed all ties in order to devote himself to revolution throughout the world . As a result , Guevara spent the next six months living clandestinely in Dar es Salaam and Prague . During this time , he compiled his memoirs of the Congo experience and wrote drafts of two more books , one on philosophy and the other on economics . As Guevara prepared for Bolivia , he secretly traveled back to Cuba to visit Castro , as well as to see his wife and to write a last letter to his five children to be read upon his death , which ended with him instructing them : 
 Above all , always be capable of feeling deeply any injustice committed against anyone , anywhere in the world . This is the most beautiful quality in a revolutionary . 
 = = Bolivia = = 
 In late 1966 , Guevara 's location was still not public knowledge , although representatives of Mozambique 's independence movement , the FRELIMO , reported that they met with Guevara in late 1966 in Dar es Salaam regarding his offer to aid in their revolutionary project , an offer which they ultimately rejected . In a speech at the 1967 International Workers ' Day rally in Havana , the acting minister of the armed forces , Major Juan Almeida , announced that Guevara was " serving the revolution somewhere in Latin America " . 
 Before he departed for Bolivia , Guevara altered his appearance by shaving off his beard and much of his hair , also dying it grey so he would be unrecognizable as Che Guevara . On November 3 , 1966 , Guevara secretly arrived in La Paz on a flight from Montevideo under the false name Adolfo Mena González , posing as a middle @-@ aged Uruguayan businessman working for the Organization of American States . 
 Three days after his arrival in Bolivia , Guevara left La Paz for the rural south east region of the country to form his guerrilla army . Guevara 's first base camp was located in the montane dry forest in the remote Ñancahuazú region . Training at the camp in the Ñancahuazú valley proved to be hazardous , and little was accomplished in way of building a guerrilla army . The Argentine @-@ born East German operative Haydée Tamara Bunke <unk> , better known by her nom de guerre " Tania " , had been installed as Che 's primary agent in La Paz . 
 Guevara 's guerrilla force , numbering about 50 men and operating as the <unk> ( Ejército de Liberación Nacional de Bolivia ; " National Liberation Army of Bolivia " ) , was well equipped and scored a number of early successes against Bolivian army regulars in the difficult terrain of the mountainous <unk> region during the early months of 1967 . As a result of Guevara 's units ' winning several skirmishes against Bolivian troops in the spring and summer of 1967 , the Bolivian government began to overestimate the true size of the guerrilla force . But in August 1967 , the Bolivian Army managed to eliminate two guerrilla groups in a violent battle , reportedly killing one of the leaders . 
 Researchers hypothesize that Guevara 's plan for fomenting a revolution in Bolivia failed for an array of reasons : 
 He had expected to deal only with the Bolivian military , who were poorly trained and equipped , and was unaware that the United States government had sent a team of the CIA 's Special Activities Division commandos and other operatives into Bolivia to aid the anti @-@ insurrection effort . The Bolivian Army would also be trained , advised , and supplied by U.S. Army Special Forces , including a recently organized elite battalion of U.S. Rangers trained in jungle warfare that set up camp in La Esperanza , a small settlement close to the location of Guevara 's guerrillas . 
 Guevara had expected assistance and cooperation from the local dissidents that he did not receive , nor did he receive support from Bolivia 's Communist Party under the leadership of Mario Monje , which was oriented toward Moscow rather than Havana . In Guevara 's own diary captured after his death , he wrote about the Communist Party of Bolivia , which he characterized as " distrustful , disloyal and stupid " . 
 He had expected to remain in radio contact with Havana . The two shortwave radio transmitters provided to him by Cuba were faulty ; thus , the guerrillas were unable to communicate and be resupplied , leaving them isolated and stranded . 
 In addition , Guevara 's known preference for confrontation rather than compromise , which had previously surfaced during his guerrilla warfare campaign in Cuba , contributed to his inability to develop successful working relationships with local rebel leaders in Bolivia , just as it had in the Congo . This tendency had existed in Cuba , but had been kept in check by the timely interventions and guidance of Fidel Castro . 
 The end result was that Guevara was unable to attract inhabitants of the local area to join his militia during the eleven months he attempted recruitment . Many of the inhabitants willingly informed the Bolivian authorities and military about the guerrillas and their movements in the area . Near the end of the Bolivian venture , Guevara wrote in his diary that " the peasants do not give us any help , and they are turning into informers . " 
 = = = Capture and death = = = 
 Félix Rodríguez , a Cuban exile turned CIA Special Activities Division operative , advised Bolivian troops during the hunt for Guevara in Bolivia . In addition , the 2007 documentary My Enemy 's Enemy alleges that Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie advised and possibly helped the CIA orchestrate Guevara 's eventual capture . 
 On October 7 , 1967 , an informant apprised the Bolivian Special Forces of the location of Guevara 's guerrilla encampment in the <unk> ravine . On the morning of October 8 , they encircled the area with two battalions numbering 1 @,@ 800 soldiers and advanced into the ravine triggering a battle where Guevara was wounded and taken prisoner while leading a detachment with <unk> Cuba <unk> . Che biographer Jon Lee Anderson reports Bolivian Sergeant Bernardino <unk> 's account : that as the Bolivian Rangers approached , a twice @-@ wounded Guevara , his gun rendered useless , threw up his arms in surrender and shouted to the soldiers : " Do not shoot ! I am Che Guevara and I am worth more to you alive than dead . " 
 Guevara was tied up and taken to a dilapidated mud schoolhouse in the nearby village of La Higuera on the evening of October 8 . For the next half day , Guevara refused to be interrogated by Bolivian officers and would only speak quietly to Bolivian soldiers . One of those Bolivian soldiers , a helicopter pilot named Jaime Nino de Guzman , describes Che as looking " dreadful " . According to Guzman , Guevara was shot through the right calf , his hair was matted with dirt , his clothes were shredded , and his feet were covered in rough leather sheaths . Despite his haggard appearance , he recounts that " Che held his head high , looked everyone straight in the eyes and asked only for something to smoke . " De Guzman states that he " took pity " and gave him a small bag of tobacco for his pipe , and that Guevara then smiled and thanked him . Later on the night of October 8 , Guevara — despite having his hands tied — kicked a Bolivian army officer , named Captain Espinosa , against a wall after the officer entered the schoolhouse and tried to snatch Guevara 's pipe from his mouth as a souvenir while he was still smoking it . In another instance of defiance , Guevara spat in the face of Bolivian Rear Admiral <unk> , who attempted to question Guevara a few hours before his execution . 
 The following morning on October 9 , Guevara asked to see the school teacher of the village , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old woman named Julia Cortez . Cortez would later state that she found Guevara to be an " agreeable looking man with a soft and ironic glance " and that during their conversation she found herself " unable to look him in the eye " because his " gaze was unbearable , piercing , and so tranquil " . During their short conversation , Guevara pointed out to Cortez the poor condition of the schoolhouse , stating that it was " anti @-@ pedagogical " to expect campesino students to be educated there , while " government officials drive Mercedes cars " , and declaring " that 's what we are fighting against . " 
 Later that morning on October 9 , Bolivian President René Barrientos ordered that Guevara be killed . The order was relayed to the unit holding Guevara by Félix Rodríguez despite the United States government 's desire that Guevara be taken to Panama for further interrogation . The executioner who volunteered to kill Guevara was Mario Terán , an alcoholic 31 @-@ year @-@ old sergeant in the Bolivian army who had personally requested to shoot Guevara because three of his friends from B Company , all with the same first name of " Mario " , had been killed in an earlier firefight with Guevara 's band of guerrillas . To make the bullet wounds appear consistent with the story that the Bolivian government planned to release to the public , Félix Rodríguez ordered Terán not to shoot Guevara in the head , but to aim carefully to make it appear that Guevara had been killed in action during a clash with the Bolivian army . Gary Prado , the Bolivian captain in command of the army company that captured Guevara , said that the reasons Barrientos ordered the immediate execution of Guevara were so there would be no possibility for Guevara to escape from prison , and also so there would be no drama in regard to a public trial where adverse publicity might happen . 
 About 30 minutes before Guevara was killed , Félix Rodríguez attempted to question him about the whereabouts of other guerrilla fighters who were currently at large , but Guevara continued to remain silent . Rodríguez , assisted by a few Bolivian soldiers , helped Guevara to his feet and took him outside the hut to parade him before other Bolivian soldiers where he posed with Guevara for a photo opportunity where one soldier took a photograph of Rodríguez and other soldiers standing alongside Guevara . A little later , Guevara was asked by one of the Bolivian soldiers guarding him if he was thinking about his own immortality . " No , " he replied , " I 'm thinking about the immortality of the revolution . " A few minutes later , Sergeant Terán entered the hut to shoot him , whereupon Guevara reportedly said : " I know you 've come to kill me . Shoot , coward , you are only going to kill a man . " Terán hesitated , then pointed his self @-@ loading M2 Carbine at Guevara and opened fire , hitting him in the arms and legs . Then , as Guevara writhed on the ground , apparently biting one of his wrists to avoid crying out , Terán fired another burst , fatally wounding him in the chest . Guevara was pronounced dead at 1 : 10 pm local time according to Rodríguez . In all , Guevara was shot nine times by Terán . This included five times in his legs , once in the right shoulder and arm , and once in the chest and throat . 
 Months earlier , during his last public declaration to the <unk> Conference , Guevara wrote his own epitaph , stating " Wherever death may surprise us , let it be welcome , provided that this our battle cry may have reached some receptive ear and another hand may be extended to wield our weapons . " 
 = = Post @-@ execution and memorial = = 
 After his execution , Guevara 's body was lashed to the landing skids of a helicopter and flown to nearby Vallegrande , where photographs were taken of him lying on a concrete slab in the laundry room of the Nuestra Señora de Malta . Several witnesses were called to confirm his identity , key amongst them the British journalist Richard Gott , the only witness to have met Guevara when he was alive . Put on display , as hundreds of local residents filed past the body , Guevara 's corpse was considered by many to represent a " Christ @-@ like " visage , with some even surreptitiously clipping locks of his hair as divine relics . Such comparisons were further extended when English art critic John Berger , two weeks later upon seeing the post @-@ mortem photographs , observed that they resembled two famous paintings : Rembrandt 's The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp and Andrea Mantegna 's Lamentation over the Dead Christ . There were also four correspondents present when Guevara 's body arrived in Vallegrande , including Björn Kumm of the Swedish Aftonbladet , who described the scene in a November 11 , 1967 exclusive for The New Republic . 
 A declassified memorandum dated October 11 , 1967 to United States President Lyndon B. Johnson from his National Security Advisor Walt Whitman Rostow , called the decision to kill Guevara " stupid " but " understandable from a Bolivian standpoint " . After the execution Rodríguez took several of Guevara 's personal items — including a Rolex GMT Master wristwatch that he continued to wear many years later — often showing them to reporters during the ensuing years . After a military doctor amputated his hands , Bolivian army officers transferred Guevara 's body to an undisclosed location and refused to reveal whether his remains had been buried or cremated . The hands were preserved in formaldehyde to be sent to Buenos Aires for fingerprint identification . ( His fingerprints were on file with the Argentine police . ) They were later sent to Cuba . 
 On October 15 Fidel Castro publicly acknowledged that Guevara was dead and proclaimed three days of public mourning throughout Cuba . On October 18 Castro addressed a crowd of one million mourners in Havana 's Plaza de la Revolución and spoke about Guevara 's character as a revolutionary . Fidel Castro closed his impassioned eulogy thus : 
 If we wish to express what we want the men of future generations to be , we must say : Let them be like Che ! If we wish to say how we want our children to be educated , we must say without hesitation : We want them to be educated in Che 's spirit ! If we want the model of a man , who does not belong to our times but to the future , I say from the depths of my heart that such a model , without a single stain on his conduct , without a single stain on his action , is Che ! 
 Also removed when Guevara was captured were his 30 @,@ 000 @-@ word , hand @-@ written diary , a collection of his personal poetry , and a short story he had authored about a young Communist guerrilla who learns to overcome his fears . His diary documented events of the guerrilla campaign in Bolivia , with the first entry on November 7 , 1966 , shortly after his arrival at the farm in Ñancahuazú , and the last dated October 7 , 1967 , the day before his capture . The diary tells how the guerrillas were forced to begin operations prematurely because of discovery by the Bolivian Army , explains Guevara 's decision to divide the column into two units that were subsequently unable to re @-@ establish contact , and describes their overall unsuccessful venture . It also records the rift between Guevara and the Communist Party of Bolivia that resulted in Guevara having significantly fewer soldiers than originally expected , and shows that Guevara had a great deal of difficulty recruiting from the local populace , partly because the guerrilla group had learned Quechua , unaware that the local language was actually a <unk> – Guaraní language . As the campaign drew to an unexpected close , Guevara became increasingly ill . He suffered from ever @-@ worsening bouts of asthma , and most of his last offensives were carried out in an attempt to obtain medicine . The Bolivian diary was quickly and crudely translated by Ramparts magazine and circulated around the world . There are at least four additional diaries in existence — those of Israel Reyes Zayas ( Alias " Braulio " ) , Harry Villegas Tamayo ( " Pombo " ) , Eliseo Reyes Rodriguez ( " Rolando " ) and <unk> Alarcón Ramírez ( " Benigno " ) — each of which reveals additional aspects of the events . 
 French intellectual Régis Debray , who was captured in April 1967 while with Guevara in Bolivia , gave an interview from prison in August 1968 , in which he enlarged on the circumstances of Guevara 's capture . Debray , who had lived with Guevara 's band of guerrillas for a short time , said that in his view they were " victims of the forest " and thus " eaten by the jungle " . Debray described a destitute situation where Guevara 's men suffered malnutrition , lack of water , absence of shoes , and only possessed six blankets for 22 men . Debray recounts that Guevara and the others had been suffering an " illness " which caused their hands and feet to swell into " mounds of flesh " to the point where you could not discern the fingers on their hands . Debray described Guevara as " optimistic about the future of Latin America " despite the futile situation , and remarked that Guevara was " resigned to die in the knowledge that his death would be a sort of renaissance " , noting that Guevara perceived death " as a promise of rebirth " and " ritual of renewal " . 
 To a certain extent , this belief by Guevara of a metaphorical resurrection came true . While pictures of the dead Guevara were being circulated and the circumstances of his death were being debated , Che 's legend began to spread . Demonstrations in protest against his " assassination " occurred throughout the world , and articles , tributes , and poems were written about his life and death . Rallies in support of Guevara were held from " Mexico to Santiago , Algiers to Angola , and Cairo to Calcutta . " The population of Budapest and Prague lit candles to honor Guevara 's passing ; and the picture of a smiling Che appeared in London and Paris . When a few months later riots broke out in Berlin , France , and Chicago , and the unrest spread to the American college campuses , young men and women wore Che Guevara T @-@ shirts and carried his pictures during their protest marches . In the view of military historian Erik <unk> : " In those heady months of 1968 , Che Guevara was not dead . He was very much alive . " 
 = = = Retrieval of remains = = = 
 In late 1995 , the retired Bolivian General Mario Vargas revealed to Jon Lee Anderson , author of Che Guevara : A Revolutionary Life , that Guevara 's corpse lay near a Vallegrande airstrip . The result was a multi @-@ national search for the remains , which would last more than a year . In July 1997 a team of Cuban geologists and Argentine forensic anthropologists discovered the remnants of seven bodies in two mass graves , including one man with amputated hands ( like Guevara ) . Bolivian government officials with the Ministry of Interior later identified the body as Guevara when the excavated teeth " perfectly matched " a plaster mold of Che 's teeth made in Cuba prior to his Congolese expedition . The " clincher " then arrived when Argentine forensic anthropologist Alejandro Inchaurregui inspected the inside hidden pocket of a blue jacket dug up next to the <unk> cadaver and found a small bag of pipe tobacco . Nino de Guzman , the Bolivian helicopter pilot who had given Che a small bag of tobacco , later remarked that he " had serious doubts " at first and " thought the Cubans would just find any old bones and call it Che " ; but " after hearing about the tobacco pouch , I have no doubts . " On October 17 , 1997 , Guevara 's remains , with those of six of his fellow combatants , were laid to rest with military honors in a specially built mausoleum in the Cuban city of Santa Clara , where he had commanded over the decisive military victory of the Cuban Revolution . 
 In July 2008 , the Bolivian government of Evo Morales unveiled Guevara 's formerly @-@ sealed diaries composed in two frayed notebooks , along with a logbook and several black @-@ and @-@ white photographs . At this event Bolivia 's vice @-@ minister of culture , Pablo <unk> , expressed that there were plans to publish photographs of every handwritten page later in the year . Meanwhile , in August 2009 anthropologists working for Bolivia 's Justice Ministry discovered and unearthed the bodies of five of Guevara 's fellow guerrillas near the Bolivian town of <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The discovery of Che 's remains metonymically activated a series of interlinked associations — rebel , martyr , rogue figure from a picaresque adventure , savior , renegade , extremist — in which there was no fixed divide among them . The current court of opinion places Che on a continuum that teeters between viewing him as a misguided rebel , a <unk> brilliant guerrilla philosopher , a poet @-@ warrior jousting at windmills , a brazen warrior who threw down the gauntlet to the bourgeoisie , the object of fervent paeans to his sainthood , or a mass murderer clothed in the guise of an avenging angel whose every action is imbricated in violence — the archetypal <unk> Terrorist . 
 Guevara 's life and legacy remain contentious . The perceived contradictions of his ethos at various points in his life have created a complex character of duality , one who was " able to wield the pen and submachine gun with equal skill , " while prophesying that " the most important revolutionary ambition was to see man liberated from his alienation . " As <unk> as he was committed , his vision of liberation was at once romantic , poetic , compassionate , and ruthless . Guevara 's paradoxical standing is further complicated by his array of seemingly diametrically opposed qualities . A secular humanist and sympathetic practitioner of medicine who did not hesitate to shoot his enemies , a celebrated internationalist leader who advocated violence to enforce a utopian philosophy of the collective good , an idealistic intellectual who loved literature but refused to allow dissent , an anti @-@ imperialist Marxist insurgent who was radically willing to forge a poverty @-@ less new world on the apocalyptic ashes of the old one , and finally , an outspoken anti @-@ capitalist whose image has been expropriated and <unk> ; Che 's history continues to be rewritten and re @-@ imagined . Sociologist Michael <unk> contends that the many facets of Guevara 's life ( i.e. doctor and economist , revolutionary and banker , military theoretician and ambassador , deep thinker and political agitator ) illuminated the rise of the " Che myth " , allowing him to be invariably crystallized in his many metanarrative roles as a " Red Robin Hood , Don Quixote of communism , new Garibaldi , Marxist Saint Just , Cid <unk> of the Wretched of the Earth , Sir Galahad of the beggars ... and Bolshevik devil who haunts the dreams of the rich , ( while ) kindling braziers of subversion all over the world . " 
 Various notable individuals have lauded Guevara as a hero ; for example , Nelson Mandela referred to him as " an inspiration for every human being who loves freedom " , while Jean @-@ Paul Sartre described him as " not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age " . Others who have expressed their admiration include authors Graham Greene , who remarked that Guevara " represented the idea of gallantry , chivalry , and adventure " , and Susan Sontag , who supposed that " [ Che 's ] goal was nothing less than the cause of humanity itself . " In the black community , philosopher Frantz <unk> professed Guevara to be " the world symbol of the possibilities of one man " , while Black Power leader Stokely Carmichael eulogized that " Che Guevara is not dead , his ideas are with us . " Praise has been reflected throughout the political spectrum , with the libertarian theorist Murray Rothbard extolling Guevara as a " heroic figure " , lamenting after his death that " more than any man of our epoch or even of our century , [ Che ] was the living embodiment of the principle of revolution " , while journalist Christopher Hitchens commented that " [ Che 's ] death meant a lot to me and countless like me at the time , he was a role model , albeit an impossible one for us bourgeois romantics insofar as he went and did what revolutionaries were meant to do — fought and died for his beliefs . " British historian Hugh Thomas opines that Guevara was a " brave , sincere and determined man who was also obstinate , narrow , and dogmatic . " At the end of his life , according to Thomas , " he seems to have become convinced of the virtues of violence for its own sake " , while " his influence over Castro for good or evil " grew after his death , as Fidel took up many of his views . In Thomas ' assessment , " As in the case of Martí , or Lawrence of Arabia , failure has brightened , not dimmed the legend . " Similarly , the Cuban @-@ American sociologist Samuel Farber lauds Che Guevara as " an honest and committed revolutionary , " but also criticizes the fact that " he never embraced socialism in its most democratic essence . " 
 Conversely , Jacobo <unk> , an exiled opposition author , dismisses all praise of Guevara and portrays him as a callous executioner . Exiled former Cuban prisoners have expressed similar opinions , among them Armando Valladares , who has declared Guevara " a man full of hatred " who executed dozens without trial , and Carlos Alberto Montaner , who has claimed that Guevara possessed " a Robespierre mentality " , wherein cruelty against the revolution 's enemies was a virtue . Alvaro Vargas Llosa of The Independent Institute has hypothesized that Guevara 's contemporary followers " delude themselves by clinging to a myth " , describing Guevara as a " Marxist Puritan " who employed his rigid power to suppress dissent , while also operating as a " cold @-@ blooded killing machine " . Llosa accused Guevara 's " fanatical disposition " as being the linchpin of the " Sovietization " of the Cuban revolution , speculating that he possessed a " total subordination of reality to blind ideological orthodoxy " . Moreover , detractors have attempted to demonstrate that Che @-@ inspired revolutions in much of Latin America had the practical result of reinforcing brutal militarism and internecine conflict for many years . Hoover Institution research fellow William Ratliff regards Guevara as a creation of his historical environment , referring to him as a " fearless " and " head @-@ strong Messiah @-@ like figure " , who was the product of a martyr @-@ enamored Latin culture which " inclined people to seek out and follow paternalistic miracle workers . " Ratliff has speculated that the economic conditions in the region suited Guevara 's commitment to " bring justice to the downtrodden by crushing centuries @-@ old tyrannies " ; describing Latin America as being plagued by what Moisés <unk> referred to as the " legendary malignancies " of inequality , poverty , dysfunctional politics and malfunctioning institutions . 
 Meanwhile , Guevara remains a national hero in Cuba , where his image adorns the 3 peso banknote and school children begin each morning by pledging " We will be like Che . " In his homeland of Argentina , where high schools bear his name , numerous Che museums dot the country , which in 2008 unveiled a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) bronze statue of him in the city of his birth , Rosario . Additionally , Guevara has been sanctified by some Bolivian campesinos as " Saint Ernesto " , who pray to him for assistance . In stark contrast , Guevara remains a hated figure amongst many in the Cuban exile and Cuban @-@ American community of the United States , who view him with animosity as " the butcher of La Cabaña " . Despite this polarized status , a high @-@ contrast monochrome graphic of Che 's face , created in 1968 by Irish artist Jim Fitzpatrick , became a universally <unk> and objectified image , found on an endless array of items , including T @-@ shirts , hats , posters , tattoos , and bikinis , ironically contributing to the consumer culture Guevara despised . Yet , he still remains a transcendent figure both in specifically political contexts and as a wide @-@ ranging popular icon of youthful rebellion . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Archival media = = 
 = = = Video footage = = = 
 Guevara addressing the United Nations General Assembly on December 11 , 1964 , ( 6 : 21 ) , public domain footage uploaded by the UN , video clip 
 Guevara interviewed by Face the Nation on December 13 , 1964 , ( 29 : 11 ) , from CBS , video clip 
 Guevara interviewed in 1964 on a visit to Dublin , Ireland , ( 2 : 53 ) , English translation , from RTÉ Libraries and Archives , video clip 
 Guevara reciting a poem , ( 0 : 58 ) , English subtitles , from El Che : Investigating a Legend – Kultur Video 2001 , video clip 
 Guevara showing support for Fidel Castro , ( 0 : 22 ) , English subtitles , from El Che : Investigating a Legend – Kultur Video 2001 , video clip 
 Guevara speaking about labor , ( 0 : 28 ) , English subtitles , from El Che : Investigating a Legend – Kultur Video 2001 , video clip 
 Guevara speaking about the Bay of Pigs , ( 0 : 17 ) , English subtitles , from El Che : Investigating a Legend – Kultur Video 2001 , video clip 
 Guevara speaking against imperialism , ( 1 : 20 ) , English subtitles , from El Che : Investigating a Legend – Kultur Video 2001 , video clip 
 Guevara interviewed in Paris and speaking French in 1964 , ( 4 : 47 ) , English subtitles , interviewed by Jean <unk> , video clip 
 = = = Audio recording = = = 
 Guevara interviewed on ABC 's Issues and Answers , ( 22 : 27 ) , English translation , narrated by Lisa Howard , March 24 , 1964 , audio clip 
 = = List of English works = = 
 = Over the Limit ( 2010 ) = 
 Over the Limit ( 2010 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Axe Hair , which took place on May 23 , 2010 at the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit , Michigan . It was the first event promoted under the Over the Limit name . 
 Nine matches took place at the event , eight of which were broadcast live on pay @-@ per @-@ view . In the main event from the Raw brand , John Cena faced Batista for the WWE Championship , while The Big Show versus World Heavyweight Champion Jack Swagger was the main event from the SmackDown brand . Matches on the undercard included Randy Orton against Edge , CM Punk facing Rey Mysterio , and Drew McIntyre defending the WWE Intercontinental Championship against Kofi Kingston . Other championships defended at the event were the WWE Divas Championship and the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 The event drew 197 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , and was attended live by 11 @,@ 000 people . Reviews for the event were generally negative , with reviewers criticizing the endings of the matches , stoppages for blood , and predictable match results . Five wrestlers sustained legitimate injuries during the course of the show . 
 = = Background = = 
 Over the Limit involved different wrestlers from scripted feuds , plots , and storylines that played out on WWE 's television programs . Wrestlers portrayed a villain or a hero as they followed a series of events that built tension , and culminated into a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main feud from the Raw brand heading into Over the Limit was between John Cena and Batista over the WWE Championship , and had been going on for several months . Cena retained the WWE Championship against Batista at the Extreme Rules pay @-@ per @-@ view in a Last Man Standing match , by taping Batista 's ankles to the ringpost to ensure he could not stand up by the count of ten . The next night on Raw , Batista defeated Randy Orton and Sheamus to become the number one contender to the championship and earn a rematch against Cena . On the May 3 episode of Raw , they competed in a Beat the Clock challenge to determine the stipulation for their match . Batista defeated Daniel Bryan in 5 : 06 , but Cena defeated Wade Barrett in 4 : 32 to win the challenge and the right to name the stipulation . The following week , Cena announced that the match would be an " I Quit " match . 
 The predominant feud from the SmackDown brand was between Jack Swagger and Big Show , over Swagger 's World Heavyweight Championship . As part of the 2010 WWE Draft , Big Show was drafted to SmackDown , where he was named the number one contender upon his debut on April 30 . Over the next several weeks , Big Show chokeslammed Swagger through the announce table , and interrupted a promo on the May 14 episode of SmackDown , in which Swagger was boasting about his accomplishments . As part of the segment , Big Show destroyed Swagger 's trophies and memorabilia . The following week , Big Show mocked Swagger in promos throughout the show and distracted Swagger during Swagger 's match with Kofi Kingston , allowing Kingston to win . 
 As part of the 2010 WWE Draft on April 26 , Edge was drafted to the Raw brand . Later that night , Edge interfered in a match to determine the number one contender to the WWE Championship , spearing Randy Orton and preventing Orton from receiving a WWE Championship match . The following week , Edge hosted an edition of his talk show , The Cutting Edge , with Orton as his special guest . During the show , Edge justified his actions by saying he was trying to make an impact , and attempted to convince Orton to reform Rated @-@ RKO , their former tag team . Instead Orton attacked Edge . The following week , Orton defeated Edge and Ted DiBiase in a handicap match , which led to " Pick Your Poison " matches on the May 17 episode of Raw , where Edge and Orton picked each other 's opponents for the night . Edge faced The Undertaker , and lost intentionally by countout , while Orton faced Jack Swagger , and lost by disqualification when Edge interfered . 
 The rivalry between Rey Mysterio and CM Punk was continued from several previous pay @-@ per @-@ views . After months of feuding , Mysterio challenged Punk to a Straight Edge Society Pledge vs. Hair match at Over the Limit . Had Punk won , Mysterio would have joined the Straight Edge Society , Punk 's faction which promoted the straight edge lifestyle . Had Mysterio won however , Punk agreed to have his head shaved . On May 14 , Mysterio and Punk faced each other in a singles match , but the Straight Edge Society ( Luke Gallows , Serena , and a mystery masked man ) interfered and attacked Mysterio . The following week , Mysterio interrupted an initiation ceremony , in which Punk was shaving the heads of three men to induct them into the Straight Edge Society , and mocked Punk , claiming everyone would be laughing at Punk when he was shaved bald at Over the Limit . Later that night , Mysterio teamed with Montel Vontavious Porter to defeat Punk and Gallows in a tag team match . 
 Another feud was over the WWE Intercontinental Championship between the defending champion Drew McIntyre and Kofi Kingston . SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long stripped McIntyre of the championship and fired him for repeatedly attacking Matt Hardy . Long set up a tournament to determine the new champion , in which Christian and Kingston qualified for the final by defeating Cody Rhodes and Dolph Ziggler . The following week , on the May 14 episode of SmackDown , Kingston defeated Christian to win the tournament and the championship . Immediately following the match , however , McIntyre presented Long with a letter from the WWE Chairman Vince McMahon , which stated that McIntyre had been reinstated to the roster and was still recognized as the Intercontinental Champion . As a result , WWE 's official website announced that McIntyre would defend the championship against tournament winner Kingston . 
 The team of Chris Jericho and The Miz had begun feuding with The Hart Dynasty ( Tyson Kidd and David Hart Smith ) over the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship . The Miz 's feud with The Hart Dynasty had begun while The Miz was one @-@ half of the Unified Tag Team Champions with Big Show . During the Draft episode of Raw , The Hart Dynasty defeated The Miz and Big Show to win the championship , which led to Big Show turning on The Miz . The following week , The Miz and Jericho , another former tag team partner of Big Show , teamed up to attack The Hart Dynasty . Jericho went on to defeat Smith to earn a championship match for himself and The Miz at Over the Limit . 
 After WrestleMania XXVI , Ted DiBiase had debuted a new gimmick of an arrogant millionaire , similar to his father ( Ted DiBiase , Sr. ) ' s old gimmick . On the April 5 episode of Raw , DiBiase was given possession of the Million Dollar Championship and access to a trust fund by his father . DiBiase then began looking for a " Virgil " , a manservant like his father used to have . He offered the position to R @-@ Truth , who refused , leading to a feud between the two . After losing a match to John Morrison , DiBiase attacked him , prompting R @-@ Truth to interfere and save Morrison . In retaliation , DiBiase paid The Colóns to attack R @-@ Truth the following week . 
 In the only women 's match scheduled on the card , Eve defended the WWE Divas Championship against the former champion , Maryse . Eve had won the championship on the April 12 episode of Raw , and in the weeks that followed she was attacked by Maryse , who was attempting to get revenge . 
 = = Event = = 
 Prior to the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Montel Vontavious Porter defeated Chavo Guerrero in a dark match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired as part of the pay @-@ per @-@ view was Drew McIntyre defending his Intercontinental Championship against Kofi Kingston . Kingston took the early advantage , by performing a suicide dive to the outside of the ring on McIntyre . McIntyre threw Kingston in the ringpost , and went on the offense . Kingston was able to counter McIntyre 's " Future Shock " DDT , and perform his finishing move , the S.O.S , to pin McIntyre for the victory and the championship . Following the match , McIntyre demanded that Teddy Long go out to the ring and reverse the decision , but instead McIntyre was attacked by Matt Hardy , who McIntyre had attacked on several occasions in the prior weeks . 
 The next match was a singles match between Ted DiBiase , who was accompanied by Virgil , and R @-@ Truth . In the early stages of the match , Virgil caused a distraction , allowing DiBiase to take the advantage by performing a reverse neckbreaker and throwing R @-@ Truth into the barricade at ringside . R @-@ Truth was able to counter a move from the top rope , and went on to win the match by utilising his " Lie Detector " finishing move ( a corkscrew flying forearm smash ) . 
 The third match on the card was a Straight Edge Society pledge vs. hair match , between CM Punk and Rey Mysterio . For this match , the other Straight Edge Society members ( Serena and Luke Gallows ) were banned from ringside . Early on in the match , Punk threw Mysterio headfirst out of the ring into the barber chair at ringside . Punk had suffered a cut to the head prior to the exchange , and while Mysterio was on the floor , the match was halted so that the blood could be cleaned up . While Punk 's wound was being attended , he dropkicked Mysterio , who was on the ring apron , and began attacking him on the floor to restart the match . After Mysterio missed a splash from the top rope , Punk went to pin him , but Mysterio was able to perform a crucifix cradle on Punk for the victory . The other Straight Edge Society members attacked Mysterio after the match , but he was saved by Kane , which allowed Mysterio to handcuff Punk to the ring ropes and shave his head . 
 A tag team match for the Unified Tag Team Championship followed , between the champions The Hart Dynasty ( Tyson Kidd and David Hart Smith ) , who were accompanied by their manager Natalya , and the team of Chris Jericho and The Miz . The Hart Dynasty took the early advantage , but Jericho and The Miz were able to isolate both Smith and Kidd in the ring at different points in the match , wearing them down . Natalya interfered by tripping up Jericho while The Miz had the referee distracted . The Hart Dynasty were able to capitalise , and performed the Hart Attack on The Miz for the pinfall victory . 
 The fifth match was between Edge and Randy Orton . Edge took early control of the match by driving Orton into the barricade outside the ring . Orton was able to recover , and performed a rope hung DDT on Edge . While setting up for his finishing move , the RKO , Orton appeared to injure his arm , and went outside the ring in an attempt to recover . Edge followed him , trying to perform the spear , but Orton was able to avoid it , and Edge hit the barricade . Neither man was able to return to the ring before the count of ten , and as a result , the match ended in a double countout . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The first main event match of the night was between the World Heavyweight Champion Jack Swagger and his challenger , Big Show . Big Show dominated the match , with Swagger getting very little offense . As a result , Swagger got frustrated and hit Big Show with the World Heavyweight Championship title belt , and was disqualified . After the match , Swagger attacked Big Show with a steel chair , but Big Show was able to stop him with a chokeslam . Big Show then performed his knockout punch on Swagger , before leaving the area . 
 The penultimate match on the card saw Eve defend the WWE Divas Championship against Maryse . Maryse took the early advantage , but when she threw Eve outside the ring , and attempted to kick her , she kicked the ringpost instead , allowing Eve to take control with a series of dropkicks . Eve performed a standing moonsault and a sunset flip for a near @-@ fall . Maryse countered a rolling senton splash attempt by Eve and went for her finishing move , the French Kiss ; that was countered by Eve for the pin , who retained her championship . 
 The main event was John Cena versus Batista for the WWE Championship in an " I Quit " match , where the object of the match is to force an opponent to say " I Quit " . As the bell rang to signal the start of the match Batista gave Cena the chance to quit immediately , but Cena refused and hit Batista with the microphone . Despite this , Batista was able to take control , and locked in a submission hold , but Cena refused to say " I quit " . Cena eventually countered the move into his own submission hold , the STF , and Batista passed out . As he had not said the words " I Quit " however , he had to be revived so the match could continue . Batista fought back , and was able to powerslam Cena through the announce table . As Cena was bleeding , the match was briefly halted so his wound could receive attention . The two fought into the crowd before ending up near the entrance ramp , with Batista hitting Cena with a steel chair . On the entrance stage , Batista got into a car , which had been placed on the stage for decoration , and attempted to run over Cena . Cena avoided it , and was able to pull Batista out of the car and slam him onto it . Cena performed his Attitude Adjustment on Batista onto the car , but when Batista refused to quit , Cena went for the move again . Batista quit , making Cena the winner , but Cena performed the Attitude Adjustment again anyway , sending Batista through the stage to the floor . As Cena was celebrating retaining the championship , he was attacked by Sheamus to end the show . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the event , five wrestlers suffered legitimate injuries . Randy Orton dislocated his shoulder while Ted DiBiase suffered a concussion , and although they both appeared on Raw the following night , they did not wrestle . CM Punk required 13 staples to close the wound in his forehead he sustained during his match with Mysterio . Batista suffered a back and tailbone injury during his match with John Cena , who himself suffered a laceration and lost a tooth . 
 On the episode of Raw following Over the Limit , Bret Hart was announced as the new Raw General Manager . During Batista 's promo at the beginning of the show , Hart interrupted and told him that if he wanted a rematch against Cena , he would have to qualify for the fatal four @-@ way match at the Fatal 4 @-@ Way pay @-@ per @-@ view in June . Batista refused to wrestle , citing his injuries , and as a result Hart awarded the match to his opponent Orton by forfeit . Following Hart 's decision , Batista quit WWE . This storyline was put in place as Batista was legitimately leaving WWE to pursue acting and a career in mixed martial arts . 
 Apart from Orton qualifying via forfeit , the other qualifying matches for the WWE Championship fatal four @-@ way match saw Sheamus defeat Mark Henry and Edge defeat Jericho and Cena in a triple threat match . 
 On the May 28 episode of SmackDown , SmackDown General Manager Teddy Long announced a fatal four @-@ way match for the World Heavyweight Championship would be taking place at the Fatal 4 @-@ Way pay @-@ per @-@ view . As the defending champion Jack Swagger automatically was part of the match , and as a result of his win by disqualification , Big Show received automatic entry . Later in the show , both The Undertaker and CM Punk qualified for the match as well , by defeating Rey Mysterio and Kane respectively . During his qualification match against Kane , Punk wore a mask to the ring in order to hide his newly @-@ shaven head . During his match with Mysterio , The Undertaker suffered a concussion , broken orbital bone and broken nose and the following week , was deemed unable to participate in the match . WWE replaced him in the match by devising a storyline in which The Undertaker was found in a " vegetative state " by his on @-@ screen half brother Kane on the following episode of SmackDown . That same broadcast , a battle royal to decide who would replace The Undertaker at the Fatal 4 @-@ Way pay @-@ per @-@ view was won by Rey Mysterio . 
 At the beginning of the May 28 episode of SmackDown , Drew McIntyre made Teddy Long read out a letter from the WWE Chairman Vince McMahon , which stated that as a result of attacking McIntyre at Over the Limit , Matt Hardy had been suspended without pay until further notice . On the same episode , McIntyre simultaneously continued his feud with Kofi Kingston by teaming with Jack Swagger in a loss to Kingston and The Big Show . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event received generally negative reviews . Writing for Canadian Online Explorer 's wrestling section , Matt Bishop derided the show , calling it " one of the worst WWE pay @-@ per @-@ view events in a long time " and awarded the show 5 @.@ 5 out of ten . The Sun writer Rob McNichol called the show " one of the oddest WWE PPVs in recent history " and awarded the show six out of ten . 
 Most of the negative comments centered around the following World Heavyweight Championship match , which ended in disqualification immediately following a double countout in the preceding Orton @-@ Edge match due to injury . McNichol described it " a weak ending in a normal show " , but especially when the Orton @-@ Edge match " had ended in such circumstances " . Bishop agreed , only awarding the match 2 @.@ 5 out of ten and said that the match " hurt the show in a big , big way " . Kevin Eck of The Baltimore Sun also criticized the booking of the finish , remarking that " Swagger came off looking like anything but a credible champion " . Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer also criticized the World Heavyweight Championship match , remarking that it was " almost an insult as a PPV main event " . Bishop stated that the show was " hampered by several stoppages for blood " and a predictable ending to the main event between Cena and Batista . McNichol also criticized the main event as " overbooked and excessive " , while Eck remarked that it had a " predictable result " . 
 Despite the generally negative reviews , the Mysterio @-@ Punk match was highly praised . McNichol touted it as " the highlight of the night " and praised the wrestlers involved for a " terrific closing sequence " . Bishop awarded the match 8 @.@ 5 out of ten , and stated it was one of two matches , along with the Tag Team Championship bout , that were not " underwhelming in every aspect " . Eck agreed , calling the Punk @-@ Mysterio match the " most compelling match on the card " and stated that the Tag Team Championship match was " well @-@ worked " . 
 11 @,@ 000 people attended Over the Limit at the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit , resulting in a gate of approximately $ 675 @,@ 000 . In August 2010 , WWE reported that the event had received 197 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . The DVD of the event contained extras including a match between Bret Hart and The Miz for the WWE United States Championship and several promos from the weeks preceding the event . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Akhtala Monastery = 
 Akhtala ( Armenian : <unk> վանք ; Georgian : <unk> <unk> ) ; also known as <unk> ( Armenian : <unk> , meaning Coppermine Monastery ) is a 10th @-@ century fortified Armenian Apostolic Church monastery located in the town of Akhtala in the <unk> of Lori , 185 kilometers ( 115 mi ) north of Yerevan . The monastery is currently inactive . The fortress played a major role in protecting the north @-@ western regions of Armenia ( Gugark ) and is among the most well preserved of all in modern Armenia . The main church at the compound is famous for its highly artistic frescoes , which cover the inside walls , the partitions , and the bearings of the building . The modern name of Akhtala was first recorded in a royal decree of 1438 . The etymology of the name Akhtala is believed to be of Turkic origin , meaning white glade . The original Armenian name of the settlement where the monastery is built is <unk> , which means copper mine . 
 = = The fortress = = 
 Between 1887 and 1889 the French archaeologist Jacques de Morgan discovered 576 rectangular stone <unk> , along with cultural items made of clay , bronze and iron near Akhtala dating back to the 8th century BC . The settlement of modern Akhtala was known as <unk> in the 5th century . The fortress was almost certainly built on top of Bronze and Iron Age foundations . It was built in the late tenth century by the Kyurikids , this branch of the <unk> originated from Gurgen ( the name was pronounced Kyurikeh in the local dialect of Gugark ) . He was the son of the patrons of Sanahin and Haghpat monasteries located not far from Akhtala , King Ashot III the Merciful and Queen <unk> . Gurgen 's brothers were King Smbat II the Conqueror and Gagik I Bagratuni , under whom the Bagratuni Kingdom of Armenia reached the peak of its prosperity . 
 Ashot III established the Kingdom of Lori ( Tashir @-@ <unk> Kingdom ) in Gugark for strategic reasons and enthroned Gurgen in 982 . Gurgen along with his brother Smbat are depicted on the sculptures of the patrons in both Sanahin and Haghpat . When the Tashir @-@ <unk> kingdom fell as a result of Seljuk raids the Kyurikids migrated to Tavush and <unk> yet they maintained ties with their ancestral fortress and compound in Akhtala . The fortress was built on an elevated rocky outcrop surrounded by deep canyons from three sides forming a natural protection . The somewhat accessible parts between the cliffs are reinforced by towers and walls . The only entrance to the compound is on the northern side protected by bell @-@ shaped towers and walls . The walls and towers of the fortress are built of bluish basalt and lime mortar . The Kyurikids gradually lost their influence under the Seljuk grasp by the end of the 12th century . 
 The monastic life was revived in Akhtala when the Zakarids heading the combined Georgian and Armenian forces liberated most of Armenia . The 13th @-@ century historians Kirakos Gandzaketsi and Vardan Areveltsi called the area Pghndzahank ( copper mine ) , because of rich copper deposits in the surroundings . Gandzaketsi writes the following : " Ivane , <unk> 's brother , also died [ that year ] and was buried at Pghndzahank ' near the church which he himself had built , taking it from the Armenians and making it into a Georgian monastery . " 
 Pghndzahank became the property of Ivane Zakarian in the 1180s . While Ivane 's brother <unk> was Armenian Apostolic , Ivane had accepted Greek Orthodoxy in the Georgian court . Several monasteries in northern Armenia were converted by the Zakarids to Greek Orthodoxy , a prominent example is the monastery of <unk> . By doing so Ivane enhanced the benevolence of the Georgian court and gained influence among the Chalcedonian Armenians who mostly inhabited Northern and North @-@ Western Armenia . The Zakarids began to lose control starting in the 1220s during the disastrous Mongol invasions of Georgia and Armenia . The son of Ivane , <unk> was forced to recognize his subordination to the Mongol leader <unk> . The Mongol rule continued until 1340 when it was interrupted by successive conquests of Turkic tribes . The Turkic tribe of Kara Koyunlu began attacking the Caucasus and took control of most of Armenia proper by 1400 . Their rule was interrupted by the conquests of Tamerlane . One of the cliffs that surrounds Akhtala is known as <unk> , named after Tamerlane who according to local tradition buried one of his wives under the cliff . 
 Since the late 18th century the monastery serviced ethnic Greeks who were settled in Akhtala in order to work in the gold and silver mines . Roughly 800 Greek families were moved from <unk> in the Ottoman Empire to Akhtala in 1763 by the Georgian King <unk> II . The Greeks called the monastery " <unk> " . The Greek miners have left inscriptions on the monastery walls . In the 19th century Akhtala was taken over by the Armenian princely family of <unk> . Currently the monastery has its pilgrimage days on September 20 – 21 . Armenians , Greeks and Georgians visit the monastery on this occasion . The Ambassador of Greece , <unk> <unk> visited the monastery on September 20 , 2006 . An ore mining and processing plant in Akhtala has been dumping copper mine tailings in the pit below the monastery . This has been classified as a threat to local residents . 
 = = Surp Astvatsatsin ( Holy Mother of God ) church = = 
 The main building of the monastic compound is Surp Astvatsatsin ( Holy Mother of God ) church . The exact date of the building of the church is unknown . It is generally regarded as an 11th @-@ 13th century complex , but the current church has been built on an earlier foundation . Kirakos Gandzaketsi mentions that Ivane Zakarian was buried in the church in 1227 . Stepanos Orbelian refers to the church in 1216 . Modern researchers date the murals within the church to 1205 – 1216 . Princess Mariam , the daughter of Gurgen II ( Kyurikeh II ) made a record in 1188 on the back of a <unk> found in a place called <unk> adjacent to Akhtala which refers to the construction of the Holy Mother of God church at Akhtala . The inscription on the <unk> states the following : " I , the daughter if Kyurikeh , Mariam , erected Surp Astvatsatsin at Pghndzahank , those who honor us remember us in their prayers . " In 1185 Mariam had constructed the narthex of the main church in Haghpat . According to some local lore , the church was built in the 7th century by Byzantine emperor of Armenian extraction , Heraclius . Another legend assumes that the church was built in the 5th century by Georgian King Vakhtang I <unk> . There is no reasonable evidence to support either story . 
 The church used to contain the cross which according to folklore was used by John the Baptist to baptise Jesus Christ . <unk> , the father of Prince <unk> , is said to have given this relic to Ivane Zakarian who later sold it for a large sum to the monastery of <unk> in Syunik . 
 The church is situated in the middle of the fortress ' territory along the longitudinal axis . It belongs to the domed basilica type of churches , where the bearings join with the side @-@ chapels of the apse . Two pairs of arches divided the longitudinal stretched prayer hall into three naves , the central one of which ( with double side @-@ chapels ) on the eastern side ends with low staged , half @-@ rounded apse and the side @-@ chapels end with sacristies . They are characterized with stylish iconography , richness of theme and variety of different colors ( where blue is dominant ) . The vertical axis of the building was crowned by a massive dome . The pointed dome with the cylindrical drum has not survived . It was damaged during Tamerlane 's invasion and completely demolished in 1784 when the Avar Omar Khan invaded the Transcaucasus from Dagestan . In the 19th century , Viceroy of the Caucasus , Prince Mikhail Vorontsov built a semi @-@ spherical wooden dome covered with iron sheets in place of the original dome . The dome was renovated during Soviet years . 
 = = Murals of Surp Astvatsatsin = = 
 The murals are one of the best representations of Byzantine art outside the traditional borders of Byzantium . The majority of the murals bear scriptures in Greek . The murals were painted under the patronage of <unk> Ivane Zakarian between 1205 and 1216 . Parallels have been drawn between the murals and the 11th century Armenian miniature paintings of the <unk> Gospels . The coloring of the murals is characteristic of typical Byzantine art while the thematic solutions are more Armenian . New and Old Testaments scenes as well as various saints including Saint Gregory the Illuminator are depicted on the murals . A large image of the Holy Virgin is depicted in the dome holding Jesus . The mural has been badly damaged and only parts of it survived . Below the Holy Virgin , the Communion is shown where Jesus is depicted twice , turning on the right and left sharing bread with the Apostles . The images of the Apostles Peter , John the Evangelist , Paul and Matthew have survived . The common Christians saints are depicted below the Communion scene , including Pope Sylvester , Saint James the son of Alpheus , Saint John Chrysostom , Basil the Great , Gregory the Illuminator , Jacob of <unk> , Clement of Rome , Gregory the <unk> , Cyril of Alexandria and Eusebius of Caesarea . The murals on the western wall depict the Kingdom of Heaven . The northern wall depicts the trial of Jesus by the high priest of Caiaphas and by the Roman Procurator Pontius Pilate . Some of the murals were renovated in 1979 . The arches , niches and columns are also covered by murals . 
 = = Other structures = = 
 The most prominent structure after the Holy Mother of God church is the rectangular edifice attached to the western wall of the church . The remaining section of the façade of the main church is situated immediately next to it with a ridge roof . Ivane Zakarian and his son <unk> were buried inside in 1227 . A small structure with a lean @-@ to roof is attached to the northern wall of the main church . It was used to store ceremonial items . On the north @-@ western side of the monastery , a single nave and ridge @-@ roofed church is located detached from the main church . Another building that hasn 't survived used to be located next to it . Numerous dilapidated dwellings and auxiliary structures are scattered in the territory of the fortress such as a two @-@ story building believed to be a residence for guards . There are traditional networks of tunnels , crypts , water reservoirs and wine cellars , found among most monasteries of medieval Armenia . Not far from the monastery one can find other medieval monuments such as the Holy Trinity monastery , Saint George church , a 13th @-@ century spring monument , a 19th @-@ century Russian chapel , a Greek church as well as various khachkars and chapels . 
 = = Known residents = = 
 Inscriptions from nearby khachkars point out that the monastery was headed by <unk> in the 1240s . The most prominent figure who resided at the monastery was the translator and scribe Simon of Pghndzahank . His diaries have survived . He was born in 1188 and was a clergyman for several years at the monastery translating Byzantine theological literature . He collaborated with another Armenian of Chalcedonian faith , Minas <unk> of Trabzon . In 1227 Simon compiled a volume of works by Gregory of Nyssa . His diary reads : 
 In 1227 I completed the book by Bishop Gregory of Nyssa which was a preserved old copy translated by the sinful and undeserving clergyman Simon who lived in Armenia , near Lore town , at the Holy Mother of God monastery of Pghndzahank . The book was translated during the reign of <unk> Ivane , the founder of the monastery , may God grant him and his sons long life . 
 Simon also translated into Armenian the Elements of Theology by Proclus <unk> , The Fountain of Wisdom by John Damascene , The Ladder of Divine Ascent by John of Sinai , A History of Georgia ( <unk> <unk> ) and The Greek Prayer Book . Simon also noted in his diaries that he only translated works which previously had not been translated into Armenian . The prominent Armenian filmmaker of the 20th century Sergei <unk> filmed two episodes of his film The Color of Pomegranates at the monastery . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Akhtala Monastery 
 = Apollo 8 = 
 Apollo 8 , the second human spaceflight mission in the United States Apollo space program , was launched on December 21 , 1968 , and became the first manned spacecraft to leave Earth orbit , reach the Earth 's Moon , orbit it and return safely to Earth . The three @-@ astronaut crew — Commander Frank Borman , Command Module Pilot James Lovell , and Lunar Module Pilot William Anders — became the first humans to travel beyond low Earth orbit , the first to see Earth as a whole planet , the first to directly see the far side of the Moon , and then the first to witness Earthrise . The 1968 mission , the third flight of the Saturn V rocket and that rocket 's first manned launch , was also the first human spaceflight launch from the Kennedy Space Center , Florida , located adjacent to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station . 
 The mission was originally planned as Apollo 9 , to be performed in early 1969 as the second test of the complete Apollo spacecraft , including the Lunar Module and the Command / Service Module in an elliptical medium Earth orbit . But when the Lunar Module proved unready to make its first test in a lower Earth orbit in December 1968 , it was decided in August to fly Apollo 8 in December as a more ambitious lunar orbital flight without the Lunar Module . This meant Borman 's crew was scheduled to fly two to three months sooner than originally planned , leaving them a shorter time for training and preparation , thus placing more demands than usual on their time and discipline . 
 Apollo 8 took three days to travel to the Moon . It orbited ten times over the course of 20 hours , during which the crew made a Christmas Eve television broadcast where they read the first 10 verses from the Book of Genesis . At the time , the broadcast was the most watched TV program ever . Apollo 8 's successful mission paved the way for Apollo 11 to fulfill U.S. President John F. Kennedy 's goal of landing a man on the Moon before the end of the 1960s . The Apollo 8 astronauts returned to Earth on December 27 , 1968 , when their spacecraft splashed down in the Northern Pacific Ocean . The crew was named Time magazine 's " Men of the Year " for 1968 upon their return . 
 = = Crew = = 
 Lovell was originally the CMP on the back @-@ up crew , with Michael Collins as the prime crew 's CMP . However , Collins was replaced in July 1968 , after suffering a cervical disc herniation that required surgery to repair . 
 This crew was unique among pre @-@ shuttle era missions in that the commander was not the most experienced member of the crew , as Lovell had flown twice before , on Gemini VII and Gemini XII . This was also the first case of the rarity of an astronaut who had commanded a spaceflight mission subsequently flying as a non @-@ commander , as Lovell had previously commanded Gemini XII . 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 On a lunar mission , the Command Module Pilot ( CMP ) was assigned the role of navigator , while the Lunar Module Pilot ( LMP ) was assigned the role of flight engineer , responsible for monitoring all spacecraft systems , even if the flight didn 't include a Lunar Module . 
 Edwin " Buzz " Aldrin was originally the backup LMP . When Lovell was rotated to the prime crew , no one with experience on CSM @-@ 103 ( the specific spacecraft used for the mission ) was available , so Aldrin was moved to CMP and Fred Haise brought in as backup LMP . Neil Armstrong went on to command Apollo 11 , where Aldrin was returned to the LMP position and Collins was assigned as CMP . Haise was rotated out of the crew and onto the backup crew of Apollo 11 as LMP . 
 = = = Mission control = = = 
 The Earth @-@ based mission control teams for Apollo 8 consisted of astronauts assigned to the support crew , as well as non @-@ astronaut flight directors and their staffs . The support crew members were not trained to fly the mission , but were able to stand in for astronauts in meetings and be involved in the minutiae of mission planning , while the prime and backup crews trained . They also served as CAPCOMs during the mission . For Apollo 8 , these crew members included astronauts John S. Bull , Vance D. Brand , Gerald P. Carr , and Ken Mattingly . The mission control teams on Earth rotated in three shifts , each led by a flight director . The directors for Apollo 8 included Clifford E. Charlesworth ( Green team ) , Glynn Lunney ( Black team ) , and Milton <unk> ( Maroon team ) . 
 = = = Mission insignia = = = 
 The triangular shape of the insignia symbolizes the shape of the Apollo Command Module ( CM ) . It shows a red figure @-@ 8 looping around the Earth and Moon representing the mission number as well as the circumlunar nature of the mission . On the red number 8 are the names of the three astronauts . 
 The initial design of the insignia was developed by Jim Lovell . Lovell reportedly sketched the initial design while riding in the backseat of a T @-@ 38 flight from California to Houston , shortly after learning of the re @-@ designation of the flight to become a lunar @-@ orbital mission . The graphic design of the insignia was done by Houston artist and animator William Bradley . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Apollo 4 and Apollo 6 had been " A " missions , unmanned tests of the Saturn V launch vehicle using an unmanned Block I production model of the Apollo Command and Service Module in Earth orbit . Apollo 7 , scheduled for October 1968 , would be a manned Earth @-@ orbit flight of the CSM , completing the objectives for Mission " C " . 
 Further missions depended on the readiness of the Lunar Module . Apollo 8 was planned as the " D " mission , to test the LM in a low Earth orbit in December 1968 by James McDivitt , David Scott and Russell Schweickart , while Borman 's crew would fly the " E " mission , a more rigorous LM test in an elliptical medium Earth orbit as Apollo 9 , in early 1969 . 
 But production of the LM fell behind schedule , and when Apollo 8 's LM arrived at the Kennedy Space Center in June 1968 , significant defects were discovered , leading Grumman , the lead contractor for the LM , to predict that the first mission @-@ ready LM would not be ready until at least February 1969 . This would mean delaying the " D " and subsequent missions , endangering the program 's goal of a lunar landing before the end of 1969 . 
 George Low , the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office , proposed a solution in August to keep the program on track despite the LM delay . Since the Command / Service Module ( CSM ) would be ready three months before the Lunar Module , a CSM @-@ only mission could be flown in December 1968 . Instead of just repeating the " C " mission flight of Apollo 7 , this CSM could be sent all the way to the Moon , with the possibility of entering a lunar orbit . The new mission would also allow NASA to test lunar landing procedures that would otherwise have to wait until Apollo 10 , the scheduled " F " mission . This also meant that the medium Earth orbit " E " mission could be dispensed with . The net result was that only the " D " mission had to be delayed . 
 Almost every senior manager at NASA agreed with this new mission , citing both confidence in the hardware and personnel , and the potential for a significant morale boost provided by a circumlunar flight . The only person who needed some convincing was James E. Webb , the NASA administrator . With the rest of his agency in support of the new mission , Webb eventually approved the mission change . The mission was officially changed from a " D " mission to a " C @-@ Prime " lunar @-@ orbit mission , but was still referred to in press releases as an Earth @-@ orbit mission at Webb 's direction . No public announcement was made about the change in mission until November 12 , three weeks after Apollo 7 's successful Earth @-@ orbit mission and less than 40 days before launch . 
 With the change in mission for Apollo 8 , Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton decided to swap the crews of the D and E missions . This swap also meant a swap of spacecraft , requiring Borman 's crew to use CSM @-@ 103 , while McDivitt 's crew would use CSM @-@ 104 . 
 On September 9 , the crew entered the simulators to begin their preparation for the flight . By the time the mission flew , the crew had spent seven hours training for every actual hour of flight . Although all crew members were trained in all aspects of the mission , it was necessary to specialize . Borman , as commander , was given training on controlling the spacecraft during the re @-@ entry . Lovell was trained on navigating the spacecraft in case communication was lost with the Earth . Anders was placed in charge of checking that the spacecraft was in working order . 
 Added pressure on the Apollo program to make its 1969 landing goal was provided by the Soviet Union 's flight of some living creatures , including Russian tortoises , in a cislunar loop around the Moon on Zond 5 and return to Earth on September 21 . There was speculation within NASA and the press that they might be preparing to launch cosmonauts on a similar circumlunar mission before the end of 1968 . 
 The Apollo 8 crew , now living in the crew quarters at Kennedy Space Center , received a visit from Charles Lindbergh and his wife , Anne Morrow Lindbergh , the night before the launch . They talked about how , before his 1927 flight , Lindbergh had used a piece of string to measure the distance from New York City to Paris on a globe and from that calculated the fuel needed for the flight . The total was a tenth of the amount that the Saturn V would burn every second . The next day , the <unk> watched the launch of Apollo 8 from a nearby dune . 
 = = Saturn V = = 
 The Saturn V rocket used by Apollo 8 was designated SA @-@ 503 , or the " <unk> " model of the Saturn V ( " 5 " ) Rocket to be used in the Saturn @-@ Apollo ( " SA " ) program . When it was erected in the Vertical Assembly Building on December 20 , 1967 , it was thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned Earth @-@ orbit test flight carrying a boilerplate Command / Service Module . Apollo 6 had suffered several major problems during its April 1968 flight , including severe pogo oscillation during its first stage , two second stage engine failures , and a third stage that failed to reignite in orbit . Without assurances that these problems had been rectified , NASA administrators could not justify risking a manned mission until additional unmanned test flights proved that the Saturn V was ready . 
 Teams from the Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) went to work on the problems . Of primary concern was the pogo oscillation , which would not only hamper engine performance , but could exert significant g @-@ forces on a crew . A task force of contractors , NASA agency representatives , and MSFC researchers concluded that the engines vibrated at a frequency similar to the frequency at which the spacecraft itself vibrated , causing a resonance effect that induced oscillations in the rocket . A system using helium gas to absorb some of these vibrations was installed . 
 Of equal importance was the failure of three engines during flight . Researchers quickly determined that a leaking hydrogen fuel line ruptured when exposed to vacuum , causing a loss of fuel pressure in engine two . When an automatic shutoff attempted to close the liquid hydrogen valve and shut down engine two , it accidentally shut down engine three 's liquid oxygen due to a <unk> connection . As a result , engine three failed within one second of engine two 's shutdown . Further investigation revealed the same problem for the third @-@ stage engine — a faulty igniter line . The team modified the igniter lines and fuel conduits , hoping to avoid similar problems on future launches . 
 The teams tested their solutions in August 1968 at the Marshall Space Flight Center . A Saturn stage IC was equipped with shock absorbing devices to demonstrate the team 's solution to the problem of pogo oscillation , while a Saturn Stage II was retrofitted with modified fuel lines to demonstrate their resistance to leaks and ruptures in vacuum conditions . Once NASA administrators were convinced that the problems were solved , they gave their approval for a manned mission using SA @-@ 503 . 
 The Apollo 8 spacecraft was placed on top of the rocket on September 21 and the rocket made the slow 3 @-@ mile ( 5 km ) journey to the launch pad on October 9 . Testing continued all through December until the day before launch , including various levels of readiness testing from December 5 through 11 . Final testing of modifications to address the problems of pogo oscillation , ruptured fuel lines , and bad igniter lines took place on December 18 , a mere three days before the scheduled launch . 
 = = Mission = = 
 = = = Parameter summary = = = 
 As the first manned spacecraft to orbit more than one celestial body , Apollo 8 's profile had two different sets of orbital parameters , separated by a translunar injection maneuver . 
 Apollo lunar missions would begin with a nominal 100 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 185 km ) circular Earth parking orbit . Apollo 8 was launched into an initial orbit with an apogee of 99 @.@ 99 nautical miles ( 185 @.@ 18 km ) and a perigee of 99 @.@ 57 nautical miles ( 184 @.@ 40 km ) , with an inclination of 32 @.@ 51 ° to the Equator , and an orbital period of 88 @.@ 19 minutes . Propellant venting increased the apogee by 6 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 11 @.@ 9 km ) over the 2 hours , 44 minutes and 30 seconds spent in the parking orbit . 
 This was followed by a Trans @-@ Lunar Injection ( TLI ) burn of the S @-@ IVB third stage for 318 seconds , accelerating the 63 @,@ 531 lb ( 28 @,@ 817 kg ) spacecraft from an orbital velocity of 25 @,@ 567 feet per second ( 7 @,@ 793 m / s ) to the injection velocity of 35 @,@ 505 ft / s ( 10 @,@ 822 m / s ) , which set a record for the highest speed , relative to Earth , that humans had ever traveled . This speed was slightly less than the Earth 's escape velocity of 36 @,@ 747 feet per second ( 11 @,@ 200 m / s ) , but put Apollo 8 into an elongated elliptical Earth orbit , to a point where the Moon 's gravity would capture it . 
 The standard lunar orbit for Apollo missions was planned as a nominal 60 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 110 km ) circular orbit above the Moon 's surface . Initial lunar orbit insertion was an ellipse with a <unk> of 60 @.@ 0 nautical miles ( 111 @.@ 1 km ) and an <unk> of 168 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 312 @.@ 1 km ) , at an inclination of 12 ° from the lunar equator . This was then circularized at 60 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 112 @.@ 4 km ) by 59 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 110 @.@ 6 km ) , with an orbital period of 128 @.@ 7 minutes . The effect of lunar mass concentrations ( " <unk> " ) on the orbit was found to be greater than initially predicted ; over the course of the twenty @-@ hour mission , the orbit was <unk> to 63 @.@ 6 nautical miles ( 117 @.@ 8 km ) by 58 @.@ 6 nautical miles ( 108 @.@ 5 km ) . 
 Apollo 8 achieved a maximum distance from Earth of 203 @,@ 752 nautical miles ( 234 @,@ 474 statute miles ; 377 @,@ 349 kilometers ) . 
 = = = Launch and trans @-@ lunar injection = = = 
 Apollo 8 launched at 7 : 51 : 00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on December 21 , 1968 , using the Saturn V 's three stages to achieve Earth orbit . The S @-@ IC first stage impacted the Atlantic Ocean at 30 ° 12 ′ N 74 ° 7 ′ W and the S @-@ II second stage at 31 ° 50 ′ N 37 ° 17 ′ W. The S @-@ IVB third stage injected the craft into Earth orbit , but remained attached to later perform the trans @-@ lunar injection ( TLI ) burn that put the spacecraft on a trajectory to the Moon . 
 The Titan II launch vehicle used for the Gemini program had been notoriously rough @-@ riding , and technicians promised the astronauts that the Saturn V , which was designed for the Apollo program rather than adapted from a missile , would have a much smoother ride . Lovell and Borman , both Gemini veterans , found this promise did not disappoint . During liftoff , they reported feeling nothing but a dull , muted rumble in the distance . 
 Once the vehicle reached Earth orbit , both the crew and Houston flight controllers spent the next 2 hours and 38 minutes checking that the spacecraft was in proper working order and ready for TLI . The proper operation of the S @-@ IVB third stage of the rocket was crucial : in the last unmanned test , it had failed to re @-@ ignite for TLI . 
 During the flight , three fellow astronauts served on the ground as Capsule Communicators ( usually referred to as " CAPCOMs " ) on a rotating schedule . The CAPCOMs were the only people who regularly communicated with the crew . Michael Collins was the first CAPCOM on duty and at 2 hours , 27 minutes and 22 seconds after launch radioed , " Apollo 8 . You are Go for TLI . " This communication signified that Mission Control had given official permission for Apollo 8 to go to the Moon . Over the next 12 minutes before the TLI burn , the Apollo 8 crew continued to monitor the spacecraft and the S @-@ IVB . The engine ignited on time and performed the TLI burn perfectly . 
 After the S @-@ IVB had performed its required tasks , it was jettisoned . The crew then rotated the spacecraft to take some photographs of the spent stage and then practiced flying in formation with it . As the crew rotated the spacecraft , they had their first views of the Earth as they moved away from it . This marked the first time humans could view the whole Earth at once . Borman became worried that the S @-@ IVB was staying too close to the Command / Service Module and suggested to Mission Control that the crew perform a separation maneuver . Mission Control first suggested pointing the spacecraft towards Earth and using the Reaction Control System ( RCS ) thrusters on the Service Module ( SM ) to add 3 ft / s ( 0 @.@ 91 m / s ) away from the Earth , but Borman did not want to lose sight of the S @-@ IVB . After discussion , the crew and Mission Control decided to burn in this direction , but at 9 ft / s ( 2 @.@ 7 m / s ) instead . These discussions put the crew an hour behind their flight plan . 
 Five hours after launch , Mission Control sent a command to the S @-@ IVB booster to vent its remaining fuel through its engine bell to change the booster 's trajectory . This S @-@ IVB would then pass the Moon and enter into a solar orbit , posing no further hazard to Apollo 8 . The S @-@ IVB subsequently went into a 0 @.@ 99 @-@ by @-@ 0 @.@ 92 @-@ astronomical @-@ unit ( 148 by 138 Gm ) solar orbit with an inclination of 23 @.@ 47 ° from the plane of the ecliptic , and an orbital period of 340 @.@ 80 days . After the insertion into trans @-@ Lunar orbit , the Saturn IVB third stage became a derelict object . It will continue to orbit the Sun for many years . 
 The Apollo 8 crew were the first humans to pass through the Van Allen radiation belts , which extend up to 15 @,@ 000 miles ( 24 @,@ 000 km ) from Earth . Scientists predicted that passing through the belts quickly at the spacecraft 's high speed would cause a radiation dosage of no more than a chest X @-@ ray , or 1 <unk> ( during a year , the average human receives a dose of 2 to 3 mGy ) . To record the actual radiation dosages , each crew member wore a Personal Radiation <unk> that transmitted data to Earth as well as three passive film dosimeters that showed the cumulative radiation experienced by the crew . By the end of the mission , the crew experienced an average radiation dose of 1 @.@ 6 mGy . 
 = = = Lunar trajectory = = = 
 Jim Lovell 's main job as Command Module Pilot was as navigator . Although Mission Control performed all the actual navigation calculations , it was necessary to have a crew member serving as navigator so that the crew could return to Earth in case of loss of communication with Mission Control . Lovell navigated by star sightings using a sextant built in to the spacecraft , measuring the angle between a star and the Earth 's ( or the Moon 's ) horizon . This task was difficult , because a large cloud of debris around the spacecraft , formed by the venting S @-@ IVB , made it hard to distinguish the stars . 
 By seven hours into the mission , the crew was about one hour and 40 minutes behind flight plan , because of the problems in moving away from the S @-@ IVB and Lovell 's obscured star sightings . The crew now placed the spacecraft into Passive Thermal Control ( PTC ) , also called " barbecue roll " , in which the spacecraft rotated about once per hour around its long axis to ensure even heat distribution across the surface of the spacecraft . In direct sunlight , the spacecraft could be heated to over 200 ° C ( 392 ° F ) while the parts in shadow would be − 100 ° C ( − 148 ° F ) . These temperatures could cause the heat shield to crack and propellant lines to burst . Because it was impossible to get a perfect roll , the spacecraft swept out a cone as it rotated . The crew had to make minor adjustments every half hour as the cone pattern got larger and larger . 
 The first mid @-@ course correction came 11 hours into the flight . Testing on the ground had shown that the Service Propulsion System ( SPS ) engine had a small chance of exploding when burned for long periods unless its combustion chamber was " coated " first . Burning the engine for a short period would accomplish coating . This first correction burn was only 2 @.@ 4 seconds and added about 20 @.@ 4 ft / s ( 6 @.@ 2 m / s ) velocity prograde ( in the direction of travel ) . This change was less than the planned 24 @.@ 8 ft / s ( 7 @.@ 6 m / s ) , because of a bubble of helium in the oxidizer lines , which caused unexpectedly low propellant pressure . The crew had to use the small RCS thrusters to make up the shortfall . Two later planned mid @-@ course corrections were canceled because the Apollo 8 trajectory was found to be perfect . 
 Eleven hours into the flight , the crew had been awake for more than 16 hours . Before launch , NASA had decided that at least one crew member should be awake at all times to deal with problems that might arise . Borman started the first sleep shift , but found sleeping difficult because of the constant radio chatter and mechanical noises . 
 About an hour after starting his sleep shift , Borman obtained permission from ground control to take a Seconal sleeping pill . The pill had little effect . Borman eventually fell asleep , and then awoke feeling ill . He vomited twice and had a bout of diarrhea ; this left the spacecraft full of small globules of vomit and feces , which the crew cleaned up as well as they could . Borman initially did not want everyone to know about his medical problems , but Lovell and Anders wanted to inform Mission Control . The crew decided to use the Data Storage Equipment ( DSE ) , which could tape voice recordings and telemetry and dump them to Mission Control at high speed . After recording a description of Borman 's illness they asked Mission Control to check the recording , stating that they " would like an evaluation of the voice comments " . 
 The Apollo 8 crew and Mission Control medical personnel held a conference using an unoccupied second @-@ floor control room ( there were two identical control rooms in Houston , on the second and third floors , only one of which was used during a mission ) . The conference participants concluded that there was little to worry about and that Borman 's illness was either a 24 @-@ hour flu , as Borman thought , or a reaction to the sleeping pill . Researchers now believe that he was suffering from space @-@ adaptation syndrome , which affects about a third of astronauts during their first day in space as their vestibular system adapts to weightlessness . Space @-@ adaptation syndrome had not occurred on previous spacecraft ( Mercury and Gemini ) , because those astronauts couldn 't move freely in the small cabins of those spacecraft . The increased cabin space in the Apollo Command Module afforded astronauts greater freedom of movement , contributing to symptoms of space sickness for Borman and , later , astronaut Russell Schweickart during Apollo 9 . 
 The cruise phase was a relatively uneventful part of the flight , except for the crew checking that the spacecraft was in working order and that they were on course . During this time , NASA scheduled a television broadcast at 31 hours after launch . The Apollo 8 crew used a 2 kg camera that broadcast in black @-@ and @-@ white only , using a <unk> tube . The camera had two lenses , a very wide @-@ angle ( 160 ° ) lens , and a telephoto ( 9 ° ) lens . 
 During this first broadcast , the crew gave a tour of the spacecraft and attempted to show how the Earth appeared from space . However , difficulties aiming the narrow @-@ angle lens without the aid of a monitor to show what it was looking at made showing the Earth impossible . Additionally , the Earth image became saturated by any bright source without proper filters . In the end , all the crew could show the people watching back on Earth was a bright blob . After broadcasting for 17 minutes , the rotation of the spacecraft took the high @-@ gain antenna out of view of the receiving stations on Earth and they ended the transmission with Lovell wishing his mother a happy birthday . 
 By this time , the crew had completely abandoned the planned sleep shifts . Lovell went to sleep 32 ½ hours into the flight — 3 ½ hours before he had planned to . A short while later , Anders also went to sleep after taking a sleeping pill . 
 The crew was unable to see the Moon for much of the outward cruise . Two factors made the Moon almost impossible to see from inside the spacecraft : three of the five windows fogging up due to out @-@ gassed oils from the silicone sealant , and the attitude required for the PTC . It was not until the crew had gone behind the Moon that they would be able to see it for the first time . 
 The Apollo 8 made a second television broadcast at 55 hours into the flight . This time , the crew rigged up filters meant for the still cameras so they could acquire images of the Earth through the telephoto lens . Although difficult to aim , as they had to maneuver the entire spacecraft , the crew was able to broadcast back to Earth the first television pictures of the Earth . The crew spent the transmission describing the Earth and what was visible and the colors they could see . The transmission lasted 23 minutes . 
 = = = Lunar sphere of influence = = = 
 At about 55 hours and 40 minutes into the flight , the crew of Apollo 8 became the first humans to enter the gravitational sphere of influence of another celestial body . In other words , the effect of the Moon 's gravitational force on Apollo 8 became stronger than that of the Earth . At the time it happened , Apollo 8 was 38 @,@ 759 miles ( 62 @,@ 377 km ) from the Moon and had a speed of 3 @,@ 990 ft / s ( 1 @,@ 220 m / s ) relative to the Moon . This historic moment was of little interest to the crew since they were still calculating their trajectory with respect to the launch pad at Kennedy Space Center . They would continue to do so until they performed their last mid @-@ course correction , switching to a reference frame based on ideal orientation for the second engine burn they would make in lunar orbit . It was only 13 hours until they would be in lunar orbit . 
 The last major event before Lunar Orbit Insertion ( LOI ) was a second mid @-@ course correction . It was in retrograde ( against direction of travel ) and slowed the spacecraft down by 2 @.@ 0 ft / s ( 0 @.@ 61 m / s ) , effectively lowering the closest distance that the spacecraft would pass the moon . At exactly 61 hours after launch , about 24 @,@ 200 miles ( 38 @,@ 900 km ) from the Moon , the crew burned the RCS for 11 seconds . They would now pass 71 @.@ 7 miles ( 115 @.@ 4 km ) from the lunar surface . 
 At 64 hours into the flight , the crew began to prepare for Lunar Orbit Insertion @-@ 1 ( LOI @-@ 1 ) . This maneuver had to be performed perfectly , and due to orbital mechanics had to be on the far side of the Moon , out of contact with the Earth . After Mission Control was polled for a " go / no go " decision , the crew was told at 68 hours , they were Go and " riding the best bird we can find " . At 68 hours and 58 minutes , the spacecraft went behind the Moon and out of radio contact with the Earth . 
 With 10 minutes before the LOI @-@ 1 , the crew began one last check of the spacecraft systems and made sure that every switch was in the correct place . At that time , they finally got their first glimpses of the Moon . They had been flying over the unlit side , and it was Lovell who saw the first shafts of sunlight obliquely illuminating the lunar surface . The LOI burn was only two minutes away , so the crew had little time to appreciate the view . 
 = = = Lunar orbit = = = 
 The SPS ignited at 69 hours , 8 minutes , and 16 seconds after launch and burned for 4 minutes and 13 seconds , placing the Apollo 8 spacecraft in orbit around the Moon . The crew described the burn as being the longest four minutes of their lives . If the burn had not lasted exactly the correct amount of time , the spacecraft could have ended up in a highly elliptical lunar orbit or even flung off into space . If it lasted too long they could have struck the Moon . After making sure the spacecraft was working , they finally had a chance to look at the Moon , which they would orbit for the next 20 hours . 
 On Earth , Mission Control continued to wait . If the crew had not burned the engine or the burn had not lasted the planned length of time , the crew would appear early from behind the Moon . However , this time came and went without Apollo 8 reappearing . Exactly at the calculated moment , the signal was received from the spacecraft , indicating it was in a 193 @.@ 3 @-@ by @-@ 69 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 311 @.@ 1 by 111 @.@ 8 km ) orbit about the Moon . 
 After reporting on the status of the spacecraft , Lovell gave the first description of what the lunar surface looked like : 
 The Moon is essentially grey , no color ; looks like plaster of Paris or sort of a grayish beach sand . We can see quite a bit of detail . The Sea of Fertility doesn 't stand out as well here as it does back on Earth . There 's not as much contrast between that and the surrounding craters . The craters are all rounded off . There 's quite a few of them , some of them are newer . Many of them look like — especially the round ones — look like hit by meteorites or projectiles of some sort . Langrenus is quite a huge crater ; it 's got a central cone to it . The walls of the crater are terraced , about six or seven different terraces on the way down . 
 Lovell continued to describe the terrain they were passing over . One of the crew 's major tasks was reconnaissance of planned future landing sites on the Moon , especially one in Mare <unk> that would be the Apollo 11 landing site . The launch time of Apollo 8 had been chosen to give the best lighting conditions for examining the site . A film camera had been set up in one of the spacecraft windows to record a frame every second of the Moon below . Bill Anders spent much of the next 20 hours taking as many photographs as possible of targets of interest . By the end of the mission the crew had taken 700 photographs of the Moon and 150 of the Earth . 
 Throughout the hour that the spacecraft was in contact with Earth , Borman kept asking how the data for the SPS looked . He wanted to make sure that the engine was working and could be used to return early to the Earth if necessary . He also asked that they receive a " go / no go " decision before they passed behind the Moon on each orbit . 
 As they reappeared for their second pass in front of the Moon , the crew set up the equipment to broadcast a view of the lunar surface . Anders described the craters that they were passing over . At the end of this second orbit they performed the 11 @-@ second LOI @-@ 2 burn of the SPS to circularize the orbit to 70 @.@ 0 by 71 @.@ 3 miles ( 112 @.@ 7 by 114 @.@ 7 km ) . 
 Through the next two orbits , the crew continued to keep check of the spacecraft and to observe and photograph the Moon . During the third pass , Borman read a small prayer for his church . He had been scheduled to participate in a service at St. Christopher 's Episcopal Church near Seabrook , Texas , but due to the Apollo 8 flight he was unable to . A fellow parishioner and engineer at Mission Control , Rod Rose , suggested that Borman read the prayer which could be recorded and then replayed during the service . 
 = = = = Earthrise = = = = 
 When the spacecraft came out from behind the Moon for its fourth pass across the front , the crew witnessed " Earthrise " for the first time in human history ( NASA 's Lunar Orbiter 1 took the very first picture of an Earthrise from the vicinity of the Moon , on August 23 , 1966 ) . Borman saw the Earth emerging from behind the lunar horizon , and then called in excitement to the others , taking a black @-@ and @-@ white photograph as he did so . In the ensuing scramble Anders took Earthrise , a more famous color photo , later picked by Life magazine as one of its hundred photos of the century . 
 Due to the synchronous rotation of the Moon about the Earth , Earthrise is not generally visible from the lunar surface . Earthrise is generally only visible when orbiting the Moon , other than at selected places near the Moon 's limb , where libration carries the Earth slightly above and below the lunar horizon . 
 Anders continued to take photographs while Lovell assumed control of the spacecraft so Borman could rest . Despite the difficulty resting in the cramped and noisy spacecraft , Borman was able to sleep for two orbits , awakening periodically to ask questions about their status . Borman awoke fully , however , when he started to hear his fellow crew members make mistakes . They were beginning to not understand questions and would have to ask for the answers to be repeated . Borman realized that everyone was extremely tired having not had a good night 's sleep in over three days . Taking command , he ordered Anders and Lovell to get some sleep and that the rest of the flight plan regarding observing the Moon be scrubbed . At first Anders protested saying that he was fine , but Borman would not be swayed . At last Anders agreed as long as Borman would set up the camera to continue to take automatic shots of the Moon . Borman also remembered that there was a second television broadcast planned , and with so many people expected to be watching he wanted the crew to be alert . For the next two orbits Anders and Lovell slept while Borman sat at the helm . On subsequent Apollo missions , crews would avoid this situation by sleeping on the same schedule . 
 As they rounded the Moon for the ninth time , the second television transmission began . Borman introduced the crew , followed by each man giving his impression of the lunar surface and what it was like to be orbiting the Moon . Borman described it as being " a vast , lonely , forbidding expanse of nothing " . Then , after talking about what they were flying over , Anders said that the crew had a message for all those on Earth . Each man on board read a section from the Biblical creation story from the Book of Genesis . Borman finished the broadcast by wishing a Merry Christmas to everyone on Earth . His message appeared to sum up the feelings that all three crewmen had from their vantage point in lunar orbit . Borman said , " And from the crew of Apollo 8 , we close with good night , good luck , a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you — all of you on the good Earth . " 
 The only task left for the crew at this point was to perform the Trans @-@ Earth Injection ( TEI ) , which was scheduled for 2 ½ hours after the end of the television transmission . The TEI was the most critical burn of the flight , as any failure of the SPS to ignite would strand the crew in lunar orbit , with little hope of escape . As with the previous burn , the crew had to perform the maneuver above the far side of the Moon , out of contact with Earth . 
 The burn occurred exactly on time . The spacecraft telemetry was reacquired as it re @-@ emerged from behind the Moon at 89 hours , 28 minutes , and 39 seconds , the exact time calculated . When voice contact was regained , Lovell announced , " Please be informed , there is a Santa Claus " , to which Ken Mattingly , the current CAPCOM , replied , " That 's affirmative , you are the best ones to know . " The spacecraft began its journey back to Earth on December 25 , Christmas Day . 
 = = = <unk> manual re @-@ alignment = = = 
 Later , Lovell used some otherwise idle time to do some navigational sightings , maneuvering the module to view various stars by using the computer keyboard . However , he accidentally erased some of the computer 's memory , which caused the Inertial Measurement Unit ( IMU ) to think the module was in the same relative position it had been in before lift @-@ off and fire the thrusters to " correct " the module 's attitude . 
 Once the crew realized why the computer had changed the module 's attitude , they realized they would have to re @-@ enter data that would tell the computer its real position . It took Lovell ten minutes to figure out the right numbers , using the thrusters to get the stars Rigel and Sirius aligned , and another 15 minutes to enter the corrected data into the computer . 
 Sixteen months later , Lovell would once again have to perform a similar manual re @-@ alignment , under more critical conditions , during the Apollo 13 mission , after that module 's IMU had to be turned off to conserve energy . In his 1994 book , Lost Moon : The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13 , Lovell wrote , " My training [ on Apollo 8 ] came in handy ! " In that book he dismissed the incident as a " planned experiment " , requested by the ground crew . In subsequent interviews Lovell has acknowledged that the incident was an accident , caused by his mistake . 
 = = = Cruise back to Earth and re @-@ entry = = = 
 The cruise back to Earth was mostly a time for the crew to relax and monitor the spacecraft . As long as the trajectory specialists had calculated everything correctly , the spacecraft would re @-@ enter two @-@ and @-@ half days after TEI and splashdown in the Pacific . 
 On Christmas afternoon , the crew made their fifth television broadcast . This time they gave a tour of the spacecraft , showing how an astronaut lived in space . When they finished broadcasting they found a small present from Deke Slayton in the food locker : a real turkey dinner with stuffing , in the same kind of pack that the troops in Vietnam received . Another Slayton surprise was a gift of three miniature bottles of brandy , that Borman ordered the crew to leave alone until after they landed . They remained unopened , even years after the flight . There were also small presents to the crew from their wives . The next day , at about 124 hours into the mission , the sixth and final TV transmission showed the mission 's best video images of the earth , in a four @-@ minute broadcast . 
 After two uneventful days the crew prepared for re @-@ entry . The computer would control the re @-@ entry and all the crew had to do was put the spacecraft in the correct attitude , blunt end forward . If the computer broke down , Borman would take over . 
 Once the Command Module was separated from the Service Module , the astronauts were committed to re @-@ entry . Six minutes before they hit the top of the atmosphere , the crew saw the Moon rising above the Earth 's horizon , just as had been predicted by the trajectory specialists . As they hit the thin outer atmosphere they noticed it was becoming hazy outside as glowing plasma formed around the spacecraft . The spacecraft started slowing down and the deceleration peaked at 6 g ( 59 m / s2 ) . With the computer controlling the descent by changing the attitude of the spacecraft , Apollo 8 rose briefly like a skipping stone before descending to the ocean . At 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 km ) the drogue parachute stabilized the spacecraft and was followed at 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 km ) by the three main parachutes . The spacecraft splashdown position was officially reported as 8 ° 8 ′ N 165 ° 1 ′ W in the North Pacific Ocean south of Hawaii . 
 When it hit the water , the parachutes dragged the spacecraft over and left it upside down , in what was termed Stable 2 position . About six minutes later the Command Module was righted into its normal apex @-@ up splashdown orientation by the inflatable bag <unk> system . As they were buffeted by a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) swell , Borman was sick , waiting for the three flotation balloons to right the spacecraft . It was 43 minutes after splashdown before the first frogman from USS Yorktown arrived , as the spacecraft had landed before sunrise . Forty @-@ five minutes later , the crew was safe on the deck of the aircraft carrier . 
 = = Historical importance = = 
 Apollo 8 came at the end of 1968 , a year that had seen much upheaval in the United States and most of the world . Even though the year saw political assassinations , political unrest in the streets of Europe and America , and the Prague Spring , Time magazine chose the crew of Apollo 8 as their Men of the Year for 1968 , recognizing them as the people who most influenced events in the preceding year . They had been the first people ever to leave the gravitational influence of the Earth and orbit another celestial body . They had survived a mission that even the crew themselves had rated as only having a fifty @-@ fifty chance of fully succeeding . The effect of Apollo 8 can be summed up by a telegram from a stranger , received by Borman after the mission , that simply stated , " Thank you Apollo 8 . You saved 1968 . " 
 One of the most famous aspects of the flight was the Earthrise picture that was taken as they came around for their fourth orbit of the Moon . This was the first time that humans had taken such a picture whilst actually behind the camera , and it has been credited with a role in inspiring the first Earth Day in 1970 . It was selected as the first of Life magazine 's 100 Photographs That Changed the World . Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins said , " Eight 's momentous historic significance was foremost " ; while many space historians , such as Robert K. Poole , see Apollo 8 as the most historically significant of all the Apollo missions . 
 The mission was the most widely covered by the media since the first American orbital flight , Mercury @-@ Atlas 6 by John Glenn in 1962 . There were 1200 journalists covering the mission , with the BBC coverage being broadcast in 54 countries in 15 different languages . The Soviet newspaper Pravda featured a quote from Boris Nikolaevich Petrov , Chairman of the Soviet <unk> program , who described the flight as an " outstanding achievement of American space sciences and technology " . It is estimated that a quarter of the people alive at the time saw — either live or delayed — the Christmas Eve transmission during the ninth orbit of the Moon . The Apollo 8 broadcasts won an Emmy Award , the highest honor given by the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences . 
 Madalyn Murray O 'Hair , an atheist , later caused controversy by bringing a lawsuit against NASA over the reading from Genesis . O 'Hair wished the courts to ban American astronauts — who were all government employees — from public prayer in space . Though the case was rejected by the Supreme Court of the United States for lack of jurisdiction , it caused NASA to be skittish about the issue of religion throughout the rest of the Apollo program . Buzz Aldrin , on Apollo 11 , self @-@ communicated Presbyterian Communion on the surface of the Moon after landing ; he refrained from mentioning this publicly for several years , and only obliquely referred to it at the time . 
 In 1969 , the United States Postal Service issued a postage stamp ( Scott catalogue # 1371 ) commemorating the Apollo 8 flight around the Moon . The stamp featured a detail of the famous photograph of the Earthrise over the Moon taken by Anders on Christmas Eve , and the words , " In the beginning God ... " Just 18 days after the crew 's return to Earth , they were featured during the 1969 Super Bowl pre @-@ game show reciting the Pledge of Allegiance prior to the national anthem being performed by Anita Bryant . 
 = = Spacecraft location = = 
 In January 1970 , the spacecraft was delivered to Osaka , Japan , for display in the U.S. pavilion at Expo ' 70 . It is now displayed at the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry , along with a collection of personal items from the flight donated by Lovell and the space suit worn by Frank Borman . Jim Lovell 's Apollo 8 space suit is on public display in the Visitor Center at NASA 's Glenn Research Center . Bill Anders 's space suit is on display at the Science Museum in London , United Kingdom . 
 = = In film = = 
 Apollo 8 's historic mission has been shown and referred to in several forms , both documentary and fiction . The various television transmissions and 16 mm footage shot by the crew of Apollo 8 was compiled and released by NASA in the 1969 documentary , <unk> : Apollo 8 , which was hosted by Burgess Meredith . In addition , Spacecraft Films released , in 2003 , a three @-@ disc DVD set containing all of NASA 's TV and 16 mm film footage related to the mission including all TV transmissions from space , training and launch footage , and motion pictures taken in flight . Portions of the Apollo 8 Mission can be seen in the 1989 documentary For All Mankind , which won the Grand Jury Prize Documentary at the Sundance Film Festival . The Apollo 8 mission was well @-@ covered in the 2007 British documentary In the Shadow of the Moon . 
 Portions of the Apollo 8 mission are dramatized in the 1998 miniseries From the Earth to the Moon episode " 1968 " . The S @-@ IVB stage of Apollo 8 was also portrayed as the location of an alien device in the 1970 UFO episode " Conflict " . 
 At the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex 's Apollo / Saturn V Center , the history of the U.S. space program leading up to the launch of Apollo 8 is the subject of a multi @-@ screen multimedia presentation which also features the actual control panels used in the Firing Room for the launch . 
 = Burger King Specialty Sandwiches = 
 The Burger King Specialty Sandwiches are a line of sandwiches developed by the international fast @-@ food restaurant chain Burger King in 1978 and introduced in 1979 as part of a new product line designed to expand Burger King 's menu with more sophisticated , adult oriented fare beyond hamburgers . Additionally , the new line was intended to differentiate the company from other fast food hamburger restaurants at the time . Since the line 's introduction , the other sandwiches have been discontinued , leaving the chicken offering , the Original Chicken Sandwich ( abbreviated as OCS ) , as the primary product left . Additionally , other sandwiches that utilize the same roll as the chicken sandwich have been introduced to the company 's menu both domestically and internationally since the original product line was introduced . 
 Burger King markets the Original Chicken Sandwich under several different names globally , including the Long Chicken , BK Chicken and Chicken Royal in the international markets it does business . The company also produces other variants that are specifically tailored to meet local taste preferences or customs of the various regions and countries in which it does business . To promote continuing interest in the product , Burger King occasionally releases limited @-@ time ( LTO ) variants in the line that have different toppings or ingredients such as ham , Italian sausage or pulled pork . Being one of the company 's major offerings , the Specialty Sandwiches are sometimes the center of product advertising for the company . Despite being a major product line in the company 's portfolio , Burger King has registered very few global trademarks to protect its investment in the products . 
 = = History = = 
 During the mid @-@ 1970s , Burger King was having issues with its operations , franchises and image . In 1978 , Donald N. Smith was hired from McDonald 's to help restructure the corporate operations of Burger King to better compete against his former company as well as the then up @-@ and @-@ coming chain , Wendy 's . As part of an operational overhaul he dubbed " Operation Phoenix " , Smith reorganized the corporate operations of Burger King . He also initiated a development plan for a new product line that would become the Specialty Sandwich line . Development began that year , and while the company found that the new product lines would add an approximate eight second delay to the production time of orders and would cost about $ 39 million in lost productivity , the product was introduced in 1979 . Despite these possible sales losses and time issues , the new products were successful and the company 's sales increased by 15 percent . 
 This line — with many non @-@ hamburger sandwiches , including chicken and fish — significantly expanded the breadth of the Burger King menu . The amount of new additions , several new sandwiches made with disparate ingredients was made possible due the design of Burger King 's kitchen . The chain 's kitchen is modeled around a more flexible concept that allows for a multiple work @-@ flow operations where preparation stations can be re @-@ tasked more easily . In comparison , McDonald 's kitchen at the time was a more rigidly designed assembly line concept intended to quickly produce a more uniform product and was not easily adapted to new products . This more rigid system prevented McDonald 's from broadening its menu to effectively competing with Burger King and other similar chains that were more flexible and were better positioned to expand their menu . 
 The introduction of the Specialty Sandwich line was one of the first attempts by a major fast food chain to target a specific demographic , in this case adults aged between 18 and 34 years , members of which were presumably willing to spend more on a higher quality product . Included in the new line was the Original Chicken Sandwich , a ham and cheese sandwich , a roast beef sandwich , a new fish sandwich called the Long Fish Sandwich , and a new burger called the Sirloin Steak Sandwich . The ham and cheese sandwich replaced an earlier version ham and cheese sandwich called the Yumbo that was served hot and was the size of a hamburger . In 1981 the chain tested a veal parmigiana sandwich in limited areas of the United States and took it national in 1982 . It was also sold in New England as part of limited time offering ( LTO ) in 1988 . 
 While most of the line has since been discontinued , the company 's Original Chicken Sandwich is still offered in North America , Europe and other markets . The ham and cheese sandwich was a regional offering , however it was reintroduced nationally in the United States as the Yumbo Sandwich in November 2014 . The Yumbo name refers to a smaller snack based sandwich from the 1970s and early 1980s which was a heated ham and cheese sandwich served on a smaller , hamburger roll . The Long Fish was discontinued and the Whaler fish sandwich was reintroduced in 1983 , while the Steak Burger sandwich was discontinued altogether . 
 = = Product description = = 
 = = = Original Chicken Sandwich = = = 
 The Original Chicken Sandwich consists of a breaded , deep @-@ fried white @-@ meat chicken patty with mayonnaise and lettuce on a sesame seed sub @-@ style bun . Burger King will also add any condiment it sells upon request based on its long standing slogan " Have It Your Way " . Additionally , Burger King has sold several different promotional varieties throughout the years as limited time offerings ( LTO ) , such as the Philly chicken sandwich with American cheese , peppers and onions or the Angry Chicken Sandwich served with pepper jack cheese , bacon , " Angry " sauce , jalapeño slices , mayonnaise , lettuce and tomato . 
 = = = = Notable variants = = = = 
 The International Chicken Sandwiches line was introduced in 1988 and is a group of three sandwiches with different toppings that are associated with cuisine from various international regions . The Italian Chicken Sandwich is a chicken parmigiana sandwich with marinara sauce and mozzarella , The French Chicken Sandwich is a Chicken Cordon Bleu sandwich with ham and Swiss cheese and the American Chicken Sandwich has mayonnaise , lettuce , tomato and American cheese . Similar regional inspired sandwiches included the Philly Chicken Sandwich which was a chicken version of a Philly <unk> sandwich made with red and green bell peppers , onions and cheese , and the Hawaiian BK Chicken with mayonnaise , lettuce , bacon , American cheese and pineapple sold in New Zealand . 
 = = = Burgers = = = 
 Besides the Original Chicken sandwich , Burger King has sold or sells several other sandwiches that are similar to the Specialty Sandwiches . Several burgers have been sold on this family of sandwiches , including a pair of triple cheeseburgers called the Limo Burger and the X @-@ Tra Long Cheeseburger , the Bull 's @-@ Eye Barbecue Burger which was a type of double cheeseburger that included two hamburger patties , American cheese , bacon and Kraft Bull 's @-@ eye brand barbecue sauce , and the BBQ Hero which was also another type of double cheeseburger with barbecue sauce , bacon , lettuce , tomato and onions . The company introduced another burger in this family called the Extra Long BBQ Cheeseburger in June 2014 . The sandwich consisted of two burger patties , BBQ sauce and onion rings . It is similar in composition to the chain 's Rodeo Cheeseburger . 
 = = = Other products = = = 
 A grilled Italian sausage sandwich was sold in 1992 and was served with onions & peppers or parmigiana style with mozzarella cheese & marinara sauce . As part of the company 's BK Dinner Baskets promotion in 1993 , the chain introduced a grilled meatloaf sandwich with ketchup and onions in the United States . In 2013 , Burger King sold a bratwurst sandwich in a regional limited time offering in the US states of Wisconsin and Illinois . The sandwich featured a bratwurst manufactured by Johnsonville Foods , raw onion and yellow mustard . Despite being discontinued , versions of the steak sandwich have been re @-@ released several times since the 1970s . The BK Dinner baskets featured a steak sandwich , and in 2003 Burger King New Zealand introduced the Big Bloke Steak Sandwich which was almost identical to the 1979 sandwich . 
 In a 2015 summer promotion , Burger King brought back its pulled pork sandwich , previously sold in 2012 and 2013 , in a new format linked to its new " XL " ( extra long ) sandwiches . The original sandwich was served on what the company called an " artisan " roll with pickles , onions , Sweet Baby Ray 's brand barbecue sauce , and a coleslaw sauce , while the 2015 XL Pulled Pork sandwich eliminated the coleslaw sauce and changed over to the 7 @-@ inch steak roll of the Specialty Sandwich . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 Burger King introduced the Specialty Sandwich line under its Burger King and I promotional campaign developed by the J. Walter Thompson ( JWT ) agency . The advertisements featured customers and employees praising the new sandwiches accompanied with a brief description of the products being sold . Actor Stuart <unk> played a doorman in one commercial in the series . Another one of the promotions used was a scratch card game called What 's my Specialty ? where the customer would receive a card with their purchase in which they would have to match famous people to said person 's profession . The commercial explained that if you expected to lose , you would be disappointed , as all cards were winners . Prizes included fries , sodas and sandwiches . 
 The veal Parmesan sandwich was introduced in a series of commercials from JWT centered around the new corporate ad slogan , Aren 't you hungry - for Burger King now ? targeting the 19- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old male demographic . The campaign was part of a back @-@ to @-@ basics program designed to put the company on a more competitive footing with main rival McDonald 's , who was outspending Burger King 's advertising budget by a factor of three . With the new program , the company hoped to establish itself as the higher quality alternative to McDonald 's . 
 The meatloaf sandwich was part of the company 's new BK Dinner Baskets product line and serving concept . To promote the product line and concept , Burger King commissioned New York based agency D 'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles to create a series of ads featuring MTV VJ Dan Cortese . The tag line developed for the promotion was " BK , I love this place " . The advertising program was designed as part of a back to basics plan by Burger King after a series of disappointing advertising schemes including the failure of its 1980s Where 's Herb ? campaign . The Dinner Baskets were one of two main parts of the plan , as was a newly introduced value menu in response to similar offerings at McDonald 's , Taco Bell and Wendy 's . 
 In the autumn and winter of 2007 BK advertised the Italian Chicken sandwich with a commercial produced by Crispin Porter + Bogusky ( CP + B ) that played the " Have it your Way " theme on an accordion with a simple text insert that asked the consumer if they had a problem with the sandwich being sold only at BK . This insert played up the Italian " <unk> " stereotypes . Another advertisement in 2014 featured the sandwich as a featured part of the company 's 2 for $ 5 promotion , a discount promotion where customers could purchase two sandwiches for $ 5 @.@ 00 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The 1980 introduction of a veal @-@ based sandwich raised the ire of animal rights groups . By 1982 , several groups were alleging that the veal being sourced to Burger King was most likely kept in battery cages , unable to move , and fed a low iron diet designed to produce the lightly toned meat associated with veal . As a result of this protest , these groups lead a three @-@ country boycott of Burger King in April 1982 . Critics of the boycott claimed that the type of veal that was being used was more @-@ likely to be free range veal due to cost issues , claiming that there is simply no way a $ 2 @.@ 00 sandwich would use the higher quality $ 15 @.@ 00 / lb veal . The rights groups refused to back down despite the cost claims because Burger King would only release the name of the meat processor , not its veal suppliers . The chain eventually announced that it intended to pull the sandwich from the market , stating that it was not because of the boycotts but because there was a lack of consumer demand . In fact , the chain said the sandwich sold best in the markets where the majority of the protests were occurring . 
 A 2009 advertising campaign in Singapore for the company 's new BK Super Seven <unk> cheeseburger , caused a notable controversy over the content of the ad . Originally and erroneously attributed to Burger King 's advertising firm at the time , Crispin Porter + Bogusky , which had generated controversy with some misogynistic and culturally insensitive American and European advertisements , it was later revealed that a local , unnamed Singaporean firm was responsible for the campaign . The print version of the advertisement ( pictured ) made an overt association with the sandwich and oral sex using imagery and less @-@ than subtle innuendo in the printed description in the advertisement . Critics across the globe complained that the ad was " disgusting " , and went " too far " . 
 Almost every aspect of the advertisement was criticized . Blogger Rein <unk> noted that the its copy featured terms such as " blow " which she felt alluded to the slang term " blow job " . She also believed that the image of the woman in the advertisement had been overtly sexualized which she thought was objectifying of women in general . An article in Psychology Today echoed <unk> concerns , adding that advertisement was openly displayed in public spaces , and could have troubling implications for parents having to explain the content to younger children . 
 = = Trademarks = = 
 In some markets the Original Chicken is called the " Chicken Royale " , " King de Pollo " ( King of Chicken ) , or the " BK Chicken " . Burger King currently does not have any trademarks on the Original Chicken Sandwich name or the line of Specialty sandwiches in the US , Canada and Europe . The alias Long Chicken is trademarked in Europe , King de Pollo in Central and South America , and Chicken Royale in Europe and the Middle East ; all are displayed with the " circle @-@ R " ( ® ) symbol in these markets . 
 = The Binding of Isaac ( video game ) = 
 The Binding of Isaac is a independent roguelike video game designed by Edmund McMillen and Florian Himsl , initially released in 2011 for Microsoft Windows ; the game was later ported for OS X , and Linux operating systems . The game 's title and plot were inspired by the Biblical story of the Binding of Isaac . After his mother receives a message from God demanding the life of her son as proof of her faith , Isaac flees into the monster @-@ filled basement of their home , where he must fight to survive . Players control Isaac or one of six other unlockable characters through a procedurally generated dungeon in a roguelike manner , fashioned after those of The Legend of Zelda , defeating monsters in real @-@ time combat while collecting items and power @-@ ups to defeat bosses and eventually Isaac 's mom . 
 The game was the result of a week @-@ long game jam between McMillen and Himsl to develop a Zelda @-@ inspired roguelike that allowed McMillen to showcase his personal feelings about both positive and negative aspects of religion that he had come to discover from his Catholic and Christian family members while growing up . McMillen had considered the title a risk but one he could take after the financial success of Super Meat Boy , and released it without much fanfare to Steam in September 2011 , not expecting many sales . The game soon gained popularity partially as a result of various Let 's Play videos showcasing the title . McMillen and Himsl released an expansion " Wrath of the Lamb " in May 2012 , but were limited from further expansion due to limitations with the Flash platform . They had started working with Nintendo in 2012 to release a 3DS version , but Nintendo later backed out of the deal , stating controversy over the game 's religious themes . 
 Developer Nicalis worked with McMillen in 2014 to complete a remake of the game The Binding of Isaac : Rebirth bringing additional features that McMillen had planned that exceeded Flash 's limitation , as well as to improve the game 's graphics and enable ports for other systems . Rebirth was released in November 2014 for Windows , OS X , Linux , and the PlayStation 4 and Vita platforms , and later in July 2015 for Xbox One , Wii U , and Nintendo 3DS . Rebirth has since seen one expansion with a second planned expansion in development . 
 The Binding of Isaac has been well @-@ received , with critics praising the game 's roguelike nature to encourage repeated playthroughs . By July 2014 , McMillen reported over 3 million copies had been sold . The game has been said to contribute to renewed interest in the roguelike genre from both players and developers . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Binding of Isaac is a top @-@ down dungeon crawler game , presented using two @-@ dimensional sprites , in which the player controls Isaac or another unlockable characters as they explore the dungeons located in Isaac 's basement . The characters differ in speed , amount of health , amount of damage they deal , and other attributes . The game 's mechanics and presentation is similar to the dungeons of The Legend of Zelda , while incorporating random , procedurally @-@ generated levels in the manner of a roguelike game . On each floor of the basement dungeon , the player must fight monsters in a room before continuing onto the next room . This is most commonly done by the character 's tears as bullets in the style of a twin @-@ stick shooter , but the player can also use a limited supply of bombs to damage enemies and clear out parts of the room . Other methods of defeating enemies become possible as the character gains power @-@ ups , items that are automatically worn by the player @-@ character when picked up that can alter the character 's core attributes , such as increasing health or the strength of each tear , or cause additional side effects , such as for allowing charged tear shots to be fired after holding down a controller button for a short while , or a means to fire tears behind the character . Power @-@ ups include passive items that improve the character 's attributes automatically , active power @-@ ups that can be used once before they are recharged by completing additional rooms in the dungeon , and single @-@ use power @-@ ups such as pills or Tarot cards that confer a one @-@ time benefit when used , such as regaining full health , or increasing or decreasing all attributes of the character . The effect of power @-@ ups stack , so that the player may come into highly @-@ beneficial power @-@ up combinations . 
 Once a room is cleared of monsters , it will remain clear , allowing the player to re @-@ trace their way through the level , though once they move onto the next level , they cannot return . Along the way , the player can collect money to buy power @-@ ups from shopkeepers , keys to unlock special treasure rooms , and new weapons and power @-@ ups to strengthen their chances against the enemies . The player 's health is tracked by a number of hearts ; if the character loses all their hearts , the game ends in permadeath and the player must start over from a freshly @-@ generated dungeon . Each floor of the dungeon includes a boss which the player must defeat before continuing to the next level . On the sixth of eight floors , the player fights Isaac 's mother ; after defeating her , Isaac crawls into her womb . Later levels are significantly harder , culminating in a fight against the heart of Isaac 's mother on the eighth floor . An optional ninth floor , <unk> contains the boss Satan . Winning the game with certain characters or by certain conditions unlocks new power @-@ ups that might appear in the dungeon or the ability to use one of the other characters . The game tracks the various power @-@ ups that the player has found over time which can be reviewed from the game 's menus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Binding of Isaac 's plot is loosely inspired by the biblical story of the same name . Isaac , a child , and his mother live in a small house on a hill , both happily keeping to themselves , with Isaac drawing pictures and playing with his toys , and his mother watching Christian broadcasts on television . Isaac 's mother then hears " a voice from above " , stating her son is corrupted with sin , and needs to be saved . It asks her to remove all that was evil from Isaac , in an attempt to save him . His mother obliges , taking away his toys , drawings , and even his clothes . 
 The voice once again speaks to Isaac 's mother , stating that Isaac must be cut off from all that is evil in the world . Once again , his mother obliges , and locks Isaac inside his room . Once more , the voice speaks to Isaac 's mother . It states she has done well , but it still questions her devotion , and tells her to sacrifice her son . She obliges , grabbing a butcher 's knife from the kitchen and walking to Isaac 's room . Isaac , watching through a sizable crack in his door , starts to panic . He finds a trapdoor hidden under his rug and jumps in , just before his mother opens his bedroom door . Isaac then puts the paper he was drawing onto his wall , which becomes the title screen . 
 During the game 's loading points , Isaac is shown curled up in a ball , crying . His thoughts are visible , ranging among rejection from his mother and humiliation from his peers to a scenario involving his own death . The game features 13 possible endings , one after each major boss fight . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The Binding of Isaac was developed following the release of Super Meat Boy , which McMillen considered a significant risk and a large time effort . When Super Meat Boy was released to both critical praise and strong sales , he felt that he no longer had to worry about the consequences of taking risks with his finances supported by its sales . He also considered he could take further risk with the concept . 
 The Binding of Isaac 's main concept was the result of a weeklong game jam that McMillen had with Florian Himsl ; at the time , his co @-@ contributor on Super Meat Boy , Tommy Refenes , was on vacation . The concept McMillan had was two @-@ fold : to develop a roguelike title based on the first The Legend of Zelda game 's dungeon structure , and to develop a game that addressed McMillen 's thoughts on religion . McMillen had been inspired by Shigeru Miyamoto , the designer of the original Zelda games . 
 Random dungeons were created for each floor of the dungeon by selecting ten to twenty rooms from a pre @-@ built library of 200 layouts , adding in the monsters , items , and other features , and then including fixed rooms that would be found on each floor , such as a boss room and treasure room . In expanding the gameplay , McMillen used the structure of Zelda 's dungeons to design how the player would progress through the game . In a typical Zelda dungeon , according to McMillen , the player acquires a new item that helps them to progress farther in the game ; he took the same inspiration to assure that each level in Isaac included at least one item and one bonus item on defeating the boss that would boost the character 's attributes . McMillen also wanted encourage players to experiment to learn how things work within Isaac , mirroring how Miyamoto had done with the original Zelda game . He designed the level progression to become more difficult with the player 's progression in the game , as well as added additional content that became available after beating the game as to make it feel like the game was long . McMillen designed four of the selectable characters based on the main classes of Dungeons & Dragons — fighter , thief , cleric and wizard . 
 On the story side , McMillen explained that the religious tone is based on his own experiences with his family , split between Catholics and born @-@ again Christians . McMillen noted that while both sides born out faith from the same Bible , their attitudes were different ; he found some of the Catholic rituals his family performed inspiring , while other beliefs they had were condemning of several pastimes McMillen had participated in like Dungeons & Dragons . He took inspiration from that duality to create Isaac 's narrative , showing how religion can both instill harmful feelings while also bringing about dark creativity . McMillen also considered the scare tactics used by the Christian right to condemn popular media of the 1980s , such as heavy metal and video games . McMillen noted how many of the propaganda films from this period features satanic cults that would sacrifice children , and he noted how many <unk> stories mirrored these concepts , subsequently building the story around that . He also stated that he also tended to like " really weird stuff " relating to toilet humor and similar types of off @-@ color humor that did not sit well with his family and which he had explored in previous games before Super Meat Boy . While Super Meat Boy helped to make his reputation ( including being one of the featured developers in Indie Game : The Movie ) , he felt it was a " safe " game considering his preferred type of humor , and used Isaac to return to this form , considering that the game could easily be " career suicide " but would make a statement about what he really wanted to do . 
 Within the week , they had a working game written in Adobe Flash 's ActionScript 2 . The two agreed to complete it out as a game they could release on Steam though with no expectations of sales . Completion of the game from the prototype to the finished state took about 3 months with part @-@ time development . During this time , they discovered there were several limitations on the size and scope of both Flash and ActionScript that limited how much they could do with the game , but continued to use the tools as to release the title . McMillen said that because they were not worried about sales , they were able to work with Valve to release the game without fears of censorship or having to seek an ESRB rating . Releasing through Steam also enabled them to update the game freely , several times on its initial release , an aspect that they could not do with other consoles without significant cost to themselves . They did release without significant end @-@ user testing , as it would have taken several hundreds of users to go through all the various combinations of items that a player could collect , and McMillen recognized they had released the title with their buyers being playtesters for them . A week after the Steam release , McMillen released a demo version via the website Newgrounds . Merge Games produced a physical edition that included the game , soundtrack , and a poster , for stores in the United Kingdom in 2012 . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Danny Baranowsky , the game 's composer and who previously worked with McMillen on Super Meat Boy , was involved early on with the project shortly after the completion of the first prototype . McMillen and Baranowsky worked back and forth , with McMillen providing artwork from the game and allowing Baranowsky to develop the musical themes based on that ; this would often lead to McMillen creating more art to support the music as it progressed . Baranowsky had been drawn to The Binding of Isaac as though the game puts forth a dark tone , he stated it had rather silly undertones underneath and such that one could not take it too seriously . Some of the songs were inspired by classical choral music but modified to fit the theme of the game . Other works were inspired by boss fight songs composed by Nobuo Uematsu for the Final Fantasy series . Baranowsky also had additional time after finishing the main songs for the game to craft short additional tracks that were used for special rooms like shops and secret areas . 
 = = = Cancelled Nintendo 3DS port = = = 
 In January 2012 , as the game has surpassed 450 @,@ 000 units sold , McMillen stated that he was approached by a publisher that had interest in bringing the title to the Nintendo 3DS as a downloadable title through the Nintendo eShop , though McMillen had reservations given Nintendo 's reputation for less risque content . In late February , McMillen stated that Nintendo had rejected the game because of " questionable religious content " . He believed this stemmed from Germany 's classification board rating the existing Windows version of the game as " age 16 + " due to potentially blasphemous content , the first such time a game was rated in that manner in the country . McMillen noted that Nintendo executives he spoke to before this decision had noted some blasphemous content would have been acceptable , and were more concerned with overtly religious content . He also noted that he was approached about his willingness to make some changes to the game to make it more suitable for the 3DS , but never was given a list of specific changes . McMillen speculated that Nintendo was worried about its reputation ; because of the game 's resemblance to Zelda , an unknowing child may download the title and be shocked by what they see , which would have reflected poorly on Nintendo . 
 Several game websites were outraged at Nintendo 's decision . Though disappointed with Nintendo 's decision , McMillen did not think the loss of the 3DS port was a major issue , and saw a brief sales burst on Steam as the news was covered in gaming website . McMillen further praised the flexibility of the Steam platform , which does not require games to obtain ESRB ratings to be published on the service , and the freedom it gave to the publishers regardless of the game content . 
 Nintendo would later allow the Rebirth remake to be released on both the New Nintendo 3DS and the Wii U in 2015 ; this came in part for three executives within Nintendo — Steve Singer , the vice president of licensing ; Mark Griffin , a senior manager in licensing , and Dan Adelman , the head of indie development — that championed support for The Binding of Isaac . 
 = = = " Wrath of the Lamb " = = = 
 An expansion to the game , entitled " Wrath of the Lamb " , was released through Steam on May 28 , 2012 . McMillen was inspired to create the expansion not only due to the success of the base game , but because his wife Danielle had fully completed the base game , the first game he had written in which she had shown significant interest . The expansion adds 70 % more content to the original , and contains more than 10 bosses , over 100 items , over 40 unlocks , two additional endings , and two additional optional levels . This expansion added new " alternate " floors , which can replace the normal floors , creating an alternate route through the game . These floors contain harder enemies , and a different set of bosses . Other features include a new item type , <unk> , which have a variety of passive or triggered effects when carried , as well as new room types . McMillen had plans to release a second expansion beyond " Wrath of the Lamb " , but was constrained by the limits of Flash at this point . 
 = = = The Binding of Isaac : Rebirth = = = 
 Sometime in 2012 after Isaac ' release , McMillen was approached by Tyrone Rodriguez of Nicalis who asked if McMillen was interested in bringing the game to consoles . McMillen was interested , but insisted that they would have to reprogram the game to get around the limitations of Flash as to include " Wrath of Lamb " and the second planned expansion , remaking the game 's graphics in 16 @-@ bit instead of 8 @-@ bit . Further , McMillen had wanted nothing to do with the business aspects of the game , having recounted the difficulties he had in handling this for Super Meat Boy . Nicalis agreed to these , and began work in 2012 on what would become The Binding of Isaac : Rebirth , an improved version of the title . It was released on November 4 , 2014 for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , PlayStation 4 , and PlayStation Vita , with versions for the Wii U , New Nintendo 3DS , and Xbox One released on July 23 , 2015 . The game introduced numerous new playable characters , items , enemies , bosses , challenges , and room layout seeds for floors . A content pack , entitled " Afterbirth " was released for Rebirth starting October 2015 , adding new alternate chapters , characters and items , as well as wave @-@ based Greed mode . A second update , " Afterbirth † " , will add additional content and support for user @-@ created modifications , and is expected sometime in 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Binding of Isaac received generally favorable reviews from game critics . On Metacritic , the game has an average of 84 out of 100 based on 30 reviews . 
 The Binding of Isaac has been received by reviewers as a game with high replayability with the extensive range and combinations of power @-@ ups that the player can encounter during a run @-@ through , while providing an accessible Zelda @-@ inspired framework that most video game players would recognize and easily come to understand . John Teti for Eurogamer praised the game for its replayability through the randomization aspects , calling it " the most accessible exploration of the roguelike idea " that he had seen . Edge 's similarly commented on the lure to replay the game due to its short playthrough time , calling it " an imaginative and quick @-@ witted arcade experience that manages to be both depraved and strangely sweet by turn " . GameSpot 's Maxwell McGee stated that the game smartly has removed extraneous features such that " what remains is a tightly focused game that continues to feel fresh even after multiple completions " . Though the game is considered to be accessible to new players , reviewers found the game to be a difficult challenge , often set by the randomness of what power @-@ ups the player happened to acquire during a single run . Writers for the A.V. Club rated the game an A on a grading scale , and favorably compared the title to McMillen 's Super Meat Boy , requiring the player to have " masochistic patience in the face of terrible odds " . This difficulty was considered mitigated by the large number of possible power @-@ ups that the game offers , most would not be seen by players until they have replayed the game many times . McGee noted that while players can review what items they have discovered prior to a run @-@ through , this feature does not explain what each item does , leaving the effect to be determined by the player while in game . 
 Game Informer 's Adam Biessener noted that while The Binding of Isaac had a number of software bugs on release that may briefly detract from the experience , " McMillen ’ s vision shines through " in the game 's playability , art style , and story . <unk> Johnson for IGN found that some players may be put off by the game 's crudeness but otherwise " it 's totally random , highly creative and brutally unforgiving " . Similarly , Nathan <unk> for GameSpy noted the game had some shock value that one must work past , but otherwise was " imaginative " and " utterly absorbing " . Alternatively , Jordan Devore for Destructoid considered the visual style of the game one of it 's " biggest selling points " , following from McMillen 's past style of dark comedy from Super Meat Boy . Baranowsky 's soundtrack was found by reviewers to well @-@ suit the themes of the game , and used appropriately to avoid extensive repetition during a playthrough . Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku called the soundtrack as the combination of several genres and the musical styles of Danny Elfman , Muse , and Final Fantasy that created something " dark and unique " . 
 The Binding of Isaac was nominated in the Best Independent Game category at the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards , but lost to Minecraft . 
 McMillen had only expected the game to sell a few hundred copies when he released it on Steam . For the first few months of its release , sales were roughly a few hundred per day , but shortly thereafter , McMillen found sales suddenly were boosted , a fact he attributed to numerous Let 's Play videos that had been published by players to showcase the game and drove sales . By November 2012 , the game sold over one million copies , with at least one quarter of those having purchased the " Wrath of the Lamb " extension . As of July 2014 , the game has sold over 3 million copies . By July 2015 , following the release of Rebirth , the combined games had over 5 million units sold . The Binding of Isaac is said to be a contributing factor towards the growth of the roguelike genre since around 2010 , with its success paving the way for later games that used the roguelike formula , such as FTL : Faster Than Light and Don 't Starve . 
 = E = MC ² ( Mariah Carey album ) = 
 E = MC ² is the eleventh studio album by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It was released in the United States on April 15 , 2008 by Island Records . The singer began recording the album in 2007 in Anguilla , after writing and composing most of its material during and after her 2006 Adventures of Mimi Tour . Carey worked with several notable songwriters and producers during the course of the project , including Jermaine Dupri , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , Stargate , The @-@ Dream , Tricky Stewart , Scott Storch and Danja . 
 The album revealed a more personal side of the singer , illustrated in its declarative theme of emancipation from her previous marriage , and from her personal and professional setbacks . Although it shared similar vocal production as well as an inclination to her signature pop and R & B ballads , the album also encompassed a variety of dance @-@ oriented and uptempo styles . It was meant to be a continuation , or a second part of her tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . Carey collaborated with a number of artists on the album , including T @-@ Pain , Damian Marley and Young Jeezy . Though considered by critics very similar to the formula its predecessor had been built on , E = MC ² included other genres she had never explored , such as reggae , and her continued recording of gospel @-@ influenced hymns . 
 E = MC ² was generally well received by music critics , with many complimenting the record 's broad genre influences , and musical and production styles . Some critics , however , felt that the album was too similar to The Emancipation of Mimi , and didn 't offer anything new from the formula . The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with opening week sales of 463 @,@ 000 copies ; the highest first @-@ week sales of Carey 's career . It opened inside the top @-@ five on the albums chart in Australia , Canada , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . The album achieved worldwide sales of over 2 @.@ 5 million copies . 
 Four singles were commission in promotion of the album . The album 's lead single , " Touch My Body " , became Carey 's eighteenth chart topper on the Billboard Hot 100 , making her the solo artist with the most number one singles in United States history , surpassing the record held by Elvis Presley . Additionally , it gave Carey her 79th week atop the chart , tying Presley for most weeks at number one . It achieved strong worldwide charting , peaking within the top five of the singles charts in Italy , Japan , New Zealand , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . " Bye Bye " served as the album 's second release . Although hailed by critics , and expected to have achieved large commercial success , the song stalled at number nineteen on the Hot 100 , and managed to chart weakly internationally . Both the third and fourth singles , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " and " I Stay in Love " failed to garner success in any prominent music market . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 2005 , Carey signed a new record deal with Island Records and released her tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi . It became the best @-@ selling album of 2005 the United States , and the second best @-@ seller around the world , with over 12 million units sold . It earned a myriad of music industry awards , and brought Carey back to the top of pop music following her commercial decline in 2001 . After completing The Adventures of Mimi Tour , she began working on material for her eleventh studio effort , the yet untitled E = MC ² . E = MC ² was hailed as one of the most anticipated albums of 2008 , with many critics weighing their opinions on whether Carey would be able to deliver significant success , following her achievements with The Emancipation of Mimi . Carey began writing and producing the music she saw fit , and not anything to please record executives . Throughout 2007 , Carey recorded the album in a studio built into her private villa in Anguilla , in the Caribbean . She describe E = MC ² as one of her most expressive albums , and one that she felt free on , and able to express herself through her music . In an interview with The Bryan Times , Carey spoke of her sentiments on the album " It 's hard for me to sit here and talk about it without sounding like if I 'm bragging if I 'm in love with it , but I am I love with this album . I think that having the success with the last record allowed me to have more freedom ... and just make records that I like . Its kind of a really fun record . 
 = = Delays and release = = 
 The album was supposed to be released in late 2007 , but Carey spoke about reason the album got delayed : " You can 't really put records out in December if you want the whole world to have a chance to actually hear it , [ and ] my fans all over the world are very important to me " , adding that she also wants to put out a pair of singles before the album drops . In a separate interview , she elaborated further : " This happened to me with The Emancipation of Mimi , I started writing more songs , I was like okay let me get these done , then I wrote four more songs and you know how it goes , so now I 'm like 22 songs in and clearly I have to cut some of those down " . It was then reported that the album will be released in February 2008 . However , the release was later pushed back yet again to April 2008 . 
 Prior to the its release , the album 's working title had been That Chick , taken from a song on the album with a similar name , " I 'm That Chick " . As the release date drew near , the title was changed to E = MC ² , in reference to Carey 's previous album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . The title signifies " ( E ) Emancipation ( = ) of ( MC ) Mariah Carey ( ² ) to the second power " . It is a word play on Albert Einstein 's famous mass – energy equivalence formula and has been dubbed as the sequel and improved counterpart to The Emancipation of Mimi . In his review of the album , Alex Macpherson from The Guardian described his thoughts on its title , as well as its meaning : 
 It is worth pondering what the title of Mariah Carey 's eleventh studio album could refer to . Emancipation , maybe , in a nod to her 2005 comeback album , The Emancipation of Mimi ; or perhaps the energy of the original equation , a statement that Carey still has what it takes to party all night at the age of 37 , even as she describes herself as " eternally 12 " . Then again , she could just be identifying herself alongside Einstein as a fellow genius . Either way , ' E = MC ² ' finds Carey <unk> than ever , embracing her own larger @-@ than @-@ life image with gusto : Mariah Carey Squared indeed . 
 Carey expressed how she considered Mimi the " main course " , and felt that the new album would be treated as " dessert " . In an interview with NME , the singer described her choice on the album 's title : " Basically , I 'm freer on this album than I 've ever been . Some of the songs on the last album were cool but maybe not quite as neat as this album . " When questioned if the title represented Carey 's interest in physics , she jokingly added " Einstein 's theory ? Physics ? Me ? Hello ! I even failed remedial math . I could not pass seventh grade math even in the lowest class with the worst kids . " The album 's similarity to its predecessor is not only found in the title and music , but also in its artwork . In the album 's cover art , she holds almost the exact pose as from her last album , only with different lighting and wardrobe . It features a black backdrop , with Carey completely naked , except for a large feathered shawl covering her body . Only her first name appears in large pink letters on the cover , with ' E = MC ² ' appearing in small white letters on the top . In describing the cover , Macpherson wrote " Carey is naked but for the world 's largest feather boa , an accessory for which flocks of birds have surely given their lives . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Style and structure = = = 
 Music critics compared E = MC ² heavily to Carey 's previous album , The Emancipation of Mimi , and felt it followed the same formula of ballads and dance @-@ able tracks . Freedom De Luc of The Washington Post felt that after experiencing strong success for the first time in the 2000s with Mimi , Carey tried to create E = MC ² with the same formula , although possibly a little improved : " Having found that winning formula of coquettish club bangers , emotional ballads and frisky , mid @-@ tempo coos , the diva with the golden tone has eschewed radical experimentalism here for stasis . ' E = MC ² ' is mostly more of the same , then , with the ' 2' representing something sequential rather than exponential . Meet the new Mariah , almost exactly the same as the old . . . ' Mimi ' ! " 
 = = = Songs and lyrics = = = 
 The first song on the album 's track @-@ list is " Migrate " , a song Carey wrote and co @-@ produced alongside Danja , and featuring a rap verse from T @-@ Pain . Its melody is built on a heavy electronic beat , and incorporates whistle registers and several studio @-@ created synthesizers into its melody . Additionally , the song features the inclusion of Auto @-@ Tune and several vocal manipulators , which are used heavily on both Carey and T @-@ Pain 's vocals . Lyrically , the song finds the singer during a night out , migrating from several locations : from the car to the club , from the bar to the V.I.P , from the party to the after @-@ party , and finally to the hotel . According to Brian Hiatt from VH1 , she " hops from my car into the club ... from the bar to VIP ... from the party to the afterparty ... afterparty to hotel " with T @-@ Pain , who urges her to " bounce , bounce , bounce . " 
 The album 's lead single , " Touch My Body " , was written and produced by Carey , Tricky Stewart and Terius " The Dream " Nash . The song 's hook is built around a piano melody and " circular keyboard line " , and features " a stuttering mid @-@ tempo beat that 's accented by finger snaps and electronic synthesizers " as its instrumentation . Lyrically , the song describes the protagonist revealing several bedroom fantasies in which she would like to engage in , asking her lover playfully to " touch her body " . According to Ben Ratliff from The New York Times , it 's a " questionably sexy striptease : a goofy @-@ sleazy tryst vignette " , with Carey singing " If there 's a camera up in here then I best not catch this flick on YouTube . " 
 " Cruise Control " , featuring reggae artist Damian Marley , is influenced by R & B and Reggae , and finds her adapting to the genre by imitating Jamaican phrases , accents and styles of singing . " I Stay in Love " was released as the fourth and final single from the album , and places fourth on its track @-@ listing . Written by Carey and Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , is a mid @-@ tempo " beat @-@ driven " and " piano @-@ laced " ballad , that is influenced by pop and R & B music genres . The song 's instrumentation is derived from a piano melody , and is backed by a strong computerized drum @-@ beat . Its lyrics find Carey as her most vulnerable ; she describes old times she shared with her lover , and that even though " we said let go " , and " inside she knows its over " , she still " stays in love with him " . Featuring American rapper Young Jeezy , " Side Effects " describes Carey 's abusive relationship with Tommy Mottola , her ex @-@ husband . During the first verse , she discusses the pair 's background , and how she was young and naive , and believed everything he preached to her . The lyrics read " Keepin ' me there , under your thumb / Cause you were scared that I 'd become much / More than you could handle , " she confesses , and refers to herself as " Shining like a chandelier / That decorated every room inside / The private hell we built / And I dealt with it / Like a kid I wished / I could fly away . " According to Freedom De Luc of The Washington Post , on the song Carey uploads on Mottola , " ' sleeping with the enemy , aware that he was smothering every last part of me . ' She finally walked away , she sings , ' but I still live with the side effects . ' Sarah Rodman from The Boston Globe described it as " another look at her fractious marriage to Mottola " , and wrote " Although the union ended in 1998 , Carey is still suffering , including dreams of the ' violent times ' and ' sleeping with the enemy ' . Interestingly , her vocal approach here is almost emo , as she hits her rock @-@ solid middle register and refuses to be held captive by the demons of her past . " MTV News writer Jennifer Vineyard described the song in detail : 
 [ It ] finally reveals a side of Mariah we don 't see that often — her true self . The Mariah we usually see and hear is a glossy one . Psychologists might say her affect is ' off ' — meaning her gestures and facial expressions don 't match her mood . There 's a reason for that , as she explains on ' Side Effects ' , which is the emotional abuse she says she suffered during her marriage to music mogul Tommy Mottola . Mariah , who is usually quite guarded , has alluded to the subject in songs like ' Petals ' , but never has she gone into such detail as she does on ' Side Effects ' , in which she refers to the marriage as a ' private hell that we built ' . Even though it 's been 11 years since they split up , she sings in a lower register that she 's still ' <unk> ' up scared some nights ... dreaming about the violent times ' . Her emotional scars left her ' a little protective ... a little defensive ... a little depressed ' , which makes her ' fake a smile ' as she ' deal [ s ] with the side effects ' . Even though it features Young Jeezy , it sounds like a rock power ballad . 
 " I 'm That Chick " is a song Carey wrote alongside Norwegian duo , Stargate . Its a fast @-@ paced song , which features a " care @-@ free feel " , and is influenced by soul , pop and disco music genres . The song incorporates a sample from Michael Jackson 's " Off the Wall " , and features a strong thumping bass @-@ line and hand claps . Evan Sawdey of PopMatters described it as a " late @-@ night disco @-@ bass groove " , and highlighted its production as the album 's finest . " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , the albums ' eventual third single , was written and produced by Carey and DJ Toomp . The song was described as a " mid @-@ tempo " , " party jam " , that is influenced by pop , R & B and soul music genres . Critics elaborated on the song 's " soul " influence , with Melissa Ruggieri from The News & Advance described it as a " soul @-@ thumper " , while Digital Spy 's Nick Levine called it a " nod towards classic soul " . The song 's title is derived from the popular line , " me love you long time " , from the 1987 war film , Full Metal Jacket . Additionally , its hook and instrumentation is derived from sampling Mark DeBarge 's Stay With Me . Critics also noted how " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " " recalls " the melody riff and chord progression of the Hill Street Blues 's theme song . The song 's main source of production comes from its " lush keyboard work " , and her usage of the " double voice " , which she uses throughout the song 's bridge . Carey described the effect as " layering her voice " , so that the bridge would sound like a " swooning bank of a hundred Mariahs " . 
 " Bye Bye " served as the album 's thirteenth track , and also composed by Carey and Stargate . An " inspirational power ballad " , it is influenced by R & B and pop music genres . The song is built on an understated and simple piano @-@ driven melody , that is decorated with a soft bass @-@ line . Lyrically , the song was described by critics as a " larger than life anthem " , and an " inspirational lighter @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air ballad " , and finds Carey remembering both her father , as well as any lost loved ones . While the verses are dedicated to him , the chorus was written in a third @-@ person point of view , for her fans : " This is for my peoples who just lost somebody / Your best friend , your baby , your man or your lady / Put your hand way up high / We will never say bye / Mamas , daddies , sisters , brothers , friends and cousins / This is for my peoples who lost their grandmothers / Lift your hands to the sky / Because we won 't ever say bye bye " . While listing several forms of loss , Carey encourages to never let go , and always live with their memory , and put their hands if they ever lost someone , ' cause we won 't ever say bye bye ' . Serving as the album 's closing number , " I Wish You Well " was compared to the closing number on Mimi , " Fly Like a Bird " . Similarly , " I Wish You Well " incorporates gospel influence into its melody of " rousing piano waltz " , that " extends forgiveness to those who have wronged her in the past and is pretty much interchangeable with its predecessors . " Extensively making use of the whistle register , she references Mottola in another light than " Side Effects " : " ' I Wish You Well 's ' message to Mottola is similarly striking . Accompanied by a piano and some multi @-@ tracked backing vocals , Carey sings : " Still bruised , still walk on eggshells / Same frightened child , hide to protect myself / But you can 't manipulate me like before . " She then prescribes Bible study and says , " I wish you well . " 
