 = = = 2007 : World top 10 = = = 
 Murray reached the fourth round of the Australian Open , where he lost a five @-@ set match against world No. 2 , Rafael Nadal . 
 Following the Miami Masters , where he reached the semifinals , Murray became the world No. 10 on 16 April . 
 The British No. 1 sustained tendon damage during his first round match at the German Open in Hamburg . Murray was up 5 – 1 when he hit a forehand from the back of the court and snapped the tendons in his wrist , leaving him out of action from 15 May until 7 August , thereby missing Wimbledon . During this rest period , Murray rose to world No. 8 , but by 7 August , he had dropped to no 14 . 
 Murray suffered a third round loss at the US Open . At the Masters tournaments , Murray reached the semifinals of Indian Wells and Miami . At Rome and Cincinnati , Murray exited in the first round whilst going out in the second in Canada . In the final two masters tournaments , Murray exited in the third round in Madrid and he went out in the quarterfinals of Paris . Murray won titles in San Jose and St. Petersburg . He also reached the final of tournaments in Doha and Metz , finishing the season ranked 11th in the world . 
 In November , Murray split with his coach Brad Gilbert and added a team of experts along with Miles Maclagan , his main coach . 
 = = = 2008 : First Grand Slam final and first Masters titles = = = 
 In 2008 , Murray suffered a first round loss at the Australian Open to eventual runner @-@ up Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga , and a third round loss at the French Open to Nicolás Almagro . Murray then made his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at Wimbledon before making his first final at the US Open . During the tournament in New York , Murray claimed his first win over Nadal . That victory meant that he 'd become the first player from Britain since Greg Rusedski in 1997 to reach a major final . In his first Grand Slam final Murray suffered a straight sets loss to Federer . At the Beijing Olympics , Murray suffered one of the worst defeats of his career , losing his first round singles match to world No. 77 Yen @-@ hsun Lu of Taiwan in straight sets . That abject defeat was still on his mind in a BBC interview five years later – despite an intervening Olympic gold medal and a head @-@ to @-@ head win – when he met the same player ( now ranked 75 in the world ) in the 2nd round of Wimbledon 2013 . 
 In the Masters tournaments Murray went out in round four in Indian Wells and the first round of Miami . In the clay Masters Murray made the third round of Monte Carlo and Hamburg and the second of Rome . On the American hard court swing Murray made the semifinals of Toronto before winning his first Masters shield in Cincinnati . He added another shield to his collection in Madrid ; before losing in the quarterfinals of Paris . Now at No. 4 in the world , Murray qualified for the first time for the Masters Cup . He played well in defeating an injured Federer but lost to Davydenko in the semifinals . Murray ended 2008 ranked fourth in the world . Murray also won tournaments in Doha , Marseille and St Petersburg . 
 = = = 2009 : World No. 2 = = = 
 Murray opened the 2009 season with a successful defence of his title at the Qatar Open in Doha , defeating Andy Roddick in straight sets . At the Australian Open , Murray made it to the fourth round , losing to Fernando Verdasco . Murray won his eleventh career title in Rotterdam , defeating No. 1 , Nadal in the three sets . Murray next went to Dubai but withdrew before the quarterfinals with a re @-@ occurrence of a virus that had affected him at the Australian Open . The virus caused Murray to miss a Davis Cup tie in Glasgow . Murray then lost in the finals to Nadal at Indian Wells , but won a week later in Miami over Djokovic for another masters title . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the French Open , Murray beat world No. 9 , Nikolay Davydenko at the Monte Carlo Masters , the first time he had beaten a top ten player on clay , though he lost to Nadal in the semifinals . Murray was upset in round two of the Rome Masters by qualifier Juan Mónaco , and he reached the quarterfinals of the Madrid Masters , losing to Juan Martín del Potro . During this time Murray achieved the highest ever ranking of a British male in the Open Era when he became world No. 3 on 11 May 2009 . Murray reached the quarterfinals of the French Open , but was defeated by Fernando González in four sets . 
 Murray won for the first time on grass at Queen 's and became the first British winner of the tournament since 1938 . In the final Murray defeated American James Blake . At Wimbledon , against Stanislas Wawrinka , Murray 's fourth round match was the first match to be played entirely under Wimbledon 's retractable roof , also enabling it to be the latest finishing match ever at Wimbledon . However Murray lost a tight semifinal to Andy Roddick . 
 Murray returned to action in Montreal , defeating del Potro in three sets to take the title . After this victory , he overtook Nadal in the rankings and held the number two position until the start of the US Open . Murray followed the Masters win playing at the Cincinnati Masters , where he lost to Federer . At the US Open , Murray was hampered by a wrist injury and suffered a straight @-@ sets loss to Čilić . Murray won both his singles matches , and lost at doubles in the Davis Cup against Poland , but was then forced to miss six weeks with a wrist injury . 
 In November , Murray won at Valencia , but bowed out in round two of the Paris Masters . To end the season , Murray did not make it out of the round robin at the World Tour Finals in London . 
 = = = 2010 : Australian Open runner @-@ up and two Masters titles = = = 
 Murray and Laura Robson represented Britain at the Hopman Cup . The pair progressed to the final , where they were beaten by Spain . At the Australian Open Murray beat Nadal and Čilić before losing in the final to world No. 1 Roger Federer . At the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells , Murray reached the quarterfinals , losing to Robin Söderling in straight sets . Murray next played at the 2010 Sony Ericsson Open , but lost his first match of the tournament to Mardy Fish , afterwards saying that his mind hadn 't been fully on tennis . At the Monte @-@ Carlo Rolex Masters , Murray suffered another first match loss , this time to Philipp Kohlschreiber . He entered the doubles competition with Ross Hutchins ; the duo lost to the Bryan Brothers on a champions tie @-@ breaker . Murray reached the third round in the Rome Masters , and the quarterfinals at the Madrid Masters , losing both times to David Ferrer . 
 After playing an exhibition match , Murray started the French Open with three tough wins , before losing in straight sets to Tomáš Berdych in the fourth round . In London , Murray progressed to the third round , where he faced Mardy Fish . At 3 – 3 in the final set with momentum going Murray 's way ( he had just come back from 3 – 0 down ) , the match was called off for bad light , leaving Murray fuming . Coming back the next day , Murray was edged out by the eventual finalist in a tie @-@ breaker for his second defeat by him in the year . At Wimbledon , Murray progressed to the semifinals , losing to Nadal in straight sets . On 27 July 2010 , Andy Murray and his coach Maclagan split , and Murray replaced him with Àlex Corretja . 
 Starting the US hard @-@ court season with the 2010 Farmers Classic , Murray reached the final but lost against Sam Querrey in three sets . This was his first loss to Querrey in five career meetings . In Canada , Murray became the first player since Andre Agassi in 1995 to defend the Canadian Masters . Murray defeated Nadal and then Federer in straight sets , ending his eight @-@ month title drought . At the Cincinnati Masters , Murray first complained about the speed of the court , and then in a quarterfinal match with Fish , Murray complained that the organisers refused to put the match on later in the day With temperatures reaching 33 ° C in the shade , Murray won the first set in a tie @-@ breaker but began to feel ill . The doctor was called on court to actively cool Murray down . Murray admitted after the match that he had considered retiring . He lost the second set , but forced a final @-@ set tie @-@ breaker , before Fish won . After losing to Stanislas Wawrinka in the third round of the US Open , questions about Murray 's conditioning arose , as he called the trainer out twice during the match . 
 His next event was the China Open in Beijing , where Murray reached the quarterfinals , losing to Ivan Ljubičić . Murray then won the Shanghai Rolex Masters dismissing Roger Federer in straight sets . He did not drop a single set throughout the event . Murray returned to Spain to defend his title at the Valencia Open 500 but lost in the second round to Juan Mónaco . However , in doubles , Murray partnered his brother Jamie Murray to the final , where they defeated Mahesh Bhupathi and Max Mirnyi . The victory was Murray 's first doubles title and the second time he had reached a final with his brother . 
 Murray reached the quarterfinals at the BNP Paribas Masters losing to Gaël Monfils in three sets . Combined with his exit and Söderling 's taking the title , Murray found himself pushed down a spot in the rankings , to No. 5 from No. 4 . At the Tour finals in London , Murray went 2 – 1 in round robin play before facing Nadal in the semifinal . They battled for over three hours , before Murray fell to the Spaniard in a final @-@ set tie @-@ breaker , bringing an end to his season . 
 = = = 2011 : Second Australian Open final and two Masters titles = = = 
 Murray and Laura Robson lost in the round @-@ robin stage 2011 Hopman Cup , losing all three ties even though Murray won all of his singles matches . Then Murray , along with other stars such as Federer , Nadal , and Djokovic , participated in the Rally for Relief event to help raise money for the flood victims in Queensland . 
 Seeded fifth in the 2011 Australian Open , Murray met former champion Novak Djokovic in the final and was defeated in straight sets . In Rotterdam , he was defeated by Marcos Baghdatis in the first round . Murray reached the semifinals of the doubles tournament with his brother Jamie . Murray lost to qualifiers in the first rounds at the Masters Series events in Indian Wells and Miami , after which he split with coach Àlex Corretja . 
 Murray returned to form at the Monte @-@ Carlo Rolex Masters , but lost to Nadal in the semifinals . Murray sustained an elbow injury before the match and subsequently withdrew from the 2011 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell due to the injury . Murray lost in the third round at the Mutua <unk> Madrid Open , but made it to the semifinals of the Rome Masters , where he lost to Novak Djokovic . 
 At the French Open , Murray won two tough early matches , before losing in his first semifinal at Roland Garros , against Rafael Nadal . 
 Murray defeated Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga to win his second Queen 's Club title . At Wimbledon , Murray lost in the semifinal to Nadal , despite taking the first set . At the Davis Cup tie between Great Britain and Luxembourg , Murray led the British team to victory . Murray was the two @-@ time defending 2011 Rogers Cup champion , but lost in the second round to South African Kevin Anderson . However , the following week , he won the 2011 Western & Southern Open after Novak Djokovic retired due to injury . At the 2011 US Open , Murray battled from two sets down to win a five @-@ set second @-@ round encounter with Robin Haase , but lost in the semifinals to Rafael Nadal in four sets . 
 Murray easily won the small 250 @-@ class Thailand Open , and the following week he won his third title in four tournaments at the Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships . His opponent in the final was Rafael Nadal , whom he beat for the first time in the year in three sets . Murray then won the doubles with his brother Jamie Murray , becoming the first person in the 2011 season to capture both singles and doubles titles at the same tournament . Murray then successfully defended his Shanghai Masters crown with a straight @-@ sets victory over David Ferrer in the final . At the ATP World Tour Finals , Murray lost to David Ferrer in straight sets and withdrew from the tournament after the loss with a groin pull . Murray ended the year as No. 4 in the world behind Djokovic , Nadal , and Federer . 
 = = = 2012 : US Open champion , Wimbledon runner @-@ up and Olympic gold = = = 
 With Ivan Lendl as his new full @-@ time coach , Murray began the season by playing in the 2012 Brisbane International . He overcame a slow start in his first two matches to win his 22nd title by beating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the final . In doubles , he lost in the quarterfinals against second seeds Jürgen Melzer and Philipp <unk> in a tight match . After an exhibition tournament , Murray made it to the semifinals of the 2012 Australian Open , where he was defeated by Djokovic in a four @-@ hour @-@ and 50 @-@ minute match . 
 At the Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships , Murray defeated Djokovic in the semifinals , but lost in the final to Roger Federer . After an early defeat at the BNP Paribas Open , Murray made the finals of the Miami Masters , losing to Djokovic . Murray then had quarterfinal losses at the Monte Carlo Masters and Barcelona Open , and a third round loss at the Italian Open . Murray battled back spasms all through the French Open , and in the quarterfinals he was beaten by David Ferrer . 
 Murray lost in the opening round of the Queen 's Club Championships to world No. 65 Nicolas Mahut . At Wimbledon , Murray set the record for the latest finish at the championships when he completed a four @-@ set victory over Marcos Baghdatis at 23 : 02 BST . Murray beat Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga in the semifinal in four sets to become the first male British player to reach the final of Wimbledon since Bunny Austin in 1938 . In the final , he faced Federer , but after taking the first set , he lost the match in four sets . 
 Murray next competed at the London 2012 Summer Olympics in singles , doubles , and mixed doubles . He partnered his brother Jamie Murray in doubles and suffered a first @-@ round exit to Austria ( Jürgen Melzer and Alexander Peya ) in three sets . In the mixed doubles , Murray was partnered by Laura Robson . They made it all the way to the finals where they lost to the Belarusian top seeds ( Victoria Azarenka and Max Mirnyi ) in three sets , settling for the silver medal . In singles , Murray lost only one set on his way to the finals where he met Federer , defeating him in straight sets , for the loss of just 7 games . By winning the Olympic gold medal , Murray became the first British man to win the Olympic singles gold medal in tennis since Josiah Ritchie in 1908 , and only the 7th man in the open era to win two medals at the same Olympic Games . Murray retired early in the Rogers Cup due to a knee injury , and was beaten by unseeded Jérémy Chardy at the Cincinnati Masters in straight sets . 
 He next competed in the final major of the season at the US Open . He cruised through his opening two rounds in straight sets against Alex <unk> and Ivan Dodig , before facing a tough four @-@ set battle with Feliciano López , where Murray had to win three tie @-@ breakers . In the fourth round , he defeated the Canadian Milos Raonic in straight sets , and then in the quarterfinals , had to come from a set and two breaks down against Marin Čilić to prevail in four . In the semifinals , he defeated Tomáš Berdych in a long @-@ fought match that lasted almost four hours , to reach his second consecutive Grand Slam final . Murray defeated Djokovic in five sets , becoming the first British man to win a Grand Slam final since Fred Perry in 1936 , and the first Scottish @-@ born player to win a Grand Slam final since Harold Mahony in 1896 . The win would also set several records for Murray : it involved the longest tiebreak in US Open final history at 12 – 10 in the first set , it made Murray the first man ever to win an Olympic gold medal and the US Open in the same year , and it tied with the 1988 US Open final ( in which Murray 's coach Lendl competed ) as the longest final in the tournament 's history . By defeating Djokovic in the final , Murray achieved his 100th Grand Slam match win of his career . The victory made Murray part of the " Big Four " according to many pundits , including Novak Djokovic . 
 In his first tournament after the US Open , Murray reached the semifinals of the Rakuten Japan Open after entering as defending champion . He was beaten by Milos Raonic in a close three @-@ set match . He was defending champion in the doubles with his brother Jamie . However , they were knocked out in the quarterfinals by top seeds Leander Paes and Radek Štěpánek . At the penultimate Masters 1000 tournament of the year in Shanghai , after receiving a bye into round two , Murray 's first match was due to be played against Florian Mayer . However , Mayer had to pull out due to injury , giving Murray a walkover into round three . After beating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the third round , he then overcame Radek Štěpánek in a three @-@ set quarterfinal . Murray next faced Roger Federer in the semifinals , whom he defeated in straight sets to set up a second consecutive final against Djokovic , and his third consecutive Shanghai final . After failing to capitalise on five match points , Murray eventually lost in three sets , bringing to an end his 12 – 0 winning streak at the competition . When Nadal pulled out of both the Paris Masters and the Year @-@ End Championships , Murray finished the year at No. 3 in the world , after four years at No. 4 . This was the first time Murray had finished the year higher than No. 4 in the world . At the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Murray found himself voted third overall , ahead of Mo Farah . Murray won the World Breakthrough of the Year at the Laureus World Sports Awards . 
 Murray was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to tennis . 
 = = = 2013 : Wimbledon champion and third Australian Open final = = = 
 Murray began his 2013 season by retaining his Brisbane International title , defeating Grigor Dimitrov in the final in straight sets . Trying to win his second Major in a row , he began the 2013 Australian Open well with a straight sets victory over Dutchman Robin Haase . He followed this up with straight set victories over João Sousa , practice partner Ričardas Berankis and French No. 14 seed Gilles Simon . In the quarterfinals he cruised past Jérémy Chardy in straight sets to set up a semifinal clash with Roger Federer . After exchanging sets , Murray eventually prevailed in 5 sets , recording his first Grand Slam tournament triumph over Federer . With this victory , each member of the ATP 's most dominant quartet of the previous four years ( Federer , Nadal , Djokovic and Murray ) had beaten the other three at the Majors . This victory set up Murray 's third consecutive Major final appearance , and second in a row against Djokovic . After taking the first set in a tiebreak , Murray was eventually defeated in four sets . His defeat in this final meant that Murray became only the second man in the Open Era to achieve three runner @-@ up finishes at the Australian Open , the other being Stefan Edberg . 
 At the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells , Murray lost at the quarterfinal stage to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets . At the Miami Masters , Murray made it through his first four matches without dropping a set , and after overcoming Richard Gasquet in the semifinals , faced David Ferrer in the final . After losing the first set , and facing match point in the decider at 5 – 6 , Murray eventually took the match in a third set tiebreaker to win his second Miami Masters title , and leapfrog Roger Federer into second place in the rankings , ending a near @-@ decade long time period in which neither Federer or Rafael Nadal were ranked in the top two . Murray briefly fell back to No. 3 in the world , following a third round defeat by Stanislas Wawrinka in Monte @-@ Carlo , but reclaimed the No. 2 ranking as a result of Federer failing to defend his title at the Mutua Madrid Open . Later , Murray lost at the quarterfinal stage to Tomáš Berdych in straight sets . 
 At the Rome Masters , Murray retired due to a hip injury during his second round match against Marcel Granollers on his 26th birthday . Murray had just battled back to tie the match at one set all after winning the second set on a tiebreak . This left Murray with only eleven days to be fit for the start of the French Open . 
 Speaking at a press conference after the match , Murray said , " As it is , I 'd be very surprised if I was playing in Paris . I need to make a plan as to what I do . I 'll chat with the guys tonight and make a plan for the next few days then make a decision on Paris after the next five days . " He would go on to withdraw from Roland Garros later , citing a back injury . After a four @-@ week break due to injury , Murray made his comeback at the 2013 Aegon Championships , where he was the top seed . After a rain delayed first day , Murray had to complete his second round match against Nicolas Mahut , and his subsequent match against <unk> <unk> on the same day , both of which he won in straight sets . After beating Benjamin Becker in the quarterfinals , Murray next faced his first top ten opponent since losing to Tomáš Berdych in Madrid , taking on Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga in the semifinals . After dropping the first set against the Frenchman , Murray eventually raised his level and won in three to set up a final against Marin Čilić of Croatia , his third consecutive final on grass courts . He came from behind again to beat Čilić in three sets to claim his third title at Queen 's Club . 
 Going into Wimbledon , Murray hadn 't lost a match on grass since the previous year 's final , and was on a winning streak of 11 matches on grass . In the first two rounds , Murray faced Benjamin Becker and Yen @-@ hsun Lu respectively , defeating both in straight sets . His third round match was against 32nd seed Tommy Robredo , and despite a tour comeback over the past year , Murray overcame the Spaniard in straight sets to set up a clash with Mikhail Youzhny , the highest seed left in Murray 's half following the unexpectedly early exits of Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal . Despite facing a fightback in the second set , Murray won in straight sets to make it through to his tenth consecutive Grand Slam quarterfinal , in which he was to play Fernando Verdasco , the first left @-@ handed player Murray had faced since the 2012 US Open . For the seventh time in his career , Murray had to come back from a deficit of two sets to ultimately come through in five , setting up a semifinal clash with 24th seed Jerzy Janowicz , the Polish player who beat Murray in their previous encounter . After Murray failed to break Janowicz 's serve , the Pole took the opening set in the tiebreak , following a double fault from Murray . However Murray managed to up his level of play , and won the next three sets , making it through to his second consecutive Wimbledon final , and third consecutive major final against Novak Djokovic . 
 Despite the Serb being the favourite to win the title throughout the Championships , Murray overcame Djokovic in a straight sets match that lasted over three hours , to become the first British winner of the men 's singles title since Fred Perry in 1936 , the first Scot of either sex to win a Wimbledon singles title since Harold Mahony in 1896 , and to extend his winning streak on grass to 18 matches . With the win , he also became only the second man in the open era after Rafael Nadal to hold the Olympic singles gold medal and Wimbledon title simultaneously . 
 At the US Open , Murray entered a Grand Slam tournament as defending champion for the first time , and started strongly with a straight sets win against Michaël Llodra . He backed this up with wins over Leonardo Mayer , Florian Mayer and Denis Istomin to reach the quarterfinals at a major for the 11th straight tournament . In the last 8 , Murray faced Stanislas Wawrinka of Switzerland , but lost in straight sets , ending Murray 's streak of four consecutive major finals . Following his disappointing run of form on hard courts , Murray next joined the Great Britain Davis Cup team in their World Group Play @-@ off tie on clay against Croatia , where he played in two singles and the doubles rubbers . After defeating 16 @-@ year @-@ old Borna Ćorić in straight sets , Murray teamed up with Colin Fleming to defeat Croatian number 1 Ivan Dodig and Mate Pavić in the doubles , and take a 2 – 1 lead in the tie . Murray then sealed Britain 's return to the World Group by defeating Dodig in straight sets . 
 Following the Davis Cup , Murray 's season was cut short by his decision to undergo surgery , in order to sort out the lower back problems that had caused him problems since the early stages of the previous season . After being forced to withdraw from the French Open in May , the injury flared up again during the US Open and later during the Davis Cup World Group Play @-@ offs , Murray made the decision that surgery was the best way to sort the problem out for the long @-@ term . Following the conclusion of the 2013 season , Murray was voted the 2013 BBC Sport Personality of the Year , after having been heavy favourite since the nominees were announced . 
 = = = 2014 : Recovery from surgery and 30th career title = = = 
 Murray started his season at the Qatar Open in Doha . In the first round , he defeated Mousa <unk> Zayed in straight sets in 37 minutes without dropping a single game , but was defeated in three sets by world No. 40 Florian Mayer in the second round , despite being a set and a break up three games into the second set . He then played a warm @-@ up match at the 2014 AAMI Classic in Kooyong against world No. 43 Lleyton Hewitt , losing in two close tiebreaks . 
 He next headed to Melbourne for the 2014 Australian Open , where he drew the world No. 112 , Go Soeda of Japan . Despite worries that he was not match @-@ fit , Murray got off to a strong start , dispatching the Japanese number 2 in under 90 minutes , losing just 5 games in the process . He next went on to defeat Vincent <unk> and Feliciano López respectively in straight sets . In the fourth round , Murray dropped his first set of the tournament on his way to beating Stephane Robert in four sets to set up a meeting with long @-@ standing rival Roger Federer in the quarterfinals . Despite saving two match points to take the third set , he ultimately went out in four , ending his streak of four consecutive Australian Open semifinals . As a result of losing before the final , Murray fell to No. 6 in the world , falling out of the top 5 for the first time since 2008 . 
 He next headed to the United States to compete in the Davis Cup World Group first round with Great Britain , who went into the tie as outsiders . Murray won both of his ties against Donald Young and Sam Querrey respectively , helping Britain to their first Davis Cup quarterfinal since 1986 . Murray 's next tournament was the Rotterdam Open after receiving a late wild card , however he lost to Marin Čilić in straight sets in the quarterfinals . His following competition , the Mexican Open in Acapulco , ended in a semifinal defeat by Grigor Dimitrov in a thrilling three @-@ setter that required two tiebreakers to decide the final two sets . 
 At Indian Wells , Murray struggled in his first two matches against Lukáš <unk> and Jiří Veselý respectively , overcoming both in close three @-@ set encounters to set up a fourth round clash with Canadian Milos Raonic , which he lost in three sets . Murray offered to play with 2012 Wimbledon Doubles champion Jonathan Marray , because Marray was unable to convince anyone to join him on court . For Murray and Marray 's first competitive match together , they won a doubles clash against Gaël Monfils and Juan Mónaco only to lose in the second round to the No 2 seeds Alexander Peya and Bruno Soares . 
 In March , Murray split with coach Ivan Lendl , who had been widely praised for helping Murray achieve his goal of winning Grand Slam titles . At the 2014 Miami Masters , Murray defeated Matthew Ebden , Feliciano López and Jo Wilfried Tsonga but lost to Djokovic in the quarterfinals . In the Davis Cup quarterfinals against Italy , he beat Andreas Seppi in his first rubber , then teamed up with Colin Fleming to win the doubles rubber . Murray had only beaten one top ten player on clay , Nikolay <unk> , back in 2009 , and so in his final singles match , was stunned by Fabio Fognini in straight sets , which took Great Britain to the deciding final rubber . However , in this match his compatriot , James Ward was defeated by Andreas Seppi , also in straight sets , knocking Murray and Great Britain out of the Davis Cup . 
 Murray next competed at the Madrid Open and following his opening win , over Nicolas Almagro , he dedicated the victory to former player Elena Baltacha . He then lost to qualifier Santiago Giraldo in the following round . Murray then reached the quarterfinals of the Rome Masters where he lost to world No. 1 Rafael Nadal in a tight match in which he had been up a break in the final set . At the French Open , Murray defeated Andrey Golubev and <unk> <unk> before edging out 28th seed Philipp Kohlschreiber 12 – 10 in the final set . This was the first time Murray had ever gone beyond 7 – 5 in a deciding set . He followed this up with a straight sets win over Fernando Verdasco and then recorded a five set victory over Frenchman Gaël Monfils in the quarterfinal , which saw Murray rise to world No. 5 and equal his best ever French Open by reaching the semifinals . However , he subsequently lost to Nadal in straight sets , winning only 6 games in the match . After losing the 2014 French Open semifinals to Nadal , Murray appointed former women 's world No. 1 , and two @-@ times slam <unk> , Amélie Mauresmo as his coach in a ' historic move ' which made Mauresmo the first woman to coach a top male tennis player . 
 After strong grass court seasons in 2012 and 2013 , Murray was seeded third for the 2014 Wimbledon Championship , behind Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal , who were seeded first and second respectively . He began his title defence with straight sets wins over David Goffin and Blaž Rola , defeating the latter for the loss of just two games . Murray continued his good form , defeating Roberto Bautista Agut and Kevin Anderson , the 27th and 20th seeds , again in straight sets to reach his seventh consecutive Wimbledon quarterfinal . Murray 's defence then came to a halt as Grigor Dimitrov ended his 17 match winning @-@ streak on the grass of Wimbledon ( this includes the 2012 Olympics ) with a straight sets win , meaning Murray failed to reach the semifinals for the first time since 2008 . After his defeat at the Championships , Murray dropped to 10th in the world , his lowest ranking since 2008 . 
 Prior to the North American hard court swing , Murray announced he was extending his partnership with Amélie Mauresmo until the end of the US Open , but was ideally looking for a long @-@ term deal . He also revealed he had only just returned to a full training schedule following his back surgery last September . Murray reached back @-@ to @-@ back quarterfinals at the Canadian Open and Cincinnati Masters , losing to eventual champions Jo Wilfried Tsonga , after being a break up in the decider , and Roger Federer , after being two breaks up in the second set , respectively . He made it to the quarterfinals of the 2014 US Open , losing to Novak Djokovic , after earning his first top ten win of the year in the previous round against Jo Wilfried Tsonga . This was the first season since 2009 where Murray failed to reach a grand slam final . As a consequence Murray fell outside of the top 10 ranking places for the first time since June 2008 . 
 Murray took a wildcard into the inaugural Shenzhen Open in China , entering as the number 2 seed . Victories over Somdev Devvarman , Lukáš <unk> and Juan Mónaco saw Murray reach his first final of the season , breaking a drought of 14 months following his title at Wimbledon . In the final he faced Tommy Robredo of Spain , the second final between the two . After saving five championship points in the second set tie break , Murray went on to win the title in three sets , Robredo 's drop in fitness ultimately proving decisive . He then took his good form into Beijing , where he reached the semifinals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets , however he lost in the third round at the Shanghai Masters to David Ferrer despite being a set up . Following his early exit in Shanghai , Murray took a wildcard into the Vienna Open in an attempt to claim a place at the ATP World Tour Finals . He reached the final , where he once again faced Ferrer , and triumphed in three sets for his second title of the season , and the 30th of his career . Murray defeated Ferrer again in the semifinals of the Valencia Open to move into his third final in five weeks , and further strengthen his bid for a place at the season finale in London . In a repeat of the Shenzhen Open final , Murray again saved five championship points as he overcame Tommy Robredo in three sets . Murray then went on to reach the quarterfinals of the Paris Masters , where he was eliminated by Djokovic in what was his 23rd match in the space of only 37 days . However , his win over Dimitrov in the third round had already guaranteed him a spot at the ATP World Tour Finals . 
 At the ATP World Tour Finals , Murray lost his opening round robin match to Kei Nishikori but won his second match against Milos Raonic . However , he lost his final group match against Federer in straight sets and only managed to win one game against him , marking his worst defeat since losing to Djokovic in the 2007 Miami Masters , eliminating him from the tournament . Despite the loss , his late @-@ season run had already propelled him back up the rankings to No. 6 in the world , his best ranking since June . 
 Following the conclusion of the season , Murray mutually agreed a split with long @-@ term backroom staff , training partner Dani <unk> and fitness coach Jez Green . They had been with him for five and seven years respectively but were both reported to have been unhappy at the lack of consultation they had been given about the appointment of Mauresmo . Murray also took part in the inaugural season of the International Premier Tennis League , representing the Manila Mavericks , who had drafted him as an icon player in February . Murray took part in the first three matches of the tournament which were all played in Manila . 
 = = = 2015 : Fourth Australian Open final , first clay titles and Davis Cup champion = = = 
 Murray began his year by winning an exhibition event in Abu Dhabi . He then played the Hopman Cup with Heather Watson and , despite winning all his singles matches in straight sets , they finished second in their group behind Poland . His first competitive tournament of the year was the Australian Open . He won his opening three matches in straight sets before defeating 11th seed Grigor Dimitrov to reach the quarterfinal . Wins over Nick Kyrgios and Tomáš Berdych followed as Murray reached his fourth final at the tournament ( three of which were against Djokovic ) and the eighth grand slam final of his career . He lost the final to Novak Djokovic in four sets , however his run to the final saw his return to the top four in the world rankings for the first time in 12 months . 
 Murray next participated in the Rotterdam Open as the top seed , but he lost in the quarterfinals to Gilles Simon who ended a 12 match losing streak against Murray . Murray then played in the Dubai Championships but suffered another quarterfinal defeat to 18 @-@ year @-@ old Borna Ćorić and as a result , Murray slipped to No. 5 in the world rankings behind Rafael Nadal and Kei Nishikori . Afterwards , Murray played the Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow against the United States . He won both his matches against Donald Young and John Isner , allowing Great Britain to progress to the quarterfinals for the second consecutive time with a 3 – 2 lead over the United States . 
 Murray then reached the semifinals of the 2015 Indian Wells , overtaking Tim Henman 's record of 496 career wins to have the most career wins for a British man in the Open Era . However , he suffered a 6th consecutive defeat to Djokovic in straight sets . Murray then reached the final of the 2015 Miami Open , recording his 500th career win along the way to become the first British player to have 500 or more wins in the Open Era . He went on to lose the final to Djokovic , this time in three sets . Murray added Jonas Björkman to his coaching staff in March initially on a five @-@ week trail to help out in periods when Mauresmo was unavailable as she only agreed to work with him for 25 weeks . However , at the end of the Australian Open , Mauresmo had informed Murray that she was pregnant and he announced at the end of April , that Björkman would be his main coach for all of the grass court season and all of the US hard court swing , while Mauresmo would only be with the team for Wimbledon . 
 Murray won his first ATP clay court title at the 2015 BMW Open . He defeated German Philipp Kohlschreiber in three close sets to become the first Briton since Buster Mottram in 1976 to win a tour level clay court event . The following week he reached his second final on clay , at the Madrid Open after recording only his second and third victories over top 10 opposition on clay , against Raonic and Nishikori . In the final , he defeated Rafael Nadal in straight sets for his first Madrid title on clay , and first ever clay court Masters 1000 title . The win was Murray 's first over Nadal , Federer or Djokovic since Wimbledon 2013 , and his first over Nadal on a clay court . 
 Murray continued his winning streak at the Italian Open , beating Jeremy Chardy in straight sets in his opening match , but then withdrew due to fatigue after having played nine matches in the space of 10 days . Murray then reached his third semifinal at the French Open , but lost to Djokovic in five sets after threatening a comeback from two sets to love down , ending his 15 match winning streak on clay . To start his grass court campaign , Murray went on to win a record tying fourth Queen 's Club title , defeating the big serving South African Kevin Anderson in straight sets in the final . At the third grand slam of the year , the 2015 Wimbledon Championships , Murray dropped only two sets on his way to setting up a semifinal clash with Roger Federer . Many people saw Murray as the favourite due to his recent form , however he lost to the Swiss veteran in straight sets , gaining only one break point in the entire match . 
 After Wimbledon , Murray returned to Queen 's Club , to play for Great Britain against France in their Davis Cup quarterfinal tie . Great Britain went 1 – 0 down when James Ward lost to Gilles Simon in straight sets , however Murray levelled the tie with a victory against Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga . Murray then teamed up with his brother Jamie to win the doubles rubber , coming back from a set down to defeat Tsonga and Nicolas Mahut in four sets , giving Britain a crucial 2 – 1 lead going into the final day . He then faced Simon in the fourth rubber and after initially being a set and a break down , he suddenly found his form again towards the end of the second set and eventually won in four sets , winning 12 of the last 15 games in the process ( with Simon struggling from an ankle injury ) . With a 3 – 1 lead over France , this resulted in Great Britain reaching their first Davis Cup semifinal since 1981 . 
 Murray next participated at the Citi Open ( for the first time since 2006 ) , as the top seed and favourite to win the tournament . However , he suffered a defeat in his first match , losing to world No. 53 Teymuraz Gabashvili in a final set tiebreak , despite serving for the match . In doubles , he partnered Daniel Nestor , however they lost in the first round to the fourth seeds , Rohan Bopanna and Florin <unk> , also in three sets . 
 He bounced back from this defeat by winning the Montreal Masters Rogers Cup , defeating Tsonga and Nishikori in the quarterfinals and semifinals respectively . He then prevailed in the final against Djokovic in three sets . This broke his eight @-@ match , two @-@ year losing streak against Djokovic , his last win against him being in the finals of Wimbledon in 2013 . Winning the title , he also surpassed Federer in terms of ranking , becoming the world No. 2 for the first time in over two years . In doubles , he partnered Leander Paes and they won their first match against Chardy and Anderson , but were then defeated by Murray 's brother Jamie and John Peers in two sets – the first time the Murray brothers had competed against each other in a Tour @-@ level match . 
 In the second Master Series tournament of the US Hard Court season , the Cincinnati Masters , Murray defeated veteran Mardy Fish in the second round , and then beat both Grigor Dimitrov and Richard Gasquet in three @-@ set matches , having to come from a set down on both occasions , while Dimitrov had served for the match in the deciding set . In the semifinal , he lost to defending champion Roger Federer in straight sets , and after Federer went on to win the tournament , this result saw Murray return to the No. 3 ranking and seeding for the US Open . At the US Open , Murray beat Nick Kyrgios in four sets before beating Adrian <unk> in five sets after being two sets down , equaling Federer for winning eight matches from two sets to love down . He then beat Thomaz Bellucci in straight sets but suffered a defeat in the fourth round to Kevin Anderson in four sets . This ended Murray 's five @-@ year run of 18 consecutive Grand Slam quarterfinals ( not counting his withdrawal from the 2013 French Open ) since his third round loss to Stan Wawrinka in the 2010 US Open . 
 Playing against Australia in the semifinals of the Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow , Murray won both his singles rubbers in straight sets , against <unk> Kokkinakis and Bernard Tomic . He also partnered his brother Jamie , and they won in five sets against the pairing of Sam Groth and Lleyton Hewitt , the results guiding Great Britain to the Davis Cup final for the first time since 1978 with a 3 – 2 lead over Australia . 
 After losing in the semifinals of the Shanghai Masters to Djokovic in straight sets , Murray reached the finals of the Paris Masters for the lost of just one set , with victories against Borna Ćorić , David Goffin and David Ferrer . After a three set win over Richard Gasquet , he joined Novak Djokovic , Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal as the only players to reach the semifinals ( or better ) at all nine of the ATP World Tour Masters 1000 tournaments , and also ensured that he compiled his best match record in a single season . He then lost the final to Djokovic again in straight sets . 
 As the world No. 2 , Murray participated in the ATP World Tour Finals in London , and was drawn into the Ilie <unk> group with David Ferrer , Rafael Nadal and Stan Wawrinka . He went out in the round @-@ robin stage , after defeating Ferrer and losing to Nadal and Wawrinka . However , after Federer failed to win the tournament , he finished the season as world No. 2 for the first time . 
 In the Davis Cup final , Murray 's victory over Ruben <unk> in straight sets pulled Great Britain level in the final after Kyle Edmund had lost the first singles rubber in five sets , played on indoor clay courts at Ghent . He then partnered his brother Jamie in a four @-@ set victory over the pairing of Steve <unk> and David Goffin , before defeating Goffin again in the reverse singles on Sunday , thus ensuring a 3 – 1 victory for Great Britain , their first Davis Cup title since 1936 and their tenth overall . Murray also became only the third person since the current Davis Cup format was introduced to win all eight of his singles rubbers in a Davis Cup season , after John McEnroe and Mats Wilander . 
 = = = 2016 : Second Wimbledon title , Australian Open and Roland Garros Finals = = = 
 Murray began his 2016 season by playing in the Hopman Cup , pairing up with Heather Watson again . However , they finished second in their group after losing their tie to eventual champions Nick Kyrgios and Daria <unk> . 
 Murray played his first competitive tournament of 2016 at the Australian Open where he was aiming to win his first title there after four runner @-@ up finishes . He went on to reach his fifth Australian Open final with victories over Alexander Zverev , Sam Groth , João Sousa , Bernard Tomic , David Ferrer and Milos Raonic , dropping four sets along the way . However , in a rematch of the previous year final , he was unable to win his first title as he lost in the final to an in @-@ form Novak Djokovic ( who won a record @-@ equaling sixth title ) in straight sets . Murray then played at 2016 Davis Cup defeating Taro Daniel in straight sets and Kei Nishikori in five sets . Murray then competed at the first Masters 1000 of the year at the 2016 Indian Wells Masters He defeated Marcel Granollers in the second round in straight sets but had an early loss to Federico <unk> in the third round . Murray then played at the 2016 Miami Open as the 2nd seed . He defeated Denis Istomin in the second round in straight sets but had another early loss , to 26th seed Grigor Dimitrov despite taking the first set . 
 Murray began his clay court season at the 2016 Monte @-@ Carlo Rolex Masters as the 2nd seed . Murray struggled in his second round match against Pierre @-@ Hugues Herbert but Murray came through in 3 sets . Murray struggled again in his third round match against 16th seed Benoît <unk> as Murray was down a set and two breaks . <unk> also served for the match in the third set but Murray still came through in 3 sets . Murray then defeated 10th seed Milos Raonic in straight sets in the quarterfinals . In the semifinals Murray lost to 5th seed and eventual champion Rafael Nadal despite winning the first set . Murray then played at the 2016 Mutua Madrid Open as the 2nd seed and the defending champion . Murray defeated qualifier Radek Štěpánek in three sets . He then proceeded to the semifinals after defeating 16th seed Gilles Simon and 8th seed Tomáš Berdych both in straight sets . In the semifinals Murray defeated Rafael Nadal in straight sets who Murray had lost to earlier in the year . In the final Murray lost to number 1 seed Novak Djokovic in three sets . This loss made Murray 's ranking go from 2 to 3 . Murray regained his number two ranking after he won the 2016 Internazionali BNL d 'Italia . He defeated Mikhail <unk> , Jérémy Chardy , 12th seed David Goffin , Lucas <unk> , and number 1 seed Novak Djokovic all in straight sets . This was his first win over Djokovic on clay and became the first British player since Virginia Wade in 1971 to win the title and the first British man since George Patrick Hughes in 1931 . Murray then moved on to the French Open where he struggled in the opening rounds coming through two five @-@ set matches against Radek Štěpánek and French wildcard Mathias <unk> . He came through in straight sets against big servers Ivo Karlović and John Isner to reach the quarterfinals where he beat home favourite Richard Gasquet in four sets to set up a semifinal clash against defending champion Stanislas Wawrinka . Murray defeated Wawrinka in four sets to become the first British player since Bunny Austin in 1937 , to reach a French Open final . He was unable to win his maiden French Open final , losing to Novak Djokovic in four sets . 
 Murray started his grass season at the 2016 Aegon Championships as the 1st seed and the defending champion . Murray defeated Nicolas Mahut in straight sets despite facing a set point in the first set and three set points in the second set . He then defeated <unk> <unk> in straight sets . He then had three set wins over Kyle Edmund and 5th seed Marin Čilić . In the final he was down a set and a break to 3rd seed Milos Raonic . Murray still managed to come back and win a record five Queen 's Club Championships . Murray then played at the third major of the year at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships as the 2nd seed . Murray had straight set wins over Liam Broady , Lu Yen @-@ hsun , John Millman , and Nick Kyrgios in the first four rounds . Murray then defeated 12th seed Jo @-@ Wilfried Tsonga in five sets in the quarterfinal and 10th seed Tomáš Berdych in straight sets to reach his third straight major final . In the final on 10 July , Murray defeated Canadian Milos Raonic in straight sets to win his second Wimbledon title and third Major title overall . 
 = = National representation = = 
 = = = Davis Cup = = = 
 = = = = 2005 = = = = 
 Murray made his Davis Cup debut for Great Britain in the Europe / Africa Zone Group 1 2nd Round against Israel in 2005 at 17 years of age , the youngest ever player for Great Britain . He teamed up with fellow debutant David Sherwood and came out victorious in the crucial doubles rubber against the experienced Jonathan Erlich and Andy Ram , helping Britain advance 3 – 2 . 
 In September , Murray played his debut singles match for the Davis Cup in the World Group Play @-@ off against Switzerland in Geneva on clay with Greg Rusedski , Alan Mackin and David Sherwood . Captain Jeremy Bates surprised everyone by naming Andy Murray as the British No 1 and Alan Mackin as British No 2 . Under the Davis Cup rules , this meant that for Friday ’ s singles , Murray played the Swiss No 2 , Stan Wawrinka while Mackin played the Swiss No 1 , Roger Federer . Both of them lost their rubbers , giving Switzerland a 2 – 0 lead . Under the rules , for Sunday ’ s reverse singles , Bates would have been able to substitute Mackin with Greg Rusedski , so that Rusedski would play Wawrinka , while Murray played Federer . However , Bates believed that Federer was virtually unbeatable because he was on a winning streak and hadn ’ t lost since June , and consequently Britain gambled on beating Wawrinka twice , with Murray playing Wawrinka when he was freshest . In the doubles , Murray / Rusedski played Federer and Yves Allegro , leaving Rusedski to play only once . The British tactics came to nought as Switzerland won the doubles rubber as well , gaining un unassailable 3 – 0 lead after two the days . Alan Mackin and David Sherwood were consequently nominated for the dead singles rubbers losing both of them , resulting in a clean sweep for Switzerland . 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 For the Europe / Africa Zone Group I tie against Serbia and Montenegro , Murray had been suffering with a bacterial infection , so he was restricted to playing the doubles alongside Greg Rusedski , which they lost . With Arvind Parmar also losing in the singles , Great Britain were beaten 3 – 2 . 
 In the same week as the relegation 1st round play @-@ off against Israel , Murray was officially entered for the ATP tournament in Indianapolis , sparking fears about his commitment . There was a controversial move by the Lawn Tennis Association to pay £ 500 @,@ 000 towards the cost of Murray 's next coach , Brad Gilbert as a way of securing Murray 's long @-@ term services for the Davis Cup team . In the event , Murray played , winning his first singles . However he lost the doubles with Jamie Delgado , during which Murray damaged his shoulder and neck . He was diagnosed with whiplash , causing him to sit out the final day ’ s singles , and eventually Great Britain were beaten 3 – 2 to proceed to the relegation 2nd round play @-@ off against Ukraine . With Murray and Greg Rusedski playing , Great Britain beat Ukraine 3 – 2 , to stay in Group I. 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 In the tie against the Netherlands , Andy Murray and Tim Henman won the opening singles , then Jamie Murray and Greg Rusedski won the doubles to secure victory . Rusedski announced his retirement on the doubles court . 
 In the run up to World Group play @-@ off against Croatia , Tim Henman had announced he would retire after this match . Murray said " I 'm not going to want to let the team down or let Tim down , I 'd feel terrible if I was the one that was responsible for losing Tim 's last tie . This means a lot to me and it 's definitely going to be the biggest Davis Cup match of my career . " " Everyone is going to want to win for Tim . I 'm hoping the way I play will show him what his career meant to my development and me . " Great Britain beat Croatia 4 – 1 to qualify for the World Group in 2008 . 
 After the retirement of Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski , the Davis Cup team was now dependent on Murray having to win three matches , though Henman had told him how wearing and time consuming that can be . While the LTA was funding Brad Gilbert , Murray was obligated to play for his country , but in November , Murray finished with Brad Gilbert as his coach . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Murray skipped the World Group 1st round tie against Argentina , over fears he could exacerbate a knee injury , leaving the British team in a hopeless situation – they lost 4 – 1 . Jamie was furious that Andy was letting them down and the Murrays would not speak to each other for two weeks . Seven months later , as the brothers prepared for the tie against Austria , Andy declared that he had healed the rift with Jamie . When Jamie Murray and Ross Hutchins were beaten in the doubles , John Lloyd suffered criticism for not playing Andy . Great Britain lost their World Group play @-@ off to Austria 3 – 2 and were relegated to Europe / Africa Zone Group I. 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 Murray withdrew from the tie against Ukraine after failing to shake off a virus , and Great Britain lost 4 – 1 . 
 Murray suffered an injury to his left wrist at the US Open , and would have rested if his next event had not been the Davis Cup . At the Poland match , he won both his singles rubbers . For the doubles with Ross Hutchins , Murray began in the right @-@ hand court , the side usually occupied by the less dominant partner , so as to afford more protection to his troublesome left wrist than when striking double @-@ handed backhands from the left court . , though allowed his partner to resume his usual role in the second set . However , the pair succumbed to the world @-@ class Polish duo , and Poland won 3 – 2 ; Great Britain were relegated to Europe / Africa Zone Group II for the first time since 1996 . Murray had aggravated his wrist injury , so couldn 't play for another six weeks . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Murray pulled out of the match against Lithuania , so younger players could gain more international experience , and to allow him to focus on trying to win Grand Slam titles . His absence was criticised by Davis Cup captain John Lloyd . The Lithuanian side entered the tie as underdogs ; fielding a team of teenagers , but Lithuania won 3 – 2 . This was the first time that Great Britain had lost five ties in a row and was described as a humiliating Davis Cup defeat for Great Britain . It led to the resignation of John Lloyd as Davis Cup captain , with Britain now threatened with relegation to the lowest tier of the competition . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 Murray returned for the Europe / Africa Zone Group II tie versus Luxembourg . He beat Laurent Bram , a tennis coach , 6 – 0 , 6 – 0 , 6 – 0 , the last time a Briton had achieved this score line in Davis Cup was Alan Mills defeating Josef <unk> in 1959 , also against Luxembourg . Andy and Jamie Murray teamed up for the first time in Davis Cup doubles for a straight sets win . In his second singles match , Andy then recorded a third straight sets victory , over world No. 81 Gilles Müller , with Great Britain eventually winning 4 – 1 . 
 Three of Hungary 's top four players were not available for the Great Britain vs Hungary tie , so Murray defeated Sebo Kiss , a law student without a ranking , in his first singles rubber . Earlier , James Ward overcame sickness to beat the Hungarian No 1 , then Colin Fleming and Ross Hutchins won the doubles , and Great Britain was promoted into Europe / Africa Zone Group I for the first time since 2009 . 
 Afterwards , Murray criticised the tournament schedule and cast doubt on his availability for next year ’ s Davis Cup . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 By 2013 , Great Britain 's other tennis players had earned the team a chance to return to the World Group . Murray was suffering a vulnerable back and intended to have surgery after the US Open . Murray revealed that the fear of being branded “ unpatriotic ” led him to delay the surgery until after the Davis Cup tie in Croatia in September , which jeopardised his place in the next Australian Open . With Croatia 's No 1 Marin Čilić absent for committing a doping offence , Murray won both his singles matches and the doubles with Colin Fleming , Great Britain eventually winning 4 – 1 , for their first victory on clay since Ukraine in 2006 , and returning to the World Group for the first time since 2008 . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 At the World Group first round tie against the United States in San Diego , Murray defeated Donald Young and James Ward unexpectedly beat Sam Querrey on the first day . On the last day , Murray beat Sam Querrey to put Great Britain into the quarterfinals of the Davis Cup for the first time since 1986 . Britain ’ s only previous victory on American soil was 111 years ago . 
 Murray had to recover from a virus to play in the Quarter Final tie against Italy in Naples after missing the Thursday draw ceremony . James Ward lost his rain delayed match , while Murray ’ s match against Andreas Seppi was halted on Friday evening due to fading light with the score at 6 – 4 , 5 – 5 to Murray . On Saturday morning , Murray finished his match , winning 6 – 4 , 7 – 5 , 6 – 3 . Two hours later , Murray partnered Colin Fleming to win the doubles rubber . Murray had only beaten one top ten player on clay , Nikolay Davydenko , back in 2009 , and was upset by Fabio Fognini , world No. 13 , in straight sets , which took Great Britain to the deciding final rubber . However , James Ward was defeated by Andreas Seppi , also in straight sets , knocking Great Britain out of the Davis Cup . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 Murray helped lead Great Britain to the final of the World Group for the first time since 1978 , winning both his singles rubbers in the matches against the USA , France and Australia . In the final , Murray defeated Belgium 's David Goffin to win the Davis Cup for Great Britain , 79 years after the national team 's last win . 
 = = = Olympics = = = 
 Murray represented Great Britain at his maiden Olympics in Beijing 2008 . He competed in the singles and doubles competitions . Despite being seeded sixth in the singles competition , he was eliminated in the first round by Chinese Taipei 's Yen @-@ hsun Lu . Along with his brother Jamie , he advanced to the second round of the doubles competition with a win over the Canadian pairing of Daniel Nestor and Frédéric Niemeyer . The Murray brothers were eliminated in the second round by France 's Arnaud Clément and Michael Llodra . In February , Murray pulled out of the Davis Cup tie against Argentina , because of a knee injury , so Argentina thrashed the under @-@ strength British team . Jamie Murray scathingly criticised Andy and they did not speak to each other for a fortnight . Their rift continued in the Olympic doubles , over a perceived lack of effort from Andy . 
 At the London 2012 Olympics , Murray competed in the singles , doubles ( partnering his brother Jamie ) and mixed doubles ( partnering Laura Robson ) . In the singles , he won the Gold Medal , including straight @-@ set victories over Novak Djokovic in the semifinals and Roger Federer in the final , four weeks after Federer had beaten him in on the same court in the Wimbledon final . He also won the silver medal in the mixed doubles , losing to the Belarusian pairing of Max Mirnyi and Victoria Azarenka . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = Murray vs. Djokovic = = = 
 Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray have met 34 times with Djokovic leading 24 – 10 . Djokovic leads 5 – 1 on clay , 19 – 7 on hard courts , and Murray leads 2 – 0 on grass . The two are almost exactly the same age , with Murray being only a week older than Djokovic . They went to training camp together , and Murray won the first match they ever played as teenagers . The pair have met 17 times in finals , with Djokovic leading 10 – 7 . Ten of the finals were at ATP Masters 1000 events , and they are tied at 5 – 5 . They have met in seven Major finals : The 2011 Australian Open , the 2012 US Open , the 2013 Australian Open , the 2013 Wimbledon Championships , the 2015 Australian Open , the 2016 Australian Open , and the 2016 French Open . Djokovic has won in Australia four times and their single French open final , Murray emerged as the victor at the US Open and Wimbledon . The former of Murray 's victories was the longest ever final at the US Open , tying with the 1988 final played between Ivan Lendl and Mats Wilander at 4 hours and 53 minutes , while the latter was notable for being the first home triumph in men 's singles at Wimbledon since 1936 . 
 They also played a nearly five @-@ hour long semifinal match in the 2012 Australian Open , which Djokovic won 7 – 5 in the fifth set after Murray led 2 sets to 1 . Murray and Djokovic met again in 2012 at the London 2012 Olympic Games , with Murray winning in straight sets . During the final of the 2012 Shanghai Masters , Murray held five championship points in the second set , however Djokovic saved each of them , forcing a deciding set . He eventually prevailed to win his first Shanghai Masters title , ending Murray 's 12 – 0 winning streak at the event . The three set matches they played in Rome and Shanghai in 2011 and 2012 respectively were voted the ATP World Tour Match of the Year for each respective season . Due to the tight competition between 2008 and 2013 , many saw this as the emerging rivalry . Djokovic went on to dominate the rivalry after the 2013 Wimbledon final , winning 13 of their last 15 matches . Their most recent meeting took place at the 2016 French Open final where Djokovic defeated Murray in four sets to win his first French Open title and complete the Career Grand Slam . 
 = = = Murray vs. Federer = = = 
 Andy Murray and Roger Federer have met 25 times with Federer leading 14 – 11 . Federer leads 12 – 10 on hard courts , 2 – 1 on grass , and they have never met on clay . After Federer won the first professional match they played , Murray dominated the first half of the rivalry , winning 8 of their first 13 matches from 2005 until 2010 . The second half of the rivalry has been dominated by Federer , who since won 9 of their last 12 matches from 2010 , and has lead their rivalry since the 2014 ATP World Tour Finals . Federer leads 5 – 3 in finals , having won each of their Grand Slam Final meetings at the 2008 US Open and 2010 Australian Open , both of which Federer won in straight sets , and the 2012 Wimbledon Championships , where Murray took the first set , but ended up losing in 4 sets . Murray leads 6 – 3 in ATP 1000 tournaments and 2 – 0 in finals . They have met five times at the ATP World Tour Finals , with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008 and Federer coming out victorious in London in 2009 , 2010 , 2012 , and in 2014 . 
 In August 2012 , Murray met Federer in the final of the London 2012 Olympics at Wimbledon Centre Court , just four weeks after the 2012 Wimbledon Final , in which Federer had defeated Murray to win his record @-@ tying 7th title at the All @-@ England Club . Murray defeated Federer in straight sets to win the gold medal , denying Federer a Career Golden Slam . In 2013 Murray beat Federer for the first time in a Major in the semifinals of the Australian Open , prevailing in five sets after Federer had come back twice from a set down . Their last grand slam meeting was at the 2015 Wimbledon Championships semifinals , where a dominant Federer defeated Murray in straight sets , earning a place in his 10th Wimbledon final . Murray is one of only three players to have recorded 10 or more victories over Federer , the other two being Nadal and Djokovic . Their most recent meeting took place at the 2015 Cincinnati Masters semifinals , with Federer winning the match in two close sets , recording his fifth consecutive victory over Murray . 
 = = = Murray vs. Nadal = = = 
 Murray has played against Nadal on 24 occasions since 2007 , with Nadal leading 17 – 7 . Nadal leads 7 – 2 on clay , 3 – 0 on grass and 7 – 5 on hard courts . The pair regularly meet at Grand Slam level , with nine out of their twenty @-@ one meetings coming in slams , with Nadal leading 7 – 2 ( 3 – 0 at Wimbledon , 2 – 0 at the French Open , 1 – 1 at the Australian Open and 1 – 1 at the US Open ) . Eight of these nine appearances have been at quarterfinal and semifinal level . They have never met in a Slam final , however , Murray leads 3 – 1 in ATP finals , with Nadal winning at Indian Wells in 2009 and Murray winning in Rotterdam the same year , Tokyo in 2011 , and at Madrid in 2015 . 
 Murray lost three consecutive Grand Slam semifinals to Nadal in 2011 from the French Open to the US Open . Of the past 20 Grand Slam <unk> , they have been drawn in the same half 16 times . The pair had not met for three years since the final of the 2011 Japan Open until the quarterfinals of the 2014 Rome Masters , although they were scheduled to meet in the semifinal of the 2012 Miami Masters before Nadal withdrew with injury . At the semifinal stage of the 2014 French Open , Nadal triumphed in a dominant straight sets win for the loss of just 6 games . In one of their most recent meetings , Murray beat Nadal for the first time on clay , and the first time in a Masters 1000 final , at the Madrid Open in 2015 . Murray beat Nadal at the 2016 Mutual Madrid Open in the semifinals . Their most recent meeting took place at the 2016 Madrid Open semifinals with Murray winning the match in straight sets . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Murray plays an all @-@ court game with an emphasis on defensive baseline play , and professional tennis coach Paul Annacone stated that Murray " may be the best <unk> on tour today . " His strengths include groundstrokes with low error rate , the ability to anticipate and react , and his transition from defence to offence with speed , which enables him to hit winners from defensive positions . His playing style has been likened to that of Miloslav <unk> . Murray also has one of the best two @-@ handed backhands on the tour , with dynamic stroke execution while he primarily uses his forehand and a sliced backhand to let opponents play into his hands . Tim Henman has stated that Murray may now have the best lob in the game , succeeding Lleyton Hewitt . Murray 's tactics often involve passive exchanges from the baseline . He is capable of injecting sudden pace into his groundstrokes to surprise his opponents who are used to the slow rally . Murray is also one of the top returners in the game , often able to block back fast serves with his excellent reach and ability to anticipate . For this reason , Murray is rarely aced . 
 Murray is known for being one of the most intelligent tacticians on the court , often constructing points . Murray is most proficient on a fast surface , like grass , where he has won eight singles titles including the Wimbledon Championships and the 2012 Olympic Gold Medal . He has worked hard since 2008 on improving his clay court game , ultimately winning his first clay titles during 2015 at Munich and Madrid , as well as his first French Open final . While Murray 's serve is a major weapon for him , with his first serve reaching speeds of 130 mph or higher on some occasions and winning him many free points , it can become inconsistent when hit under pressure , especially with a more vulnerable and slower second serve . Since his 2011 season and Ivan Lendl 's coaching , he has worked to improve his consistency , second serve and mental game , resulting in a more offensive game . 
 = = Endorsements and equipment = = 
 In 2009 , German manufacturer Adidas and Murray signed a five @-@ year @-@ deal worth £ 30 million . This included wearing their range of tennis shoes . The contract with Adidas allowed Murray to keep his shirt sleeve sponsors <unk> Chen , Royal Bank of Scotland and Highland Spring . Before he was signed by Adidas in late 2009 , he wore Fred Perry apparel . At the end of their contract together Adidas decided not to re @-@ sign with Murray , and he began a 4 @-@ year partnership with athletic apparel company Under Armour in December 2014 , reportedly worth $ 25 million . Murray uses Head rackets , and regularly appears in advertisements for the brand . In June 2012 , the Swiss watch manufacturer Rado announced that Murray had signed a deal to wear their D @-@ Star 200 model . 
 = = Charitable work = = 
 Murray is a founding member of the Malaria No More UK Leadership Council and helped launch the charity in 2009 with David Beckham . Footage from the launch at Wembley Stadium can be seen on YouTube and the charity 's website . Murray also made ' Nets Needed ' , a short public service announcement , for the charity to help raise awareness and funds to help in the fight against malaria . Murray has also taken part in several charity tennis events , including the Rally for Relief events that took place prior to the start of the 2011 Australian Open . 
 In June 2013 , Murray teamed up with former British number 1 Tim Henman for a charity doubles match against Murray 's coach and eight @-@ time grand slam champion Ivan Lendl , and world No. 6 Tomáš Berdych at the Queen 's Club in London . The event named Rally Against Cancer was organised to raise money for Royal Marsden Cancer Charity after his best friend and fellow British player Ross Hutchins was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma . The event took place following the final day of competitive play at the <unk> Championships , on Sunday 16 June . Subsequently , following his victory at the tournament , Murray donated his entire prize money pot to The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity . 
 In June 2014 , following the death of Elena Baltacha , Murray featured in an event known as ' Rally for Bally ' . Murray played at Queen 's Club alongside Victoria Azarenka , Martina Hingis , Heather Watson and his brother Jamie . The event raised money for the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity and the Elena Baltacha Academy of Tennis . Children from Baltacha 's academy took to the court to play alongside Murray . As a result of his various charitable exploits , Murray was awarded the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year award for 2014 . 
 = = Image = = 
 = = = National identity = = = 
 Murray identifies himself as Scottish and British . His national identity has often been commented on by the media . While making a cameo appearance on the comedy show Outnumbered , Murray was asked whether he was British or Scottish , to which he responded " It depends if I 'm winning " . Much of the discussion about Murray 's national identity began prior to Wimbledon 2006 , when he was quoted as saying he would " support whoever England is playing " at the 2006 World Cup . English ex @-@ tennis player Tim Henman confirmed that the remarks had been made in jest and were only in response to Murray being teased by journalist Des Kelly and Henman about Scotland 's failure to qualify . 
 Murray initially refused to endorse either side of the debate in the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence , citing the abuse he had received after his comments in 2006 . Just before the referendum , Murray tweeted a message that was considered by the media to be supportive of independence . He received online abuse for expressing his opinion , including messages that were described as " vile " by Police Scotland ; one referred to the Dunblane massacre . A few days after the vote , in which a 55 % majority opposed Scottish independence , Murray said that he did not regret stating his view , but admitted that it was out of character and that he would concentrate on his tennis career in the future . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 In 2006 , there was uproar after a match with Kenneth Carlsen . Having been given a warning for racket abuse , he went on in the post @-@ match interview to state that he and Carlsen had " played like women " during the first set . Murray was booed for the remark , but explained later that the comment had been intended as a jocular response to what Svetlana Kuznetsova had said at the Hopman Cup . A few months later , Murray was fined for swearing at the umpire during a Davis Cup doubles rubber with the Serbia and Montenegro Davis Cup team . Murray refused to shake hands with the umpire at the end of the match . 
 In 2007 , Murray suggested that tennis had a match @-@ fixing problem , stating that everyone knows it goes on , in the wake of the investigation surrounding Nikolay Davydenko . Both Davydenko and Rafael Nadal questioned his comments , but Murray responded that his words had been taken out of context . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Ranking = = = 
 = = = Grand Slam tournament performance timeline = = = 
 Finals : 11 ( 3 titles , 8 runner @-@ ups ) 
 = = = Olympic Games = = = 
 = = = = Finals : 2 ( 1 gold medal , 1 silver medal ) = = = = 
 = = = = = Singles : 1 ( 1 – 0 ) = = = = = 
 = = = = = Mixed Doubles : 1 ( 0 – 1 ) = = = = = 
 = = = Records and achievements = = = 
 These records were attained in the Open Era . 
 Records in bold indicate peer @-@ less achievements . 
 Records in italics are currently active streaks . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Gilly Roach = 
 Gilbert " Gilly " Roach is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Anthony Quinlan . The character debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 4 October 2005 . Gilly was created in 2005 by executive producer David Hanson . Gilly has often been portrayed as a push @-@ over and has a double act partnership with fellow character Rhys Ashworth . His main character traits have been his " nice attitude " , with Quinlan branding Gilly in his first five years as a " push @-@ over " . He has been labelled a loser and unlucky in love after failed relationships with Jessica Harris , Beth Clement , Cheryl Brady and Jem Costello . In 2009 , executive producer Lucy Alan made changes to the character and reached a mutual agreement with Quinlan to shave off his hair , which has characterised Gilly during his early years . 
 In 2010 he was paired with Steph Cunningham , who was later killed on @-@ screen after Stenson quit her role . This resulted in a long @-@ running storyline for Gilly in which he was seen taking a " dark journey " unable to cope with grief . Another big storyline for the character occurs in 2011 when Jacqui McQueen accuses him of rape ; the storyline subsequently received media attention . A fictional jury consisting of viewers is to decide if he is guilty or innocent . Other storylines have involved the effects of binge drinking , which was portrayed during an online spin @-@ off drama . Gilly has sometimes proved unpopular with television critics , with one branding him a " <unk> drizzle of a character " . Quinlan has also been nominated for minor awards for his portrayal . In 2011 , it was announced that Quinlan would be leaving the serial to pursue other projects and would leave at the end of the rape storyline . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Relationship with Beth Clement = = = 
 BBC America described Gilly on their official website stating : " His most endearing quality is his honesty and despite his countless flaws , what you see is what you get . He 's hardly a <unk> but what he lacks in appearance he makes up for with charisma . " E4 publicity describe Gilly as fun @-@ loving and always trying to woo females but hardly manages to impress them and has also been described as unlucky @-@ in @-@ love after his failed relationships . Initially he failed to impress females and didn 't have much in common with them . Gilly has been portrayed as a strong supporter of Manchester City F.C. , it was this single thing that drew him and Beth Clement ( Sinéad Moynihan ) together . Gilly was later made a fool by Beth and his best friend Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) after they continued an affair despite the fact they were siblings , they split , Beth subsequently died and due to Gilly 's forgiving personality he later forgave Rhys . Holy Soap opined that this was a stand out moment of the character 's duration . Another storyline showing his timid personality was when he was mugged by a group of teenagers and was left fearing for his safety and even let them pick on him on the streets . In a further twist Gilly was left feeling so ashamed of the attack he pretended it was adult attackers fearing what people would think of him . 
 = = = Binge drinking = = = 
 During a spin @-@ off series titled Hollyoaks : The Morning After The Night Before , Gilly and Josh Ashworth head to Manchester . The series explored the dangers of <unk> drinking and was funded by the Home Office . This was the start of changes implemented to the character that would continue into the main series . During the spin @-@ off he was portrayed having negative experiences with excessive alcohol consumption , of this Quinlan said : " Gilly and Josh had a little fight over Ruby ( Nika McGuigan ) , so the character did change due to all the drink consumed . His mood changed further when he attempted to run after Josh after the scuffle , and fell down a set of stairs in the nightclub , losing some of his teeth . After the incident he couldn 't wait to get back home to the village . " 
 He then stated that he wanted viewers to learn from his character 's scenario and be responsible while drinking , stating : " It will make people think twice about binge drinking and make people aware of the consequences if you do . " When the character lost his teeth it made the character 's low confidence worsen , Quinlan made comment of this saying : " Gilly 's confidence was always low really - self @-@ confidence , self @-@ belief . But having no teeth isn 't good to look at - not a good look . It 's going to draw attention to him and not do him any favours . " To enable continuity the character was scripted a slight speech impediment , behind the scenes Quinlan had a special palette fitted , it was a real one fitted by real life dentists and paid for by the show , it would black the character 's front teeth and leave a chipped one at the side . Quinlan also revealed it was quite difficult to speak when wearing it , but praised it as being realistic to have some form of speech impediment having teeth knocked out . Talking of his character 's changes and lessons learnt during the special episodes Quinlan said : " I think Gilly 's learnt to chill out a little , not to follow the crowd and be a sheep . Everyone was drinking loads , he got caught up in it and he came out on the wrong side of it . So , I think there is a lesson learned there - Gilly will do his own thing and not drink as much . " 
 = = = Relationship with Steph Cunningham = = = 
 Gilly was later seen using his new look in attempt to get the affections of Steph Cunningham ( Carley Stenson ) . After failing he acted out of character and struck up a scam date with Cheryl Brady ( Bronagh Waugh ) to make Steph jealous but it back @-@ fired when his false tooth came loose in Cheryl 's mouth . He later has relationships with Cheryl and Jem Costello ( Helen Russell @-@ Clark ) . Another change implemented during this period was a dramatic change to the character 's appearance after new series producer Lucy Allan and Quinlan came to a mutual decision to transform his hairstyle by shaving it all off , a stark contrast as during his early years he was constantly seen with long hair . 
 After Gilly eventually starts a relationship with Steph , she is diagnosed with cervical cancer and initially keeps the news a secret from him . Stenson spoke of Steph 's reasoning stating : " With Gilly , she 's embarrassed and doesn 't want him to look after her . " Speaking of the storyline Quinlan stated during an interview with Inside Soap : " I think Gilly 's really gutted that he didn 't get together with Steph sooner - he wasted so much time with Cheryl and Jem , when really he was in love with her . " At one point Steph cancels her wedding to Gilly because he cannot accept she is dying , of this Quinlan states : " His denial is not helping her . She 's tying to take this in her stride and wants to spend quality time with the people she loves before she goes . She tells him he has to accept she 's going to die or the wedding is <unk> and she hands back her engagement ring . " Quinlan has also stated he was eager for the pair to marry because of the " tear jerking " scenes it would create . Steph is killed off during a special week of episodes dubbed " fire week " . The cast filmed many stunts themselves , and Quinlan filmed scenes in front of a burning set , and he stated he " was very manly about it " whilst filming a ladder rescue scene . Gilly 's immediate grief resulted in the characters name trending on Twitter , of this Quinlan stated : " So glad that the ep had the impact that was desired ! <unk> Gilly is trended again ! " Gilly 's grief is made worse because of Steph making the decision to die prematurely . <unk> this Quinlan said : " He 's grieving - he just can 't understand why she took her life like that . " He added that Gilly 's grief turns to anger because he cannot get the answers to his questions . Quinlan opined that he wanted Gilly to take a different root stating : " I 'd like to see Gilly go down a bit of a different route because he ’ s been a bit of a push @-@ over in the past . I 'd like to see his character progress a bit more and I 'd like to see a side of him that we haven 't seen before . " Gilly 's grief then continued to get worse with Quinlan adding : " The poor guy 's heading off on a very dark journey that I 'm sure he 'll live to regret . " As Gilly is still so angry , at Steph 's funeral , the director of the episode asked Quinlan not to cry at all during the ceremony . Quinlan added " It was all so heartfelt , though , that I broke down for real a few times - and I think that 's going to come across in the final episode . " 
 = = = Sexual assault = = = 
 Gilly later finds himself attracted to Lynsey Nolan ( Karen Hassan ) ; he initially fears he is moving on to soon . Whilst interviewed by Inside Soap Quinlan describes the scenes in which they share their first kiss stating : " Gilly gets a new job at Look Sharpe as a personal trainer , and invites Lynsey for a free session , Lynsey 's looking pretty good when she turns up , so Gilly gets a bit sweaty and hot under the collar - and she ends up hopping into the tub and dragging Gilly in fully clothed ! " They later meet up and feel awkward because of Gilly 's grief for Steph , of this Quinlan adds : " They 're getting on well , but as soon as the word date is mentioned , it goes a bit wrong , nerves get the better of them and they have a huge row . " Off @-@ screen Quinlan was not happy with the fact Gilly is trying to move on quick , of this he states : " I thought it was a bit harsh , it feels like it 's a little too soon , doesn 't it ? We 'll just have to wait and see what the future holds for Gilly and Lynsey - but there 's no comparison to Steph ... " 
 In December 2010 Channel 4 released a press statement which revealed Jacqui McQueen ( Claire Cooper ) would cheat on Rhys with Gilly and that the night 's events would " change their lives forever " . It was later announced that the storyline would see Jacqui accusing Gilly of raping her . The storyline received much coverage in various tabloid newspapers who also branded it as a " shock plot " for the serial . None of the cast members involved in the storyline knew if Jacqui had actually been raped , of this Cooper states : ' They 're telling the same story but are looking at it from different angles . Just who to believe is a very grey area . It will split the village and the viewers . We don 't know what happened that night , We 've just been told that our characters each think they 're telling the truth . [ Anthony ] and I have talked about it a lot . I even read his scripts to try to work it out . The outcome will be a surprise for both of us.' 
 The storyline began to play out on @-@ screen in February 2011 , describing how it starts to develop and the effects it has on Gilly , a spokesperson for the serial told Inside Soap : " She runs into Gilly who 's also got relationship problems , . The drink starts to flow , and one thing leads to another ... Gilly consumed with guilt over sleeping with his best friend 's girlfriend , it doesn 't help that Jacqui leaves Gilly 's place while he 's asleep - and runs into Rhys . But after Gilly wakes up , he knows he has to tell his mate what he 's done . When Gilly confesses , Rhys is both furious and hurt , and lashes out violently . [ ... ] Once he 's confronted Gilly , he demands an explanation from Jacqui - and is stunned when she tells him she was actually raped , it 's absolutely devastating . " The storyline later takes another turn when Gilly confronts Jacqui in the village with everyone watching , leading everyone to doubt if he did commit the act or not . 
 It was later revealed that the details were left unclear because Lime Pictures had decided to leave the outcome of the rape trial to viewers . Viewers have been given the chance to apply for the fictional jury , consisting of a cross section of society , including non @-@ Hollyoaks viewers . They will be shown evidence from the case and then decide whether Gilly is guilty or innocent . Chief executive of Lime Pictures , Carolyn Reynolds stated : " We wanted to open up the thorny issue of how hard it is to be a juror and whether the court room is the best place to resolve some of these questions about rape . " The storyline was developed with the " St Mary 's Sexual Assault Referral Centre " and other charities . DCI Ben <unk> , leader of Don 't Cross the Line campaign , explained : " This storyline represents an issue that we see all too often , involving whether consent is clear on the part of both parties involved in sexual activity , and particularly when alcohol and drugs are involved . " 
 In late 2011 , Quinlan announced his departure from Hollyoaks . The serial decided to write a conclusion to the rape storyline , airing in a special three @-@ hander episode centered on Gilly , Jacqui and Rhys which featured Gilly confessing to the rape as he knew Jacqui was not consenting when he raped her . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Gilly is from Manchester . When the <unk> move to Hollyoaks , Gilly decides to move with them . He sneaks into a Halloween party at HCC , Gilly kisses Jessica Harris ( Jennifer Biddall ) and assumes the role of her wannabe boyfriend . This leads to him pretending to be a philosophy student just to get close to her and finds a rival in Mark Jury ( Asier Newman ) , Jessica 's real boyfriend . The two battled for affections but Jessica could not decide between them and ended both relationships . Neville ( Jim Millea ) buys Drive ' n ' Buy and Gilly becomes an employee , mainly so he can become close to Sarah Barnes ( Loui Batley ) . The pair start going on dates , however , Sarah loses interest . Any chance of a relationship ends when Gilly reveals Rhys slept with her mother , Kathy Barnes ( Sarah Jane Buckley ) . Rhys becomes jealous over Gilly and Sarah and kicks him out of the home . Gilly moves into the student halls with ex @-@ girlfriend , Jess . After Gilly defends Zak after he is accused of stealing Zoë 's belongings , he and Rhys renew their friendship and he moves back into the <unk> ' . Gilly finds out Rhys is an escort and decides to be one himself , unaware the job involves nothing sexual . 
 Rhys discovers Zak and Gilly are planning a strip show at nightclub The Loft . Rhys agrees to join , however , is replaced by Calvin Valentine ( Ricky Whittle ) . During the strip show , Rhys tries to chat up a girl , who is only interested in Gilly . Gilly meets a young woman named Molly Traverse ( Kate Deakin ) , whom he is put off by when she mentions marriage . During her battle with anorexia , Hannah Ashworth ( Emma Rigby ) and friend , Melissa Hurst ( Carla Chases ) , begin being horrible to Gilly . Hannah hits him , however , after returning from hospital , she apologises . After finding out his girlfriend Beth is his half @-@ sister , Rhys begins being jealous after she and Gilly grow close . Gilly and Beth grow closer and kiss . They start a relationship and agree to take it slowly . Gilly decides to become a lifeguard . Whilst cleaning up , Gilly sees boss , Simon Crosby ( Simon Lawson ) , leaving a cubicle with a crying child . Gilly automatically assumes he is a paedophile . Gilly breaks into Simon 's house and finds pictures of children in their swimwear , one of whom is Tom Cunningham ( Ellis Hollins ) . He also finds a boy 's room with a lock on the door . Gilly shows various residents the proof . Angry parents begin to gather outside Simon 's home and vandalise it by smashing the windows . <unk> his reputation is ruined , Simon attempts suicide . Simon 's wife Gemma <unk> ( Gemma Langford ) shows Gilly a picture of their son , who died . Gilly realises Simon is innocent and feels guilty . 
 Gilly goes backpacking around Thailand . At this time , Beth and Rhys rekindle their romance and start an affair . Guilty , Beth leaves with Gilly and they return later in 2008 . Gilly proposes to Beth , who agrees to make Rhys , who is in a relationship with Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) , jealous . Michaela McQueen ( Hollie @-@ Jay Bowes ) catches Rhys and Beth kissing and tells Gilly , who refuses to believe . Later , Michaela tells Gilly to go home in an attempt to make him see the truth . Gilly does so and catches Rhys and Beth sleeping together . He begins to beat up Rhys and calls the police . Realising they face a prison sentence for incest , Rhys and Beth leave Hollyoaks , however , they are involved in a car crash which results in Beth 's death . After time away , Rhys returns and he and Gilly decide to make up . 
 Gilly meets Leila Roy ( Lena Kaur ) and the pair begin a relationship . The romance is short as Leila tells Gilly they cannot be together . Gilly is upset by the breakup . After a break of several months , Gilly returned . At the SU Bar , Gilly begins looking for a new girlfriend with Josh Ashworth ( Sonny Flood ) . A drunken Hannah then throws herself at Gilly and tries to kiss him . Gilly tells her he sees her as a sister . She then apologises . In Hollyoaks : The Morning After the Night Before , Gilly goes to Manchester to party with Josh . Josh and Gilly begin a fight which ends with Gilly losing his front teeth . After returning to the village , Gilly begins to develop feelings for Steph and is jealous towards her relationship with Fernando Fernandez ( Jeronimo Best ) . 
 Whilst at a boot camp trip with Steph and Fernando , Steph believes Gilly has feelings for Sarah , and is unaware his feelings are for her . During the trip , after Steph , Fernando and Gilly leave , Sarah is killed in a tragic parachute jump . Gilly writes a poem for Steph , and in it , offends Fernando . When Steph reads it she is angry at Gilly , who tells her it is Rhys who has the feelings for her . Fernando punches Rhys as Gilly convinces Steph he had nothing to do with the poem . In order to make Steph jealous , Gilly kisses Cheryl who is trying to make Calvin jealous . Despite using him , Cheryl develops true feelings for Gilly . Frankie Osborne ( Helen Pearson ) works out that Gilly is in love with Steph . However , Gilly denies it , saying that he loves Cheryl . Cheryl catches Gilly looking at an engagement ring , which Fernando has bought for Steph . She assumes the ring is for her and tells everyone in The Dog in the Pond that she and Gilly are getting married . Gilly reluctantly goes along , not wanting to hurt her feelings . Cheryl notices the growing closeness between Gilly and Steph and confronts him . On discovering he is in love with Steph , she breaks off their engagement , at the same time Steph and Fernando break up . Gilly goes travelling with Zoe and Mike Barnes ( Tony Hirst ) . Steph , after being told about Gilly 's feelings for her , rushes after him to admit her love just as Gilly leaves . Gilly returns on 5 March with his girlfriend Jem . Steph is upset when he proposes to Jem . Steph admits her feelings to Gilly , but he decides to stay with Jem . Rhys tells Jem that Gilly still loves Steph causing them to split up . Gilly and Steph finally confess their true feelings to each other and begin a relationship . 
 Steph is diagnosed with cervical cancer and does not tell Gilly , who later finds out from Cheryl . Gilly is angry at Steph for keeping this from him . Steph undergoes a hysterectomy to remove the cancer . However , doctors tell her and Gilly it failed . She is soon told her cancer is terminal . Gilly takes the news bad . The pair split up when Steph feels it is unfair on Gilly , but they get back together and start to plan their wedding . Gilly and Steph eventually get married beside the village river . 
 Gilly and Steph take a walk round the village on bonfire night where she finally admits she 's scared of dying , they have a heart to heart conversation where she realises she 's it is how she is going to die that scares her . When the pair see restaurant Il Gnosh on fire , Gilly rings for help whilst Steph runs into the burning building to save Amy Barnes ( Ashley Slanina @-@ Davies ) and her children . Gilly stands on a ladder outside and begs her to come out , however she tells him she 's ready to die and walks back into the flames . Gilly deals with his grief by becoming angry that Steph has ' left ' him . After Rhys tries to comfort him , Gilly goes into Steph 's room and trashes it after seeing that she has still kept her photo of her and Max Cunningham ( Matt Littler ) on their wedding day , placed on a table . Gilly argues with Steph 's family as they blame him for not saving her and disagree on the funeral arrangements . Frankie then tells him that Steph had never loved him and that Max would have done anything to save Steph from the fire , making him further deeply upset and angry . He starts drinking heavily , causing trouble on many occasions . 
 Gilly starts to date Lynsey , he initially thinks it is too soon after Steph 's death . He is shocked when she finds a lump and it halts their relationship . He sleeps with Jacqui when they get drunk , she tells Rhys he sexually assaulted her . She reports him to the police and Gilly faces trial . Steph 's family support Gilly however many villagers do not . 
 During the trial it is shown Gilly and Jacqui remember the same events very differently . The jury find Gilly not guilty however the events ruin Gilly and Rhys ' friendship as Rhys eventually believes Jacqui . Lynsey also takes Jacqui 's side . Gilly then goes to spend some time away from the village . He returns in September and is given a job at Chez Chez by Cheryl leading Rhys to quit before punching him . 
 Gilly moves in with Cheryl , and they begin to rekindle their romantic relationship . But when they try to become physically intimate , Gilly becomes overwhelmed with memories of the rape and cannot go through with sleeping with Cheryl . Later that night , he goes to Rhys ' and Jacqui 's flat , and in a three @-@ hander episode , the three of them discuss everything that 's happened and they all eventually come to the conclusion that Gilly did indeed rape Jacqui . Jacqui forgives him , and Gilly decides that he must leave the village . He confesses the rape to everyone in his life and says his goodbyes . Cheryl in particular is devastated by Gilly 's abrupt departure and begs for him to stay , but he refuses . Jacqui comforts Cheryl as she sobs on the steps outside her flat , while Gilly and Rhys share one final look goodbye before he leaves the village forever . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Quinlan was nominated for sexiest male at the 2010 Inside Soap Awards . He was also nominated in the category of " Best Serial Drama Performance " at the 2011 National Television Awards . That same year he was nominated in the category of " Best Actor " at the British Soap Awards . Ruth Deller of Lowculture has criticised Gilly , branding him as a poor character . Commenting on Steph 's death she stated : " No wonder that , gazing upon his face , she realised she was better off burning to death than enduring one more day staring at him . " She praised Paul Marquess ' cast cull of 2010 , but stated that Gilly is " still hanging around like that bit of dog mess you can ’ t get out of the grooves in your trainers . " She also opined : " A damp drizzle of a character , Gilly hasn ’ t worked as Rhys ’ s wide boy sidekick , hasn ’ t worked as a loved @-@ up hippy , hasn ’ t worked as a doting husband , doesn ’ t work on any level . " Also stating she wanted Hollyoaks serial killer Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) to kill him . Colin Robertson , writing for British tabloid newspaper The Sun brands Gilly a kind @-@ hearted type character . 
 Roz Laws writing for the Sunday Mercury felt there was " plenty of chemistry " present between Gilly and Steph . Their relationship was frequently commented on by the Daily Mail 's Jaci Stephen in her weekly soap column . She expressed disinterest in Steph and Cheryl 's rivalry over Gilly , and found it implausible that Jem and Steph would quarrel over him . When the two finally admitted their feelings for one another in May 2010 , Stephen accurately predicted that their happiness would be short @-@ lived . She bemoaned the lack of subtlety in the scripting of the lead @-@ up to their wedding , observing : " Of course , you know that the moment she says that nothing is going to stop her marrying Gilly , the Grim Reaper will be pulling up in his hearse , shortly behind the wedding car . " 
 = The Perks of Being a Wallflower = 
 The Perks of Being a Wallflower is a coming @-@ of @-@ age epistolary novel by American writer Stephen Chbosky which was first published on February 1 , 1999 by Pocket Books . Its narrator is an introverted teenager known as Charlie , who describes his experiences in a series of letters to an anonymous stranger . Set in the early 1990s , the novel follows Charlie through his freshman year of high school in a Pittsburgh suburb . Intelligent beyond his years , he is an unconventional thinker ; as the story begins , the reader learns that Charlie is also shy and unpopular . 
 Chbosky took five years to develop and publish The Perks of Being a Wallflower , creating the characters and other aspects of the story from his own memories . The novel addresses themes permeating adolescence , including introversion , sexuality , and drug use . Chbosky makes several references to other literary works , films , and pop culture in general . 
 Although Chbosky 's first book was a commercial success , it was banned in some American schools for its content and received mixed reviews from literary critics . In 2012 , he adapted and directed a film version starring Logan Lerman , Ezra Miller and Emma Watson . The film boosted the novel 's sales , and the book reached The New York Times Best Seller list . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins with a quiet , sensitive , 15 @-@ year @-@ old boy named Charlie writing letters about his life to an unknown recipient . Charlie chooses that person because he said that he heard he was nice and thought that this person would not be judgmental . He discusses his first year at high school , grappling with two traumatic experiences from his past : the suicide of his only middle @-@ school friend , Michael , a year before , and the death of his favorite aunt , Helen , during his early childhood . 
 His English teacher , Mr. Anderson , notices Charlie 's passion for reading and writing , and acts as a mentor by assigning him extracurricular books and reports . Although he is a wallflower , Charlie is befriended by two seniors : Patrick and Sam . Patrick is secretly dating Brad , a closeted football player , and Sam is Patrick 's stepsister . Charlie quickly develops a crush on Sam and subsequently admits his feelings to her . It is revealed that Sam was sexually abused as a child , and she kisses Charlie to ensure that his first kiss is from someone who truly loves him . 
 In parallel , Charlie witnesses his sister 's boyfriend hit her across the face , but she forbids him from telling their parents . He eventually mentions the occurrence to Mr. Anderson , who tells Charlie 's parents about it . Charlie 's relationship with his sister rapidly deteriorates and she continues to see her boyfriend against her parents ' wishes . Eventually , he discovers that his sister is pregnant and agrees to bring her to an abortion clinic without telling anyone . His sister breaks up with her boyfriend , after which her and Charlie 's relationship begins to improve significantly . 
 Charlie is accepted by Sam and Patrick 's group of friends and begins experimenting with tobacco , alcohol and other drugs . As Charlie engages with his new friends he can control his flashbacks of Aunt Helen , who died in a car crash on her way to buy him a birthday gift . Eventually , Mary Elizabeth , a member of the group , invites Charlie to the school 's Sadie Hawkins dance and the two enter into a desultory relationship . During a game of Truth or Dare , when dared to kiss the prettiest girl in the room he kisses Sam ; Mary Elizabeth storms out , the rest of the group shuns him and Patrick suggests that Charlie stay away from Sam for a while . His flashbacks return . 
 Patrick and Brad 's relationship is discovered by Brad 's abusive father , and Brad disappears from school for a few days . Upon returning , Brad is cold and mean towards Patrick , while Patrick attempts to reconnect with him . However , when Brad derogatorily attacks Patrick 's sexuality in public , Patrick physically attacks Brad until other football players join in and gang up on Patrick . Charlie breaks up the fight , regaining the respect of Sam and her friends . Patrick begins spending much of his time with Charlie and Patrick kisses Charlie impulsively and then apologizes , but Charlie understands that he is recovering from his romance with Brad . Soon Patrick sees Brad engaging with a stranger in the park and Patrick is able to move on from the relationship . 
 As the school year ends , Charlie is anxious about losing his older friends — especially Sam , who is leaving for a summer college @-@ preparatory program and has learned that her boyfriend cheated on her . When Charlie helps her pack , they talk about his feelings for her ; she is angry that he never acted on them . They begin to engage sexually , but Charlie suddenly grows inexplicably uncomfortable and stops Sam . Charlie begins to realize that his sexual contact with Sam has stirred up repressed memories of having been molested by his aunt Helen as a child . 
 In an epilogue , Charlie is discovered by his parents in a catatonic state and does not show any movement despite being hit reluctantly by his father . After being admitted to a mental hospital , it emerges that Helen sexually abused him when he was young , and his love for her ( and empathy for her troubled youth ) caused him to repress his traumatic memories . This psychological damage explains his flashbacks and derealization phases throughout the book . In two months Charlie is released , and Sam and Patrick visit him . In the epilogue , Sam , Patrick and Charlie go through the tunnel again and Charlie stands up and exclaims that he felt infinite . 
 He comes to terms with his past : " Even if we don 't have the power to choose where we come from , we can still choose where we go from there " . Charlie decides to " participate " in life , and his letter @-@ writing ends . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Chbosky first conceived random ideas , including " a kid standing up in a tunnel , " a girl he likes , and parties he goes to . After five years with these elements in mind , he had the idea of writing the novel during a difficult period in his life . He was experiencing a " bad breakup " which led him to ask , " Why good people let themselves get treated so badly ? " The author tried to answer the question with the sentence " we accept the love we think we deserve " . That meant to be an advice to remark that one is in charge of one 's life as he is referring to " not just romance love but also love of self , it 's love of your future , it 's the love you have for your life . " 
 The story began when Chbosky was in school , evolving from another book on which he was working . In that book he wrote the sentence , " I guess that 's just one of the perks of being a wallflower " , which led him to realize " that somewhere in that ... was the kid I was really trying to find . " Chbosky began writing the novel in the summer of 1996 while he was in college , and within a month and six weeks he completed the story . He rewrote it into two more drafts , concluding the published version in the summer of 1998 . 
 Charlie , " [ his ] hope in the form of a character " , is loosely based on the author and Chbosky included " countless details " in the novel from the time he lived in Pittsburgh . The other characters were " pieces of real people in [ his ] life " ; Chbosky focused on people 's struggles and what they are passionate about , attempting to " hone in [ on ] the essence of each . " The characters of Sam and Patrick were an " amalgamate and celebration " of several people Chbosky has met ; Sam was based on girls who confided in him , and Patrick was " all the kids I knew who were gay and finding their way to their own identity . " 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The idea of anonymous letters came from a real experience ; during his senior year in high school , Chbosky wrote an anonymous letter to Stewart Stern about how Rebel Without a Cause had influenced him . A year and a half later , Stern found Chbosky and became his mentor . By using a series of letters from Charlie to an anonymous character , Chbosky found " the most intimate way " to talk directly to the reader . He thought the letters would help him keep the story cohesive , " to convey the highs and lows of being young — one day , you 're on top of the world and you ’ ve had the greatest of times " . 
 Critics have identified primary themes of teenage reality and ( for adults ) nostalgia . According to David Edelstein of the New York Magazine , Chbosky captures the " feeling [ that ] you belong when among friends , yet you 'd soon be alone " and notes that " the pain of loss ... [ is ] almost as intense as the bliss ... it 's nostalgia with an emphasis on <unk> , pain [ sic ] . " Word Riot 's Marty Beckerman said that The Perks of Being a Wallflower connects with young people because its scenes are " so universal and happen to so many teenagers . " Chbosky wanted to convey respect for teenagers , to " validate and respect and celebrate what [ teenagers ] are going through every day " , and said that the novel is for " anyone who 's felt like an outcast . " 
 Although it is also read by adults , The Perks of Being a Wallflower is targeted at a teenaged audience . The book addresses a range of themes ( including sex and drugs ) dispassionately . Other themes include friendship , body image , first love , suicide , eating disorders and sexuality . Chbosky appreciates the importance of entertainment in adolescence : " Books , songs , and movies are more than entertainment when we 're young . They help all of us discover who we are , what we believe , and what we hope our life can be . " As such , there are several cultural references : musical ( The Smiths and Fleetwood Mac ) , literary ( This Side of Paradise , On the Road , To Kill a Mockingbird ) and theatrical ( The Rocky Horror Picture Show ) . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The Perks of Being a Wallflower was first published on February 1 , 1999 by Pocket Books through its MTV Books imprint . It became the subsidiary 's best @-@ selling book with 100 @,@ 000 copies in print as of 2000 , and was included on school reading lists and gathered a cult following . In spite of it , The Perks of Being a Wallflower has appeared six times on the American Library Association 's list of 10 most @-@ frequently @-@ challenged books . Usually , there are request to remove it from high school public libraries because it deals with drugs use among teenagers , homosexuality , suicide , and has sexually explicit scenes and " offensive language . " Since Chbosky " didn 't write it to be a controversial book , " he was surprised by the bans . 
 Critical response was mixed ; Publishers Weekly called the novel " trite " , dealing with " standard teenage issues " in which " Chbosky infuses a droning insistence on Charlie 's supersensitive disposition . " Although Kirkus Review said it had " the right combination of realism and uplift " , the reviewer criticized Chbosky 's " rip @-@ off " of J. D. Salinger 's The Catcher in the Rye . Although other reviewers made similar comparisons , Chbosky said he " was not trying to mimic [ Salinger 's ] style as a writer " ; he saw " how readers could compare Charlie to Salinger 's Holden Caulfield " , but " they are very different people with unique problems and perspectives " . 
 Francisca Goldsmith of the School Library Journal said the novel " cleverly " makes the readers the recipients of Charlie 's letters , and it " will engage teen readers for years to come . " Common Sense Media 's Kate Pavao praised its relevant themes for teenagers : " Readers will find themselves quickly feeling sorry for the protagonist and worrying about him throughout his transformative journey . " In an Amazon.com review , <unk> Davies wrote : " What is most notable about this funny , touching , memorable first novel from Stephen Chbosky is the resounding accuracy with which the author captures the voice of a boy teetering on the brink of adulthood . " For The A.V. Club , Marah Eakin wrote that although for an adult " Perks suffers from an overabundance of pure , raw angst ... unlike some more arrested development @-@ friendly YA fare like Harry Potter , Perks speaks to a more specific age range and does it well . " 
 With the announcement of a film adaptation the novel received more attention ; it sales increased from 88 @,@ 847 copies in 2011 to 425 @,@ 933 in 2012 , and it reached the New York Times bestseller lists . It entered the Children 's <unk> Books category on the June 23 , 2012 list , and had 1 @.@ 5 million copies in print in November 2012 . As of May 11 , 2014 it appeared on The New York Times top 10 list for the 71st non @-@ consecutive week , and was in the top 15 on the November 23 list . The novel has been published in 16 countries in 13 languages . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 Since he wrote The Perks of Being a Wallflower Chbosky aspired to adapt it into a film , calling this " a lifelong dream of mine . " After the publication of the novel Chbosky said he received film offers , refusing them because he " owed the fans a movie that was worthy of their love for the book . " In 2010 Mr. Mudd began developing a film version , and the author was signed to write and direct the film by producers John Malkovich , Lianne <unk> and Russell Smith . The film , shot in the Pittsburgh area from May 9 to June 29 , 2011 , starred Logan Lerman as Charlie , Emma Watson as Sam , Ezra Miller as Patrick , and Nina Dobrev as Charlie 's sister , Candace . 
 It premiered on September 8 , 2012 at the Toronto International Film Festival , and was released theatrically in the United States by Summit Entertainment on September 21 . According to Metacritic it has received " generally favorable reviews " , with an average of 67 out of 100 based on 36 reviews . Rotten Tomatoes reported an 85 % approval rate , based on 151 reviews . The film was a commercial success , grossing over $ 33 million worldwide from a $ 13 million production budget . 
 = Kelly Rowland = 
 <unk> <unk> " Kelly " Rowland ( born February 11 , 1981 ) is an American singer , songwriter , actress , and television personality . Rowland rose to fame in the late 1990s as a member of Destiny 's Child , one of the world 's best @-@ selling girl groups of all time . During their hiatus , Rowland released her debut solo album Simply Deep ( 2002 ) , which sold 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide and produced the number @-@ one single " Dilemma " with Nelly , as well as the international top @-@ ten hit " Stole " . Rowland also transitioned into acting , with guest appearances in television sitcoms , and starring roles in Freddy vs. Jason ( 2003 ) and The Seat Filler ( 2005 ) . 
 Following the disbandment of Destiny 's Child in 2005 , she released her second album Ms. Kelly ( 2007 ) , which included international hits " Like This " and " Work " . In 2009 , Rowland served as a host on the first season of The Fashion Show , and was featured on David Guetta 's number @-@ one dance hit " When Love Takes Over " . The song 's global success influenced Rowland to explore dance music on her third album Here I Am ( 2011 ) , which spawned the international top @-@ ten hit " Commander " and US R & B / Hip @-@ Hop number @-@ one " Motivation " . In 2011 , she returned to television as a judge on the eighth season of The X Factor UK , and in 2013 , became a judge on the third and final season of The X Factor USA . Rowland 's fourth album Talk a Good Game ( 2013 ) , which saw a return to her " R & B roots " , was released to positive reviews . 
 Throughout a career spanning 19 years , Rowland has sold over 27 million records as a solo artist and 60 million records with Destiny 's Child . Her work has earned her several awards and nominations , including four Grammy Awards , two Billboard Music Awards and two Soul Train Music Awards . Rowland has also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame with Destiny 's Child , and as a solo artist she has been honored by the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers and Essence for her contributions to music . In 2014 , Fuse ranked Rowland in their " 100 Most Award @-@ Winning Artists " list at number 20 . 
 She currently hosts BET 's Chasing Destiny with Frank Gatson Jr . They formed a girl group , June 's Diary . 
 = = Early life = = 
 <unk> <unk> Rowland was born on February 11 , 1981 , in Atlanta , Georgia . She is the daughter of Doris Rowland ( née Garrison ; December 6 , 1947 – December 2 , 2014 ) and Christopher Lovett Rowland . Kelly has an older brother named Orlando . When she was seven , her mother took her and left her father , who was an abusive alcoholic . At the age of eight , she relocated to Houston . Rowland was placed into a girl group , along with Beyoncé and friend LaTavia Roberson . Originally named Girl 's Tyme in 1992 , they were eventually cut down to six members . West coast R & B producer , Arne Frager , flew to Houston to see them and eventually brought them to his studio , The Plant Recording Studio , in Northern California . As part of efforts to sign Girl 's Tyme to a major label record deal , Frager 's strategy was to debut them in Star Search , the biggest talent show on national TV at that time . They participated , but lost the competition . 
 To manage the group , Mathew Knowles , Beyoncé 's father , resigned in 1995 from his job as a medical @-@ equipment salesman . He dedicated his time and established a " boot camp " for their training . At this time Rowland moved in with the Knowles 's . Not long after the inclusion of Rowland , Mathew cut the original lineup to four with LeToya Luckett joining in 1993 . <unk> in Tina Knowles ' hairstyling salon and their backyards , the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R & B girl groups of the time . They auditioned before record labels and were finally signed to Elektra Records , only to be dropped months later , before they could release an album . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2001 : Destiny 's Child = = = 
 Taken from a passage in the Biblical Book of Isaiah , the group changed their name to Destiny 's Child in 1993 . Together , they performed in local events and , after four years on the road , the group was signed to Columbia Records in late 1997 . That same year , Destiny 's Child recorded their major label debut song " Killing Time " , for the soundtrack to the 1997 film , Men in Black . The following year , the group released their self @-@ titled debut album , spawning hits such as " No , No , No " . The album established the group as a viable act in the music industry , amassing moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards . The group rose to fame after releasing their multi @-@ platinum second album The Writing 's on the Wall in 1999 . The album featured some of the group 's most widely known songs such as " Bills , Bills , Bills " , " Jumpin ' Jumpin ' " and " Say My Name " , which became their most @-@ successful song at the time , and would remain as one of their signature songs . " Say My Name " won Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and Best R & B Song at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards . The Writing 's on the Wall sold more than 15 million copies worldwide , essentially becoming their breakthrough album . 
 Along with their commercial successes , the group became entangled in much @-@ publicized turmoil involving the filing of a lawsuit by Luckett and Roberson for breach of contract . The issue was heightened after Michelle Williams and Farrah Franklin appeared in the video of " Say My Name " , implying that Luckett and Roberson had already been replaced . Eventually , Luckett and Roberson left the group . Franklin would eventually fade from the group after five months , as evidenced by her absences during promotional appearances and concerts . She attributed her departure to negative vibes in the group resulting from the departure . After settling on their final lineup , the trio recorded " Independent Women Part I " , which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film , Charlie 's Angels . It became their best @-@ charting single , topping the Billboard Hot 100 for eleven consecutive weeks . The success cemented the new lineup and skyrocketed them to fame . Later that year , Luckett and Roberson withdrew their case against their now @-@ former band mates , while maintaining the suit against Mathew , which ended in both sides agreeing to stop public disparaging . 
 Later that year , while Destiny 's Child was completing their third album Survivor , Rowland appeared on the remix of Avant 's single " Separated " . Survivor , which channeled the turmoil the band underwent , spawned its lead single of the same name , which was a response to the experience . The song went on to win a Grammy Award for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . The themes of " Survivor " , however , caused Luckett and Roberson to refile their lawsuit ; the proceedings were eventually settled in June 2002 . Meanwhile , the album was released in May 2001 , debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 663 @,@ 000 copies sold . To date , Survivor has sold over twelve million copies worldwide , over forty percent of which were sold in the US alone . The album also spawned the number @-@ one hit " Bootylicious " . After releasing their remix album This Is the Remix in 2002 , the group announced their temporary break @-@ up to pursue solo projects . 
 = = = 2002 – 06 : Simply Deep and acting career debut = = = 
 In 2002 , Rowland was featured on Nelly 's single " Dilemma " , which won the pair a Grammy Award for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . The song became one of the most successful singles of the year , topping many charts worldwide including the United States , where it became Rowland 's first number @-@ one single as a solo artist , selling worldwide over 7 @,@ 6 million copies . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian wrote that because of the song 's success , " Rowland is no longer a mere backing vocalist for Beyoncé " . 
 Rowland 's debut solo album , Simply Deep , was released on October 22 , 2002 in the US . Featuring production contributions by Mark J. Feist , Big Bert , Rich Harrison , and singers Brandy and Solange Knowles providing background vocals , the album took Rowland 's solo work further into an alternative music mixture , which Rowland described as a " weird fusion [ of ] a little bit of Sade and a little bit of rock . " Simply Deep debuted at number 12 on the Billboard 200 and at number three on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , with first @-@ week sales of 77 @,@ 000 copies sold . It was eventually certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . As of 2013 , Simply Deep remains as Rowland 's best @-@ selling album in the US , with 602 @,@ 000 copies sold . Released to an even bigger success in international territories , the album topped the UK Albums Chart and became a gold @-@ seller in Australia , Canada and New Zealand , resulting in worldwide sales total of 2 @.@ 5 million copies . Simply Deep yielded the international top @-@ ten single " Stole " and the UK top @-@ five single " Can 't Nobody " . 
 Rowland transitioned into acting in 2002 , playing the recurring role of Carly in the fourth season of UPN sitcom The Hughleys . She continued her acting career the following year , with guest roles in UPN sitcom Eve as Cleo , and in NBC drama series American Dreams as Martha Reeves . In August 2003 , Rowland made her big screen debut playing the supporting role of Kia Waterson alongside Robert Englund and Monica Keena in the slasher film , Freddy vs. Jason , which grossed $ 114 @.@ 5 million at the box office worldwide . 
 In July 2005 , Rowland starred opposite Duane Martin and <unk> Moore in the romantic comedy The Seat Filler , which grossed $ 17 @.@ 9 million worldwide . She played <unk> , a pop star who falls for an awards @-@ show seat filler whom she mistakes for a high @-@ profile entertainment attorney . After a three @-@ year hiatus that involved concentration on individual solo projects , Rowland rejoined Beyoncé and Michelle Williams for Destiny 's Child 's final studio album Destiny Fulfilled , released on November 15 , 2004 . The album hit number two on the Billboard 200 , and spawned the top @-@ five singles " Lose My Breath " and " Soldier " , which features T.I. and Lil Wayne . The following year , Destiny 's Child embarked on a worldwide concert tour , Destiny Fulfilled ... And Lovin ' It . During the last stop of the European tour in Barcelona , Spain on June 11 , Rowland announced that they would disband following the North American leg of the tour . Destiny 's Child released their first compilation album Number 1 's on October 25 in the US , which peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 . On March 28 , 2006 , Destiny 's Child accepted a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 After Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , Rowland and Beyoncé founded the Survivor Foundation , a charitable entity set up to provide transitional housing for victims and storm evacuees in the Houston , Texas area . The Survivor Foundation extended the philanthropic mission of the Knowles @-@ Rowland Center for Youth , a multi @-@ purpose community outreach facility in downtown Houston . Rowland and Beyoncé lent their voices to a collaboration with Kitten Sera , entitled " All That I 'm Lookin for " . The song appeared on The Katrina CD album , whose proceeds went to the Recording Artists for Hope organization . In 2006 , Rowland joined other artists such as Pink and Avril Lavigne in ads for so @-@ called empowerment tags for the ALDO Fights AIDS campaign , which went on sale exclusively at ALDO stores and benefited the <unk> initiative . Rowland returned to television that same year , playing Tammy Hamilton , in the sixth season of UPN sitcom Girlfriends . Rowland initially hoped her three @-@ episode stint would expand to a larger recurring role , but as the show was moved to The CW Television Network the following year plans for a return eventually went nowhere . 
 = = = 2007 – 09 : Ms. Kelly , new management and label = = = 
 In June 2007 , Kelly Rowland embarked on the Ms. Kelly Tour to promote her second solo album Ms. Kelly . The five date tour visited Europe , North America , Africa and Asia . Ms. Kelly was released on July 3 , 2007 in the United States . Originally entitled My Story , the album 's first version was actually scheduled for a June 2006 release , but Rowland , her management and Columbia Records decided to shelve the album at the last minute to re @-@ work a version with a different vibe as the singer considered the final track listing " too full of <unk> and ballads . " Rowland eventually consulted additional producers to collaborate on the album , including Billy Mann , <unk> & Pizzi , Sean Garrett , Scott Storch , and Polow da Don . Upon its release , Ms. Kelly debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 , and at number two on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , with first @-@ week sales of 86 @,@ 000 copies . Outside the US , the album widely failed to reprise the success of Simply Deep , barely reaching the top @-@ forty on the majority of all charts it appeared on , except for the UK , where it opened at number 37 . 
 Ms. Kelly included the UK top @-@ five hit " Like This " , featuring Eve , and the international top @-@ ten hit " Work " . In July 2007 , Rowland released her first DVD entitled BET Presents Kelly Rowland , which celebrates the release Ms. Kelly and features an interview with Rowland about the album 's production , footage of her time with Destiny 's Child , live performances and music videos . Following the album 's lukewarm sales , it was re @-@ released as an extended play entitled , Ms. Kelly : Diva Deluxe , on March 25 , 2008 . Previously unreleased Bobby Womack cover " Daylight " , a collaboration with Travie McCoy , served as the EP 's lead single and was a moderate success in the UK . 
 In 2007 , Rowland , along with stars such as Jessica Simpson and the cast of Grey 's Anatomy autographed pink Goody <unk> brushes that were made available for auction on eBay , with all proceeds going to Breast Cancer Awareness . In addition , the singer teamed up with Kanye West , Nelly Furtado and Snoop Dogg to design a Nike sneaker for another eBay auction . All proceeds went to AIDS Awareness . In October 2007 , Rowland auditioned for the role of Louise , Carrie Bradshaw 's assistant , in the 2008 film adaptation of HBO 's comedy series Sex and the City . The part eventually went to Jennifer Hudson . Two months later , Rowland appeared as a choirmaster in the first season of the NBC talent show Clash of the Choirs among other musicians such as Michael Bolton , Patti LaBelle , Nick Lachey , and Blake Shelton . Rowland 's choir finished fifth in the competition , and Clash of the Choirs did not return for a second season . 
 In 2008 , Rowland officially became ambassador for MTV 's Staying Alive Foundation , which aims to reduce stigma against people living with HIV and AIDS . She visited projects in Tanzania and Kenya to promote the charity , and underwent an HIV test in Africa to raise awareness of the disease . In 2009 , Rowland connected with <unk> , MTV 's platform to connect young people with local volunteerism opportunities , for a series of on @-@ air PSAs . From battling homelessness to beautifying impoverished neighborhoods to saving whales , Rowland was joined by the likes of Cameron Diaz , will.i.am , and Sean Kingston as they discuss causes they volunteer to support , and urge young people to join with their friends in making civic service a part of their lifestyle . That same year , she spearheaded a bone marrow drive , and joined fellow singers Alesha Dixon and Pixie Lott to create T @-@ shirts for River Island in aid of the Prince 's Trust , profits from which help change young lives . 
 In January 2009 , Rowland ended her professional relationship with Beyoncé 's father Mathew Knowles , who had managed her career since she was a member of Destiny 's Child . Knowles stressed that no animosity was involved in the decision and acknowledged that Rowland will always be a part of the Knowles family . Then two months later , Rowland announced that she left Columbia Records , adding that she " felt the need to explore new directions , new challenges , and new freedoms outside my comfort zone . " In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Rowland stated that the label ended her contract because Ms. Kelly was not commercially successful . She later signed with Universal Motown Records . 
 In April 2009 , Rowland was featured on David Guetta 's single " When Love Takes Over " , which topped many charts in Europe , selling over 5 @,@ 5 million copies worldwide , and received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Dance Recording . Billboard crowned the song as the number one dance @-@ pop collaboration of all time . In May 2009 , Rowland was cast to host the first season of Bravo 's reality competition series The Fashion Show alongside Isaac Mizrahi , but was replaced by fashion model Iman in the second season . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Here I Am and The X Factor UK = = = 
 In 2010 , Kelly Rowland launched I Heart My Girlfriends , a charity that focuses on self @-@ esteem , date violence prevention , community service , abstinence , sports , drugs and alcohol and smoking avoidance , obesity , disabilities , and education . In April 2010 , Rowland toured Australia alongside Akon , Pitbull , Sean Paul , Jay Sean , and Eve for the Australian urban festival , Supafest . Later that month , her song " Everywhere You Go " , featuring an all @-@ star supergroup of international artists called Rhythm of Africa United , was released as the MTN theme song for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa . In October 2010 , the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) honored Rowland at the second annual ASCAP Presents Women Behind the Music , an event which recognizes women in all areas of the music industry . Rowland 's first compilation album , Work : The Best of Kelly Rowland , was released on October 25 , 2010 but failed to impact the charts . 
 In January 2011 , Rowland reunited with Nelly on " Gone " , a sequel to their successful 2002 collaboration " Dilemma " . Upon its release , the song failed to reprise the success of " Dilemma " . In April 2011 , Rowland appeared on Italian DJ Alex Gaudino 's single " What a Feeling " , which became another UK top @-@ ten hit . Originally scheduled for release in 2010 , Rowland 's third studio album Here I Am was released on July 26 , 2011 in the United States . The album sold 77 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . Here I Am produced the successful lead single " Commander " , which peaked in the top @-@ ten of many charts in Europe , and the UK top @-@ ten single " Down for Whatever " . It also included another successful single " Motivation " , with Lil Wayne , which topped the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for seven consecutive weeks and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . " Motivation " won Song of the Year at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards and Top R & B Song at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards , and received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . 
 Rowland was the face of Diddy 's women 's fragrance Empress , the female counterpart to his men 's fragrance I Am King . She was also the worldwide ambassador for watchmakers company TW Steel . Rowland 's second compilation album , Playlist : the Very Best of Kelly Rowland , was released on October 18 , 2011 , but failed to impact the charts . She also released her first fitness DVD entitled , Sexy Abs with Kelly Rowland . Later that year , it was confirmed that Rowland would replace Dannii Minogue as a judge for the eighth series of The X Factor UK alongside Louis Walsh , Gary Barlow and Tulisa Contostavlos . Due to a conflicting schedule , Rowland did not return for the ninth series in 2012 and was replaced by Nicole Scherzinger . During the Black Women in Music event held on February 8 , 2012 , Essence magazine honored Rowland and music executive Sylvia Rhone for their contributions to music . In April 2012 , Rowland toured Australia alongside Ludacris , Chris Brown , Trey Songz , T @-@ Pain , Ice Cube , Lupe Fiasco , and Big Sean for the urban festival , Supafest . That same month , she returned to the big screen playing the supporting role of Brenda in the romantic comedy Think Like a Man . The film , which also starred Michael Ealy , Jerry Ferrara , Meagan Good , Regina Hall , and Kevin Hart , topped the US box office and grossed $ 91 @.@ 5 million . Rowland recorded " Need a Reason " with Future and Bei <unk> for the Think Like a Man soundtrack . 
 In June 2012 , Rowland became the face of popular rum brand Bacardi . Rowland and German production team Project B reworked the Bacardi song , " Bacardi Feeling ( Summer Dreamin ' ) " , and released an accompanying music video to help promote the brand . In August 2012 , Rowland became a dance master in the first season of the Australian talent show Everybody Dance Now alongside Jason Derulo . The show was cancelled after the fourth episode due to poor ratings . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : Talk a Good Game and The X Factor USA = = = 
 In January 2013 , Destiny 's Child released a compilation album entitled Love Songs , a collection of romance @-@ themed songs from their previous albums and newly recorded song " Nuclear " . On February 3 , 2013 , during Beyoncé 's performance at the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show , held at the Mercedes @-@ Benz Superdome in New Orleans , Rowland and Michelle Williams joined her on stage to perform " Bootylicious " , " Independent Women " and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . On February 24 , 2013 , Rowland co @-@ hosted the Academy Awards pre @-@ show for the 85th Academy Awards alongside Kristin Chenoweth , Lara Spencer , Robin Roberts and Jess Cagle . In May 2013 , it was announced that Rowland would replace Britney Spears as a judge on The X Factor USA for its third and final season , joining Simon Cowell , Demi Lovato and fellow new judge Paulina Rubio . Later that month , Rowland performed as a supporting headlining act at the <unk> 2013 in Little Rock , Arkansas . 
 Rowland embarked on the Lights Out Tour , a co @-@ headlining tour with The @-@ Dream , to promote her fourth studio album Talk a Good Game . Formerly titled Year of the Woman , the album was released on June 18 , 2013 in the US . It is Rowland 's first release with Republic Records following Universal Music Group 's decision to close Universal Motown and Universal Republic , and reviving Motown Records and Republic Records . Talk a Good Game sold 68 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 , becoming Rowland 's third top @-@ ten album in the US . The album 's lead single " Kisses Down Low " was a moderate success on the US R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and was certified gold by RIAA for exceeded 500 @,@ 000 copies sold . The second and final single " Dirty Laundry " was acclaimed by critics for its lyrical and the emotional honesty . In December 2013 , Rowland appeared in Beyoncé 's " Grown Woman " music video and alongside Williams in Beyoncé 's " Superpower " music video and provided backing vocals on the same track , taken from her self @-@ titled fifth studio album . 
 In February 2014 , Rowland was featured on Joe 's single " Love & Sex Part 2 " . In March 2014 , she was named a spokesperson for cosmetic company , Caress . During an interview with HuffPost Live on March 26 , 2014 , Rowland revealed that she has begun recording her fifth studio album and said the new music , which encompasses horns , drums , and flutes , was influenced by iconic female singers including Diana Ross . Rowland also announced in the interview that she left Republic Records , adding that she " just needed a fresh , new start . " In June 2014 , Rowland and Beyoncé were featured on Williams ' single " Say Yes " . The same month , her song " The Game " and its music video appeared on Pepsi 's visual album for the 2014 FIFA World Cup titled , Beats of the Beautiful Game . On July 19 , 2014 , Rowland was featured on Adrian Marcel 's song " Honey " from his mixtape Weak After Next and on Beau Vallis 's song " Love Stand Still " . Rowland also contributed background vocals to the song " You 're My Star " , the first single released from Tank 's 2014 album Stronger . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Empire , Chasing Destiny and fifth studio album = = = 
 In August 2015 , she was featured on Jacob <unk> 's single " I Know What You Did Last Summer " . Rowland is part of the recurring cast of the second season of the American drama television series Empire . She played Leah Walker , Lucious Lyon 's mother , in flashbacks and starred in five episodes . She recorded a song for the show called " Mona Lisa " which included on the EP Empire : Music from " Be True " , released on October 21 , 2015 . On October 26 , 2015 , Rowland released a new song titled " Dumb " which will appear on her fifth album , set for a 2016 release . Rowland says that she 's been hard at work in the studio and will release new music in 2016 , is shooting a music video , and has recorded 45 songs for her new album . Rowland along with other female artists such as Missy Elliot , Kelly Clarkson , Zendaya , Janelle Monae , Lea Michele and newcomers Chloe & Halle , all feature on a charity single put together by US First Lady Michelle Obama . This Is For My Girls was written by Diane Warren and was released on March 15 . The song was created to raise funds and awareness towards Obama 's Let Girls Learn initiative - aimed at boosting education rates amongst adolescent girls around the world who are denied the right to an education The iTunes @-@ exclusive record will be used to both coincide with Obama 's Texan SXSW speech and to promote the First Lady 's third @-@ world educational <unk> " Let Girls Learn " . 
 On April 5 , 2016 Rowland stepped into her " music @-@ mogul shoes " for the debut of Chasing Destiny . Partnering with BET , Rowland began the search to find the next superstars for an all female group . As stated by Rowland herself , she 's not looking for reality stars , but she 's looking for stars . The show also stars Frank Gatson Jr .. The group released its first single in June 2016 titled " All of Us " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rowland began dating American football player Roy Williams in 2004 and they became engaged later that year , however , the couple called off their engagement in January 2005 , two months prior to the planned wedding ceremony in March . Williams stated that they did not " know each other well enough to get married " . Shortly after , Rowland appeared on the cover of Modern Bride wearing her wedding dress . The singer stated that she was so embarrassed about the cover because the public already knew about her separation from Williams . " I didn 't even want to go out of the house and I really didn 't want to put my family in the position of having to answer questions about the wedding " . 
 Rowland and her manager Tim Witherspoon ( not to be confused with the former heavyweight boxing champion ) reportedly began dating in 2011 . She announced her engagement to Witherspoon during an appearance on The Queen Latifah Show on December 16 , 2013 . They were married in Costa Rica on May 9 , 2014 , with guests including Beyoncé and her sister Solange Knowles . On June 10 , 2014 , Rowland announced via Instagram that she and Witherspoon were expecting their first child . On November 4 , 2014 , Rowland gave birth to her son Titan Jewell Witherspoon . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Rowland 's voice is classified as a three @-@ octave lyric mezzo @-@ soprano , and her music includes various styles of musical genres such as contemporary R & B , pop , hip hop , soul , rock and dance . Her debut solo album Simply Deep ( 2002 ) followed an adult @-@ alternative rock sound , while her second album Ms. Kelly ( 2007 ) featured an urban sound . In an interview with The Independent , Rowland admitted that with her first two albums she struggled to find her sound . " I was in a stage with the first two records where I was searching and I was like , let me try a rock @-@ dance approach , the label [ and management ] wanted me to try it and I did it ... And then after that came a more urban approach with Ms. Kelly in 2007 . " Her third album Here I Am ( 2011 ) consisted of a pop and R & B sound , with subtle influences of dance . Rowland stated that meeting David Guetta had influenced her to record dance music . During production of the album , Rowland stated that part of the reason for the new sound on Here I Am was wanting to do something different , saying " I knew I couldn 't be afraid of this direction , and I wasn 't going to let the thoughts and opinions of others make me afraid to go in this direction " . 
 Most of the lyrical themes in Simply Deep ( 2002 ) speak of love and life experiences , particularly in the songs " Dilemma " , in which Rowland expresses her endless love to her love interest , and " Stole " , in which she sings about an emotional " tale of school shootings and suicides " . In Ms. Kelly ( 2007 ) , Rowland covers topics such as her " deeply personal relationship issues " in her songs , " Still in Love with My Ex " , " Flashback " , " Love " , " Better Without You " and " <unk> Go ( Part I ) " . Alex Macpherson of The Guardian noted that the songs could be about Rowland 's former relationship with American football player Roy Williams . Here I Am ( 2011 ) included common themes of womanhood , sexual intimacy and love . Some of Rowland 's other songs such as " Work " , " I 'm Dat Chick " and " Work It Man " have been musically compared to the work of former Destiny 's Child bandmate Beyoncé . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Rowland has cited Whitney Houston , her namesake Kevin Rowland and Janet Jackson as her biggest musical influences . She stated that Houston " was the woman that inspired me to sing " . Rowland is also inspired by Sade Adu and says that " she has a style that 's totally her own " . Her other inspirations include Destiny 's Child , Martin Luther King , Jr . , Mariah Carey , Mary J. Blige , Naomi Campbell , and Oprah Winfrey , whom she describes as " the female version of God " . Rowland has discussed how living in Miami has influenced her style , growth , and music . From a fashion perspective , Rowland credits her grandmother , Halle Berry , Jennifer Lopez , Beyoncé , and Oprah Winfrey as her style icons . Rowland cited Houston , Beyoncé , and Brandy Norwood as vocal inspirations for her second solo album Ms. Kelly , " I love how different they are . I love how they take themselves to the next level " . Her third solo album Here I Am was inspired by Donna Summer and Diana Ross , as well as dance producers David Guetta and will.i.am. Rowland 's fourth solo album Talk a Good Game was also inspired by Houston , Marvin Gaye , and Stevie Wonder . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 After Destiny 's Child disbanded , Rowland has always been compared by the media to her former <unk> Beyoncé . After the international success of her singles " Dilemma " and " Stole " and of her debut album Simply Deep , music critics wrote of Rowland as an emancipated and different artist from Beyoncé , that has established herself as a solo singer and songwriter . Over the years , the media have speculated about a feud between the two and have often referred to Rowland as living in Beyoncé 's shadow . In an interview with <unk> ! Insider , Rowland commented on the feud rumors stating , " I think the people wanted those stories for years and that 's just so sad on them because it 's not like that " . She also commented on her relationship with Beyoncé stating , " I love my sister and she is so incredibly supportive . One of the closest people to me . I love her to death " . Rowland expressed her envy of Beyoncé 's solo success in the lyrics to " Dirty Laundry " : " When my sister was on stage , killing it like a motherfucker , I was in rage , feeling it like a motherfucker . Bird in a cage , you 'd never know what I was dealing with . Went our separate ways but I was happy she was killin ' it . Bittersweet , she was up , I was down . No lie , I feel good for her but what do I do now ? " . The song garnered widespread media attention upon its release . 
 Rowland stated that there was a time in her life when she struggled about being dark @-@ skinned . Beyoncé 's mother Tina Knowles would eventually help Rowland embrace her skin color . In October 2007 , Rowland underwent plastic surgery to receive breast implants . She stated , " I simply went from an A @-@ cup to a B @-@ cup " and that " the decision was 10 years in the making " . In 2012 , Rowland ranked at number 61 on Complex magazine 's list of " The 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time " and was recognized as one of the best @-@ dressed women by Glamour UK . In April 2013 , Rowland ranked seventh on People 's Most Beautiful in the World list . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Simply Deep ( 2002 ) 
 Ms. Kelly ( 2007 ) 
 Here I Am ( 2011 ) 
 Talk a Good Game ( 2013 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Freddy vs. Jason ( 2003 ) 
 The Seat Filler ( 2005 ) 
 Think Like a Man ( 2012 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Headlining 
 2003 : Simply Deeper Tour 
 2007 : Ms. Kelly Tour 
 2013 : Lights Out Tour ( Co @-@ headlined with The @-@ Dream ) 
 Supporting 
 2010 : Supafest ( Australia ) 
 2011 : F.A.M.E. Tour ( North America ) 
 2012 : Supafest ( Australia ) 
 = Radioland Murders = 
 Radioland Murders is a 1994 comedy mystery film directed by Mel Smith and co @-@ written / produced by George Lucas . Radioland Murders is set in the 1939 atmosphere of old @-@ time radio and pays homage to the screwball comedy films of the 1930s . The film tells the story of writer Roger Henderson trying to settle relationship issues with his wife while dealing with a whodunit murder mystery in a radio station . The films stars an ensemble cast , including Brian Benben , Mary Stuart Masterson , Scott Michael Campbell , Michael Lerner and Ned Beatty . Radioland Murders also features numerous small roles and cameo appearances , including Michael McKean , Bobcat Goldthwait , Jeffrey Tambor , Christopher Lloyd , George Burns ( in his final film appearance ) , Billy Barty and Rosemary Clooney . 
 George Lucas began development for the film in the 1970s , originally attached as director for Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz 's script . Universal Pictures commenced pre @-@ production and both Steve Martin and Cindy Williams had already been approached for the two leads before Radioland Murders languished in development hell for over 20 years . In 1993 , Lucas told Universal that advances in computer @-@ generated imagery from Industrial Light & Magic ( owned by Lucasfilm ) , particularly in digital mattes , would help bring Radioland Murders in for a relatively low budget of about $ 10 million , which eventually rose to $ 15 million . Mel Smith was hired to direct and filming lasted from October to December 1993 . Radioland Murders was released on October 21 , 1994 to negative reviews from critics and bombed at the box office , only grossing $ 1 @.@ 37 million in US totals . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1939 , a new radio network based at station WBN in Chicago , Illinois begins its inaugural night . The station 's owner , General Walt Whalen , depends on his employees to impress main sponsor Bernie King . This includes writer Roger Henderson , assistant director Penny Henderson ( Roger 's wife , seeking divorce ) , page boy Billy Budget , engineer Max Applewhite , conductor Rick Rochester , announcer Dexter Morris , director Walt Whalen , Jr. and stage manager Herman Katzenback . After King commissions rewrites on the radio scripts , the WBN writers get angry , adding to the fact that they have not been paid in weeks . 
 When Ruffles Reedy , a trumpet player , falls dead from rat poisoning , a series of events ensue . Director Walt Jr. is hanged ( the mysterious killer makes it look like a suicide ) , and his father , the General , has the Chicago Police Department ( CPD ) get involved to solve the murder mysteries as the nightly radio performance continues . Herman Katzenback is then killed after attempting to fix the main stage when the machinery malfunctions . Penny is appointed both stage manager and director due to Walt Jr. and Katzenback 's deaths . Writer Roger Henderson tries to solve the killings , much to the annoyance of the police , led by Lieutenant Cross . 
 Because Roger unfortunately appears at every scene of crime just as the murders take place , he is ruled as the prime suspect . Roger and Billy Budget then theorize that announcer Dexter Morris is the next to die . Dexter ignores their warning and is killed by electrocution . By going through private documents in WBN 's file room , Roger finds that the victims all previously worked together at a radio station in Peoria , Illinois , which he then correlates into a secretive FCC scandal . King ( laughing gas ) and General Whalen ( falls down an elevator shaft ) are the next to die after Roger 's warning , causing even more suspicion from the police . 
 After escaping from custody , Roger uses Billy to communicate and send scripts to Penny . When rewriting one of the programs , <unk> : Son of Fire , Roger attempts to write the script with self @-@ referential events , proving to everyone that the mysterious killer is actually sound engineer Max Applewhite . Max explains that his killings were a revenge scheme that dealt with stock holders and patents , specifically detailing his invention of television , which other scientists have copied . Roger and Penny are taken by Max atop the radio tower at gunpoint . Max is eventually killed when a biplane shows up and guns him down . Impressed by the nightly performance , the sponsors decide to fund WBN . Roger and Penny reconcile their complex relationship and decide not to divorce . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Brian Benben as Roger Henderson : Ecstatic writer of WBN and husband to Penny . Much to the consternation of the police force , Roger solves the murder mystery . 
 Mary Stuart Masterson as Penny Henderson : Stressed WBN secretary who is promoted to both director and stage manager after the deaths of Walt Jr. and Herman Katzenback . She initially intends to divorce Roger after catching him in a compromising position with Claudette Katzenback , but they later reconcile their relationship . 
 Scott Michael Campbell as Billy Budget : WBN page boy who is used by Roger to communicate with Penny and send scripts , despite the fact that he is trying to hide from the police . 
 Michael Lerner as Lieutenant Cross : Short @-@ tempered policeman who has a vendetta against Roger . 
 Ned Beatty as General Walt Whalen : Owner of WBN who commands his staff with a military @-@ like work environment . The General dies after falling down an elevator shaft . 
 Brion James as Bernie King : WBN 's main sponsor who has no sense of humor . King eventually dies from laughing gas . 
 Stephen Tobolowsky as Max Applewhite : WBN 's sound engineer who is found to be responsible for the murders . Max dies after getting shot atop the radio tower . 
 Michael McKean as Rick Rochester : WBN band conductor who despises Dexter ( McKean also appeared as Benben 's boss in Dream On ) . 
 Corbin Bernsen as Dexter Morris : The station 's announcer who has a smoking habit . Dexter dies of electrocution , ignoring Roger and Billy 's warning . 
 Bobcat Goldthwait as Wild Writer : Violent and melancholic WBN writer . 
 Anita Morris as Claudette Katzenback : Famous singer and Herman 's wife . Penny catches her with Roger , presumably having sex , but this appears to have been a prank Claudette created . Roger originally believes she was responsible for killings . This was Anita Morris ' final acting role , as she died seven months before the film 's release . 
 Jeffrey Tambor as Walt Whalen , Jr . : The General 's toupée @-@ wearing son and show director . 
 Larry Miller as Herman Katzenback : German stage manager of WBN . Herman is the third to die and is aware of Claudette 's multiple affairs with other employees . 
 Christopher Lloyd as Zoltan : Eccentric sound designer . 
 Harvey Korman as Jules Cogley : Alcoholic writer who confirms that Ruffles ' death came from poisoning . 
 Dylan Baker as Detective Jasper : Cross ' idiot assistant . 
 Jack Sheldon as Ruffles Reedy : Drunk trumpet player of Rochester 's band . He is the first to die . 
 Cameo appearances are provided by George Burns ( in his final feature film , as Milt Lackey , a 100 @-@ year @-@ old comedian ) , Joey Lawrence , Billy Barty , Peter MacNicol , Robert Klein , Ellen Albertini Dow , Candy Clark , Bo Hopkins ( as Billy Budget 's parents ) and Wilbur Fitzgerald , as well as singers Rosemary Clooney and Tracy Byrd . 
 = = Production = = 
 The genesis of Radioland Murders came from executive producer / co @-@ writer George Lucas 's obsession with old @-@ time radio . Lucas conceived the storyline of the film during the writing phase of American Graffiti , viewing it as a homage to the various Abbott and Costello films , primarily Who Done It ( 1942 ) , in which Abbott and Costello star as two soda jerks solving a murder in a radio station . Radioland Murders also shares some inspiration from The Big Clock ( 1948 ) . When Universal Pictures accepted American Graffiti in 1972 , Lucas also allowed the studio first look deals for both Radioland Murders and an untitled science fiction film ( which eventually became the basis for Star Wars ) . 
 Lucas eventually negotiated a deal to produce Radioland Murders for Universal shortly after the successful release of American Graffiti in late 1973 . Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz prepared a rough draft based on Lucas 's 1974 film treatment , and Universal was confident enough to announce pre @-@ production soon after . Lucas was set to direct with Gary Kurtz producing . In the original Huyck / Katz script , Roger and Penny were not a married couple seeking divorce , but were boyfriend and girlfriend with a love @-@ hate relationship . Their script also included the controversy over the invention of radio . 
 In July 1978 , Lucas revealed that Radioland Murders was still in development , and that both Steve Martin and Cindy Williams were approached for the two leads . The script was being rewritten and the planned start date was early @-@ 1979 . However , throughout the 1970s to early 1990s , Radioland Murders remained in development hell . Between this time , Lucas commissioned Theodore J. Flicker to perform a rewrite . In early @-@ 1993 Lucas told Universal that advances in computer @-@ generated imagery from Industrial Light & Magic ( owned by Lucasfilm ) , particularly in digital mattes , would help bring Radioland Murders in for a relatively low budget of about $ 10 million , which eventually rose to $ 15 million . 
 Universal agreed to greenlight Radioland Murders if Lucas would " update " the script . The Huyck / Katz script contained parodies of old @-@ time radio that the general public in the 1970s would likely acknowledge . Universal reasoned that the script would have to be modified in an attempt to accustom audiences from the MTV Generation . Based on Ron Howard 's recommendation , Lucas hired Jeff Reno and Ron Osborn ( known for their work on Moonlighting ) to " update " the screenplay . The shooting script was prepared by Lucas , who combined his favorite elements of the Reno / Osborn draft with the original Huyck / Katz script from the 1970s . Lucas then hired Mel Smith to direct , who recommended Brian Benben for the lead role . Lucas specifically choose Smith because he believed the British comedian / filmmaker could handle Radioland Murders ' form of slapstick comedy and dark humor . Universal was adamant that the ensemble cast be filled with then @-@ popular TV stars of the early 1990s . Christopher Lloyd agreed to make a small appearance as the eccentric sound designer Zoltan on the agreement that all of his scenes were shot in one day . 
 Principal photography for Radioland Murders began on October 28 , 1993 at Carolco Studios in Wilmington , North Carolina . Brief filming also took place at Hollywood Center Studios . Production designer Gavin Bocquet ( Star Wars prequels , Stardust ) disguised the film 's limited rooms in a <unk> structure . Larger areas , notably the exterior of the building and the transmission tower on the roof , were created or augmented with digital mattes added by visual effects supervisor Scott Squires ( The Lost World : Jurassic Park , Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace ) at Industrial Light & Magic . Following a break , in which Lucas , director Mel Smith and editor Paul Trejo reviewed the footage using the new digital Avid Technology editing system ( the successor to <unk> ) , the cast and crew were reassembled for a further two weeks of filming . Principal photography for Radioland Murders ended on December 23 , 1993 . 
 = = Release = = 
 To market Radioland Murders , Universal attached a film trailer to The Flintstones in May 1994 . The studio believed both films would specifically appeal to the Baby Boom Generation . Radioland Murders was originally set to be theatrically released in September 1994 before it was pushed back . The film was released in the United States on October 21 , 1994 in 844 theaters , only grossing $ 1 @.@ 37 million . Ultimately the film bombed at the box office because it did not recoup its $ 15 million budget . It ranks among the top ten widely @-@ released films for having the biggest second weekend drop at the box office , dropping 78 @.@ 5 % from $ 835 @,@ 570 to $ 179 @,@ 315 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Radioland Murders received negative reviews with Rotten Tomatoes calculated a 24 % approval rating based on 17 reviews collected . Roger Ebert criticized the film for containing too much slapstick comedy instead of subtle humor . Although he praised the art direction and visual effects , Ebert believed " the movie just doesn 't work . It 's all action and no character , all situation and no comedy . The slapstick starts so soon and lasts so long that we don 't have an opportunity to meet or care about the characters in a way that would make their actions funny . " Richard Schickel , writing in Time magazine gave a mixed review , mainly criticizing the film for its fast pacing . Caryn James of The New York Times dismissed the film for trying too hard to pay homage to screwball comedy films of the 1930s . 
 Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave a mixed reaction , feeling the filmmakers failed in attempting to woo audiences with nostalgia . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli called the film a " horrible concoction synthesizing elements of The Hudsucker Proxy and Brain Donors , and setting them in the world of David Lynch 's On the Air . This film has more gags in it than anything this side of a Zucker , Abrahams and Zucker production , too few of which work . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The first Region 1 DVD release came in March 1998 by Image Entertainment . Universal Studios Home Entertainment re @-@ released the film on DVD in August 2006 . 
 = Albin K. Longren = 
 Albin Kasper Longren ( January 18 , 1882 – November 19 , 1950 ) was an American aviation pioneer from the state of Kansas . Beginning in 1911 , Longren successfully flew airplanes of his own design and construction . Fully self @-@ taught as an aircraft designer and pilot , he built a thriving career as a barnstormer with his own craft , becoming known throughout the Midwest as the " Birdman " . 
 He established his own aeronautics manufacturing company , Longren Aircraft Corporation , which produced several models through the 1920s . The handcrafted Longren planes were well regarded by aviation professionals of the era . Longren created several innovations including the design for the first semi @-@ monocoque airplane body . In addition to his own independent enterprises , he worked for many years with some of the best @-@ known companies in the industry – Spartan , Luscombe , and Cessna – until his retirement in 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Albin K. Longren was born on January 18 , 1882 , in a rural cabin just outside Leonardville , Kansas . Known familiarly as " A.K. " , he was one of the eight children of local farmers Charles and Emma Longren . As a young man he worked as a hardware dealer , but was also known as a handyman and an avid tinkerer who built his own automobiles and motorcycles out of spare parts . 
 He served in the Clay Center Kansas National Guard and in that capacity was called to assist in crowd safety at one of the popular flying demonstrations in Topeka in June 1910 . Longren 's interest in aircraft was ignited after he witnessed the featured airplane spin out shortly after takeoff and crash to the ground . The 28 @-@ year @-@ old tinkerer immediately set upon building his own improved version of a flying machine . 
 = = Aviation career = = 
 = = = Topeka I = = = 
 Longren obtained space in Topeka for a small factory and enlisted the help of his brother <unk> and his friend William <unk> , a fellow mechanic . Together the three men began working on Longren 's design for a new airplane , despite having no prior aviation experience or professional assistance . The trio built the prototype in complete secrecy , wishing to forestall publicity of any potential failures ; they even disassembled the craft and transported it discreetly in boxes to its first flight trial . 
 The new biplane was 12 metres ( 39 ft ) long with a 9 @.@ 8 metres ( 32 ft ) wingspan , and weighed 283 kilograms ( 625 lb ) . A pusher configuration with a 60 @-@ hp V8 engine and two ribbed canvas wings , the debut Longren aircraft – eventually designated the Topeka I – flew for the first time in trials beginning on September 2 , 1911 . Three days later , in his first public demonstration , Longren piloted the plane through a brief but satisfying circular pattern at 61 metres ( 200 ft ) in the air , for a total distance of about 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 6 mi ) . A beaming Longren told the local newspaper , " I ’ m glad now to let the people of Topeka know what I 've built . " 
 = = = Longren Aircraft Company = = = 
 To pay for construction of new planes at his factory , Longren performed frequently at airshows . Barnstorming before crowds across the U.S. , he became a popular attraction in his own right , nicknamed " Birdman " . Longren , who had never had formal training as a pilot , ended up flying 1 @,@ 372 demonstrations over the next few years . 
 Longren met his future wife Dolly Trent while performing in Minneapolis and married her soon thereafter . His wife quickly became an essential member of his small @-@ scale airplane factory : admiringly he said , " she could repair a plane as well as any man . " A Kansas beauty queen , Dolly also helped Longren 's cause in the arena of public relations . As one historian wrote , " she was a bubbly counterpart to her taciturn husband . " 
 Longren established his own firm , the Longren Aircraft Corporation of Topeka , and began offering his airplanes via mail order . He designed and sold ten different models , all of which were acknowledged for their high quality and durability . The company , however , had only moderate sales and fluctuating commercial success . In late 1915 , he was seriously injured in a mishap at a flying demonstration in Abilene , Texas , and thereafter the barnstormer devoted most of his time to architecture and design . He also took some time off beginning in 1917 when America entered the First World War – for nearly two years , he served as chief inspector of aircraft at the nation 's first military aviation research and development center , McCook Field in Ohio . 
 = = = Longren AK = = = 
 Returning to Topeka , he set upon constructing what he billed as " The New Longren Airplane " , also known as the Longren AK . A small biplane powered by a 60 @-@ hp <unk> three @-@ cylinder radial engine , the AK was sturdy , fast , and nimble . Its most arresting feature , however , was the folding set of wings which , when turned inward on the fuselage , shrank the plane 's width from 5 @.@ 8 metres ( 19 ft ) to a mere 2 @.@ 7 metres ( 9 ft ) . Longren hoped that buyers would keep the tidy craft in barns or car garages ; it was thought that the AK could become " the Ford of the air " . With its new products , the struggling company had achieved national stature by 1921 , just a decade after Longren 's first flight . 
 = = = Fuselage design = = = 
 The AK was not the commercial breakthrough that Longren would have liked , but it featured a design innovation that would burnish his reputation greatly . Improving upon the day 's standard airplane <unk> – essentially a wooden frame with a fabric skin – Longren designed the first semi @-@ monocoque fuselage . The AK body was formed by joining two mirroring halves into a simple but aerodynamic shape . The two halves formed a hard shell , made of strong vulcanized fibrous material and reinforced on both sides with wood veneer . The advanced design of the AK was remarkable for its day , and presents what Air & Space / Smithsonian calls " the world 's first semi @-@ monocoque , truly composite shell fuselage " . 
 The U.S. government showed interest in Longren 's finely handcrafted airplanes . Karl Smith , a general inspector from the Navy , toured the Topeka factory and his report praised Longren 's low @-@ tech manufacturing skills : despite using " more or less unsatisfactory equipment " , Longren was able to produce a first @-@ rate fuselage which the inspector described as " phenomenal in its strength and particularly easy to build " . The fuselage 's three @-@ ply bonded material particularly impressed the Navy , who found its resistance to bullets most intriguing . But the novice entrepreneur was unable to raise the necessary capital to begin production in the desired quantities , and the Navy took its business elsewhere . 
 = = = Later work = = = 
 Despite all his prowess in piloting and design work , Longren was unable to maintain the financial side of his business and in 1924 he declared bankruptcy . He sold most of the company 's assets and designs to new investors who in turn founded the Alexander Aircraft Company . Longren went on to work as a prized consultant for several other aeronautics firms including Spartan and Luscombe . 
 He was responsible for numerous aviation @-@ related patents throughout his career . His most significant work concerned the process of " stretch @-@ forming " metal into assembly @-@ ready fuselage panels . Luscombe was the first of many manufacturers to benefit from this patent when it produced its Luscombe Phantom , the first mass @-@ produced airplane with an all @-@ aluminum , semi @-@ monocoque fuselage . Longren brought most of his patents over to Cessna in 1935 when he joined that company as Vice @-@ President for the next three years . 
 Through the 1930s , new incarnations of Longren Aircraft appeared briefly , according to Longren 's energies and financial state . The last and most substantial iteration was conceived in 1938 solely as a fuselage manufacturer , with headquarters in Torrance , California . It persevered long after its founder 's departure , until April 1959 , when it was acquired by Aeronca . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After his 1945 retirement , Longren moved to a ranch in Adin , California , where he stayed until his death in 1950 . His body was brought back to Kansas and buried near his birthplace in Leonardville . 
 He ranks as an early pioneer of aviation , having built and flown his own inventions at a time roughly contemporaneous with the Wright brothers during the heady , pre @-@ WWI era of aeroplane vogue . He was accepted into the exclusive pioneers ' club of Early Birds of Aviation soon after its foundation , and he was formally added to the Kansas Aviation Museum 's Hall of Fame in 1997 . A single example of Longren 's aircraft – the 1914 pusher biplane that he crashed in Abilene – remains on permanent exhibit at the Kansas Museum of History . 
 Longren remains a local Kansas hero : the Kansas Aviation Hall of Fame recognizes him for " outstanding aviation contributions " to the state , which is home to Amelia Earhart and Clyde Cessna , and where the city of Wichita is celebrated as the " Air Capital of the World " . For Kansas , Longren is both the first successful pilot and the first aircraft manufacturer in the state . 
 = Battle of Burton Bridge ( 1322 ) = 
 The 1322 Battle of Burton Bridge was fought between Thomas , 2nd Earl of Lancaster and his cousin Edward II of England during the Despenser War . Edward 's army was proceeding northwards to engage Lancaster , having defeated his Marcher Lord allies in Wales . Lancaster fortified the bridge at Burton upon Trent , an important crossing of the River Trent , in an attempt to prevent the king from proceeding . Edward arrived at nearby Cauldwell on 7 March 1322 and intended to use the ford at Walton @-@ on @-@ Trent to cross the river and outflank Lancaster . Edward was delayed for three days by floodwaters , during which time some of his force was deployed opposite Lancaster 's men at the bridge . 
 On 10 March 1322 Edward 's main force crossed the river at Walton and proceeded to the south side of Burton . Lancaster moved his men outside the town , intending to face the king in open battle , but withdrew northwards when he saw that he was heavily outnumbered . Lancaster was pursued closely by the king 's men and eventually captured at the Battle of Boroughbridge ; he was later executed on the king 's orders . Lancaster 's defeat removed the immediate threat to Edward 's rule , but the king continued to prove unpopular with his barons , and in 1327 was forced to abdicate the throne in favour of his son Edward III . 
 = = Background = = 
 Thomas , Earl of Lancaster had long been an enemy of the king , alienated by his practice of promoting young favourites ( and alleged lovers ) such as Piers Gaveston , 1st Earl of Cornwall , who had at one stage been made regent in Edward 's absence . Lancaster further demonstrated his disapproval of the king by his refusal to assist Edward in his Scottish campaigns , including the decisive defeat at the Battle of Bannockburn . The resulting raids by the Scottish on Northern England forced Edward to concede to demands from his barons for the kingdom to be governed by a council led by the earl and to submit to the restrictions on royal power laid out in the Ordinances of 1311 . Shortly afterwards Lancaster captured and executed Gaveston after an attack upon Scarborough Castle . The new baronial council demonstrated itself no more suited to rule than the king by failing to prevent the loss of Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed to the Scots in 1318 . 
 Edward continued to alienate the Barons by promoting young men such as Hugh Despenser the Younger , a known enemy of Lancaster 's . In 1318 Lancaster met with Archbishop of Dublin Alexander de Bicknor and two bishops at <unk> , now a suburb of Burton upon Trent , in initial negotiations that resulted in the signing of the Treaty of Leake , an attempt to reconcile the king and his barons . However such co @-@ operation was short @-@ lived as Despenser 's continued rise threatened the holdings of the Welsh Marcher Lords and in 1321 Lancaster joined them in an outright rebellion against Edward . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Edward acted quickly against the Marcher Lords , defeating them easily due to a lack of co @-@ ordination amongst them , before moving north to confront Lancaster . The earl moved from his base at Pontefract , West Yorkshire to block the strategically important crossing of the River Trent at Burton . He arrived in early March 1322 , having lost much of his stores to floods en route , and set about fortifying the western end of the bridge , a 36 @-@ arch stone structure that was 515 yards ( 471 m ) long and just 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide . Lancaster sent out men to prevent the king from crossing the Trent elsewhere and outmanoeuvring him . Two such men were John de <unk> , master forester of <unk> Forest , and Richard de Holland , who broke the bridges at <unk> and <unk> <unk> . De Holland was later fined 40 shillings by the king for his actions . De Holland 's kinsman Lord Robert de Holland had long been a supporter of Lancaster , was said to be his closest friend , and had raised troops for him to send against the king 's men in Cheshire . However , on 4 March de Holland received a secret order from the king to join him against Lancaster which he seems to have obeyed , forming a body of troops at <unk> Park in Derbyshire ostensibly to reinforce Lancaster 's army at Burton . 
 Edward arrived at nearby Cauldwell on 7 March 1322 , intending to make use of the ford at Walton @-@ on @-@ Trent to outflank Lancaster . This ford was , however , impassable due to flooding , and for three days Edward waited . During this time Edward ordered an attack upon Lancaster 's fortified position , and despite a full day 's fighting , the Royalist forces were unable to make any headway . Lancaster awaited reinforcement from Holland , who had encamped with his men at <unk> , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Burton . Holland , however , apparently wished to await the result of the battle prior to committing himself and revealing his loyalties . Holland may have actually sent Lancaster letters intended to draw his men away from Burton . 
 Edward 's troops were able to cross the Trent at Walton on 10 March 1322 and advanced upon Burton from the south . Lancaster , outflanked , then moved from his positions at the bridge to a field outside of Burton , firing the town as he went . Once he realised how badly outnumbered his men were , and that Holland was not moving to his aid , Lancaster decided to withdraw and was pursued by Edward . The clash is not classified as a battle by English Heritage , though some casualties were suffered , and is not registered as a battlefield with the Battlefields Trust . The casualties included the keeper of Alton Castle , Sir Roger D 'Amory , who was injured in the fight and later died of his wounds at Tutbury . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The king 's troops , led by John de Warenne , 7th Earl of Surrey and Edmund of Woodstock , 1st Earl of Kent , chased Lancaster to Tutbury and Kenilworth , capturing both towns and devastating the counties of Staffordshire and Derbyshire . Holland , seeing the outcome of the battle and knowing that the king had recently imprisoned his daughter at the Tower of London , openly acted against Lancaster . Holland 's men attacked and robbed various supporters of Lancaster at <unk> including Hugh de Audley and Lancaster 's wife Alice de Lacy to the value of £ 1000 . He also ordered the men raised in Cheshire to march towards Burton and prevent the escape of Lancaster 's troops to the River Mersey . Holland turned his troops over to the king at Derby on 13 March but was coldly received , his past alliance with Lancaster condemning him to imprisonment at Dover Castle and the loss of his estates . He was beheaded by an unknown gang in 1328 and his head was given to Thomas Lancaster 's brother Henry , 3rd Earl of Lancaster . 
 Lancaster was able to flee Tutbury Castle under cover of darkness and , with much of his army , evaded Edward 's patrols to cross the flooded River Dove and make his way northwards . Upon taking Tutbury Edward ordered D 'Amory 's corpse to be posthumously executed for treason . Lancaster fled north where Sir Andrew Harclay , having heard of the king 's victory at Burton , moved to engage him at the Battle of Boroughbridge . Lancaster was defeated and captured by Harclay and later executed at Pontefract . Edward ordered a chapel constructed on the Burton bridge in commemoration of his victory there . 
 Lancaster had finally been dealt with , but Edward continued to upset his barons , reneging upon his previously agreed limitations to royal power , continuing to promote Despenser and losing key battles against the Scots . With Edward 's reign becoming more unpopular , Lancaster 's grave became a site of pilgrimage for those who opposed him . Edward 's own queen , Isabella of France , sided with her lover , the Marcher Lord Roger Mortimer , and in 1327 forced Edward to abdicate in favour of his son who became Edward III . 
 In the aftermath of the battle , the Audley family claimed to have lost £ 300 of goods : seven cartloads of gold cloth , silver vessels and chapel ornaments from <unk> Castle . These had been ordered to be removed to Tutbury Priory by Peter de <unk> , but according to the prior they never arrived and were taken to Tutbury Castle and subsequently lost in the retreat of the Lancastrians from Burton . Burton Abbey also suffered damage at the hands of the Lancastrian forces . 
 The Abbot of Burton was charged with concealing goods from the king after it was claimed he had taken the Earl of Lancaster 's money and goods left behind after the battle , to the value of £ 200 . The abbot claimed that all he had found was a single silver cup which he subsequently gave to the king . The finding in 1831 of a large quantity of silver coins , suspected to be part of Lancaster 's treasure , in the River Dove , near Tutbury may support the abbot 's case . In either case , the next year Edward felt able to award Burton Abbey the advowsons of Tatenhill and Hanbury , which had previously belonged to Lancaster , in " perpetual memory of the glorious victory which God gave to the King over his enemies and the rebels near Burton @-@ on @-@ Trent , and also to relieve the condition of the Abbey " . 
 The battle gave rise to a tradition at nearby Chartley Park , a holding of Robert de Ferrers , 2nd Baron Ferrers of Chartley . The baron maintained a herd of white cattle with black ears , descended from wild specimens found when the park was formed from part of the ancient <unk> Forest . In 1322 an unusual black calf was born in the herd that was said to have foretold the Battle of Burton Bridge and the subsequent downfall of the de Ferrers house ( who were supporters of Lancaster ) . Subsequently it was said that the birth of a dark @-@ hued or part @-@ coloured calf in the herd would foretell a death in the de Ferrers family within the year . Such omens were said to have preceded the deaths of , amongst others , Robert Shirley , 7th Earl Ferrers ; his wife ; their son Robert <unk> Shirley and his wife and the son , daughter and wife of Washington Shirley , the 8th Earl . Another local tradition places the legendary figure of Robin Hood at the battle fighting for Lancaster . 
 = Military history of the Aleutian Islands = 
 The military history of the Aleutian Islands began almost immediately following the purchase of Alaska by the United States . Prior to the early 20th century , the Aleutian Islands were essentially ignored by the military of the United States , although the islands played a small role in the Bering Sea Arbitration when a number of British and American vessels were stationed at Unalaska to enforce the arbitrators ' decision . By the early 20th century , a number of war strategies examined the possibility of conflict breaking out between the Empire of Japan and the United States . While the Aleutian Islands were seen as a potential staging point for invasions by either side , this possibility was dismissed owing to the islands ' dismal climate . In 1922 , the Washington Naval Treaty was signed , after which the United States Navy began to take an interest in the islands . However , nothing of significance was to materialize until World War Two . 
 In June 1942 , the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked and captured Attu Island and Kiska . The Americans wanted to recapture the two islands , and in January the following year began their advance by capturing Amchitka without opposition . On March 26 , the Battle of the Komandorski Islands ensued after the United States Navy imposed a naval blockade on the two islands to reduce the opportunities for the Japanese to keep their Attu and Kiska bases supplied . In May , Attu Island was recaptured , with a total of almost 3 @,@ 000 deaths from both sides combined . The Americans then prepared to attack Kiska in August , only to find that the entire island had been evacuated by the Japanese in late July . During the recapture of Kiska by the United States , 313 men died as a result of friendly fire and a mine , despite no Japanese soldiers being present on the island . 
 During the 1960s and early 1970s , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) executed a number of nuclear tests on the island of Amchitka in the face of vehement opposition from environmental and local indigenous groups . The first test , conducted in 1965 , caused significant damage to the surrounding area , although the details of this damage were not released to the public until 1969 . In 1969 , the AEC executed a ' calibration shot ' to determine whether Amchitka would be suitable for future tests . In 1970 , the AEC announced plans to detonate a bomb named ' Cannikin ' , set to release a blast 385 times that released by the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima in 1945 . After a United States Supreme Court challenge to the testing failed by one vote , the testing proceeded as scheduled in November 1971 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 In 1853 , prior to the purchase of Alaska by the United States , the United States Navy sent the USS Fenimore Cooper to the Aleutian Islands with the aim of locating potential harbors and find coal deposits . No coal deposits were found . In 1867 , the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian Empire . By 1869 , a number of military posts had been established by the Government of the United States , although the Aleutian Islands did not receive such a post , with the nearest post being located on Kodiak Island . The United States Army made the decision to leave the exploration of the Aleutians to the United States Navy , and the latter showed little interest in doing so . The Aleutian Islands played a small role in the ongoing sealing dispute between the United Kingdom and the United States , which later culminated in the Bering Sea Arbitration . In 1888 , following what the United States Government saw as an infringement on the nation 's sovereignty by Canadian and Japanese sealers , the United States Navy sent a number of its ships to Unalaska to police the foreign sealers . By 1891 , an accord had been reached between the United Kingdom and the United States , and for some time a number of British and American vessels remained in Unalaska to enforce the deal . 
 By October 1906 , many in the U.S. government , including Secretary of State Elihu Root , were worried that war could break out in the Pacific between the United States and Japan . However , the Aleutian Islands were believed to be of little strategic importance to the United States , and were ignored by a number of pre @-@ war strategies formulated by the U.S. armed forces , including the Naval War Board 's 1896 plan , which would have brought only a few scout ships to the Islands . In 1911 , the Naval War Board considered three options through which Japan could mount an invasion of the United States , one of which involved an attack on the Aleutian Islands . However , this option was discarded by the Board owing to the cold climate of the islands . 
 The Aleutian Islands played little part in the proceedings of World War I , as the events of this war were concentrated in Europe . In 1922 , the Washington Naval Treaty was signed by the United States , the British Empire , the Empire of Japan , the French Third Republic , and the Kingdom of Italy . Article XIX of the Treaty required Japan , Britain and the United States to maintain the status quo in terms of military fortifications in their respective Pacific Rim territories . While Japan and Britain gained a number of exemptions from the terms of Article XIX ( for example , Australia and New Zealand were not prevented from building up their fortifications as a result of the Treaty ) , Japan made it a requirement of their agreement to the Treaty that the Aleutian Islands were not to be exempted . 
 = = The interwar period = = 
 Although the United States Navy was prevented from developing fortifications on the Aleutian Islands due to the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , the Navy believed that at some point the United States ' treaty obligations would no longer apply , and began to scout the Aleutians for possible naval bases . In 1923 , two scouting ships investigated the possibility of establishing anchorages off the Islands , and attempted to claim the United States Army 's bases on the Aleutians for the purposes of national security . 
 After the mid @-@ 1920s , little attention was paid to the Aleutian Islands as a potential strategic area . United States President Herbert Hoover did not concentrate his government 's resources on developing the nation 's military due to the economic challenge posed by the Great Depression . In 1930 , one of Hoover 's aides claimed that North America 's coastal islands would play little part in a potential war between the United States and Japan unless the Navy was rendered ineffective and Canada turned against its southern neighbor . In June 1933 , a Japanese ship visited Attu Island three times . Although the ship was purportedly only carrying farming and forestry specialists , John Troy , then the Governor of Alaska , believed that the Aleutian Islands was a possible target for enemy navies and lobbied the federal government for military support . While Major General Benjamin Foulois was willing to commit to deploying more military resources in the resource @-@ rich strip of land stretching from Fairbanks to Anchorage , he was not willing to devote more of his military 's resources to the Aleutians , as , according to him , there was " nothing in southeastern Alaska or along the Aleutian Islands which is worth making an effort to defend . " 
 In May 1934 , following reports of a Japanese spy operating out of Dutch Harbor , the United States Navy dispatched Edwin T. Layton to the Aleutians to investigate the allegations . The result of this investigation was the arrest of the only Japanese man in the region , as well as the town 's only prostitute , a woman accused of conspiring with the Japanese man . During the 1930s , a number of United States governmental committees , boards and reports concluded that air bases in the Aleutians would be for the most part impractical due to the region 's inclement weather . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Preparing for battle = = = 
 On December 7 , 1941 , the Imperial Japanese Navy executed a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor , bringing the United States into a war against Japan , Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . The Pacific Theater was divided into three sectors – north , central and south , with the Aleutians falling inside the north sector , though it was also part of the American theater . With the Aleutians located just 650 miles ( 1 @,@ 050 km ) east of the Kuril Islands , the former served as an ideal physical bridge between the two nations of Japan and the United States . Although dismal climate conditions on the Aleutians made an approach by Japan unlikely , neither of the two countries could afford to not cover their bases with respect to these islands . On April 18 , 1942 , sixteen aircraft bombed Tokyo in what has become known as the Doolittle Raid . The Imperial High Command were unsure of where the aircraft originated and speculated that a hidden air base existed on the western tip of the Aleutian Islands , sparking interest by the High Command in capturing the island chain . 
 An early strategic plan by Isoroku Yamamoto involved the occupation of the western Aleutians and Midway Island as a ' decoy ' to lure the United States Navy 's Pacific fleet away from Pearl Harbor so as to effect the complete destruction of the Hawaiian base before reconstruction efforts could take hold . However , the Aleutians campaign meant that fewer ships could be devoted to the Battle of Midway , a turning point during World War Two . The United States armed forces had broken the Japanese communications code , and were able to learn of the Japanese plan to attack the Aleutians by May 21 , 1942 . The Imperial Japanese Navy 's plan was to attack and hold Attu and Kiska for future use , while inflicting damage on Dutch Harbor and Adak . Once the United States Navy learned of the plan , Admiral Chester W. Nimitz sent a third of his Pacific Fleet to the Aleutian Islands , under orders to hold Dutch Harbor at all costs . 
 = = = The initial attacks = = = 
 By June 1 , 1942 , the American military contingent on the Aleutians numbered 2 @,@ 300 . On 2 June , a patrol plane spotted a Japanese armada 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) southwest of Dutch Harbor . On June 3 , Imperial Japanese Navy Admiral <unk> <unk> ordered some of his aircraft to attack Dutch Harbor , despite rough conditions in the air and on the ground . Only half managed to attack the town , with 17 aircraft arriving in the airspace above Dutch Harbor around 6 : 00am . Finding themselves confronted by U.S. forces , the aircraft hastily dropped their bombs and quickly returned to their carriers . On June 4 , the aircraft returned , and attacked the town 's oil storage tanks , a barracks ship and part of the military base 's hospital . On that day , 43 Americans died and 64 were wounded . Ten Japanese aircraft were lost , as were 11 American planes . 
 On June 6 , the Imperial Japanese Navy returned to the Aleutians , occupying Kiska on that day and Attu Island the next . Despite the U.S. not posting any forces to oppose the occupation of those islands , the Japanese public was informed of a great triumph over U.S. forces on the islands . It was the desire of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to recapture these islands as quickly as possible , and on August 30 , 1942 , 4 @,@ 500 U.S. Army troops secured the island of Adak , to be used as a staging post to recapture Kiska . In two weeks , Army engineers had constructed an airfield on the island , and on September 14 , a number of Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberators took off from Adak to attack Kiska . Repeated bombings during the fall season convinced the Japanese of the Americans ' desire to recapture Kiska and Adak , and by November the Japanese had bolstered troop numbers on the ground on both islands . During the winter months , the short daily sunshine period and inclement weather protected the Japanese from attack . 
 = = = Moving towards Kiska = = = 
 On January 11 , 1943 , U.S. forces captured Amchitka , an island just fifty miles from Kiska . However , challenges faced the Americans stationed there from the outset – on the first night that the Americans spent on the ground , harsh winds destroyed many of the Americans ' boats , and on the second night a blizzard reduced the base 's line of sight . By mid @-@ February , Army engineers had completed an airfield on the island , after which attacks on the island by the Japanese became less frequent . 
 With the Americans moving closer towards Kiska and Attu , the Japanese were finding it increasingly difficult to resupply their bases there . In March 1943 , Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid established a naval blockade around the islands , refusing to let Japanese ships through . On March 26 , Admiral <unk> attempted to break the blockade with eight battle ships as well as three transports , resulting in the Battle of the Komandorski Islands , the last battle fought only between surface ships in the Pacific War . Following the American victory in this battle , the Japanese were forced to resupply their occupied possessions in the Aleutian chain by submarine . 
 Following the Battle of the Komandorski Islands , Admiral Kinkaid requested a larger force of 25 @,@ 000 troops to support an assault on Kiska . However , as there were not enough ships to transport such a large division to the Aleutians , Kinkaid suggested that the Americans ' objective change from Kiska , which was defended by about 9 @,@ 000 men , to Attu , which was home to only 500 Japanese . On April 1 , Kinkaid received approval from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to execute the operation , codenamed <unk> . The terrain of Attu Island was not hospitable for such an operation – much of the island 's landmass not covered in snowy peaks was covered in muskeg , a marshy soil type that is almost impossible to cross by foot . In addition , Attu Island was subject to frequent storms and soupy fogs . 
 = = = The recapture of Attu Island = = = 
 The 7th Infantry Division was selected to undertake the task of recapturing Attu Island . The Division arrived at Cold Bay on April 30 , 1943 , and despite the cold weather prevailing in the region , many of the American troops were wearing only regular field clothing as the Division had previously been stationed in California . Due to poor weather , the Americans ' assault on Attu was delayed twice – first to May 4 and then to May 11 . When the operation commenced on May 11 , heavy fog shrouded the recapturing force from the Japanese , which hampered the latter 's attempts at defending the island . 
 However , the inclement weather also hampered the Americans ' advance , and until May 15 the recapturing forces were unsure of whether the Japanese had held their position or retreated . When the fog lifted on that day , it became clear that the Japanese had retreated further west . However , when the American forces gave chase , they were immediately slowed by an accidental air strike upon them by an American aircraft . By May 29 , the Japanese forces numbered only 700 – 1 @,@ 000 , and these troops attempted to run through the advancing American forces as a last show of defiance against the recapturing forces . By May 30 , the Americans had recaptured Attu , and although a few small pockets of Japanese troops remained on the island , the Battle of Attu had essentially concluded . 
 During the American assault on Attu Island , 2 @,@ 400 Japanese troops were killed , and only 25 were captured . The Americans ' losses were significantly lower , at 566 dead and 1 @,@ 442 wounded . The bodies of the killed Japanese troops were buried in mass graves on the island – only five per cent of Japanese troops fighting on Attu Island wore dog tags , making identification difficult . In addition , many fallen Japanese were buried by their fellow soldiers up in the island 's peaks , and many bodies still remain undiscovered . The American burials were undertaken at Massacre Bay as well as at Holtz Bay – in the former case , the bodies of the soldiers were buried in group graves . Large holes of seven feet in depth were dug by bulldozers , and eight small foot @-@ deep graves were dug at the bottom of each of these holes to serve as the American soldiers ' final resting places . 
 = = = The recapture of Kiska = = = 
 With Attu Island secure , the Americans diverted their attention towards forcing the Japanese off Kiska . U.S. intelligence estimated at that point that the number of Japanese troops on Kiska was likely to be 10 @,@ 000 , so Kinkaid deployed 34 @,@ 426 men , composed of both Americans and Canadians , to the Aleutians to work on recapturing Kiska . With the recapturing operation scheduled to begin on August 15 , the Eleventh Air Force dropped 424 tons of bombs on Kiska during the month of July . In addition , the Navy fired 330 tons of shells onto the island during the same period . In late July , the pilots charged with scouting for enemy forces on Kiska reported a sharp decline in the amount of fire received by their planes from Japanese forces on the ground . The Americans believed that one of two events had occurred – either Kiska had been evacuated , or the Japanese had retreated into the hills of Kiska . 
 By 4 : 00pm on August 15 , a total of 6 @,@ 500 troops were on the ground on the west side of Kiska . The Canadian contingent came ashore on the north side of the island the next day . However , the invasion was an embarrassment for the Allied forces . The island of Kiska was , in fact , uninhabited – the entire Japanese force of 5 @,@ 183 men had left the island on July 28 without the Americans noticing . However , the Americans suffered significant casualties during their ' invasion ' – 313 men died as a result of accidents , with many dying due to accidental fire . Of the total 313 dead , 70 died when the destroyer USS Abner Read struck a mine , while at least 21 died due to friendly fire . The Japanese had completely deserted their buildings on the island , leaving behind them scrawled messages on the walls for the Allied troops to read – most attacked President of the United States Franklin Roosevelt and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Winston Churchill ; for example , one of the messages read , in a mixture of English and German , " You are dancing by <unk> order of <unk> [ sic ] . " 
 On August 24 , 1943 , Kiska was declared secure by the American forces . The Aleutian Islands campaign was officially over . 
 For the commanding officers stationed on the Aleutian Islands during the Aleutian Islands campaign , attacking the Kuril Islands from the Aleutians was a logical continuation to recapturing Attu and Kiska . However , these officers faced resistance from their superiors in Washington and their troops on the ground . Troop morale had sharply declined as a result of the island 's dismal conditions , creating a condition that the troops called the ' Aleutian stare ' amongst those who had been on the island for more than six months . An American assault of the <unk> never materialised . 
 = = Nuclear testing = = 
 During the 1960s , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) conducted nuclear tests on Amchitka . Despite being designated as a national wildlife refuge by President William Taft in 1913 , Amchitka was chosen as a nuclear testing site by the AEC . There were several reasons for this decision . Firstly , Amchitka was close to the former Soviet Union , making it an ideal location for a nuclear test to intimidate the latter . However , the public reason given by the AEC was the island 's remoteness . <unk> objections were raised against the testing by a number of organisations and groups , most notably the Aleut people , who , although they vacated the island in the 19th century after Russian fur traders reduced sea otter numbers in the area , are resident on nearby islands , and were concerned about radiation leaks as well as potential physical damage resulting from the nuclear tests . 
 In 1965 , the Long Shot nuclear test was executed by the Department of Defense . Almost immediately , fallout from the nuclear test began to leak into adjacent freshwater lakes , although details of this contamination were not made public until 1969 . On October 2 , 1969 , the AEC executed a calibration shot underground to determine whether the island would be a safe place for future tests . However , this test set off a number of reactions in the surrounding area – the test triggered earthquakes and landslides , and sent water from lakes flying 50 feet ( 15 m ) up into the air . 
 In 1970 , the AEC announced plans for another test , named Cannikin . The environmental movement , then in its infancy , vehemently opposed the testing , and filed a suit in the United States Supreme Court to stop the testing . This motion was denied by a 4 to 3 vote . On November 6 , 1971 , the Cannikin bomb was detonated , creating a 60 feet ( 18 m ) deep crater in the island , killing 1 @,@ 000 sea otters and thousands of birds . The blast was 385 times that created by the Hiroshima bombing , and was the largest underground test of a nuclear weapon in history . 
 = Pilot ( Supernatural ) = 
 " Pilot " is the first episode of the television series Supernatural . It premiered on The WB on September 13 , 2005 and was written by series creator Eric Kripke , and directed by David Nutter . The Supernatural pilot introduces the characters of Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) , brothers who travel throughout the country hunting supernatural creatures , as they battle a ghostly Woman in White ( Sarah Shahi ) while searching for their missing father ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) . 
 Kripke had been developing the concept for ten years before it was greenlit as a television series . Before it could be filmed , the script underwent numerous revisions . It was produced in Los Angeles , though future episodes were filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia , to save money . The episode established the series ' tradition of a rock @-@ music soundtrack , and included background music scored by Kripke 's friend Christopher Lennertz . The series premiere received mixed reviews , with critics praising the horror elements but having varying opinions of the lead actors ' performances . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Lawrence , Kansas , Mary Winchester ( Samantha Smith ) investigates a sound coming from her infant son Sam 's nursery . She sees a figure standing over his crib , and confronts him . Her husband , John ( Morgan ) , is awoken by her screams and finds her pinned to the ceiling with a slash across her stomach . She bursts into flames , and John is forced to evacuate the house with Sam and his older son , Dean , while the house erupts into flames . 
 Twenty @-@ two years later , Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) and his girlfriend Jessica Moore ( Adrianne Palicki ) celebrate his high LSAT score . Later that night , Dean ( Jensen Ackles ) shows up at Sam 's home . Though the brothers have not spoken in years , Dean comes looking for help in finding their father , who disappeared while hunting a supernatural entity . After Sam hears a voicemail from his father that contains electronic voice phenomenon of a woman saying , " I can never go home , " he agrees to help Dean in the search . The brothers head to John 's last known whereabouts — the town of Jericho — where he had been investigating the disappearances of young men along a single stretch of road over ten years . Sam and Dean discover a local legend of a murdered girl who has returned as a homicidal , hitchhiking ghost . Research points to Constance Welch ( Shahi ) , who jumped to her death off a nearby bridge after drowning her children . While they stakeout the bridge that night , Sam tells Dean he does not want to return to hunting supernatural creatures . He points out that finding whatever creature killed their mother — a task their father has dedicated his life to — will not bring her back . The two are interrupted by a ghostly woman jumping off the bridge . Sam and Dean later check into a local motel , and discover their father is also renting a room there . They break into it and discover his research scattered all over the room ; all his findings point to Constance being a woman in white . 
 When Dean leaves the room to get food , he is arrested by the police , who believe he is connected to the disappearances . At the police station , they show him John 's journal , and he notices the message " Dean 35 @-@ 11 " written inside it . As Dean is interrogated , Sam tracks down Constance 's husband ( Steve Railsback ) , and learns the locations of both her grave site and the house in which she drowned their children . Sam then fakes a 911 call so Dean can escape the station . However , Constance targets Sam in his car ; she attempts to seduce him and requests he take her home . Sam refuses , but she possesses the car so that it drives Sam to her home . She attacks him once they arrive at her old house . Dean forces her to temporarily dissipate by shooting her with rock salt , and Sam uses the opportunity to crash the car into the house . Constance reappears and attacks them , but the spirits of her children confront her . They embrace their mother , causing her to scream in pain as demonic like beings spawn from under her , dragging her down through the floor . 
 Dean deduces John 's message was coordinates to where he has headed . Sam still does not want to join the search , so Dean drops him off at his apartment . Lying alone in bed , Sam discovers Jessica pinned to the ceiling with a slash across her stomach . She ignites into flames as Dean breaks in and rescues Sam . While firefighters attempt to put out the inferno , Sam decides to join his brother in the search for their father and the creature that killed their mother and Jessica . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Series creator Eric Kripke had previously written for the WB series Tarzan , and was offered the chance to pitch show ideas to the network . He used the opportunity for Supernatural , a concept he had been developing for nearly ten years . Kripke envisioned Supernatural as a road trip series , deeming it the " best vehicle to tell these stories because it 's pure , stripped down and uniquely American ... These stories exist in these small towns all across the country , and it just makes so much sense to drive in and out of these stories . " Though the network rejected his initial pitch — a tabloid reporter investigates supernatural occurrences throughout the country — they were still interested in a series featuring urban legends . Kripke quickly suggested a Route 66 @-@ style series , and the network loved it . Filming was greenlit after director David Nutter , who previously had worked with Kripke on Tarzan , signed on . 
 = = = Cast and characters = = = 
 The pilot stars Jared Padalecki and Jensen Ackles as Sam and Dean Winchester , whom Kripke likened to Luke Skywalker and Han Solo of Star Wars . Padalecki knew executive producers McG and Nutter , the former convincing him to audition for the role . He was excited to play " the reluctant hero " , and compared Sam to The Matrix 's Neo . However , Nutter also asked Ackles to audition for the role of Sam . Nutter and Kripke found themselves in a predicament , as they felt both actors were great as Sam . To remedy the situation , Warner Bros. president Peter Roth suggested Ackles instead audition for Dean . Kripke agreed , believing Ackles ' " smart @-@ ass attitude " made him " born to play " the Harrison Ford @-@ like character , and Ackles preferred the character of Dean after reading the script . Both actors were the only ones to audition , and network executives instantly noticed a brotherly chemistry between them . Evil Dead @-@ actor Bruce Campbell was Kripke 's first choice to portray John Winchester , father of Sam and Dean . However , Campbell was unavailable , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan eventually received the role . With Morgan 's scene taking place 22 years before the series , he expected to be replaced by an older actor for subsequent episodes , and was surprised when he was later asked to reprise the role . 
 For the role of Constance Welch — the Woman in White — production set out to find the " perfect actress " . Nutter , a fan of The L Word , had watched an episode featuring actress Sarah Shahi one night during the casting process . He felt she was " really sharp " and a " fine actress " , with a " seductive quality about her " . Surprised when she came in to audition the following day , he knew she " had the job when she walked in the door " . Because the scene involving Constance 's husband Joseph Welch merely discusses Constance 's backstory , the scene hinged on the actors ' performances . Seeking a " great actor " , Nutter recalled his previous experience working with Steve Railsback , and offered him the role . Other guest stars include Adrianne Palicki as Sam 's girlfriend Jessica Moore , and Samantha Smith as Mary Winchester . The latter felt she landed the part due to her joking around with Nutter during the audition . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Eric Kripke , who described its creation as a " very difficult , birthing process " due to the numerous rewrites required . The original version did not feature the Woman in White , and John Winchester died in the teaser . In the revised script , Sam and Dean Winchester were raised by their aunt and uncle instead of their father . Because of this , Sam is unaware that supernatural beings exist , and Dean must convince him of the truth when he asks for help . Kripke realized this made the backstory too complicated , and reworked it with co @-@ executive producer Peter Johnson so that their father raised them to be hunters like him . This decision granted the brothers proficiency in both fighting and swindling people . Other revised concepts included Sam believing Dean to be a serial killer who murdered their father , and John dying instead of Sam 's girlfriend Jessica . The scene in which the brothers discuss their childhood and delve into their backstory was rewritten 20 to 30 times , and the final version was heavily trimmed . 
 A gas @-@ station scene within the episode was meant to establish what the brothers and the series are about — bantering , credit card scams , and classic rock ; Kripke feared that it would be cut because it was character @-@ based and did not further the episode 's plot . He also did not want the series to feature ballad music typical of The WB network , and forced the use of classic rock for the soundtrack by writing the music into the script . For the episode 's villain , Kripke used the well @-@ known urban legend of the vanishing hitchhiker , but combined it with the Mexican legend of La Llorona to give the spirit more motivation and characterization . The ghost was younger in an earlier version of script , and murdered her parents instead of her children ; this was revised to allow for the casting of an older actress . 
 Originally , the studio did not want Kripke to kill Jessica at the episode 's end , but rather keep her as a recurring character in the series . Kripke felt this would not fit the series 's format , and decided to have her revealed as a demon , with the revelation prompting Sam to join Dean in hunting . However , with only a short amount of screentime available to depict this , Kripke believed it would be a " tough aspect to sell " . Because Luke Skywalker only begins his journey after the deaths of his aunt and uncle , Kripke found it more appropriate for Sam 's motivation to be Jessica 's death . Thus , the character is killed in the same manner as Sam 's mother , making the deaths the " right bookends " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the pilot took place in Los Angeles , though subsequent episodes of the series are filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia to save money . The bridge sequences were shot at Lake Piru , near a War of the Worlds filming location , and the library and phone booth scenes were filmed at an elementary school . Triplet babies portrayed Sam in the episode 's teaser , and production found it difficult to get them to cry on cue . Though a real house served as the first @-@ story level in the teaser , the upstairs was constructed on a sound stage because of the special effects required for Mary 's fiery death . Script rewrites for the opening sequence — a better introduction for Sam was needed — required reshoots on the set of The O.C. two months after principal photography . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 To depict the supernatural aspects of the show , the series makes use of visual , special , and make @-@ up effects , as well as stuntwork . Businesses , such as visual effects company Entity FX , were contracted for production of the pilot episode . Subsequent episodes were filmed in Vancouver and required a new crew that works exclusively for the show . Mary Winchester 's death scene , which had the character pinned to the ceiling and burning to death , required actress Samantha Smith to lie on a floor with two propane pipes spouting fire approximately five feet away from her on either side . For the actual burning of the character , a fake body the crew named " Christina " was made out of wire and papier @-@ mâché , and was then ignited on a fake ceiling . However , the room quickly caught fire , forcing an evacuation . Green screen coincided with the visual effects for the ghostly Woman in White , and executive producer McG chose to make the imagery of her death sequence an homage to Chris Cunningham 's Aphex Twin video " Windowlicker " . Japanese horror also influenced the scene , such as the school uniforms worn by the ghost children , the water cascading down the stairs , and the Dark Water elements . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode 's synthesized orchestral score was written by Christopher Lennertz , Kripke 's friend and next @-@ door neighbor . The two attended USC School of Cinematic Arts together , and worked together on various projects afterwards . Lennertz described Supernatural as " one of those dream situations where you get to work with someone who you admire , but also have a relationship with already " , and noted he and Kripke " were already on the same page without even talking about [ the series ' music ] " . 
 For the scenes involving Mary and Jessica 's deaths at the hands of the demon Azazel , Lennertz used a piano solo with discordant notes and reverberations to create a " really nasty " sounding echo effect . He would later reuse this theme in the season one episode " Nightmare " . The episode also included a number of rock songs , which would become a tradition for the series . Kripke wanted to feature the song " Enter Sandman " , but Metallica would not grant permission . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , the pilot was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 69 million viewers . The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Diana Steenbergen of IGN , who was " hooked right away " , gave the pilot episode a score of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . She felt it began " heartbreakingly " , and the " genuinely scary " death scenes of Mary and Jess " will haunt ... the viewers " . Steenbergen praised both the writers and the lead actors for making the " [ exposition scenes ] still feel natural , for the most part " , and noted Ackles and Padalecki were " instantly convincing as brothers " . Also credited for this " well paced " episode was director David Nutter , who did an " excellent job of setting up the atmosphere and tone of the series " . Likewise , BuddyTV 's Don Williams posited , " It 's about as good as a pilot can get . " He ranked it ninth out of his favorite episodes of the first three seasons , believing it introduces the characters " in a memorable fashion " and " wonderfully " establishes the show 's universe . Robert Bianco of USA Today deemed the series as possibly " the simplest and the scariest " of the season 's new dark shows , and wrote , " It wants nothing more than to frighten you — and tonight , it does . " He noted the episode " [ pulls ] off a few surprises " and " works its way to an ending that lives up to Dean 's ' no chick @-@ flick moments ' " . However , Bianco criticized the " pauses for comic relief " ; he felt Ackles ' " comic touch " was " not yet as skillful as it needs to be " , with Ackles ' attempts at being " humorously annoying " leaving him " simply annoying " . Despite the episode having a somewhat unoriginal villain and a " relatively simple " solution , Brian Lowry of Variety deemed the series ' debut as " a promising plunge into the darkness " . Lowry applauded Ackles , who " brings an easygoing charm and engaging wise @-@ ass personality to the absurd notion of traveling the country with a trunk full of wooden stakes and holy water " . 
 Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times found the first half of the episode " quite effective " , with the " camera angles , spooky music and jumpy sequences ... [ being ] as frightening as those found in any horror movie , with an added twist of suspense " . However , she deemed the depiction of the ghostly villain as " pretty silly " , and noted the second half " stops building suspense and turns predictable " . Calling the series " Ghostbusters ' Creek " , Stanley felt the episode " reverts to a WB family drama about the bonds between two mismatched brothers and their father " . Similarly , Matthew Gilbert of the Boston Globe called Ackles and Padalecki " generic cuties who hold their lips together tightly , except to utter the word ' Dude ' " . Although Gilbert noted there are a couple " moderately creepy " twists , he found there to be " nothing about the central family story in Supernatural or its bland actors that makes it addictive " . 
 Work on the pilot episode garnered two Emmy Award nominations in 2006 . Lennertz was nominated in the category of " Outstanding Music Composition For A Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " , and the sound editors for " Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series " . 
 = Rufus Wainwright ( album ) = 
 Rufus Wainwright is the eponymous debut studio album by Canadian @-@ American singer @-@ songwriter Rufus Wainwright , released in the United States on May 19 , 1998 through DreamWorks Records . The album was produced by Jon Brion , except " In My Arms " was produced and mixed by Pierre Marchand , and " Millbrook " and " Baby " were produced by Brion and Van Dyke Parks . Lenny Waronker was the executive producer . 
 Wainwright was signed to the DreamWorks label in 1996 after Waronker heard the demo tape he recorded with Marchand . Over the course of two years , Wainwright and Brion recorded 56 songs on 62 rolls of tape at a cost that exceeded $ 700 @,@ 000 , which was then narrowed down to twelve tracks for the album . No singles were released from Rufus Wainwright , though Sophie Muller directed the music video for " April Fools " , which featured Wainwright in Los Angeles attempting to prevent the deaths of opera heroines . To support the album , Wainwright toured throughout the United States and Canada following its release . 
 Overall , reviews for the album were positive . Though the album failed to chart in any nations , Wainwright reached number 24 on Billboard 's Top Heatseekers chart ( which highlights sales by new and developing musical recording artists ) and Rolling Stone named Wainwright the Best New Artist of 1998 . Rufus Wainwright also earned him recognitions from the Gay & Lesbian American Music Awards , the GLAAD Media Awards and the Juno Awards . The album was released in Japan with the bonus track " A Bit of You " , and later in 2008 in LP form through the record label Plain Recordings . 
 = = Background = = 
 Wainwright , born into a musical family which included parents Loudon Wainwright III and Kate McGarrigle and sister Martha Wainwright , began touring in his early teens with his family throughout Canada , Europe and the United States . At age fourteen , his song " I 'm a Runnin ' , written for the 1988 Canadian film Tommy Tricker and the Stamp Traveller , earned him a Genie Award nomination for Best Achievement in Music – Original Song and a Juno Award nomination in 1990 for Most Promising Male Vocalist of the Year . 
 Wainwright attended McGill University in Montreal to study classical composition for a short time . With his mother 's support , he began pursuing pop songwriting and learned how to play guitar . Wainwright started performing at the night club Sarajevo , and eventually recorded a demo tape with record producer Pierre Marchand , a " family friend " who had also worked with Kate and Anna and who also later produced Wainwright 's second studio album Poses . Songs were recorded at Marchand 's studio in Morin @-@ Heights , Quebec , and no edits were made to the simple live tunes . The tape impressed Wainwright 's father , who passed the songs along to producer Van Dyke Parks , who in turn presented them to DreamWorks executive Lenny Waronker . Waronker had signed McGarrigle to Warner Bros. Records in the 1970s . Describing his initial reaction to Wainwright 's music , Waronker stated : " When I was about to listen to his tape , I remember clearly I was thinking , ' Gee , if he has the mom 's musicality and smarts , and the dad 's smarts and voice , that 'd be nice . ' Then I put it on and I said , ' Oh , my God , this is stunning . ' " Wainwright acknowledged that having musicians as parents gave him a " foot in the door " , but attributed his success to hard work . 
 = = Development = = 
 Wainwright was signed to DreamWorks in 1996 . Waronker paired the singer with producer Jon Brion , and together they spent " most of 1996 and 1997 " recording 56 songs on 62 rolls of tape . Costs for the recording sessions reached between $ 700 @,@ 000 and $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Wainwright admitted that he and Brion took their time recording the album in Los Angeles , and considered the extended time a " blessing " and " luxury " , claiming that " most people have two weeks to record their first album " . According to Wainwright , Waronker " didn 't care how long it took , as long as we were doing good work . " Waronker was pleased with the final product , and he and Wainwright agreed on the twelve tracks that made up the album . 
 Songs on the album were produced by Brion , except " In My Arms " was produced and mixed by Marchand and " Millbrook " and " Baby " were produced by Brion and Van Dyke Parks . Waronker served as the executive producer . Rufus Wainwright was recorded mostly in Los Angeles studios — Ocean Way Three & Seven , Sunset Sound Factory , Sunset Sound , Media Vortex , Hook Studios , Groove Masters , Red Zone , Sony , The Palindrome Recorder , and NRG Recording Services — although recording also took place in Marchand 's Wild Sky in Morin @-@ Heights . Parks conducted his orchestrations at Studio B in the Capitol Studios complex . Wainwright and Brion did not always get along , the latter admitting to The New York Times : " Rufus had all these beautiful songs but every time the vocals would kick in , he 'd write some complicated keyboard part so you couldn 't hear them . He wasn 't interested in listening to ideas about simplifying arrangements . " The duo also contributed the songs " Le Roi D <unk> " and " Banks of the Wabash " ( both " contemporary " cover versions ) to the 1997 soundtrack to the film The Myth of Fingerprints . Brion later considered " Le Roi D <unk> " , recorded in around six hours , to be one of his favorite tracks by Wainwright . 
 Rufus Wainwright was released on May 19 , 1998 through DreamWorks . Following the album 's release , which earned him mostly positive reviews , Wainwright contributed to The McGarrigle Hour , a 1998 album by Kate & Anna McGarrigle featuring family members Loudon and Martha along with singers Emmylou Harris and Linda Ronstadt . In December 1998 , Wainwright appeared in a Gap commercial in which he performed Frank Loesser 's 1947 song " What Are You Doing New Year 's Eve ? " In 1999 , he was one of several featured artists promoted by Best Buy as part of a campaign to promote young talent . The album was re @-@ issued in 2008 in LP form through the record label Plain Recordings . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The " neo @-@ operatic " opening track " Foolish Love " , arranged by Van Dyke Parks , was described by Allmusic contributor Matthew Greenwald as a " lush , orchestral @-@ soaked ballad , with incredible strings " . He asserted that Wainwright 's lyrics took the form of a letter to himself , defining his goals and " sense of purpose " . The song " Danny Boy " , with its " fabulous wordplay that stays literate and easy to understand at the time " , contains " subtle " horn lines and sampled percussion . The song alludes to Wainwright 's homosexuality , which Greenwald considered a " brave move " . According to biography author Kirk Lake , " Danny Boy " is a companion piece to " Foolish Love " and together they represent the start and end of a relationship between a gay man and a straight man . Danny , the straight " drug @-@ addled " title figure with whom Wainwright had a three @-@ year relationship , is the subject of both songs in addition to others on the album ; he appears in the album 's collage artwork . Wainwright sings of being so blinded by love that he fails to notice the " ship with eight sails " threatening to come around the bend , a reference to Bertolt Brecht 's 1928 musical The Threepenny Opera . 
 The chorus in " April Fools " begins with an " unusually upbeat attitude " and was considered by Greenwald to be the most accessible track on the album . The song showcased Jim Keltner 's drum performance as well as Wainwright 's piano playing . Driven by Wainwright 's guitar playing , " In My Arms " was described by Greenwald as a " forlorn " , Spanish @-@ influenced ballad that sounded as though it " could have been recorded in France in the 1920s " . The song " Millbrook " is an ode to his boarding school compatriots . Wainwright has admitted to being " upset and drunk " when recording the final take . " Baby " , which has been considered one of the most melancholic songs on the album , contains " oddly placed " and " slightly quirky " major seventh chords . Greenwald called the lyrics " a stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness pleasure , relating the confusing and intoxicating emotions of young love . " 
 " Beauty Mark " is an ode to Wainwright 's mother , the title referring to the mole above her lip . The song is one of the few up @-@ tempo tracks on the album and contains multiple keyboard overdubs by Brion . Chris <unk> of the Montreal Mirror considered the track to be the most moving love song on the album , with an " overt and open @-@ hearted " reference to his homosexuality : " I may not be so manly , but still I know you love me . " Wainwright 's Summer Stage performance of " Beauty Mark " appears on his 2005 DVD All I Want . In " Barcelona " , Wainwright recalls a love affair that took place in the city of the same name . The song is loosely about AIDS and contains the Italian language lyric " <unk> , regal <unk> " , taken from Giuseppe Verdi 's opera Macbeth . According to Wainwright , the line appears in a scene when " Macbeth is going mad and sees the ghost , and in [ Wainwright 's ] mind the ghost was AIDS . " " Matinee Idol " is about the rise and fall of an entertainment figure , inspired by the death of actor River Phoenix . According to Greenwald , the musical song has a " 1920s , cabaret musical feel " . " Damned Ladies " is a slow ballad about the " beloved yet doomed ladies of opera " . Wainwright said the following of " Damned Ladies " , which contains references to nine opera heroines : " In the song , I lament how these women are constantly dying brutal deaths , which I can see coming but cannot stop . It gets me every time . " Greenwald described " Sally Ann " as 1920s love ballad of " lost love and emotional regret " . The melody in " Imaginary Love " , the album 's closing track , contains sixth and major seventh chords . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Wainwright acknowledged that his debut album was " not a single driven album " ; no singles were released from Rufus Wainwright . To promote the album , a music video was produced for the song " April Fools " . Directed by Sophie Muller , the video features Wainwright in Los Angeles " amidst a clique of classic opera characters " such as Madame Butterfly , attempting to prevent each of them from committing suicide . However , in each instance he arrives too late . The video also contains cameo appearances by No Doubt 's Gwen Stefani , a friend of Muller 's , and Hole bassist Melissa Auf der Maur , a high school acquaintance and former roommate of Wainwright 's . Part of the video was filmed in Stefani 's house . 
 Wainwright performed " Beauty Mark " on Today , the American morning news and talk show . He also taped an episode of MTV 's television program 120 Minutes to promote the album , which aired on March 28 , 1999 . An advertisement in Billboard promoting the album also referred to appearances on CBS News Sunday Morning , Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , Late Show with David Letterman , and Sessions at West 54th . 
 In the year prior to the album 's release , Wainwright opened for artists such as Barenaked Ladies and Sean Lennon . On March 1 , 1999 , Wainwright began his first tour as a headlining act in Hoboken , New Jersey . During that month , Wainwright toured throughout New England and the mid @-@ Atlantic states , Ontario ( Ottawa and Toronto ) , Quebec ( Montreal ) , the Southern United States ( Nashville and Atlanta ) , and midwestern United States ( Cincinnati , Chicago , and Pontiac ) . Wainwright continued to tour throughout the month of April before heading to Europe . Stops were mostly along the West Coast , including four in California , Portland , Oregon , and Seattle . Three concerts were also held in Canada , including Vancouver , Edmonton , and Calgary . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overall , reception of the album was positive . Speaking of second @-@ generation artists emerging around the same time , Allmusic 's Jason Ankeny wrote that Wainwright " deserves to be heard regardless of his family tree " . Furthermore , Ankeny complimented the musician for his songwriting abilities and his " knack for elegantly rolling piano melodies and poignantly romantic lyrics " . Music journalist Robert Christgau characterized Wainwright as a " mind @-@ boggling original " whose talent is " too big to let pass " . One NME reviewer called the album " floridly impersonal and " grandiosely arranged " , but also criticized Wainwright for being " too overwrought and naff " . Greenwald complimented Martha 's backing vocals in the song " In My Arms " , as well as Parks ' " positively sterling " string arrangement in " Millbrook " . Furthermore , he praised the vocal duet between Rufus and Martha in " Sally Ann " , claiming that a similar sibling performance had not been heard since The Everly Brothers . The album 's cabaret elements and 1970s singer @-@ songwriter style drew comparisons to Cole Porter and Joni Mitchell . Josh Kun of Salon.com wrote that Wainwright poetically incorporated " foolish love and fantasy love , healing love and destructive love and love that makes you want to lose your sense of self just so you can find it again . " Kun asserted that the songs were " built on a similar set of angled melodies and hairpin turns of phrase " , and that each " succeeds as its own distinctly intimate portrait of emotion and desire " . 
 Ann Powers , music critic for The New York Times , included the album at number five on her list of the Top 10 albums of 1998 . The album was also included in The Village Voice 's 1998 Pazz & Jop Critics Poll , which combined ballots from 496 critics . Rufus Wainwright was nominated four times by the Gay & Lesbian American Music Awards , an organization that provided the foundation for the recognition of the excellence of LGBT artists . Wainwright received the award for Best New Artist , the album was nominated for Album of the Year , and " April Fools " was nominated for Video of the Year and Best Pop Recording . The GLAAD Media Awards , created by the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) to recognize and honor the mainstream media for their fair and accurate representations of the LGBT community , presented Wainwright with the award for Outstanding Music Album . At the Juno Awards of 1999 , Rufus Wainwright earned Wainwright the Juno Award for Best Alternative Album . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Album sales were limited — by March 1999 only 35 @,@ 000 copies had been sold . In 2001 , Michael <unk> of The Advocate wrote that Wainwright 's biggest sales boost came from the Gap advertisement rather than radio play . Despite low sales , Wainwright reached number 24 on Billboard 's Top Heatseekers chart , and Rolling Stone named him 1998 's Best New Artist . The January 19 , 1999 CMJ New Music Report showed that Rufus Wainwright spent nine weeks on CMJ Radio 200 reaching a peak position of number 52 , five weeks on CMJ Code Radio reaching a peak position of number 42 , as well as nine weeks on CMJ Triple A reaching a peak position of number 9 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Wainwright . 
 " Foolish Love " – 5 : 46 
 " Danny Boy " – 6 : 12 
 " April Fools " – 5 : 00 
 " In My Arms " – 4 : 08 
 " Millbrook " – 2 : 11 
 " Baby " – 5 : 13 
 " Beauty Mark " – 2 : 14 
 " Barcelona " – 6 : 53 
 " Matinee Idol " – 3 : 08 
 " Damned Ladies " – 4 : 07 
 " Sally Ann " – 5 : 01 
 " Imaginary Love " – 3 : 28 
 Bonus track 
 " A Bit of You " – 5 : 00 ( Japan ) 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic and the album liner notes . 
 = Aboriginal peoples in Canada = 
 Aboriginal peoples in Canada , or Aboriginal Canadians , ( also known as Indigenous peoples in Canada and Indigenous Canadians ) are the indigenous peoples within the boundaries of present @-@ day Canada . They comprise the First Nations , Inuit and Métis . Although " Indian " is a term still commonly used in legal documents , the descriptors " Indian " and " Eskimo " have somewhat fallen into disuse in Canada and are sometimes considered pejorative . 
 Old Crow Flats and Bluefish Caves are some of the earliest known sites of human habitation in Canada . The Paleo @-@ Indian Clovis , Plano and Pre @-@ Dorset cultures pre @-@ date current indigenous peoples of the Americas . Projectile point tools , spears , pottery , bangles , chisels and scrapers mark archaeological sites , thus distinguishing cultural periods , traditions and lithic reduction styles . 
 The characteristics of Canadian Aboriginal culture included permanent settlements , agriculture , civic and ceremonial architecture , complex societal hierarchies and trading networks . The Métis culture of mixed blood originated in the mid @-@ 17th century when First Nation and Inuit people married Europeans . The Inuit had more limited interaction with European settlers during that early period . Various laws , treaties , and legislation have been enacted between European immigrants and First Nations across Canada . Aboriginal Right to Self @-@ Government provides opportunity to manage historical , cultural , political , health care and economic control aspects within first people 's communities . 
 As of the 2011 census , Aboriginal peoples in Canada totaled 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 685 people , or 4 @.@ 3 % of the national population , spread over 600 recognized First Nations governments or bands with distinctive cultures , languages , art , and music . National Aboriginal Day recognizes the cultures and contributions of Aboriginals to the history of Canada . First Nations , Inuit and Métis peoples of all backgrounds have become prominent figures and have served as role models in the Aboriginal community and help to shape the Canadian cultural identity . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The terms First Peoples and First Nations are both used to refer to indigenous peoples of Canada . The terms First Peoples or Aboriginals in Canada are normally broader terms than First Nations , as they include Inuit , Métis and First Nations . First Nations ( most often used in the plural ) has come into general use for the indigenous peoples of North America in Canada , and their descendants , who are neither Inuit nor Métis . On reserves , First Nations is being supplanted by members of various nations referring to themselves by their group or ethnical identity . In conversation this would be " I am Haida " , or " we are <unk> " , in recognition of their First Nations ethnicities . In this Act , " Aboriginal peoples of Canada " includes the Indian , Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada . 
 Indian remains in place as the legal term used in the Canadian Constitution . Its usage outside such situations can be considered offensive . Aboriginals is more commonly used to describe all indigenous peoples of Canada . It also refers to self @-@ identification of aboriginal people who live within Canada claiming rights of sovereignty or aboriginal title to lands . 
 The term Eskimo has pejorative connotations in Canada and Greenland . Indigenous peoples in those areas have replaced the term Eskimo with Inuit . The Yupik of Alaska and Siberia do not consider themselves Inuit , and ethnographers agree they are a distinct people . They prefer the terminology Yupik , <unk> , or Eskimo . The Yupik languages are linguistically distinct from the Inuit languages . Linguistic groups of Arctic people have no universal replacement term for Eskimo , inclusive of all Inuit and Yupik people across the geographical area inhabited by the Inuit and Yupik peoples . 
 Besides these ethnic descriptors , Aboriginal peoples are often divided into legal categories based on their relationship with the Crown ( i.e. the state ) . Section 91 ( clause 24 ) of the Constitution Act , 1867 gives the federal government ( as opposed to the provinces ) the sole responsibility for " Indians , and Lands reserved for the Indians " . The government inherited treaty obligations from the British colonial authorities in Eastern Canada and signed treaties itself with First Nations in Western Canada ( the Numbered Treaties ) . It also passed the Indian Act in 1876 which governed its interactions with all treaty and non @-@ treaty peoples . Members of First Nations bands that are subject to the Indian Act with the Crown are compiled on a list called the Indian Register , and such people are called Status Indians . Many non @-@ treaty First Nations and all Inuit and Métis peoples are not subject to the Indian Act . However , two court cases have clarified that Inuit , Métis , and non @-@ status First Nations people , all are covered by the term " Indians " in the Constitution Act , 1867 . The first was Re Eskimos in 1939 covering the Inuit , the second being Daniels v. Canada in 2013 which applies to Métis and non @-@ Status First Nations . 
 Notwithstanding Canada 's location within the Americas , the term " Native American " is not used in Canada as it is typically used solely to describe the indigenous peoples within the boundaries of the present @-@ day United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Paleo @-@ Indians period = = = 
 According to archaeological and genetic evidence , North and South America were the last continents in the world with human habitation . During the Wisconsin glaciation , 50 @,@ 000 – 17 @,@ 000 years ago , falling sea levels allowed people to move across the Bering land bridge that joined Siberia to north west North America ( Alaska ) . Alaska was ice @-@ free because of low snowfall , allowing a small population to exist . The Laurentide ice sheet covered most of Canada , blocking nomadic inhabitants and confining them to Alaska ( East Beringia ) for thousands of years . 
 Aboriginal genetic studies suggest that the first inhabitants of the Americas share a single ancestral population , one that developed in isolation , conjectured to be Beringia . The isolation of these peoples in Beringia might have lasted 10 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 years . Around 16 @,@ 500 years ago , the glaciers began melting , allowing people to move south and east into Canada and beyond . 
 The first inhabitants of North America arrived in Canada at least 15 @,@ 000 years ago , though increasing evidence suggests an even earlier arrival . It is believed the inhabitants entered the Americas pursuing Pleistocene mammals such as the giant beaver , steppe wisent , musk ox , mastodons , woolly mammoths and ancient reindeer ( early caribou ) . One route hypothesized is that people walked south by way of an ice @-@ free corridor on the east side of the Rocky Mountains , and then fanned out across North America before continuing on to South America . The other conjectured route is that they migrated , either on foot or using primitive boats , down the Pacific Coast to the tip of South America , and then crossed the Rockies and Andes . Evidence of the latter has been covered by a sea level rise of hundreds of metres following the last ice age . 
 The Old Crow Flats and basin was one of the areas in Canada untouched by glaciations during the Pleistocene Ice ages , thus it served as a pathway and refuge for ice age plants and animals . The area holds evidence of early human habitation in Canada dating from about 12 @,@ 000 . Fossils from the area include some never accounted for in North America , such as hyenas and large camels . Bluefish Caves is an archaeological site in Yukon , Canada from which a specimen of apparently human @-@ worked mammoth bone has been radiocarbon dated to 12 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Clovis sites dated at 13 @,@ 500 years ago were discovered in western North America during the 1930s . Clovis peoples were regarded as the first widespread Paleo @-@ Indian inhabitants of the New World and ancestors to all indigenous peoples in the Americas . Archaeological discoveries in the past thirty years have brought forward other distinctive <unk> cultures who occupied the Americas from the lower Great Plains to the shores of Chile . 
 Localized regional cultures developed from the time of the Younger Dryas cold climate period from 12 @,@ 900 to 11 @,@ 500 years ago . The Folsom tradition are characterized by their use of Folsom points as projectile tips at archaeological sites . These tools assisted activities at kill sites that marked the slaughter and butchering of bison . 
 The land bridge existed until 13 @,@ 000 – 11 @,@ 000 years ago , long after the oldest proven human settlements in the New World began . Lower sea levels in the Queen Charlotte sound and Hecate Strait produced great grass lands called archipelago of Haida Gwaii . Hunter @-@ gatherers of the area left distinctive lithic technology tools and the remains of large butchered mammals , occupying the area from 13 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 years ago . In July 1992 , the Federal Government officially designated X ̲ á : <unk> ( near Mission , British Columbia ) as a National Historic Site , one of the first Indigenous spiritual sites in Canada to be formally recognized in this manner . 
 The Plano cultures was a group of hunter @-@ gatherer communities that occupied the Great Plains area of North America between 12 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The Paleo @-@ Indians moved into new territory as it emerged from under the glaciers . Big game flourished in this new environment . The Plano culture are characterized by a range of projectile point tools collectively called Plano points , which were used to hunt bison . Their diets also included pronghorn , elk , deer , raccoon and coyote . At the beginning of the Archaic Era , they began to adopt a sedentary approach to subsistence . Sites in and around Belmont , Nova Scotia have evidence of Plano @-@ Indians , indicating small seasonal hunting camps , perhaps re @-@ visited over generations from around 11 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Seasonal large and smaller game fish and fowl were food and raw material sources . Adaptation to the harsh environment included tailored clothing and skin @-@ covered tents on wooden frames . 
 = = = Archaic period = = = 
 The North American climate stabilized by 8000 BCE ( 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) ; climatic conditions were very similar to today 's . This led to widespread migration , cultivation and later a dramatic rise in population all over the Americas . Over the course of thousands of years , American indigenous peoples domesticated , bred and cultivated a large array of plant species . These species now constitute 50 – 60 % of all crops in cultivation worldwide . 
 The vastness and variety of Canada 's climates , ecology , vegetation , fauna , and landform separations have defined ancient peoples implicitly into cultural or linguistic divisions . Canada is surrounded north , east , and west with coastline and since the last ice age , Canada has consisted of distinct forest regions . Language contributes to the identity of a people by influencing social life ways and spiritual practices . Aboriginal religions developed from anthropomorphism and animism philosophies . 
 The placement of artifacts and materials within an Archaic burial site indicated social differentiation based upon status . There is a continuous record of occupation of S <unk> <unk> by Aboriginal people dating from the early Holocene period , 10 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 years ago . Archaeological sites at Stave Lake , Coquitlam Lake , Fort Langley and region uncovered early period artifacts . These early inhabitants were highly mobile hunter @-@ gatherers , consisting of about 20 to 50 members of an extended family . The Na @-@ Dene people occupied much of the land area of northwest and central North America starting around 8 @,@ 000 BCE . They were the earliest ancestors of the Athabaskan @-@ speaking peoples , including the Navajo and Apache . They had villages with large multi @-@ family dwellings , used seasonally during the summer , from which they hunted , fished and gathered food supplies for the winter . The <unk> peoples settled into Southern Ontario along the <unk> River around 8 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 BCE ( 10 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 years ago ) . They were concentrated between Lake Simcoe and Georgian Bay . <unk> hunted caribou to survive on the glacier @-@ covered land . Many different First Nations cultures relied upon the buffalo starting by 6 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 BCE ( 8 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 years ago ) . They hunted buffalo by herding migrating buffalo off cliffs . Head @-@ Smashed @-@ In Buffalo Jump , near Lethbridge , Alberta , is a hunting grounds that was in use for about 5 @,@ 000 years . 
 The west coast of Canada by 7 @,@ 000 – 5000 BCE ( 9 @,@ 000 – 7 @,@ 000 years ago ) saw various cultures who organized themselves around salmon fishing . The Nuu @-@ chah @-@ nulth of Vancouver Island began whaling with advanced long spears at about this time . The Maritime Archaic is one group of North America 's Archaic culture of sea @-@ mammal hunters in the subarctic . They prospered from approximately 7 @,@ 000 BCE – 1 @,@ 500 BCE ( 9 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 500 years ago ) along the Atlantic Coast of North America . Their settlements included longhouses and boat @-@ topped temporary or seasonal houses . They engaged in long @-@ distance trade , using as currency white chert , a rock quarried from northern Labrador to Maine . The Pre @-@ Columbian culture , whose members were called Red Paint People , is indigenous to the New England and Atlantic Canada regions of North America . The culture flourished between 3 @,@ 000 BCE – 1 @,@ 000 BCE ( 5 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 years ago ) and was named after their burial ceremonies , which used large quantities of red ochre to cover bodies and grave goods . 
 The Arctic small tool tradition is a broad cultural entity that developed along the Alaska Peninsula , around Bristol Bay , and on the eastern shores of the Bering Strait around 2 @,@ 500 BCE ( 4 @,@ 500 years ago ) . These Paleo @-@ Arctic peoples had a highly distinctive toolkit of small blades ( <unk> ) that were pointed at both ends and used as <unk> or end @-@ barbs on arrows or spears made of other materials , such as bone or antler . <unk> , engraving tools and adze blades were also included in their toolkits . The Arctic small tool tradition branches off into two cultural variants , including the Pre @-@ Dorset , and the Independence traditions . These two groups , ancestors of Thule people , were displaced by the Inuit by 1000 Common Era ( CE ) . 
 = = = Post @-@ Archaic periods = = = 
 The Old Copper Complex societies dating from 3 @,@ 000 BCE – 500 BCE ( 5 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 500 years ago ) are a manifestation of the Woodland Culture , and are pre @-@ pottery in nature . Evidence found in the northern Great Lakes regions indicates that they extracted copper from local glacial deposits and used it in its natural form to manufacture tools and implements . 
 The Woodland cultural period dates from about 2 @,@ 000 BCE – 1 @,@ 000 CE , and has locales in Ontario , Quebec , and Maritime regions . The introduction of pottery distinguishes the Woodland culture from the earlier Archaic stage inhabitants . Laurentian people of southern Ontario manufactured the oldest pottery excavated to date in Canada . They created pointed @-@ bottom beakers decorated by a cord marking technique that involved impressing tooth implements into wet clay . Woodland technology included items such as beaver incisor knives , bangles , and chisels . The population practising sedentary agricultural life ways continued to increase on a diet of squash , corn , and bean crops . 
 The Hopewell tradition is an Aboriginal culture that flourished along American rivers from 300 BCE – 500 CE . At its greatest extent , the Hopewell Exchange System networked cultures and societies with the peoples on the Canadian shores of Lake Ontario . Canadian expression of the <unk> peoples encompasses the Point Peninsula , Saugeen , and Laurel complexes . 
 = = = = First Nations = = = = 
 First Nations peoples had settled and established trade routes across what is now Canada by 500 BCE – 1 @,@ 000 CE . Communities developed each with its own culture , customs , and character . In the northwest were the <unk> , Slavey , <unk> , <unk> , and Tlingit . Along the Pacific coast were the <unk> ; Haida ; Salish ; Kwakiutl ; <unk> ; Nootka ; Nisga 'a ; <unk> and <unk> . In the plains were the Blackfoot ; <unk> ; Sarcee and <unk> . In the northern woodlands were the Cree and Chipewyan . Around the Great Lakes were the Anishinaabe ; Algonquin ; <unk> ; Iroquois and Huron . Along the Atlantic coast were the <unk> , Maliseet , Innu , Abenaki and Mi 'kmaq . 
 Many Canadian Aboriginal civilizations established characteristics and hallmarks that included permanent urban settlements or cities , agriculture , civic and monumental architecture , and complex societal hierarchies . These cultures had evolved and changed by the time of the first permanent European arrivals ( c. late 15th – early 16th centuries ) , and have been brought forward through archaeological investigations . 
 There are indications of contact made before Christopher Columbus between the first peoples and those from other continents . Aboriginal people in Canada interacted with Europeans around 1000 CE , but prolonged contact came after Europeans established permanent settlements in the 17th and 18th centuries . In Columbus ' time there was speculation that other Europeans had made the trip in ancient or contemporary times ; Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés records this in his General y natural historia de las Indias of 1526 , which includes biographical information on Columbus . European written accounts generally recorded friendliness of the First Nations , who profited in trade with Europeans . Such trade generally strengthened the more organized political entities such as the Iroquois Confederation . Throughout the 16th century , European fleets made almost annual visits to the eastern shores of Canada to cultivate the fishing opportunities . A sideline industry emerged in the un @-@ organized traffic of furs overseen by the Indian Department . 
 Prominent First Nations people include Joe Capilano , who met with King of the United Kingdom , Edward VII , to speak of the need to settle land claims and <unk> <unk> , a leader at both the Meech Lake Accord constitutional reform discussions and Oka Crisis . 
 = = = = Inuit = = = = 
 The Inuit are the descendants of what anthropologists call the Thule culture , which emerged from western Alaska around 1 @,@ 000 CE and spread eastward across the Arctic , displacing the Dorset culture ( in Inuktitut , the <unk> ) . Inuit historically referred to the <unk> as " giants " , or " dwarfs " , who were taller and stronger than the Inuit . Researchers hypothesize that the Dorset culture lacked dogs , larger weapons and other technologies used by the expanding Inuit society . By 1300 , the Inuit had settled in west Greenland , and finally moved into east Greenland over the following century . The Inuit had trade routes with more southern cultures . Boundary disputes were common and led to aggressive actions . 
 Warfare was common among Inuit groups with sufficient population density . Inuit , such as the <unk> ( <unk> ) who inhabited the Mackenzie River delta area , often engaged in common warfare . The Central Arctic Inuit lacked the population density to engage in warfare . In the 13th century , the Thule culture began arriving in Greenland from what is now Canada . Norse accounts are scant . Norse @-@ made items from Inuit campsites in Greenland were obtained by either trade or plunder . One account , <unk> <unk> , speaks of " small people " with whom the Norsemen fought . 14th @-@ century accounts that a western settlement , one of the two Norse settlements , was taken over by the <unk> . 
 After the disappearance of the Norse colonies in Greenland , the Inuit had no contact with Europeans for at least a century . By the mid @-@ 16th century , Basque fishers were already working the Labrador coast and had established whaling stations on land , such as been excavated at Red Bay . The Inuit appear not to have interfered with their operations , but they did raid the stations in winter for tools , and particularly worked iron , which they adapted to native needs . 
 Notable among the Inuit are Abraham <unk> and family who became a zoo exhibit in Hamburg , Germany , and Tanya <unk> , a traditional throat singer . Abe <unk> was instrumental in helping Inuit obtain surnames rather than disc numbers and <unk> ( David Ward ) won the legal right to use his single @-@ word <unk> name . 
 = = = = Métis = = = = 
 The Métis are people descended from marriages between Europeans ( mainly French ) and Cree , Ojibway , Algonquin , Saulteaux , Menominee , Mi 'kmaq , Maliseet , and other First Nations . Their history dates to the mid @-@ 17th century . When Europeans first arrived to Canada they relied on Aboriginal peoples for fur trading skills and survival . To ensure alliances , relationships between European fur traders and Aboriginal women were often consolidated through marriage . The Métis homeland consists of the Canadian provinces of British Columbia , Alberta , Saskatchewan , Manitoba , Quebec , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , and Ontario , as well as the Northwest Territories ( NWT ) . 
 Amongst notable Métis people are television actor Tom Jackson , Commissioner of the Northwest Territories Tony Whitford , and Louis Riel who led two resistance movements : the Red River Rebellion of 1869 – 1870 and the North @-@ West Rebellion of 1885 , which ended in his trial . 
 The languages inherently Métis are either Métis French or a mixed language called Michif . Michif , <unk> or <unk> is a phonetic spelling of <unk> , a variant of Métis . The Métis today predominantly speak English , with French a strong second language , as well as numerous Aboriginal tongues . A 19th @-@ century community of the Métis people , the Anglo @-@ Métis , were referred to as <unk> . They were children of Rupert 's Land fur trade typically of Orcadian , Scottish , or English paternal descent and Aboriginal maternal descent . Their first languages would have been Aboriginal ( Cree , Saulteaux , Assiniboine , etc . ) and English . Their fathers spoke Gaelic , thus leading to the development of an English dialect referred to as " Bungee " . 
 <unk> of the Constitution Act , 1982 mentions the Métis yet there has long been debate over legally defining the term Métis , but on September 23 , 2003 , the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that Métis are a distinct people with significant rights ( <unk> ruling ) . 
 Unlike First Nations people and Inuit , there has been no distinction between status and non @-@ status , and the Métis , their heritage and aboriginal ancestry have often been absorbed and assimilated into their surrounding populations . 
 = = = Forced assimilation = = = 
 From the late 18th century , European Canadians ( and the Canadian government ) encouraged assimilation of Aboriginal culture into what was referred to as " Canadian culture " . These attempts reached a climax in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , with a series of initiatives that aimed at complete integration of the aboriginal peoples . These policies , which were made possible by legislation such as the Gradual Civilization Act and the Indian Act , focused on European ideals of Christianity , sedentary living , agriculture , and education . 
 The attempt at Christianization of the aboriginal people of Canada had been ongoing since the first missionaries arrived in the 1600s , however it became more systematic with the Indian Act in 1876 , which would bring new sanctions for those who did not convert to Christianity . For example , the new laws would prevent non @-@ Christian aboriginals from testifying or having their cases heard in court and ban alcohol consumption . When the Indian Act was amended in 1884 , traditional aboriginal religious and social practices , such as the Potlatch , would be banned , and further amendments in 1920 would prevent aboriginals from wearing traditional dress or performing traditional dances in an attempt to stop all non @-@ Christian practices . 
 Another focus of the Canadian government was to make the aboriginal groups of Canada sedentary , as they thought that this would make them easier to assimilate . In the 19th century , the government began to support the creation of model farming villages , which were meant to encourage non @-@ sedentary aboriginal groups to settle in an area and begin to cultivate agriculture . When most of these model farming villages failed , the government turned instead to the creation of Aboriginal reservations with the Indian Act of 1876 . With the creation of these reservations came many restricting laws , such as further bans on all intoxicants , restrictions on eligibility to vote in band elections , decreased hunting and fishing areas , and inability for aboriginals to visit other groups on their reservations . 
 Through the Gradual Civilization Act in 1857 , the government would encourage aboriginals to enfranchise – to remove all legal distinctions between [ Indians ] and Her Majesty ’ s other Canadian Subjects . If an aboriginal chose to enfranchise , it would strip them and their family of aboriginal title , with the idea that they would become more integrated into Canadian society . However , they were often still defined as non @-@ citizens by Europeans , and those few who did enfranchise were often met with disappointment . 
 The final government strategy of assimilation , made possible by the Indian Act was the Canadian residential school system : 
 Of all the initiatives that were undertaken in the first century of Confederation , none was more ambitious or central to the civilizing strategy of the Department , to its goal of assimilation , than the residential school system … it was the residential school experience that would lead children most effectively out of their " savage " communities into " higher civilization " and " full citizenship . " 
 Beginning in 1847 and lasting until 1996 , the Canadian government , in partnership with the Catholic Church , ran 130 residential boarding schools across Canada for aboriginal children , who were forcibly taken from their homes . While the schools were said to educate , they were plagued by under @-@ funding , disease , and abuse . 
 Because of laws and policies that encouraged or required aboriginals to assimilate into a Eurocentric society , Canada violated the United Nations Genocide Convention that Canada signed in 1949 and passed through Parliament in 1952 . The residential school system that removed aboriginal children from their homes has led scholars to believe that Canada can be tried in international court for genocide . A legal case resulted in settlement of 2 billion C $ in 2006 and the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission which confirmed the injurious effect on children of this system and turmoil created between aboriginal Canadians and Canadian Society . In 2008 Prime Minister Stephen Harper issued an apology on behalf of the Canadian government and its citizens for the residential school system . 
 = = Politics , law and legislation = = 
 = = = Treaties = = = 
 The Canadian Crown and Aboriginal peoples began interactions during the European colonialization period . Numbered treaties , the Indian Act , the Constitution Act of 1982 and case laws were established . Aboriginals construe these agreements as being between them and the Crown of Canada through the districts Indian Agent , and not the Cabinet of Canada . The Māori interprets the Treaty of Waitangi in New Zealand similarly . A series of eleven treaties were signed between Aboriginals in Canada and the reigning Monarch of Canada from 1871 to 1921 . The Government of Canada created the policy , commissioned the Treaty Commissioners and ratified the agreements . These Treaties are agreements with the Government of Canada administered by Canadian Aboriginal law and overseen by the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development . 
 According to the First Nations – Federal Crown Political Accord " cooperation will be a cornerstone for partnership between Canada and First Nations , wherein Canada is the short @-@ form reference to Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada . The Supreme Court argued that treaties " served to reconcile pre @-@ existing Aboriginal sovereignty with assumed Crown sovereignty , and to define Aboriginal rights " . First Nations people interpreted agreements covered in treaty 8 to last " as long as the sun shines , grass grows and rivers flow . " 
 = = = Indian Act = = = 
 The Indian Act is federal legislation that dates from 1876 . There have been over 20 major changes made to the original Act since then , the last time being in 1951 ; amended in 1985 with Bill C @-@ 31 . The Indian Act indicates how Reserves and Bands can operate and defines who is recognized as an " Indian " . 
 In 1985 , the Canadian Parliament passed Bill C @-@ 31 , " An Act to Amend the Indian Act " . Because of a Constitutional requirement , the Bill took effect on April 17 , 1985 . 
 It ends discriminatory provisions of the Indian Act , especially those that discriminated against women . 
 It changes the meaning of " status " and for the first time allows for limited reinstatement of Indians who were denied or lost status and / or Band membership . 
 It allows bands to define their own membership rules . 
 Those people accepted into band membership under band rules may not be status Indians . C @-@ 31 clarified that various sections of the Indian Act would apply to band members . The sections under debate concern community life and land holdings . Sections pertaining to Indians ( Aboriginals ) as individuals ( in this case , wills and taxation of personal property ) were not included . 
 = = = Royal Commission = = = 
 The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples was a Royal Commission undertaken by the Government of Canada in 1991 to address issues of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada . It assessed past government policies toward Aboriginal people , such as residential schools , and provided policy recommendations to the government . The Commission issued its final report in November 1996 . The five @-@ volume , 4 @,@ 000 @-@ page report covered a vast range of issues ; its 440 recommendations called for sweeping changes to the interaction between Aboriginal , non @-@ Aboriginal people and the governments in Canada . The report " set out a 20 @-@ year agenda for change . " 
 = = = Health policy = = = 
 In 1995 , the federal government announced the Aboriginal Right to Self @-@ Government Policy . This policy recognizes that First Nations and Inuit have the constitutional right to shape their own forms of government to suit their particular historical , cultural , political and economic circumstances . The Indian Health Transfer Policy provided a framework for the assumption of control of health services by Aboriginal peoples , and set forth a developmental approach to transfer centred on self @-@ determination in health . Through this process , the decision to enter transfer discussions with Health Canada rests with each community . Once involved in transfer , communities can take control of health programme responsibilities at a pace determined by their individual circumstances and health management capabilities . The National Aboriginal Health Organization ( <unk> ) incorporated in 2000 , is an Aboriginal @-@ designed and @-@ controlled not @-@ for @-@ profit body in Canada that works to influence and advance the health and well @-@ being of Aboriginal Peoples . 
 = = = Political organization = = = 
 First Nations and Inuit organizations ranged in size from band societies of a few people to multi @-@ nation confederacies like the Iroquois . First Nations leaders from across the country formed the Assembly of First Nations , which began as the National Indian Brotherhood in 1968 . The Métis and the Inuit are represented nationally by the Métis National Council and the Inuit Circumpolar Council respectively . 
 Today 's political organizations have resulted from interaction with European @-@ style methods of government through the Federal <unk> for Métis and Non @-@ Status Indians . Aboriginal political organizations throughout Canada vary in political standing , viewpoints , and reasons for forming . First Nations , Métis and Inuit negotiate with the Canadian Government through Indian and Northern Affairs Canada in all affairs concerning land , entitlement , and rights . The First Nation groups that operate independently do not belong to these groups . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Countless North American Indigenous words , inventions and games have become an everyday part of Canadian language and use . The canoe , snowshoes , the toboggan , lacrosse , tug of war , maple syrup and tobacco are just a few of the products , inventions and games . Some of the words include the barbecue , caribou , chipmunk , <unk> , hammock , skunk , and moose . Many places in Canada , both natural features and human habitations , use indigenous names . The word " Canada " itself derives from the St. Lawrence Iroquoian word meaning " village " or " settlement " . The province of Saskatchewan derives its name from the Saskatchewan River , which in the Cree language is called " <unk> Sipi " , meaning " swift @-@ flowing river . " Canada 's capital city Ottawa comes from the Algonquin language term " <unk> " meaning " to trade . " Modern youth groups such as Scouts Canada and the Girl Guides of Canada include programs based largely on Indigenous lore , arts and crafts , character building and outdoor camp craft and living . 
 Aboriginal cultural areas depend upon their ancestors ' primary <unk> , or occupation , at the time of European contact . These culture areas correspond closely with physical and ecological regions of Canada . The indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast were centred around ocean and river fishing ; in the interior of British Columbia , hunter @-@ gatherer and river fishing . In both of these areas the salmon was of chief importance . For the people of the plains , bison hunting was the primary activity . In the subarctic forest , other species such as the moose were more important . For peoples near the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence River , shifting agriculture was practised , including the raising of maize , beans , and squash . While for the Inuit , hunting was the primary source of food with seals the primary component of their diet . The caribou , fish , other marine mammals and to a lesser extent plants , berries and seaweed are part of the Inuit diet . One of the most noticeable symbols of Inuit culture , the <unk> is the emblem of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics . <unk> are rock sculptures made by stacking stones ; in the shape of a human figure , they are called <unk> . 
 Indian reserves , established in Canadian law by treaties such as Treaty 7 , are lands of First Nations recognized by non @-@ indigenous governments . Some reserves are within cities , such as the <unk> Reserve in Prince Albert , Saskatchewan , <unk> in Quebec City or Stony Plain 135 in the Edmonton Capital Region . There are more reserves in Canada than there are First Nations , which were ceded multiple reserves by treaty . Aboriginal people currently work in a variety of occupations and may live outside their ancestral homes . The traditional cultures of their ancestors , shaped by nature , still exert a strong influence on them , from spirituality to political attitudes . National Aboriginal Day is a day of recognition of the cultures and contributions of the First Nations , Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada . The day was first celebrated in 1996 , after it was proclaimed that year , by then Governor General of Canada Roméo LeBlanc , to be celebrated on June 21 annually . Most provincial jurisdictions do not recognize it as a statutory holiday . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 There are 13 Aboriginal language groups , 11 oral and 2 sign , in Canada , made up of more than 65 distinct dialects . Of these , only Cree , Inuktitut and Ojibway have a large enough population of fluent speakers to be considered viable to survive in the long term . Two of Canada 's territories give official status to native languages . In Nunavut , Inuktitut and Inuinnaqtun are official languages alongside the national languages of English and French , and Inuktitut is a common vehicular language in territorial government . In the NWT , the Official Languages Act declares that there are eleven different languages : Chipewyan , Cree , English , French , <unk> ’ in , Inuinnaqtun , Inuktitut , <unk> , North Slavey , South Slavey and <unk> . Besides English and French , these languages are not vehicular in government ; official status entitles citizens to receive services in them on request and to deal with the government in them . 
 Source : Statistics Canada , 2006 Census Profile of Federal Electoral Districts ( 2003 Representation Order ) : Language , Mobility and Migration and Immigration and Citizenship Ottawa , 2007 , pp. 2 , 6 , 10 . 
 = = = Visual art = = = 
 Aboriginals were producing art for thousands of years before the arrival of European settler colonists and the eventual establishment of Canada as a nation state . Like the peoples who produced them , indigenous art traditions spanned territories across North America . Indigenous art traditions are organized by art historians according to cultural , linguistic or regional groups : Northwest Coast , Plateau , Plains , Eastern Woodlands , Subarctic , and Arctic . 
 Art traditions vary enormously amongst and within these diverse groups . Indigenous art with a focus on portability and the body is distinguished from European traditions and its focus on architecture . Indigenous visual art may be used conjunction with other arts . Shamans ' masks and rattles are used ceremoniously in dance , storytelling and music . Artworks preserved in museum collections date from the period after European contact and show evidence of the creative adoption and adaptation of European trade goods such as metal and glass beads . The distinct Métis cultures that have arisen from inter @-@ cultural relationships with Europeans contribute culturally hybrid art forms . During the 19th and the first half of the 20th century the Canadian government pursued an active policy of forced and cultural assimilation toward indigenous peoples . The Indian Act banned manifestations of the Sun Dance , the Potlatch , and works of art depicting them . 
 It was not until the 1950s and 1960s that indigenous artists such as Mungo Martin , Bill Reid and Norval <unk> began to publicly renew and re @-@ invent indigenous art traditions . Currently there are indigenous artists practising in all media in Canada and two indigenous artists , Edward Poitras and Rebecca Belmore , have represented Canada at the Venice Biennale in 1995 and 2005 respectively . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Aboriginal peoples of Canada encompass diverse ethnic groups with their individual musical traditions . Music is usually social ( public ) or ceremonial ( private ) . Public , social music may be dance music accompanied by rattles and drums . Private , ceremonial music includes vocal songs with accompaniment on percussion , used to mark occasions like <unk> ceremonies and Sun Dances . 
 Traditionally , Aboriginal peoples used the materials at hand to make their instruments for centuries before Europeans immigrated to Canada . First Nations people made gourds and animal horns into rattles , which were elaborately carved and brightly painted . In woodland areas , they made horns of birch bark and drumsticks of carved antlers and wood . Traditional percussion instruments such as drums were generally made of carved wood and animal hides . These musical instruments provide the background for songs , and songs the background for dances . Traditional First Nations people consider song and dance to be sacred . For years after Europeans came to Canada , First Nations people were forbidden to practice their ceremonies . 
 = = Demographics and classification = = 
 There are three ( First Nations , Inuit and Métis ) distinctive groups of North America indigenous peoples recognized in the Canadian Constitution Act , 1982 , sections 25 and 35 . Under the Employment Equity Act , Aboriginal people are a designated group along with women , visible minorities , and persons with disabilities . They are not a visible minority under the Employment Equity Act and in the view of Statistics Canada . 
 The 2011 Canadian Census enumerated 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 685 Aboriginal people in Canada , 4 @.@ 3 % of the country 's total population . This total comprises 851 @,@ 560 people of First Nations descent , 451 @,@ 795 Métis , and 59 @,@ 445 Inuit . National representative bodies of Aboriginal people in Canada include the Assembly of First Nations , the Inuit <unk> <unk> , the Métis National Council , the Native Women 's Association of Canada , the National Association of Native Friendship Centres and the Congress of Aboriginal Peoples . 
 Approximately 40 @,@ 115 individuals of Aboriginal heritage could not be counted during the 2006 census . This is due to the fact that certain Aboriginal reserves and communities in Canada did not participate in the 2006 census , since enumeration of those communities were not permitted . In 2006 , 22 Native communities were not completely enumerated unlike in the year 2001 , when 30 First Nation communities were not enumerated and during 1996 when 77 Native communities could not be completely enumerated . Hence , there were probably 1 @,@ 212 @,@ 905 individuals of Aboriginal ancestry ( North American Indian , Metis , and Inuit ) residing in Canada during the time when the 2006 census was conducted in Canada . 
 Indigenous people assert that their sovereign rights are valid , and point to the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , which is mentioned in the Canadian Constitution Act , 1982 , Section 25 , the British North America Acts and the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties ( to which Canada is a signatory ) in support of this claim . 
 A. ^ % of the provincial or territorial population that is Aboriginal 
 B. ^ According to Statistics Canada this figure " Includes those who identified themselves as Registered Indians and / or band members without identifying themselves as North American Indian , Métis or Inuit in the Aboriginal identity question . " 
 Ethnographers commonly classify indigenous peoples of the Americas in the United States and Canada into ten geographical regions , cultural areas , with shared cultural traits . The Canadian regions are : 
 Arctic cultural area – ( Eskimo – Aleut languages ) 
 Subarctic culture area – ( Na @-@ Dene languages – <unk> languages ) 
 Eastern Woodlands ( Northeast ) cultural area – ( <unk> languages and Iroquoian languages ) 
 Plains cultural area – ( Siouan – <unk> languages ) 
 Northwest Plateau cultural area – ( Salishan languages ) 
 Northwest Coast cultural area – ( Penutian languages , <unk> languages and <unk> languages ) 
 In the 20th century the Aboriginal population of Canada increased tenfold . Between 1900 and 1950 the population grew by 29 % . After the 1960s the infant mortality level on reserves dropped dramatically and the population grew by 161 % . Since the 1980s the number of First Nations babies more than doubled and currently almost half of the First Nations population is under the age of 25 . 
 = Rounds ( album ) = 
 Rounds is the third full @-@ length solo album by British electronic musician Kieran Hebden , released under his alias Four Tet on 5 May 2003 by Domino Recording Company . Wanting to make a more personal record , Hebden recorded and produced the album in his North London flat over ten months using a desktop computer and a home hi @-@ fi system . Its ten tracks feature elements of hip @-@ hop , jazz and folk ; apart from a guitar part recorded for " Slow Jam " , the music is composed exclusively from between 200 and 300 samples , many processed beyond recognition . 
 Rounds produced two singles and one EP . Critics praised the album for its unique fusion of electronic and " organic " styles , and Metacritic lists it as the fourth best @-@ reviewed album of 2003 . Several publications included Rounds on " best albums of the decade " lists . In May 2013 , on the tenth anniversary of its release , Domino reissued Rounds with a bonus disc including a 2004 live performance . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After being a member of Fridge since 1995 , Kieran Hebden began releasing solo records under the name Four Tet in 1998 . His first release was the " <unk> " single , followed by the albums Dialogue in 1999 and Pause in 2001 . The albums were influenced by hip @-@ hop , jazz and electronic music . Hebden felt his output had sounded too much like his influences and wanted to make a record that was more personal and harder to define . Hebden drew on influences from Pete Rock , DJ Premier , Jim O 'Rourke , Timbaland , the Neptunes and Rodney Jerkins . 
 Hebden recorded Rounds over ten months in his North London flat , using a desktop computer and a home hi @-@ fi system . With the exception of a guitar part recorded for " Slow Jam " , he composed the music exclusively from a file of samples he had assembled over several years . The album uses between 200 and 300 samples ; each song is built from between 20 and 30 samples heavily processed with the software packages <unk> and Cool Edit Pro , in many cases beyond recognition . The nine @-@ minute track " Unspoken " was originally based on a sample from the Tori Amos song " Winter " but was reworked when Hebden failed to get sample clearance . Hebden also used a Creative Labs microphone to record the guitar part for " Slow Jam " and some sounds from television and sequenced the results in Cakewalk Pro Audio 9 . 
 After spending the early part of his career naming his songs with random words , he decided to use more personal titles . " As Serious as Your Life " takes its name from a 1977 Val Wilmer book about free jazz in New York City . Hebden was given a copy of the book by his father and said " I did hope that some kid would get interested and ask what the title was and then check out the book , so it 's a bit like leaving little trails for people . " He was inspired to title the album Rounds after hearing that his sister had been singing a musical round , telling an interviewer : " It seemed totally relevant ; a round is all about repetition and phasing , which is the essence of what I 've been doing since I 've been making music . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Rounds contains ten instrumental tracks with a total running time of 45 minutes , which Colin Joyce of Spin called a " folktronica tapestry . " Sound on Sound writer Sam Inglis said that the album was a " blend of fragile acoustic fragments , brutal beats and glitchy electronica " ; The Age described it as " electronic music that sounds deceptively organic . " Guardian critic David Peschek , who noted the influence of hip @-@ hop , R & B and folk music , wrote that " Rounds invents its own dizzying , unlikely genres . " John Bush of AllMusic found the album contained elements of electronic and experimental music combined with " a dreamy melodicism sure to endear it to indie pop fans . " Dusted critic Michael <unk> noticed the influence of folk and jazz , writing that Hebden had " taken his earlier nods to other specific genres and turned them into something wholly his own . " PopMatters ' Adrien Begrand noted how " Hebden shifts the focus from hip @-@ hop beats , jazz influences , and far @-@ reaching sonic adventurousness , to a more spare , focused sound " that contributed to Rounds ' original sound . Nick Southall , in his review for Stylus magazine , stated that " it is more of the same , but ' the same ' for Four Tet is perpetual evolution and motion . " 
 " Unspoken " was named by several critics as the album 's centrepiece ; Begrand described it as " virtuosic laptop music " . NME critic Tony Naylor thought that " As Serious as Your Life " was one of the album 's more straightforward songs . The album 's closing track , " Slow Jam " , which Pitchfork reviewer Andy Beta said " has that long goodbye of the best melancholy closers , " was described by Begrand as a " warm , wide @-@ eyed , watching @-@ the @-@ sun @-@ rise song " that features chiming guitars and a sample of a child 's squeaky toy . 
 = = Release = = 
 The track " She Moves She " was released as a 12 @-@ inch single on 31 March 2003 , with " Cradle " on the B @-@ side . Rounds was released on double vinyl and compact disc by Domino on 5 May 2003 , spending one week on the UK Albums Chart at number 60 . The second single , " As Serious as Your Life " , was released in October 2003 on 7- and 12 @-@ inch formats featuring remixes and a 23 @-@ minute live version ; a second 12 @-@ inch of the same song , containing a remix by Jay Dee featuring rapping by Guilty Simpson , was released on 18 November 2003 . An EP , My Angel Rocks Back and Forth , was released in May 2004 , containing Rounds tracks , two remixes , and the unreleased songs " I 've Got Viking in Me " and " All the <unk> " , plus a DVD of music videos for " My Angel Rocks Back and Forth " , " She Moves She " , " As Serious as Your Life " and Pause single " No More Mosquitoes " . 
 Domino reissued Rounds in May 2013 on double vinyl , CD , and download . The CD and vinyl releases include a bonus CD of live material recorded in 2004 previously only available on the limited edition 2004 live album Live in Copenhagen 30th March 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rounds received critical acclaim . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews and ratings from mainstream critics , the album received a metascore of 89 based on 26 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim . " 
 AllMusic reviewer John Bush wrote that " though Rounds is experimental by nature " it " offers something for nearly every audience that could approach it . " Michael <unk> of Dusted found the album " a musical salvo from an artist who ’ s confidently coming into his own " , describing it as " a cozy , evocative soundtrack that ’ s as intricate as it is beautiful . " In his review for The Guardian , David Peschek described the album as " a trove of bewitching melody and subtle invention " , and wrote that " Rounds succeeds not only as a meticulously conceived piece of art but also as a moving expression of human warmth . " In NME , Tony Naylor wrote that the album was " extraordinary " , " essential " and " full of remarkable sonic ideas . " Andy Beta , writing for Pitchfork Media , praised the record 's " internal order " which " allows it to stand out against previous laptop explorations of immense record collections " . 
 Adrien Begrand 's review in PopMatters found that Rounds is " a remarkable record " and that " sublime , computer @-@ crafted recordings like Rounds provides in spades are making the most exciting sounds right now in 2003 . " In Spin , Will Hermes described the album as a " varied trip " and noted " a darker vibe suggesting the influence of Hebden 's labelmate Dan Snaith of Manitoba . " Stylus Magazine writer Nick Southall recognised Hebden 's " perpetual evolution and motion , " declaring that " this is simply a great record of beautiful music . " Robert Christgau 's review of Rounds for the Village Voice argued that Hebden " imagines an aural space in which electronic malfunction is cute rather than annoying or ominous , " using " the computer as music box . " Tom Ridge of The Wire stated that " nothing here sounds like an exercise in genre plundering , " and that " Hebden has devised a musical identity that is distinctly different from his work with Fridge , but both projects share a passion for defying boundaries . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Rounds was ranked number four on the Metacritic list of highest @-@ scoring albums of 2003 , and was named as one of the albums of 2003 by many publications , including the NME , The Wire , The Observer , Prefix magazine , Pitchfork , Drowned in Sound , the BBC , The Face , Q and Uncut . 
 Several publications rated Rounds as one of the best albums of the decade , with Pitchfork Media placing it at number 123 on their list of the top 200 albums of the 2000s . On similar lists , Drowned in Sound placed it at number 13 , One Thirty BPM placed it at number 99 , and No Ripcord at number 48 . GQ rated it as one of the 40 best albums of the 21st century . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Kieran Hebden . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Kieran Hebden – music , production 
 Additional personnel 
 Guy Davie – mastering 
 Matt Cooper – layout , design 
 Jason Evans – photography 
 = A. Merritt 's Fantasy Magazine = 
 A. Merritt 's Fantasy Magazine was a pulp magazine which published five issues from December 1949 to October 1950 . It took its name from fantasy writer A. Merritt , who had died in 1943 , and it aimed to capitalize on Merritt 's popularity . It was published by Popular Publications , alternating months with Fantastic Novels , another title of theirs . It may have been edited by Mary Gnaedinger , who also edited Fantastic Novels and Famous Fantastic Mysteries . It was a companion to Famous Fantastic Mysteries , and like that magazine mostly reprinted science @-@ fiction and fantasy classics from earlier decades . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 In 1942 , Popular Publications acquired Famous Fantastic Mysteries and Fantastic Novels , both of them pulp magazines specializing in reprints of fantasy , from the Munsey Company . Fantastic Novels had ceased publication in April 1941 , but was relaunched by Popular in early 1948 as a companion to Famous Fantastic Mysteries , which was still being published . The following year Popular decided to add another fantasy reprint magazine to their line @-@ up : the title they chose was A. Merritt 's Fantasy Magazine , and the first issue was dated December 1949 . Abraham Merritt ( usually known as A. Merritt ) , after whom the magazine was named , was one of the most popular fantasy authors of the pulp era : the magazine was intended to take advantage of his popularity , but only five issues appeared , over a period of just under a year , before the magazine was cancelled . 
 In addition to Merritt 's novel Creep , Shadow ! , which appeared in the first issue , the magazine printed several well @-@ received stories . These included " The Smoking Land " , a novel by Frederick Faust , under the pseudonym George Challis , and a detective novel by Jack Mann , The Ninth Life . A letter to the magazine from a young Robert Silverberg appeared in one of the letter columns . 
 Different theories have been offered as to why the magazine failed . Editor and science fiction historian Malcolm Edwards suggests that Merritt 's death six years earlier , in 1943 , made the magazine a risky proposition , despite Merritt 's continuing popularity in the late 1940s . Science fiction historian and critic Sam Moskowitz suggests that , conversely , the magazine did not go far enough in depending on Merritt 's popularity , as it only printed three works of his during its run . This may have been because Merritt was sufficiently popular that it was not easy for the magazine to obtain reprint rights to his stories . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The editor was not announced in the magazine . Mary Gnaedinger was the editor for the two companion magazines , Famous Fantastic Mysteries and Fantastic Novels , but Sam Moskowitz has suggested that it was unlikely Gnaedinger was the editor for A. Merritt 's Fantasy Magazine . The magazine remained in pulp format throughout its short run . It was 132 pages and priced at 25 cents for all five issues . A Canadian edition of all five issues appeared ; these were identical to the originals in every way except for the back cover advertisement and the format — the Canadian issues were half an inch longer . 
 = Constitution of May 3 , 1791 = 
 The Constitution of 3 May 1791 ( Polish : Konstytucja 3 maja , Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was adopted by the Great Sejm ( parliament ) of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , a dual monarchy comprising Poland and Lithuania . Drafted over 32 months beginning on 6 October 1788 , and formally adopted as the Government Act ( Ustawa rządowa ) , the document was designed to redress the Commonwealth 's political defects . The system of Golden Freedoms , also known as the " Nobles ' Democracy " , had conferred disproportionate rights on the nobility ( szlachta ) and over time had corrupted politics . The adoption of the Constitution was preceded by a period of agitation for — and gradual introduction of — reforms beginning with the Convocation Sejm of 1764 and the election of Stanisław August Poniatowski as the Commonwealth 's last king . 
 The constitution sought to supplant the prevailing anarchy fostered by some of the country 's magnates with a more democratic constitutional monarchy . It introduced elements of political equality between townspeople and nobility , and placed the peasants under the protection of the government , thus mitigating the worst abuses of serfdom . It banned parliamentary institutions such as the liberum veto , which had put the Sejm at the mercy of any deputy who could revoke all the legislation that had been passed by that Sejm . The Commonwealth 's neighbours reacted with hostility to the adoption of the constitution . Frederick William II 's Kingdom of Prussia broke its alliance with the Commonwealth , which was attacked and then defeated in the War in Defence of the Constitution by an alliance between Catherine the Great 's Imperial Russia and the Targowica Confederation of anti @-@ reform Polish magnates and landless nobility . The King , a principal co @-@ author , eventually capitulated to the Confederates . 
 The 1791 document remained in force for less than 19 months ; it was annulled by the Grodno Sejm on 23 November 1793 . By 1795 , the Second and Third Partitions of Poland ended the existence of the sovereign Polish state . Over the next 123 years , the Constitution of 3 May , 1791 , was seen as proof of successful internal reform and as a symbol promising the eventual restoration of Poland 's sovereignty . In the words of two of its co @-@ authors , Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj , it was " the last will and testament of the expiring Country . " British historian Norman Davies described the document as " the first constitution of its type in Europe " ; others have called it the world 's second @-@ oldest codified national constitution after the 1789 U.S. Constitution . 
 = = Background = = 
 Polish constitutionalism can be traced to the 13th century , when government by consensus and representation was already well established in the young Polish state . The emergence of parliamentary bodies , the sejm and sejmiki , followed . By the 17th century , Poland 's legal and political tradition was characterized by : parliamentary institutions and a system of checks and balances on state power , which was itself limited by decentralization ; the idea of a contractual state , embodied in texts like the Henrician Articles and the Pacta conventa ; the concept of individual liberties ; and the notion that the monarch owed duties to his subjects . This system , which primarily benefited the Polish nobility ( szlachta ) , came to be known as the " nobles ' democracy " . 
 = = = End of the Golden Age = = = 
 The 1791 Constitution was a response to the increasingly perilous situation in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , which had been a major European power only a century earlier and was still the largest state on the continent . In the 1590s , at the peak of the nobles ' democracy , King Sigismund III Vasa 's court preacher — the Jesuit Piotr Skarga — had condemned the weaknesses of the Commonwealth . In the same period , writers and philosophers such as Andrzej <unk> <unk> and Wawrzyniec Grzymała <unk> , and the <unk> praw ( Execution @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Laws ) reform movement led by Jan Zamoyski had advocated political reforms . In 1656 , Sigismund 's son King John II Casimir Vasa made a solemn vow at the ' old ' Lvov Cathedral on behalf of the entire Republic of Poland , that he would free the Polish peasants “ from their unjust burdens and oppression . ” As he was struggling with the Sejm , in 1661 John Casimir — whose reign saw highly destructive wars and obstructionism by the nobility — correctly predicted that the Commonwealth was in danger of a partition by Russia , Brandenburg and Austria . 
 As the Sejm failed to implement sufficient reforms , the state machinery became increasingly dysfunctional . A major cause of the Commonwealth 's downfall was the liberum veto ( " free veto " ) , which since 1652 had allowed any Sejm deputy to nullify all the legislation enacted by that Sejm . As a result , deputies bribed by magnates or foreign powers — primarily from the Russian Empire , the Kingdom of Prussia and France — or deputies who believed they were living in an unprecedented " Golden Age " paralysed the Commonwealth 's government for over a century . The threat of the liberum veto could only be overridden by the establishment of a " confederated sejm " , which was immune to the liberum veto . Declaring that a sejm either constituted a " confederation " or belonged to one was a contrivance prominently used by foreign interests in the 18th century to force a legislative outcome . 
 By the early 18th century , the magnates of Poland and Lithuania controlled the state , ensuring that no reforms that might weaken their privileged status ( the " Golden Freedoms " ) would be enacted . The ineffective monarchs who were elected to the Commonwealth throne in the early 18th century , Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland of the House of Wettin , did not improve matters . The <unk> , used to the absolute rule practiced in their native Saxony , tried to govern through intimidation and the use of force , which led to a series of conflicts between their supporters and opponents — including another pretender to the Polish throne , King Stanisław Leszczyński . Those conflicts often took the form of confederations — legal rebellions against the king permitted under the Golden Freedoms — including the Warsaw Confederation ( 1704 ) , Sandomierz Confederation , <unk> Confederation , <unk> Confederation and the War of the Polish Succession . Only 8 out of 18 Sejm sessions during the reign of Augustus II ( 1694 – 1733 ) passed legislation . For 30 years during the reign of Augustus III , only one session was able to pass legislation . The government was near collapse , giving rise to the term " Polish anarchy " , and the country was managed by provincial assemblies and magnates . 
 Other reform attempts in the Wettin era were led by individuals such as Stanisław Dunin @-@ <unk> , Stanisław A. <unk> , Kazimierz Karwowski and Michał Józef Massalski ; these mostly proved to be futile . 
 = = = Early reforms = = = 
 The Enlightenment greatly influenced certain Commonwealth circles during the 1764 – 95 reign of its last king , Stanisław II August Poniatowski . Poniatowski was an " enlightened " Polish magnate who had been a deputy to several Sejms between 1750 and 1764 and had a deeper understanding of Polish politics than previous monarchs . The Convocation Sejm of 1764 , which elected Poniatowski to the throne , was controlled by the Czartoryski family 's reformist Familia party and was backed up by Russian military forces , which the <unk> invited . In exchange for passing decrees favorable to them , the Russians and Prussians let the confederated Convocation Sejm enact a number of reforms , including the weakening of liberum veto and ensuring it no longer applied to treasury and economic matters . A more comprehensive reform package was presented by Andrzej Zamoyski , but opposition from Prussia , Russia and the Polish nobility thwarted this ambitious program , which proposed to decide on all motions by majority voting . In part because his election was imposed by Empress Catherine the Great , Poniatowski 's political position was weak from the beginning . He proceeded with cautious reforms such as the establishment of fiscal and military ministries and the introduction of a national customs tariff , which was soon abandoned because of opposition from Frederick the Great of Prussia . These measures had already been authorized by the Convocation Sejm ; more legislative and executive improvements inspired by Familia or the King were implemented during and after the 1764 Sejm . 
 The Commonwealth 's magnates viewed reform with suspicion and neighboring powers , content with the deterioration of the Commonwealth , abhorred the thought of a resurgent and democratic power on their borders . With the Commonwealth Army reduced to around 16 @,@ 000 , it was easy for its neighbors to intervene directly — the Imperial Russian Army numbered 300 @,@ 000 and the Prussian Army and Imperial Austrian Army had 200 @,@ 000 each . 
 Russia 's Empress Catherine and Prussia 's King Frederick II provoked a conflict between members of the Sejm and the King over civil rights for religious minorities , such as Protestants and Greek Orthodox whose positions , which were guaranteed equal with the Catholic majority by the Warsaw Confederation of 1573 , had worsened considerably . Catherine and Frederick declared their support for the szlachta and their " liberties " , and by October 1767 Russian troops had assembled outside Warsaw in support of the conservative Radom Confederation . The King and his adherents had little choice but to acquiesce to Russian demands . During the Repnin Sejm ( named after the unofficially presiding Russian ambassador Nicholas Repnin ) the King accepted the five " eternal and invariable principles " which Catherine had vowed to " protect for all time to come in the name of Poland 's liberties " : the election of kings , the right of liberum veto , the right to renounce allegiance to and raise rebellion against the king ( rokosz ) , the szlachta 's exclusive right to hold office and land , and landowners ' power over their peasants . Thus all the privileges ( " Golden Freedoms " ) of the nobility that had made the Commonwealth ungovernable were guaranteed as unalterable in the Cardinal Laws . The Cardinal Laws and the rights of " religious dissenters " passed by the Repnin Sejm were personally guaranteed by Empress Catherine . By these acts of legislation , for the first time , Russia formally intervened in the Commonwealth 's constitutional affairs . 
 During the 1768 Sejm , Repnin showed his disregard for local resistance by arranging the abduction and imprisonment of <unk> Sołtyk , Józef A. Załuski , Wacław Rzewuski and Seweryn Rzewuski , all vocal opponents of foreign domination and the recently proclaimed policies . The Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth had legally and practically become a protectorate of the Russian Empire . Nonetheless , several minor beneficial reforms were adopted , political rights of the religious minorities were restored and the need for more reforms was becoming increasingly recognized . 
 King Stanisław August 's acquiescence to the Russian intervention encountered some opposition . On February 29 , 1768 , several magnates — including Józef Pułaski and his young son Kazimierz Pułaski ( Casimir Pulaski ) — vowing to oppose Russian influence , declared Stanisław August a lackey of Russia and Catherine , and formed a confederation at the town of Bar . The Bar Confederation focused on limiting the influence of foreigners in Commonwealth affairs , and being pro @-@ Catholic was generally opposed to religious tolerance . It began a civil war to overthrow the King , but its irregular forces were overwhelmed by Russian intervention in 1772 . 
 The defeat of the Bar Confederation set the scene for the partition treaty of August 5 , 1772 , which was signed at Saint Petersburg by Russia , Prussia and Austria . The treaty divested the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth of about a third of its territory and population — over 200 @,@ 000 km2 ( 77 @,@ 220 sq mi ) and 4 million people . The three powers justified their annexation , citing anarchy in the Commonwealth and its refusal to cooperate with its neighbors ' efforts to restore order . King Stanisław August yielded and on April 19 , 1773 , he called the Sejm into session . Only 102 of about 200 deputies attended what became known as the Partition Sejm . The rest were aware of the King 's decision and refused . Despite protests from the deputy Tadeusz Rejtan and others , the treaty — later known as the First Partition of Poland — was ratified . 
 The first of the three successive 18th @-@ century partitions of Commonwealth territory that would eventually remove Poland 's sovereignty shocked the Commonwealth 's inhabitants and made it clear to progressive minds that the Commonwealth must either reform or perish . In the thirty years before the Constitution , there was a rising interest among progressive thinkers in constitutional reform . Before the First Partition , a Polish noble , Michał Wielhorski was sent to France by the Bar Confederation to ask the philosophes Gabriel Bonnot de Mably and Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau for their suggestions on a new constitution for a reformed Poland . Mably submitted his recommendations Du gouvernement et des lois en Pologne ( The Government and Laws of Poland ) in 1770 – 71 , whereas Rousseau finished his Considerations on the Government of Poland in 1772 when the First Partition was already underway . Works advocating the need for reform and presenting specific solutions were published in the Commonwealth by Polish – Lithuanian thinkers : On an Effective Way of Councils or on the Conduct of Ordinary Sejms ( 1761 – 63 ) , by Stanisław Konarski , founder of the Collegium Nobilium ; Political Thoughts on Civil Liberties ( 1775 ) and Patriotic Letters ( 1778 – 78 ) , by Józef Wybicki , author of the lyrics of the Polish National Anthem ; ( Anonymous Letters to Stanisław Małachowski ( 1788 – 89 ) and The Political Law of the Polish Nation ( 1790 ) , by Hugo Kołłątaj , head of the Kołłątaj 's Forge party ; and Remarks on the Life of Jan Zamoyski ( 1787 ) , by Stanisław Staszic . Ignacy Krasicki 's satires of the Great Sejm era were also seen as crucial to giving the constitution moral and political support . 
 A new wave of reforms supported by progressive magnates such as the Czartoryski family and King Stanisław August were introduced at the Partition Sejm . The most important included the 1773 establishment of the Commission of National Education ( Komisja Edukacji Narodowej ) — the first ministry of education in the world . New schools were opened , uniform textbooks were printed , teachers received better education and poor students were provided with scholarships . The Commonwealth 's military was to be modernized and funding to create a larger standing army was agreed . Economic and commercial reforms — including some intended to cover the increased military budget previously shunned as unimportant by the szlachta — were introduced . A new executive assembly , the 36 @-@ strong Permanent Council comprising five ministries with limited legislative powers , was established , giving the Commonwealth a governing body in constant session between Sejms and therefore immune to their liberum veto disruptions . 
 In 1776 , the Sejm commissioned former chancellor Andrzej Zamoyski to draft a new legal code . By 1780 , he and his collaborators had produced the Zamoyski Code ( <unk> praw <unk> ) . It would have strengthened royal power , made all officials answerable to the Sejm , placed the clergy and their finances under state supervision , and deprived landless szlachta of many of their legal immunities . The Code would also have improved the situation of non @-@ nobles — townspeople and peasants . Zamoyski 's progressive legal code , containing elements of constitutional reform , met with opposition from native conservative szlachta and foreign powers ; the 1780 Sejm did not adopt it . 
 = = Adoption = = 
 An opportunity for reform occurred during the " Great Sejm " — also called the " Four @-@ Year Sejm " — of 1788 – 92 , which began on October 6 , 1788 , with 181 deputies . In accordance with the Constitution 's preamble , from 1790 it met " in dual number " when 171 newly elected deputies joined the earlier @-@ established Sejm . On its second day , the body became a confederated sejm to avoid the liberum veto . Concurrent world events appeared to have been opportune for the reformers . Russia and Austria were at war with the Ottoman Empire , and the Russians found themselves simultaneously fighting in the Russo @-@ Swedish War , 1788 – 1790 . A new alliance between the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth and Prussia seemed to provide security against Russian intervention , and King Stanisław August drew closer to leaders of the reform @-@ minded Patriotic Party . 
 The Sejm passed few major reforms in its first two years , but the subsequent two years brought more substantial changes . The Sejm adopted the 1791 Free Royal Cities Act , which was formally incorporated into the final constitution . This act addressed a number of matters related to the cities , crucially expanding burghers ' ( i.e. , townspeople 's ) rights , including electoral rights . While the Sejm comprised representatives of the nobility and clergy , the reformers were supported by the burghers , who in late 1789 organized in Warsaw a " Black Procession " demanding full political enfranchisement of the bourgeoisie . On 18 April 1791 the Sejm — fearing that the burghers ' protests , if ignored , could turn violent , as they had in France not long before — adopted the Free Royal Cities Act . 
 The new constitution was drafted by the King , with contributions from Ignacy Potocki , Hugo Kołłątaj and others . The King is credited with writing the general provisions and Kołłątaj with giving the document its final shape . Stanisław August wanted the Commonwealth to become a constitutional monarchy similar to that of Great Britain , with a strong central government based on a strong monarch . Potocki wanted the Sejm to be the strongest branch of government . Kołłątaj wanted a " gentle " revolution , carried out without violence , to enfranchise other social classes in addition to the nobility . 
 The proposed reforms were opposed by the conservatives , including the Hetmans ' Party . Threatened with violence by their opponents , the advocates of the draft began the debate on the Government Act two days early , while many opposing deputies were away on Easter recess . The debate and subsequent adoption of the Government Act was executed as a quasi @-@ coup d 'état . No recall notices were sent to known opponents of reform , while many pro @-@ reform deputies secretly returned early . The royal guard under the command of the King 's nephew Prince Józef Poniatowski were positioned about the Royal Castle , where the Sejm was gathered , to prevent opponents from disrupting the proceedings . On May 3 , the Sejm convened with only 182 members , about half its " dual " number . The bill was read and overwhelmingly adopted , to the enthusiasm of the crowds outside . A protest was submitted the next day by a small group of deputies , but on May 5 the matter was officially concluded and protests were invalidated by the Constitutional Deputation of the Sejm . It was the first time in the 18th century that a constitutional act had been passed in the Commonwealth without the involvement of foreign powers . 
 Soon after , the Friends of the Constitution ( <unk> <unk> Konstytucji <unk> ) — which included many participants in the Great Sejm — was organised to defend the reforms already enacted and to promote further ones . It is now regarded as the first modern @-@ style political party in Poland 's history . The response to the new constitution was less enthusiastic in the provinces , where the Hetmans ' Party enjoyed considerable influence . General support among the middle nobility was crucial and still very substantial ; most of the provincial sejmiks deliberating in 1791 and early 1792 supported the constitution . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Polish constitution was one of several to reflect Enlightenment influences , in particular Rousseau 's social contract and Montesquieu 's advocacy of a separation and balance of powers between the three branches of government and his advocacy of a bicameral legislature . Once the government was established , it aimed to ensure , in accordance with Article V , that " the integrity of the states , civil liberty , and social order shall always remain in equilibrium " . According to Polish @-@ American historian Jacek Jędruch , the liberality of its provisions " fell somewhere below [ those of ] the French , above the Canadian , and left the Prussian far behind " , but did not equal the American Constitution " . King Stanisław August Poniatowski said the new constitution was " founded principally on those of England and the United States of America , but avoiding the faults and errors of both , and adapted as much as possible to the local and particular circumstances of the country . " George Sanford said that the Polish constitution provided " a constitutional monarchy close to the English model of the time . " 
 Article I acknowledged the Roman Catholic faith as the " dominant religion " , but guaranteed tolerance and freedom to all religions . It was less progressive than the 16th @-@ century Warsaw Confederation , and placed Poland clearly within the Catholic sphere of influence . Article II confirmed many old privileges of the nobility , stressing that all nobles are equal and should enjoy personal security and the right to property . Article III stipulated that the earlier Free Royal Cities Act ( <unk> <unk> <unk> Wolne w <unk> Rzeczypospolitej ) of April 18 ( or 21 ) , 1791 , was integral to the constitution . Personal security — <unk> <unk> , the Polish habeas corpus act — was extended to townspeople ( including Jews ) . Townspeople also gained the right to acquire landed property and became eligible for military officers ' commissions and public offices , such as reserved seats in the Sejm and seats in the executive commissions of the Treasury , the Police and the Judiciary . Membership of the nobility was also made easier for burghers to acquire . 
 With half a million burghers in the Commonwealth now substantially enfranchised , political power became more equally distributed , but little was done about the less politically conscious and active classes , such as the Jews and peasants . Although Article IV placed the Commonwealth 's peasantry under the protection of the national law — a first step toward enfranchising the country 's largest and most oppressed social class — the low status of the peasantry as compared to other classes was not eliminated , as the constitution did not abolish serfdom . Not until the Second Partition and Kościuszko 's Proclamation of Połaniec in 1794 would the Polish government begin to abolish serfdom . 
 Article V stated that " all power in civil society [ should be ] derived from the will of the people . " The constitution referred to the country 's " citizens " , which for the first time in Polish legislation was meant to include townspeople and peasants , as well as nobles . The document 's preamble and 11 individual articles introduced the principle of popular sovereignty applied to the nobility and townspeople , and the separation of powers into legislative ( a bicameral Sejm ) , executive ( " the King and the Guardians " , the Guardians of the Laws being the newly established top governmental entity ) and judicial branches . It advanced the democratization of the polity by limiting the excessive legal immunities and political prerogatives of landless nobility . 
 Legislative power , as defined in Article VI , rested with the bicameral parliament ( an elected Sejm and an appointed Senate ) and the king . The Sejm met " ordinarily " every two years and " extraordinarily " whenever required by a national emergency . Its lower chamber — the Chamber of Deputies ( Izba <unk> ) — comprised 204 deputies ( 2 from each powiat , 68 each from the provinces of Greater Poland , Lesser Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania ) and 21 <unk> of royal cities ( 7 from each province ) . The royal chancellery was to inform the sejmiks of the legislation it intended to propose in advance , so that the deputies would have time to prepare for the discussions . The Sejm 's upper chamber — the Chamber of Senators ( Izba <unk> ) — comprised between 130 and 132 ( sources vary ) senators ( voivodes , castellans , and bishops , as well as governments ministers without the right to vote ) . The Senate was presided over by the king , who had one vote which could be used to break ties . The king and all deputies had legislative initiative , and most matters — known as general laws , and divided into constitutional , civil , criminal , and those for the institution of perpetual taxes — required a simple majority , first from the lower chamber , then from the upper one . For the more specialized resolutions , such as for treaties of alliance , declarations of war and peace , <unk> and increases in national debt , a majority vote of both chambers voting jointly was needed . The Senate ( but not the king ) had a <unk> veto over the laws that the Sejm passed , applicable until the next Sejm session , when it could be overruled . 
 Article VI also recognized the Prawo o <unk> , the act on regional assemblies ( sejmiks ) that had been passed on March 24 , 1791 . By reducing the enfranchisement of the noble classes , this law introduced major changes to the electoral ordinance . Previously , all nobles had been eligible to vote in sejmiks , which de facto meant that many of the poorest , landless nobles — known as " clients " or " clientele " of local magnates — voted as the magnates bade them . Now the voting right was tied to a property qualification : one had to own or lease land and pay taxes , or be closely related to somebody who did , to be eligible to vote . 300 @,@ 000 of 700 @,@ 000 previously eligible nobles were thus disfranchised , much to their displeasure . Voting rights were restored to landowners who were in military service . They had lost these rights in 1775 . Voting was limited to males of at least 18 years of age . The eligible voters elected deputies to local <unk> , or county sejmiks , which elected deputies to the General Sejm . 
 Finally , Article VI explicitly abolished several institutional sources of government weakness and national anarchy , including the liberum veto ( which was replaced by a simple majority vote ) , confederations and confederated sejms , and the excessive influence of sejmiks stemming from the previously binding nature of their instructions to their Sejm deputies . The confederations were declared " contrary to the spirit of this constitution , subversive of government and destructive of society " . Thus the new constitution strengthened the powers of the Sejm , moving the country towards a constitutional monarchy . 
 Executive power , according to Article V and Article VII , was in the hands of " the king in his council " , a cabinet of ministers called the Guardians of the Laws ( or Guard of the Laws , Straż <unk> ) . The ministries could not create or interpret the laws and all acts of the foreign ministry were provisional and subject to the Sejm 's approval . The king presided over this council , which was composed of the Roman Catholic Primate of Poland — who was also president of the Education Commission — and five ministers appointed by the king : a minister of police , a minister of the seal ( internal affairs ) , a minister of foreign affairs , a minister belli ( of war ) , and a minister of treasury . Council members also included — without a vote — the Crown Prince , the Marshal of the Sejm , and two secretaries . This royal council descended from similar councils that had functioned since King Henry 's Articles ( 1573 ) , and from the recent Permanent Council . Acts of the king required the countersignature of the respective minister . A minister was required to <unk> a law if the king demanded it , unless that minister refused and all other ministers unanimously endorsed his objection , in which case the king could withdraw the law or press the issue by taking it before the parliament . The stipulation that the king , " doing nothing of himself , ... shall be answerable for nothing to the nation , " parallels the British constitutional principle that " The king can do no wrong . " ( In both countries , the respective minister was responsible for the king 's acts . ) The ministers were responsible to the Sejm , which could dismiss them by a vote of no confidence with a two @-@ third majority in both houses . Ministers could be also held accountable by the Sejm court , and a simple majority vote was sufficient for the Sejm to demand that a minister face an impeachment trial . The king was the nation 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief , commanding its armies ; the institution of the hetman ( high @-@ ranking military official ) was not mentioned . The king also had the right to grant pardon except in cases of treason . The decisions of the royal council were carried out by commissions , including the previously created Commission of National Education , and the new Commissions for Police , the Military and the Treasury , whose members were elected by the Sejm . 
 The constitution also changed the government from an elective monarchy in its unique Polish variant to a hereditary monarchy . This provision was intended to reduce the destructive , vying influences of foreign powers at each royal election . The royal dynasty was elective , and if it were to die out a new one would be chosen by " the Nation " . The king held the throne " by the grace of God and the will of the Nation " , and " all authority derives from the will of the Nation . " The institution of pacta conventa was preserved . On Stanisław August 's death the Polish throne would become hereditary and pass to Frederick Augustus I of Saxony of the House of Wettin , which had provided Poland 's two most recent elective kings before Stanisław August . This provision was contingent upon Frederic Augustus ' consent , but he declined when the offer was presented to him by Adam Czartoryski . 
 Discussed in Article VIII , the judiciary was separated from the two other branches of the government , and was to be served by elective judges . Courts of first instance existed in each voivodeship and were in constant session , with judges elected by the regional sejmik assemblies . Appellate tribunals were established for the provinces , based on the reformed Crown Tribunal and Lithuanian Tribunal . The Sejm elected from its deputies the judges for the Sejm court , a precursor to the modern State Tribunal of Poland . <unk> courts were established in each province to hear the cases of the peasantry . Municipal courts , described in the law on towns , complemented this system . 
 Article IX covered procedures for regency , which should be taken up jointly by the council of the Guardians , headed by the Queen , or in her absence by the Primate . Article X stressed the importance of education of royal children and tasked the Commission of National Education with this responsibility . The last article of the constitution , Article XI , concerned the national standing army . Said army was defined as a " defensive force " dedicated " solely to the nation 's defense " . The army was to be increased in strength to 100 @,@ 000 men . 
 To further enhance the Commonwealth 's integration and security , the constitution abolished the erstwhile union of Poland and Lithuania in favor of a unitary state . Its full establishment , supported by Stanisław August and <unk> , was opposed by many Lithuanian deputies . As a compromise , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania received numerous privileges guaranteeing its continued existence . Related acts included the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Declaration of the Assembled Estates ) of May 5 , 1791 , confirming the Government Act adopted two days earlier , and the <unk> <unk> Obojga Narodów ( Reciprocal Guarantee of Two Nations , i.e. , of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania ) of October 22 , 1791 , affirming the unity and indivisibility of Poland and the Grand Duchy within a single state and their equal representation in state @-@ governing bodies . The Reciprocal Guarantee strengthened the Polish – Lithuanian union while keeping many federal aspects of the state intact . 
 The Constitution of the 3rd May was also translated into Lithuanian , that marked the significant change in the upper society way of thinking , marked the efforts of the modernization of the State . 
 The Constitution remained to the last a work in progress . The provisions of the Government Act were detailed in a number of laws passed in May and June 1791 : on sejm courts ( two acts of May 13 ) , the Guardians of the Laws ( June 1 ) , the national police commission ( a ministry , June 17 ) and municipal administration ( June 24 ) . The constitution included provisions for amendments , which were to be dealt with by an extraordinary Sejm held every 25 years . Its co @-@ author Hugo Kołłątaj announced that work was underway on " an economic constitution ... guaranteeing all rights of property [ and ] securing protection and honor to all manner of labor ... " . A third planned basic law was mentioned by Kołłątaj ; a " moral constitution " , most likely a Polish analog to the United States Bill of Rights and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen . The constitution called for the preparation of a new civil and criminal code , tentatively called the Stanisław August Code . The King also planned a reform improving the situation of the Jews . 
 = = Aftermath : war and the final two partitions = = 
 The constitution remained in effect for little over a year before being overthrown by Russian armies allied with conservative Polish nobility in the Polish – Russian War of 1792 , also known as the War in Defense of the Constitution . With the wars between Turkey and Russia and Sweden and Russia having ended , Empress Catherine was furious over the adoption of the document , which she believed threatened Russian influence in Poland . Russia had viewed Poland as a de facto protectorate . " The worst possible news have arrived from Warsaw : the Polish king has become almost sovereign " was the reaction of one of Russia 's chief foreign policy authors , Alexander Bezborodko , when he learned of the new constitution . The contacts of Polish reformers with the Revolutionary French National Assembly were seen by Poland 's neighbors as evidence of a revolutionary conspiracy and a threat to the absolute monarchies . The Prussian statesman Ewald von Hertzberg expressed the fears of European conservatives : " The Poles have given the coup de grâce to the Prussian monarchy by voting a constitution " , elaborating that a strong Commonwealth would likely demand the return of the lands Prussia acquired in the First Partition . 
 <unk> who had opposed the constitution draft from the start , Franciszek Ksawery Branicki , Stanisław Szczęsny Potocki , Seweryn Rzewuski , and Szymon and Józef Kossakowski , asked Tsarina Catherine to intervene and restore their privileges — the Cardinal Laws abolished under the new statute . To that end these magnates formed the Targowica Confederation . The Confederation 's proclamation , prepared in St. Petersburg in January 1792 , criticized the constitution for contributing to " contagion of democratic ideas " following " the fatal examples set in Paris " . It asserted that " The parliament ... has broken all fundamental laws , swept away all liberties of the gentry and on the third of May 1791 turned into a revolution and a conspiracy . " The Confederates declared an intention to overcome this revolution . We " can do nothing but turn trustingly to Tsarina Catherine , a distinguished and fair empress , our neighboring friend and ally " , who " respects the nation 's need for well @-@ being and always offers it a helping hand " , they wrote . 
 Russian armies entered Poland and Lithuania , starting the Polish – Russian War of 1792 . The Sejm voted to increase the army of the Commonwealth to 100 @,@ 000 men , but owing to insufficient time and funds this number was never achieved and soon abandoned even as a goal . The Polish King and the reformers could field only a 37 @,@ 000 @-@ man army , many of them untested recruits . This army , under the command of Józef Poniatowski and Tadeusz Kościuszko , defeated or fought to a draw the Russians on several occasions , but in the end , a defeat loomed inevitable . Despite Polish requests , Prussia refused to honor its alliance obligations . Stanisław August 's attempts at negotiations with Russia proved futile . As the front lines kept shifting to the west and in July 1792 Warsaw was threatened with siege by the Russians , the King came to believe that victory was impossible against the numerically superior enemy , and that surrender was the only alternative to total defeat . Having received assurances from the Russian ambassador Yakov Bulgakov that no territorial changes will occur , the Guardians of the Laws cabinet voted 8 : 4 to surrender . On July 24 , 1792 , King Stanisław August Poniatowski joined the Targowica Confederation , as the Empress had demanded . The Polish Army disintegrated . 
 Many reform leaders , believing their cause was for now lost , went into self @-@ imposed exile . Some hoped that Stanisław August would be able to negotiate an acceptable compromise with the Russians , as he had done in the past . But the King had not saved the Commonwealth and neither had the Targowica Confederates , who governed the country for a short while . To their surprise , the Grodno Sejm , bribed or intimidated by the Russian troops , enacted the Second Partition of Poland . On November 23 , 1793 , it concluded its deliberations under duress , annulling the constitution and acceding to the Second Partition . Russia took 250 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 97 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , while Prussia took 58 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 22 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The Commonwealth now comprised no more than 215 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 83 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . What was left of the Commonwealth was merely a small buffer state with a puppet king , and Russian garrisons keeping an eye on the reduced Polish army . 
 For a year and a half , Polish patriots waited while planning an insurrection . On March 24 , 1794 in Kraków , Tadeusz Kościuszko declared what has come to be known as the Kościuszko Uprising . On May 7 , he issued the Proclamation of Połaniec ( <unk> <unk> ) , granting freedom to the peasants and ownership of land to all who fought in the insurrection . Revolutionary tribunals administered summary justice to those deemed traitors to the Commonwealth . After initial victories at the Battle of Racławice ( April 4 ) , the capture of Warsaw ( April 18 ) and the Wilno ( April 22 ) — the Uprising was crushed when the forces of Russia , Austria and Prussia joined in a military intervention . Historians consider the Uprising 's defeat to have been a foregone conclusion in face of the superiority in numbers and resources of the three invading powers . The defeat of Kościuszko 's forces led in 1795 to the third and final partition of the Commonwealth . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historical significance = = = 
