 = = Critical reception = = 
 E = MC ² received a 63 / 100 ( indicating " generally positive reviews " ) on the website Metacritic , which averages professional reviews into a numerical score . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , senior editor of Allmusic , rated the album three out of five stars , and wrote " it 's misleading to judge Mariah based on her new record of possessing the most number one singles , as she 's not about longevity , she 's about being permanently transient , a characteristic ' E = MC ² ' captures all too well . " Billboard 's Gary Trust felt that on the album , Carey was in " pristine form " , stating , " She 's proclaimed emancipation before , but Mariah Carey 's never sounded as free as she does on her 10th album . Carey 's made a pop album with equal parts levity and gravity . " Writing fir Entertainment Weekly , Margeaux Watson graded E = MC ² an ' A- ' , and described how the album 's goal was to prove " her comeback was no fluke " . She continued complimenting the album 's several collaborations , and wrote " the result is a largely enjoyable mix of flirtatious club jams , midtempo love songs , and emotional ballads anchored by hip @-@ hop beats that handsomely showcase the singer 's powerful vocal chops . " Though Carey 's voice had been criticized since her 2002 release , Charmbracelet , for not being able to deliver the " gravity defying vocals " from the 1990s , Roger Friedman from Fox News wrote " Her infamous eight @-@ octave range has suffered a little wear and tear over the years , but Carey still can flutter from great highs to mellow lows like no one else . " Alex Macpherson from The Guardian gave the album four out of five stars , heavily describing the singer 's vocal state throughout the album : " Carey 's voice has been mocked , bizarrely , as being a triumph of technique over soul - an argument that fails to comprehend that technique and soul are intertwined , that technique primarily exists as a means to convey emotion - but she is on fine vocal form throughout ' E = MC ² ' , whether belting out massive ballads , or layering her voice into a swooning bank of a hundred Mariahs . " Macpherson concluded his review with , " When she sings elsewhere , " Them other regularities , they can 't compare with MC , " " it is hard not to agree " , referencing a lyric on " For the Record " . 
 The Houston Chronicle 's Joey Guerra felt all of the album 's tracks were strong , and wrote " Every track plays like a potential hit single , and that 's exactly what fans will love about ' E = MC ² ' . Expect it to soundtrack much of the summer and beyond . " Los Angeles Times staff writer , Richard Cromelin , gave the album two out of four stars , noting its " alternatives to the glass @-@ shattering flamboyance of her early ' 90s youth . " He concluded in his mixed review of the album , " Of course , consistency isn 't so important when an album is assembled as a series of singles rather than a cohesive work . Fortunately for Carey , the tabloid @-@ tailored real @-@ life back story on one side and the producer 's craft on the other matter more than the art of singing in this particular fairy tale . " Ben Ratliff of The New York Times felt the album didn 't level up to par with Carey 's previous release , writing " Much of the record sounds like urban @-@ radio imitations , without the peculiarities and effective hooks of ' Mimi ' . Maybe emancipation isn 't a continuing procedure ; maybe it only comes once . " Writing for PopMatters , Evan Sawdey rated E = MC ² four out of ten discs , describing it as a " shallow imitation of its predecessor " . Sawdey concluded his review on a mixed note , stating " the second act of Mariah 's comeback doesn 't wisely expand her sound : it instead succumbs to the blueprint so carefully laid out by its predecessor , a pointless remake that exists only because it has to . If you ever had a doubt as to its formulaic nature , you need to look no further than its title . Long live the Diva . " Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone questioned why she limited her vocal abilities throughout the record , " nearly every song confines Carey to four @-@ note verses , offering little room for her glorious range . " Journalist Eric Henderson , writing for Slant Magazine , graded the album three out of five stars , and concluding with , " Such are the rewards of an album like ' E = MC ² ' , in which one does reach a solution , but not before Mariah bends over backward to show her work . " The album finished in the top @-@ ten of several " best of 2008 " lists , ending at number four on an official poll held by Billboard , eight by The Detroit News , and number ten by The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune . Robert Christgau picked out one song from the album , " Touch My Body " , as a " choice cut " ( ) . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 E = MC ² debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with 463 @,@ 000 copies sold , making it the biggest opening week sales of Carey 's career , and also the biggest opening album in 2008 for a female artist , before matched by Taylor Swift 's Fearless in November . With six number one albums , Carey is now tied with Britney Spears and Janet Jackson and Beyoncé in the United States for the third most number one albums for a female artist , behind Madonna with eight and Barbra Streisand 's nine chart toppers . In its second week , the album remained at number one on the albums chart , with 182 @,@ 000 copies sold . E = MC ² became Carey 's first album to spend two straight weeks at number one since 1995 's Daydream , although The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) spent two non @-@ consecutive weeks at the top spot . On Billboard 's Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , E = MC ² debuted at number one , and spent forty @-@ seven weeks fluctuating within the top 100 . The album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on July 8 , 2008 , denoting shipments of one million units . According to Nielsen SoundScan , stateside sales of the album stand at 1 @,@ 289 @,@ 000 copies as of April 2013 . In total , E = MC ² spent twenty @-@ seven weeks within the Billboard 200 , and finished at number twenty @-@ two on the Year @-@ End chart . On the same day the album was released , Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa proclaimed April 15 officially as " Mariah Carey day " in Los Angeles . It was in part of celebrating her eighteenth number one single , " Touch My Body " . Also , from April 25 through April 27 , 2008 , the Empire State Building was lit up in Carey 's motif colors — lavender , pink , and white — in celebration of her achievements in the world of music . On the Canadian Albums Chart , during the week dated May 3 , 2008 , E = MC ² debuted at number one , with first @-@ week sales of 19 @,@ 000 copies . It became her first number one album in Canada since before 1999 , as Rainbow and The Emancipation of Mimi both opened at number two . The album spent seven weeks within the album 's chart , and was eventually certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 E = MC ² entered the Australian Albums Chart on April 5 , 2008 , at number two . The album spent eight weeks in the albums chart , and was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . In France , the album debuted at its peak position of number six during the week dated April 19 , 2008 . E = MC ² spent twenty weeks on the albums chart , and ended its run on August 30 , 2008 . On the Dutch Albums Chart , it debuted at its peak position of number eleven on April 19 , 2008 . The album ended its eight @-@ week chart run on June 7 , 2008 . During the week dated April 28 , 2008 , E = MC ² debuted at number ten on the New Zealand Albums Chart , starting a ten @-@ week run on the chart . The album peaked within the top ten in several European countries , such as number five in Switzerland , seven in Germany and Ireland , eight in Austria and number nine in Italy . On the UK Albums Chart , the album debuted at number three , selling 34 @,@ 800 copies . This was her highest peak position in the United Kingdom since Butterfly ( 1997 ) , which peaked at number two . After thirteen weeks on the chart , the album was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In Japan , the album peaked at number seven on the Oricon Overall Chart , and was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . After only eight days of release , E = MC ² was certified Gold in the Philippines , denoting shipments of 15 @,@ 000 units . The album was the 26th best @-@ selling album worldwide in 2008 , according to International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) . As of September 19 , 2009 , the album has sold 2 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Touch My Body " was released as the lead single from the album on February 12 , 2008 . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who complimented its hook and production , as well as its playful lyrics . " Touch My Body " reached the top position on the Hot 100 in its fourth week , and became Carey 's eighteenth chart topper , selling 286 @,@ 000 digital downloads . The song 's opening week broke several records , making her the solo artist with the most number one singles in United States history , surpassing the record held by Elvis Presley . Additionally , it gave Carey her 79th week atop the Hot 100 , tying her with Presley as the artist with the most weeks at number one in the Billboard chart history . " The song also sold the highest amount of digital records in one week , surpassing Rihanna 's " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) , which sold 277 @,@ 000 units . Internationally , the song achieved strong chart success , peaking within the top five on the charts in Italy , Japan , New Zealand , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . The song 's music video was directed by film @-@ maker Brett Ratner , who had previously worked with the singer on five other music videos . It follows around a story revolving around a computer employees fantasy as he visits Carey 's home . As he fixes her computer , he enters a fantasy in which the pair perform several activities together , including a pillow fight , playing laser tag , Guitar Hero and slot cars , and throw a frisbee , all while showing off Carey 's figure in several revealing outfits . 
 " Bye Bye " was announced as the second single from the album on April 15 , 2008 . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , and was heavily speculated to have become her 19th number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 . Many reviewers complimented its simple and understated musical arrangement and personalized lyrics , while some felt the song was too simple for an artist of Carey 's stature . The track only managed to reach a peak position of number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 . Throughout other countries where it found release , the song achieved relatively weak charting , peaking within the top ten in New Zealand , and in the top @-@ fifty in Canada , Ireland , Slovakia , and the United Kingdom . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Justin Francis on the island of Antigua in the Caribbean . Notably , Carey and Cannon began dating during their trip to the island , and later wed on April 30 , 2008 . The video features behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the couple , Carey promoting the album in the United Kingdom , as well as photos of several of Carey 's close friends , family and past collaborators such as Luciano Pavarotti and Luther Vandross . 
 The album 's third single , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , was released on June 1 , 2008 . Many complimented the song 's production and incorporation of the " Stay With me " sample , while others were unimpressed with the chorus in general . Chuck Taylor of Billboard assured the song would endure strong success and radio appeal , and complimented its overall production , as well as Carey 's voice : " [ It 's ] a playful , beach @-@ befitting groove , featuring a bright sample from DeBarge 's " Stay With Me , " lushly woven vocals and Carey 's highs doting on fans with her sonic signature . " In the United States , the song peaked at number fifty @-@ eight , and at number twenty @-@ seven in Japan . On the UK Singles Chart , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " peaked at number eighty @-@ four , and spent only one week in the chart . The song was featured on the final scene of You Don 't Mess with the Zohan ( 2008 ) , a film in which Carey made a cameo appearance . Its accompanying music video was shot over a three @-@ day interval in Hawaii , and makes usage of the islands scenery , as well as shots of Carey in several bikinis , while swimming with a dolphin . 
 " I Stay in Love " was released as the fourth and final single from the album on October 28 , 2008 . The song failed to chart on the Hot 100 , though became Carey 's fourteenth chart topper on the Hot Dance Club Play . Additionally , it peaked at number ninety @-@ five on the UK Singles Chart . The song 's accompanying music video was filmed by Carey 's husband , Nick Cannon , and features Carey as a dancer in a Las Vegas show at the The Bellagio Hotel and Casino Resort . Additionally , during the show and its preparations , Carey realizes that her ex @-@ lover has found love with one of her fellow dancers , leading her to blow up the car he gave her , as well as its accompaniments in the Mojave Desert . 
 Other notable songs 
 Though not released as singles , three of the album 's songs managed to chart on Billboard 's Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart due to high sales . " Migrate " peaked at number ninety @-@ two on the Hot 100 , and ninety @-@ five on the R & B chart , while both " I 'm That Chick " and " Side Effects " peaked at numbers eighty @-@ two and ninety @-@ three on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Following the song 's digital release , Carey promoted the song on several live televised appearances and programs throughout the world . Only days prior to being released digitally , the singer was announced as the musical guest on an episode of Saturday Night Live , taking over for Janet Jackson who caught the flu and was unable to perform . Hosted by Jonah Hill , Carey performed both " Touch My Body " , as well as live rendition of " Migrate " alongside T @-@ Pain . Following the set , Carey and her manager at the time , Benny Medina , met with Lee Daniels , who then offered her a role in his film adaptation of Precious ( 2008 ) , in which Carey would later star and earn acclaim for her acting . After reaching the top of the Billboard charts , the Empire State Building was lit up in Carey 's motif colors , white , pink and lavender , for the entire week . On March 25 , 2008 , Carey was featured as the special guest performer at The Hills season premiere party , an event marking the start of a span of ten episodes airing in between season three and four . Carey performed " Touch My Body " , " I 'm That Chick " and " We Belong Together " , before exiting the stage to a standing ovation . After the performance , Carey received strong praise from the program 's cast members , with Lauren Conrad saying " I 've always been a huge Mariah fan , and she 's just so beautiful and talented ' . Whitney Port and Audrina Patridge referred to Carey as " an amazing singer " , while claiming to have listened to her music from a young age . On April 12 , 2008 , Carey made an appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show . Winfrey interviewed the singer on her weight loss , E = MC ² , and even showed footage of Carey in her New York apartment , showing off her lingerie closet . Following the interview , Carey performed a live rendition of " Bye Bye " for the audience , with three background vocalists assisting her . Kevin Johnson from St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch described the performance as " touching " , and complimented the song 's appeal . 
 On the seventh season of the talent competition American Idol , Carey was featured as a mentor for the top @-@ seven week . Titled " Mariah Carey Week " and airing live on April 14 , 2008 , the contestants were to perform a song from the singer 's catalog . After all seven contestants sang their individual songs , they all came together for a live rendition of Carey 's 1996 collaboration with Boyz II Men , " One Sweet Day " . Overall , critics noted how a Carey themed week would be extremely difficult for the performers , due to their vocally strenuous nature . Following their joint performance , Carey emerged onto the stage and performed " Bye Bye " live , while backed by a trio of supporting vocalists . Tamara Jones of The Washington Post jokingly commented on Carey 's flailing hand movements during the performance , writing how she was " waving like a malevolent homecoming queen " . Gil Kaufman from MTV News complimented Carey 's performance , commenting on her " barely there micro @-@ dress " and writing how she " serenaded the audience with her homage to lost ones . " The Calgary Sun 's Lindsey Ward described it as a " less @-@ than @-@ fab performance " , although complimenting on Carey 's leaner figure , " Oh , who am I kidding ? She would look hot in a paper bag . " On April 25 , 2008 , Carey opened the Good Morning America " Summer Concert Series " with a live performance in Times Square . Carey , wearing a pink mini @-@ skirt , began the set with " Touch My Body " in front of thousands of fans . During the song , her backing vocals began to malfunction , causing it to repeat phrases and play during her main vocal moments . In order to let the sound engineer know of the problem , she substituted part of the lyrics for " stop singing my part now baby " , and completed the final chorus . She continued on with " I 'm That Chick " , and completed the three @-@ song set @-@ list with her follow @-@ up single , " Bye Bye " . After marking the album 's stateside launch with her appearance on Good Morning America , Carey took to Europe to perform on several programs . She began with an interview on the British radio station , BBC Radio 1 , and continued onto a live rendition of " Touch My Body " on both The Sunday Night Project and The Paul O 'Grady Show . 
 Similarly , Carey performed the song live on the German talent show , Deutschland sucht den Superstar ( Germany searches for the superstar ) , in April 2008 . On August 8 , 2008 , Carey performed a mash @-@ up of the song at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards . She began with her single at the time , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , and worked into the bridge of " Touch My Body " , before reverting to the former song . At the Fashion Rocks ceremony in 2009 , Carey performed " Touch My Body " and her current single , " Obsessed " , as well as the remix to her 1995 song " Fantasy " . During the set @-@ list , Carey was accompanied by six men in black ties , who hoisted her into the air in front of over 6 @,@ 000 people during " Obsessed " , and rigorous dance routines throughout " Touch My Body " . In promotion for E = MC ² and the single , Carey was featured as a guest judge and musical act on the fifth season of the British talent competition , The X Factor . During that week , all the contestants would have to sing songs from Carey 's catalog . Prior to her arrival , one of the show 's judges Dannii Minogue said " Could it get any more nerve @-@ wracking for the contestants ? " , due to the general strenuous nature of Carey 's songs . After several performances by the finalists , Carey performed " I Stay in Love " , accompanied by three background vocalists . She received a standing ovation from the audience and judges , and continued backstage for a taped session with the contestants . At the end of the program , she performed her classic " Hero " ( 1993 ) , and was eventually joined by the finalists for the finale of the song . " Hero " was re @-@ recorded by the 2008 UK X Factor finalists and released as a single , becoming the best @-@ selling single of 2008 . According to reports , the episode gained a large increase in viewers due to Carey 's presence , and was able to surpass its long @-@ time rival program , Strictly Come Dancing , in the ratings . Carey made an appearance at the American Music Awards , held on November 23 , 2008 at the Nokia Theatre . Wearing a long black gown , she performed the song after receiving an honorary award for her achievements in music . Chris Harris from MTV News described it as a " riveting performance " . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 Since the album 's release in early April , Carey had said publicly that she planned on embarking on a large worldwide tour in support of E = MC ² . In an interview with Billboard on March 28 , 2008 , Carey explained " It 's come up , and I 'm probably going to do it , but I don 't know exactly how we 're going to do it or when . I 'm thinking probably September . But I think it 's important to tour with this album , because there are so many songs that I really want to sing live , that I really enjoy . " Months later , in an interview with MTV News in July , Carey further addressed her plans of a tour : " We 're looking at November right now . Please don 't hold me accountable if it turns out to be December 5 or December 7 or January 18 ! " When asked to describe the tour 's theme , Carey explained " I 'm thinking elaborate . I like elaborate . We only do substantial . That 's what my jeweler says . I haven 't gotten the looks in mind just yet , but we 're going to figure it out soon enough . " Despite continued plans for a tour , and announcements made on The X Factor in United Kingdom in November , the tour was suddenly cancelled by early December . Tabloids and critics began heavily speculating that Carey had become pregnant , and had abandoned plans for a tour as a result . Many claimed to have seen Carey visiting a famed gynecologist 's office in Los Angeles . Additionally , Carey 's newly slimmed figure began to change , as she stopped her exercise routines and gained weight . Though Carey had eventually announced that she was pregnant with twins on November 28 , 2010 , over two years later , she admitted she had indeed been pregnant during that time period , and suffered a miscarriage . For that reason , she cancelled the tour , and lost the child only two months later . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for E = MC ² adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Tara ( 1961 ) = 
 Hurricane Tara , also known as Cyclone Tara , was one of the deadliest Pacific hurricanes on record . The final tropical cyclone of the 1961 Pacific hurricane season , Tara formed on November 10 about 230 mi ( 365 km ) off the coast of Mexico . It strengthened to reach maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) before making landfall in the Mexican state of Guerrero near Zihuatanejo . Hurricane Tara dissipated on November 12 , bringing heavy rainfall and strong winds to locations inundated by 10 days of precipitation . Damage was light in the major port city of Acapulco , though further west along the coast , the effects of Tara were much worse . The city of Nuxco in Tecpán de Galeana municipality received the most damage and deaths from the hurricane . Throughout Mexico , at least 436 fatalities were reported , and damage exceeded $ 16 million ( 1961 USD , $ 115 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 9 , a weak circulation remained nearly stationary off the coast of Acapulco , Mexico . It did not have significant convection , although it organized enough to be considered a tropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on November 10 , about 230 mi ( 365 km ) off the coast of Mexico . By the afternoon of the 10th , it was a tropical depression moving northeastward toward the coastline . Tara intensified , reaching hurricane status and its peak intensity of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) late on November 11 . Early on November 12 , Hurricane Tara made landfall near Zihuatanejo , Guerrero , between Acapulco and Manzanillo , near where Hurricane Iva moved ashore five months earlier . Continuing inland , it was last observed at 1200 UTC on November 12 . At the time , it was known as Cyclone Tara , as the term cyclone was the more common equivalent for hurricane in the region . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Hurricane Tara caused severe damage in southern Guerrero where it moved ashore , wrecking at least 10 communities . Heavy rainfall from Tara exacerbated flooding in the area , which was caused by ten days of precipitation preceding the hurricane ; the heavy rainfall contaminated drinking water . Strong waves killed a surfer in the Acapulco area . In the city , low @-@ lying areas were inundated with water , causing in excess of $ 1 million in damage ( 1961 USD ) . In nearby Tecpán de Galeana , the hurricane killed 116 people , and dozens more were killed in other close villages . Elsewhere in Guerrero , the coastal highway between Acapulco and Zihuatanejo received heavy damage , which later hampered relief efforts ; the highway was a priority for storm repairs , with crews working continuously for several days to restore the vital link . Many deaths were reported in coastal towns of Guerrero , although exact death tolls were initially unknown , with many of the towns covered in mud . People received little warning of the hurricane , and many people died while sleeping . In addition , thousands were left homeless by the storm . According to radio reports , a hurricane @-@ related waterspout wrecked the city of Nuxco , although the damage was later described as flooding from a lagoon ; 225 deaths were reported in Nuxco . Food supplies were depleted in some coastal communities , forcing residents to rely on coconuts that were downed during the hurricane . Overall crop damage in Mexico was unofficially estimated at $ 16 million ( 1961 USD , $ 115 million 2009 USD ) . By two days after the storm , the government of Mexico sent two airplanes to Acapulco , where the food , clothing , and medicine were distributed by truck or helicopter to the affected areas . The Mexican government arranged plans to drop food and medical aid into isolated villages , although food supplies were initially insufficient for the great number of people affected by the storm . Five army units and three helicopters were sent to the region to assist in the aftermath , although planes encountered difficulties in landing due to flooded runways . Army soldiers were responsible for rescue operations , while paratroopers were sent to the most affected areas to distribute aid . Despite fears of the spread of disease in the aftermath , prompt work by medical officials prevented any epidemics due to the storm . 
 The exact death toll was unknown , but believed to be several hundred . About two days after the storm , the official death toll was more than 80 . By three days after the storm , the toll rose to 190 , and by four days after it made landfall , the official total was 290 deaths ; officials estimated the toll could have exceeded 500 . Due to downed communications , reports of storm fatalities were slow to spread , though news became more rapid as links were repaired . On November 19 , a week after the storm struck , the Mexican Army set the final death toll at 436 deaths , with 300 missing ; the death toll was later reported by the United States Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance in 1993 . Overall , Hurricane Tara was the deadliest disaster in 1961 , as well as the third deadliest Mexico Pacific hurricane on record , after a hurricane in 1959 and Hurricane Liza in 1976 . 
 = Orion Nebula = 
 The Orion Nebula ( also known as Messier 42 , M42 , or NGC 1976 ) is a diffuse nebula situated in the Milky Way , being south of Orion 's Belt in the constellation of Orion . It is one of the brightest nebulae , and is visible to the naked eye in the night sky . M42 is located at a distance of 1 @,@ 344 ± 20 light years and is the closest region of massive star formation to Earth . The M42 nebula is estimated to be 24 light years across . It has a mass of about 2000 times the mass of the Sun . Older texts frequently refer to the Orion Nebula as the Great Nebula in Orion or the Great Orion Nebula . 
 The Orion Nebula is one of the most scrutinized and photographed objects in the night sky , and is among the most intensely studied celestial features . The nebula has revealed much about the process of how stars and planetary systems are formed from collapsing clouds of gas and dust . Astronomers have directly observed protoplanetary disks , brown dwarfs , intense and turbulent motions of the gas , and the photo @-@ ionizing effects of massive nearby stars in the nebula . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The nebula is visible with the naked eye even from areas affected by some light pollution . It is seen as the middle " star " in the " sword " of Orion , which are the three stars located south of Orion 's Belt . The star appears fuzzy to sharp @-@ eyed observers , and the nebulosity is obvious through binoculars or a small telescope . The peak surface brightness of the central region is about 17 Mag / <unk> ( about 14 <unk> ) and the outer bluish glow has a peak surface brightness of 21 @.@ 3 Mag / <unk> ( about 0 @.@ 27 <unk> ) . ( In the photos shown here the brightness , or luminance , is enhanced by a large factor . ) 
 The Orion Nebula contains a very young open cluster , known as the Trapezium due to the asterism of its primary four stars . Two of these can be resolved into their component binary systems on nights with good seeing , giving a total of six stars . The stars of the Trapezium , along with many other stars , are still in their early years . The Trapezium is a component of the much larger Orion Nebula Cluster , an association of about 2 @,@ 800 stars within a diameter of 20 light years . Two million years ago this cluster may have been the home of the runaway stars AE Aurigae , 53 Arietis , and Mu Columbae , which are currently moving away from the nebula at velocities greater than 100 km / s . 
 = = = Coloration = = = 
 Observers have long noted a distinctive greenish tint to the nebula , in addition to regions of red and of blue @-@ violet . The red hue is a result of the Hα recombination line radiation at a wavelength of 656 @.@ 3 nm . The blue @-@ violet coloration is the reflected radiation from the massive O @-@ class stars at the core of the nebula . 
 The green hue was a puzzle for astronomers in the early part of the 20th century because none of the known spectral lines at that time could explain it . There was some speculation that the lines were caused by a new element , and the name <unk> was coined for this mysterious material . With better understanding of atomic physics , however , it was later determined that the green spectrum was caused by a low @-@ probability electron transition in doubly ionized oxygen , a so @-@ called " forbidden transition " . This radiation was all but impossible to reproduce in the laboratory at the time , because it depended on the quiescent and nearly collision @-@ free environment found in the high vacuum of deep space . 
 = = History = = 
 There has been speculation that the Mayans of Central America may have described the nebula within their " Three <unk> " creation myth ; if so , the three would correspond to two stars at the base of Orion , Rigel and <unk> , and another , <unk> at the tip of the " belt " of the imagined hunter , the vertices of a nearly perfect equilateral triangle with Orion 's Sword ( including the Orion Nebula ) in the middle of the triangle seen as the smudge of smoke from copal incense in a modern myth , or , in ( the translation it suggests of ) an ancient one , the literal or figurative embers of a fiery creation . 
 Neither Ptolemy 's Almagest nor Al Sufi 's Book of Fixed Stars noted this nebula , even though they both listed patches of nebulosity elsewhere in the night sky ; nor did Galileo mention it , even though he also made telescopic observations surrounding it in 1610 and 1617 . This has led to some speculation that a flare @-@ up of the illuminating stars may have increased the brightness of the nebula . 
 The first discovery of the diffuse nebulous nature of the Orion Nebula is generally credited to French astronomer Nicolas @-@ Claude Fabri de Peiresc , on 26 November 1610 when he made a record of observing it with a refracting telescope purchased by his patron Guillaume du Vair . 
 The first published observation of the nebula was by the Jesuit mathematician and astronomer Johann Baptist <unk> of Lucerne in his 1619 monograph on the comets ( describing observations of the nebula that may date back to 1611 ) . He made comparisons between it and a bright comet seen in 1618 and described how the nebula appeared through his telescope as : 
 " one sees how in like manner some stars are compressed into a very narrow space and how round about and between the stars a white light like that of a white cloud is poured out " 
 His description of the center stars as different from a comet 's head in that they were a " rectangle " may have been an early description of the Trapezium Cluster ( The first detection of three of the four stars of this cluster is credited to Galileo Galilei in a February 4 , 1617 although he did not notice the surrounding nebula — possibly due to the narrow field of vision of his early telescope . ) 
 The nebula was independently discovered by several other prominent astronomers in the following years , including by Giovanni Battista Hodierna ( whose sketch was the first published in De <unk> orbis <unk> , <unk> <unk> coeli <unk> ) . 
 Charles Messier first noted the nebula on March 4 , 1769 , and he also noted three of the stars in Trapezium . Messier published the first edition of his catalog of deep sky objects in 1774 ( completed in 1771 ) . As the Orion Nebula was the 42nd object in his list , it became identified as M42 . 
 In 1865 English amateur astronomer William Huggins used his visual spectroscopy method to examine the nebula showing it , like other nebulae he had examined , was made up of " luminous gas " . On September 30 , 1880 Henry Draper used the new dry plate photographic process with an 11 @-@ inch ( 28 cm ) refracting telescope to make a 51 @-@ minute exposure of the Orion Nebula , the first instance of astrophotography of a nebula in history . Another set of photographs of the nebula in 1883 saw breakthrough in astronomical photography when amateur astronomer Andrew Ainslie Common used the dry plate process to record several images in exposures up to 60 minutes with a 36 @-@ inch ( 91 cm ) reflecting telescope that he constructed in the backyard of his home in Ealing , outside London . These images for the first time showed stars and nebula detail too faint to be seen by the human eye . 
 In 1902 , Vogel and Eberhard discovered differing velocities within the nebula and by 1914 astronomers at Marseilles had used the interferometer to detect rotation and irregular motions . Campbell and Moore confirmed these results using the spectrograph , demonstrating turbulence within the nebula . 
 In 1931 , Robert J. Trumpler noted that the fainter stars near the Trapezium formed a cluster , and he was the first to name them the Trapezium cluster . Based on their magnitudes and spectral types , he derived a distance estimate of 1 @,@ 800 light years . This was three times farther than the commonly accepted distance estimate of the period but was much closer to the modern value . 
 In 1993 , the Hubble Space Telescope first observed the Orion Nebula . Since then , the nebula has been a frequent target for HST studies . The images have been used to build a detailed model of the nebula in three dimensions . Protoplanetary disks have been observed around most of the newly formed stars in the nebula , and the destructive effects of high levels of ultraviolet energy from the most massive stars have been studied . 
 In 2005 , the Advanced Camera for Surveys instrument of the Hubble Space Telescope finished capturing the most detailed image of the nebula yet taken . The image was taken through 104 orbits of the telescope , capturing over 3 @,@ 000 stars down to the 23rd magnitude , including infant brown dwarfs and possible brown dwarf binary stars . A year later , scientists working with the HST announced the first ever masses of a pair of eclipsing binary brown dwarfs , 2MASS <unk> – <unk> . The pair are located in the Orion Nebula and have approximate masses of 0 @.@ 054 M ☉ and 0 @.@ 034 M ☉ respectively , with an orbital period of 9 @.@ 8 days . Surprisingly , the more massive of the two also turned out to be the less luminous . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The entirety of the Orion Nebula extends across a 1 ° region of the sky , and includes neutral clouds of gas and dust , associations of stars , ionized volumes of gas , and reflection nebulae . 
 The Nebula is part of a much larger nebula that is known as the Orion Molecular Cloud Complex . The Orion Molecular Cloud Complex extends throughout the constellation of Orion and includes Barnard 's Loop , the Horsehead Nebula , M43 , <unk> , and the Flame Nebula . Stars are forming throughout the entire Cloud Complex , but most of the young stars are concentrated in dense clusters like the one illuminating the Orion Nebula . 
 The current astronomical model for the nebula consists of an ionized ( H II ) region , roughly centered on Theta1 Orionis C , which lies on the side of an elongated molecular cloud in a cavity formed by the massive young stars . ( Theta1 Orionis C emits 3 @-@ 4 times as much <unk> light as the next brightest star , <unk> Orionis A. ) The H II region has a temperature ranging up to 10 @,@ 000 K , but this temperature falls dramatically near the edge of the nebula . The nebulous emission comes primarily from <unk> gas on the back surface of the cavity . The H II region is surrounded by an irregular , concave bay of more neutral , high @-@ density cloud , with clumps of neutral gas lying outside the bay area . This in turn lies on the perimeter of the Orion Molecular Cloud . The gas in the molecular cloud displays a range of velocities and turbulence , particularly around the core region . Relative movements are up to 10 km / s ( 22 @,@ 000 mi / h ) , with local variations of up to 50 km / s and possibly more . 
 Observers have given names to various features in the Orion Nebula . The dark lane that extends from the north toward the bright region is called the " Fish 's Mouth " . The illuminated regions to both sides are called the " Wings " . Other features include " The Sword " , " The Thrust " , and " The Sail " . 
 = = Star formation = = 
 The Orion Nebula is an example of a stellar nursery where new stars are being born . Observations of the nebula have revealed approximately 700 stars in various stages of formation within the nebula . 
 Recent observations with the Hubble Space Telescope have yielded the major discovery of protoplanetary disks within the Orion Nebula , which have been dubbed proplyds . HST has revealed more than 150 of these within the nebula , and they are considered to be systems in the earliest stages of solar system formation . The sheer numbers of them have been used as evidence that the formation of star systems is fairly common in our universe . 
 Stars form when clumps of hydrogen and other gases in an H II region contract under their own gravity . As the gas collapses , the central clump grows stronger and the gas heats to extreme temperatures by converting gravitational potential energy to thermal energy . If the temperature gets high enough , nuclear fusion will ignite and form a protostar . The protostar is ' born ' when it begins to emit enough radiative energy to balance out its gravity and halt gravitational collapse . 
 Typically , a cloud of material remains a substantial distance from the star before the fusion reaction ignites . This remnant cloud is the protostar 's protoplanetary disk , where planets may form . Recent infrared observations show that dust grains in these protoplanetary disks are growing , beginning on the path towards forming planetesimals . 
 Once the protostar enters into its main sequence phase , it is classified as a star . Even though most planetary disks can form planets , observations show that intense stellar radiation should have destroyed any proplyds that formed near the Trapezium group , if the group is as old as the low mass stars in the cluster . Since proplyds are found very close to the Trapezium group , it can be argued that those stars are much younger than the rest of the cluster members . 
 = = = Stellar wind and effects = = = 
 Once formed , the stars within the nebula emit a stream of charged particles known as a stellar wind . Massive stars and young stars have much stronger stellar winds than the Sun . The wind forms shock waves or hydrodynamical instabilities when it encounters the gas in the nebula , which then shapes the gas clouds . The shock waves from stellar wind also play a large part in stellar formation by compacting the gas clouds , creating density inhomogeneities that lead to gravitational collapse of the cloud . 
 There are three different kinds of shocks in the Orion Nebula . Many are featured in Herbig – Haro objects : 
 Bow shocks are stationary and are formed when two particle streams collide with each other . They are present near the hottest stars in the nebula where the stellar wind speed is estimated to be thousands of kilometers per second and in the outer parts of the nebula where the speeds are tens of kilometers per second . Bow shocks can also form at the front end of stellar jets when the jet hits interstellar particles . 
 Jet @-@ driven shocks are formed from jets of material sprouting off newborn T Tauri stars . These narrow streams are traveling at hundreds of kilometers per second , and become shocks when they encounter relatively stationary gases . 
 Warped shocks appear bow @-@ like to an observer . They are produced when a jet @-@ driven shock encounters gas moving in a cross @-@ current . 
 The interaction of the stellar wind with the surrounding cloud also forms " waves " which are believed to be due to the hydrodynamical Kelvin @-@ Helmholtz instability . 
 The dynamic gas motions in M42 are complex , but are trending out through the opening in the bay and toward the Earth . The large neutral area behind the ionized region is currently contracting under its own gravity . 
 There are also supersonic " bullets " of gas piercing the hydrogen clouds of the Orion Nebula . Each bullet is ten times the diameter of Pluto 's orbit and tipped with iron atoms glowing in the infra @-@ red . They were probably formed one thousand years ago from an unknown violent event . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Interstellar clouds like the Orion Nebula are found throughout galaxies such as the Milky Way . They begin as gravitationally bound blobs of cold , neutral hydrogen , intermixed with traces of other elements . The cloud can contain hundreds of thousands of solar masses and extend for hundreds of light years . The tiny force of gravity that could compel the cloud to collapse is counterbalanced by the very faint pressure of the gas in the cloud . 
 Whether due to collisions with a spiral arm , or through the shock wave emitted from supernovae , the atoms are precipitated into heavier molecules and the result is a molecular cloud . This presages the formation of stars within the cloud , usually thought to be within a period of 10 @-@ 30 million years , as regions pass the Jeans mass and the destabilized volumes collapse into disks . The disk concentrates at the core to form a star , which may be surrounded by a protoplanetary disk . This is the current stage of evolution of the nebula , with additional stars still forming from the collapsing molecular cloud . The youngest and brightest stars we now see in the Orion Nebula are thought to be less than 300 @,@ 000 years old , and the brightest may be only 10 @,@ 000 years in age . 
 Some of these collapsing stars can be particularly massive , and can emit large quantities of ionizing ultraviolet radiation . An example of this is seen with the Trapezium cluster . Over time the ultraviolet light from the massive stars at the center of the nebula will push away the surrounding gas and dust in a process called photo evaporation . This process is responsible for creating the interior cavity of the nebula , allowing the stars at the core to be viewed from Earth . The largest of these stars have short life spans and will evolve to become supernovae . 
 Within about 100 @,@ 000 years , most of the gas and dust will be ejected . The remains will form a young open cluster , a cluster of bright , young stars surrounded by wispy filaments from the former cloud . 
 = = Image gallery = = 
 = The Boat Race 1931 = 
 The 83rd Boat Race took place on 21 March 1931 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by the former rower John Houghton Gibbon , Cambridge won by two and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 26 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 42 – 40 in their favour . It was the first race for which John Snagge provided a radio commentary for the BBC . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1930 race by two lengths , and led overall with 41 victories to Oxford 's 40 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by R. W. M. Arbuthnot ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1909 and 1912 ) , J. A. MacNabb ( who had rowed in the 1924 race ) and P. H. Thomas ( a four @-@ time Blue between 1902 and 1905 ) . Oxford 's coaches were A. V. Campbell ( who took part in the 1922 and 1925 races ) , Stanley Garton ( who had rowed three times between 1909 and 1911 ) and P. C. Mallam ( a Dark Blue from 1921 to 1924 inclusive ) . The race was umpired by former Cambridge rower John Houghton Gibbon who had participated in the 1899 and 1900 races . 
 The rowing correspondent for The Times stated that the crews were " well @-@ matched " , while The Manchester Guardian 's correspondent predicted a " gruelling struggle " . It was the first time John Snagge provided a radio commentary for the BBC . He would go on to commentate for the corporation every year up to and including the 1980 race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 4 @.@ 625 lb ( 78 @.@ 1 kg ) , 1 @.@ 125 pounds ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw three rowers return to their crew with Boat Race experience , including D. E. <unk> who was making his third consecutive appearance . Cambridge 's crew included five rowers who had participated in the event prior to this year , including their stroke T. A. Brocklebank who was also rowing for the third year in a row . All of the participants in the race were registered as British . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to <unk> . In wind gusting from the south @-@ west , the umpire Gibbons started the race . Cambridge took an early lead , although they were out @-@ rated by the Dark Blues . The boats were close , with oars nearly touching , for the first two minutes of the race , before the Light Blue cox steered to avoid a collision . By the end of Fulham Wall , Cambridge held a half @-@ length lead although Oxford kept in touch , and even reduced the deficit to a quarter of a length by the time the crews passed the Mile Post . 
 By the Crab Tree pub , Cambridge 's stroke Brocklebank made his first push for ten strokes to which Oxford responded in kind . A second push from the Light Blues however saw them pull away and lead by one and a quarter lengths as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge . As both crews <unk> a headwind , they dropped to 29 strokes per minute , but their styles were markedly different : Cambridge were lively while Oxford laboured . By Chiswick Steps the lead was two and a half lengths and three by Barnes Bridge . The Dark Blues pushed hard in the final stretches and slowly reduced Cambridge 's lead until Brocklebank put one final spurt in at Mortlake Brewery to secure the victory . 
 Cambridge won by two and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 26 seconds , their eighth consecutive win in the event and the narrowest margin of victory since the 1923 race . The win took the overall record in the event to 42 – 40 in their favour . 
 = Portia labiata = 
 Portia labiata is a jumping spider ( family Salticidae ) found in Sri Lanka , India , Burma ( Myanmar ) , Malaysia , Singapore , Java , Sumatra and the Philippines . In this medium @-@ sized jumping spider , the front part is orange @-@ brown and the back part is brownish . The conspicuous main eyes provide vision more acute than a cat 's during the day and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly 's , and this is essential in P. labiata ′ s navigation , hunting and mating . 
 The genus Portia has been called " Eight @-@ legged Cats " , as their hunting tactics are as versatile and adaptable as a lion 's . All members of Portia have instinctive hunting tactics for their most common prey , but often can improvise by trial and error against unfamiliar prey or in unfamiliar situations , and then remember the new approach . While most jumping spiders prey mainly on insects and by active hunting , females of Portia also build webs to catch prey directly and sometimes join their own webs on to those of web @-@ based spiders . Both females and males prefer web spiders as prey , followed by other jumping spiders , and finally insects . In all cases females are more effective predators than males . 
 Populations from Los Baños and from Sagada , both in the Philippines , have slightly different hunting tactics . In laboratory tests , Los Baños P. labiatas rely more on trial and error than Sagada P. labiatas in finding ways to vibrate the prey 's web and thus lure or distract the prey . Around Los Baños the web @-@ building Scytodes pallida , which preys on jumping spiders , is very abundant , and spits a sticky gum on prey and potential threats . A P. labiata from Los Baños instinctively detours round the back of S. pallida while with plucking the web in a way that makes the prey believe the threat is in front of it . In areas where S. pallida is absent , the local members of P. labiata do not use this combination of deception and detouring for a stab in the back . In a test to explore P. labiata ′ s ability to solve a novel problem , a miniature lagoon was set up , and the spiders had to find the best way to cross it . Specimens from Sagada , in the mountains , almost always repeated the first option they tried , even when that was unsuccessful . When specimens from Los Baños , beside a lake , were unsuccessful the first time , about three quarters switched to another option . 
 Adult P. labiatas sometimes uses " propulsive displays " , in which an individual threatens a rival of the same sex , and unreceptive females also threaten males in this way . P. labiata females are extremely aggressive to other females , trying to invade and take over each other 's webs , which often results in cannibalism . A test showed that they minimise the risk of confrontations by using silk draglines as territory marks . Another test showed that females can recognise the draglines of the most powerful fighters and prefer to move near the draglines of less powerful ones . Females try to kill and eat their mates during or after copulation , while males use tactics to survive copulation , but sometimes females outwit them . Before being mature enough to mate , juvenile females mimic adult females to attract males as prey . When hunting , P. labiata mature females emit olfactory signals that reduce the risk that any other females , males or juveniles of the same species may contend for the same prey . 
 = = Body structure and appearance = = 
 As in most species of the genus , the bodies of female Portia labiatas are 7 to 10 millimetres long : 433 and their carapaces are 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 8 millimetres long . : 103 @-@ 105 Males ' bodies are 5 to 7 @.@ 5 millimetres long , : 433 with carapaces 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 3 millimetres long . : 103 @-@ 105 The carapaces of females are orange @-@ brown , slightly lighter around the eyes , where there are sooty streaks and sometimes a violet to green sheen in certain lights . : 103 @-@ 105 There is a broad white moustache along the bottom of the carapace , and running back from each main eye is ridge that looks like a horn . Females ' chelicerae are dark orange @-@ brown and decorated with sparse white hairs , which form bands near the carapaces . The abdomens of females are mottled brown and black , and bear hairs of gold , white and black , and there are tufts consisting of brown hairs tipped with white . The carapaces of males are orange @-@ brown , slightly lighter around the eyes , and have brown @-@ black hairs lying on the surface but with a white wedge @-@ shape stripe from the highest point down to the back , and white bands just above the legs . Males ' chelicerae are also orange @-@ brown with brown @-@ black markings . The abdomens of males are brown with lighter markings and with brown @-@ black hairs lying on the surface , and a short band of white hairs . The legs of both sexes are dark brown , with light markings in the femora ( the sections of the legs nearest the body ) . : 103 @-@ 105 All species of the genus Portia have elastic abdomens , so that those of both sexes can become almost spherical when well fed , and females ' can stretch as much when producing eggs . : 495 
 = = Senses = = 
 Although other spiders can also jump , salticids including Portia fimbriata have significantly better vision than other spiders , : 521 and their main eyes are more acute in daylight than a cat 's and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly 's . Jumping spiders have eight eyes , the two large ones in the center @-@ and @-@ front position ( the anterior @-@ median eyes , also called " principal eyes " : 51 ) housed in tubes in the head and providing acute vision . The other six are secondary eyes , positioned along the sides of the carapace and acting mainly as movement detectors . : 16 In most jumping spiders , the middle pair of secondary eyes are very small and have no known function , but those of Portias are relatively large , and function as well as those of the other secondary eyes . : 424 : 232 The main eyes focus accurately on an object at distances from approximately 2 centimetres to infinity , : 51 and in practice can see up to about 75 centimetres . : 53 Like all jumping spiders , P. labiata can take in only a small visual field at one time , as the most acute part of a main eye can see all of a circle up to 12 millimetres wide at 20 centimetres away , or up to 18 millimetres wide at 30 centimetres away . Jumping spider 's main eyes can see from red to ultraviolet . 
 Generally the jumping spider subfamily Spartaeinae , which includes the genus Portia , cannot discriminate objects at such long distances as the members of subfamilies <unk> or Lyssomaninae can . However , members of Portia have vision about as acute as the best of the jumping spiders , for example : the <unk> <unk> neglectus can distinguish prey and conspecifics up to 320 millimetres away ( 42 times its own body length ) , while P. fimbriata can distinguish these up to 280 millimetres ( 47 times its own body length ) . The main eyes of a Portia can also identify features of the scenery up to 85 times its own body length , which helps the spider to find detours . : 21 
 However , a Portia takes a relatively long time to see objects , possibly because getting a good image out of such tiny eyes is a complex process and needs a lot of scanning . This makes a Portia vulnerable to much larger predators such as birds , frogs and mantises , which a Portia often cannot identify because of the other predator 's size . 
 Spiders , like other arthropods , have sensors , often modified setae ( bristles ) , for smell , taste , touch and vibration protruding through their cuticle ( " skin " ) . : 532 – 533 Unlike insects , spiders and other chelicerates do not have antennae . A Portia can sense vibrations from surfaces , and use these for mating and for hunting other spiders in total darkness . It can use air- and surface " smells " to detect prey which it often meets , to identify members of the same species , to recognise familiar members , and to determine the sex of other member of the same species . : 13 
 = = Hunting tactics = = 
 = = = Tactics used by most jumping spiders and by most of genus Portia = = = 
 Almost all jumping spiders are predators , mostly preying on insects , on other spiders , and on other arthropods . The most common procedure is sighting the prey , stalking , fastening a silk safety line to the surface , using the two pairs of back legs to jump on the victim , and finally biting the prey . Most jumping spiders walk throughout the day , so that they maximize their chances of a catch . 
 Members of the genus Portia have hunting tactics as versatile and adaptable as a lion 's . All members of Portia have instinctive tactics for their most common prey , but can improvise by trial and error against unfamiliar prey or in unfamiliar situations , and then remember the new approach . They can also make detours to find the best attack angle against dangerous prey , even when the best detour takes a Portia out of visual contact with the prey , and sometimes the planned route leads to abseiling down a silk thread and biting the prey from behind . Such detours may take up to an hour , and a Portia usually picks the best route even if it needs to walk past an incorrect route . : 422 If a Portia makes a mistake while hunting another spider , it may itself be killed . 
 While most jumping spiders prey mainly on insects and by active hunting , : 340 females of Portia also build webs to catch prey directly . These capture webs are funnel @-@ shaped and widest at the top : 513 and are about 4 @,@ 000 cubic centimetres in volume . : 429 – 431 The web is initially built in about 2 hours , and then gradually made stronger . : 239 A Portia often joins her own web on to one of a web @-@ based non @-@ salticid spider . : 432 When not joined to another spiders ' , a P. labiata female 's capture web may be suspended from rigid foundations such as boughs and rocks , or from pliant bases such as stems of shrubs . : 432 
 A web spider 's web is an extension of the web spider 's senses , informing the spider of vibrations that signal the arrival of prey and predators . If the intruder is another web spider , these vibrations vary widely depending on the new web spider 's species , sex and experience . A Portia can pluck another spider 's web with a virtually unlimited range of signals , either to lure the prey out into the open or calming the prey by monotonously repeating the same signal while the Portia walks slowly close enough to bite it . : 340 – 341 Such tactics enable Portias to take web spiders from 10 % to 200 % of a Portia ′ s size , and Portias hunt in all types of webs . : 491 In contrast , other cursorial spiders generally have difficulty moving on webs , and web @-@ building spiders find it difficult to move in webs unlike those they build : sticky webs adhere to cursorial spiders and to web @-@ builders of non @-@ sticky webs ; builders of <unk> webs have difficulty with non @-@ <unk> webs , and vice versa . : 424 Where the web is sparse , a Portia will use " rotary probing " , in which it moves a free leg around until it meets a thread . : 433 – 434 When hunting in another spider 's web , a Portia ′ s slow , choppy movement and the flaps on its legs make it resemble leaf detritus caught in the web and blown in a breeze . : 514 P. labiata and some other Portias use breezes and other disturbances as " smokescreens " in which these predators can approach web spiders more quickly , and revert to a more cautious approach when the disturbance disappears . : 313 A few web spiders run far away when they sense the un @-@ rhythmical gait of a Portia entering the web – a reaction Wilcox and Jackson call " Portia panic " . : 418 
 If a large insect is struggling in a web , Portia does not usually take the insect , but waits for up to a day until the insect stops struggling , even if the prey is thoroughly stuck . : 448 When an insect stuck in a web owned by P. labiata , P. schultzi or any regional variant of P. fimbriata , and next to a web spider 's web , the web spider sometimes enters the Portia ′ s web , and the Portia pursues and catches the web spider . : 440 – 441 , 444 
 When catching an insect outside a web , a Portia sometimes lunges and sometimes uses a " pick up " , : 441 in which it moves its fangs slowly into contact with the prey . In some pick ups , Portia first slowly uses its forelegs to manipulate the prey before biting . : 441 P. labiata and P. schultzi also occasionally jump on an insect . : 448 However , Portias are not very good at catching moving insects : 516 and often ignore them , while some other salticid genera , especially the quick , agile <unk> and <unk> , perform well against small insects . : 516 
 When a Portia stalks another jumping spider , the prey generally faces the Portia and then either runs away or displays as it does to another member of its own species . : 444 
 The webs of spiders on which Portias prey sometimes contain dead insects and other arthropods which are uneaten or partly eaten . P. labiata and some other Portias such as P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) and P. schultzi sometimes scavenge these corpses if the corpses are not obviously decayed . : 448 
 A Portia typically takes 3 to 5 minutes to pursue prey , but some pursuits can take much longer , and in extreme cases close to 10 hours when pursuing a web @-@ based spider . : 439 
 All Portias eat eggs of other spiders , including eggs of their own species and of other cursorial spiders , and can extract eggs from cases ranging from the flimsy ones of Pholcus to the tough papery ones of Philoponella . While only P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) captures cursorial spiders in their nests , all Portias steal eggs from empty nests of cursorial spiders . : 448 
 Portias ' venom is unusually powerful against spiders . : 491 When a Portia stabs a small to medium spider ( up to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , including another Portia , the prey usually runs away for about 100 to 200 millimetres , enters convulsions , becomes paralysed after 10 to 30 seconds , and continues convulsing for 10 seconds to 4 minutes . Portia slowly approaches the prey and takes it . : 441 – 443 Portia usually needs to inflict up to 15 stabbings to completely immobilise a larger spider ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 times to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , and then Portia may wait about 20 to 200 millimetres away for 15 to 30 minutes from seizing the prey . : 441 – 443 Insects are usually not immobilised so quickly but continue to struggle , sometimes for several minutes . If Portia cannot make further contact , all types of prey usually recover , making sluggish movements several minutes after the stabbing but often starting normal movement only after an hour . : 441 – 443 
 Spiders have a narrow gut that can only cope with liquid food , and have two sets of filters to keep solids out . Some spiders pump digestive enzymes from the midgut into the prey and then suck the liquified tissues of the prey into the gut , eventually leaving behind the empty husk of the prey . Others grind the prey to pulp using the fangs and the bases of the pedipalps , while flooding it with enzymes ; in these species the fangs and the bases of the pedipalps form a preoral cavity that holds the food they are processing . : 576 
 Occasionally a Portia is killed or injured while pursuing prey up to twice Portia ′ s size . P. labiata is killed in 2 @.@ 1 % of pursuits and injured but not killed in 3 @.@ 9 % , P. schultzi is killed in 1 @.@ 7 % and injured but not killed in 5 @.@ 3 % , and P. fimbriata in Queensland is killed in 0 @.@ 06 % of its pursuits and injured but not killed in another 0 @.@ 06 % . A Portia ′ s especially tough skin often prevents injury , even when its body is caught in the other spider 's fangs . When injured , Portia bleeds and may lose one or more legs . Spiders ' palps and legs break off easily when attacked , Portia ′ s palps and legs break off exceptionally easily , which may be a defence mechanism , and Portias are often seen with missing legs or palps , while other salticids in the same habitat are not seen with missing legs or palps . : 440 – 450 
 = = = Tactics used by Portia labiata = = = 
 All performance statistics summarise result of tests in a laboratory , using captive specimens . : 429 – 430 The following table shows the hunting performance of adult females . In addition to P. labiata , the table shows for comparison the hunting performances of P. africana , P. schultzi and three regional variants of P. fimbriata . : 424 , 432 , 434 
 A female P. labiata often hangs a capture web from pliant stems and leaves of shrubs and lower branches of trees , rather than from rocks and tree trunks . : 432 Males of Portia do not build capture webs . : 429 
 A female P. labiata more often pursues small jumping spiders and web spiders than larger prey . While it more often catches small jumping spiders than larger ones , it is about equally effective with all sizes of web spiders up to twice P. labiata ′ s size . : 437 – 439 A female P. labiata is effective against insects up to twice P. labiata ′ s size when the insect is stuck in a non @-@ salticid 's web , and against insects not in webs and up to P. labiata ′ s size , while P. labiata seldom pursues or catches a larger insect in the open . A female P. labiata very seldom pursues or catches a larger insect in her own web , and is slightly less effective against smaller insects in P. labiata ′ s web than in other situations . : 439 Males are less efficient in all cases . : 436 
 A test in 1997 showed that P. labiata from the Philippines and from Sri Lanka have similar preferences for different types of prey , and that the order of preference is : web spiders ; jumping spiders ; and insects . : 337 – 339 These preferences apply to both live prey and motionless lures , and to P. labiata specimens without prey for 7 days ( " well @-@ fed " : 335 ) and without prey for 14 days ( " starved " : 335 ) . P. labiata specimens without prey for 21 days ( " extra @-@ starved " ) showed no preference for different types of prey . : 339 The test included as prey several species of web spiders and jumping spiders , and the selection of the prey species showed no evidence of affecting the results . : 337 – 339 Insects were represented by the house fly Musca domestica . : 335 
 Unlike the Queensland variant of P. <unk> , P. labiata has no special tactics when hunting other jumping spiders . : 343 
 P. labiata does not prey on ants , : 45 – 46 but is preyed on by the ants Oecophylla smaragdina and Odontomachus sp . ( species uncertain ) . : 47 
 P. labiata sometimes approaches a translucent nest contain a spider . Usually P. labiata waits faces the prey for up to several hours . Occasionally P. labiata leaps at the prey in the nest , but this is ineffective . : 447 
 Populations from Los Baños and from Sagada , both in the Philippines , have slightly different hunting tactics , and Los Baños has some very dangerous prey spiders . In laboratory tests , Los Baños P. labiatas rely more on trial and error than Sagada P. labiatas in finding ways to vibrate the prey 's web and thus lure or distract the prey . : 283 – 284 Around Los Baños the web @-@ building Scytodes pallida , which preys on jumping spiders , is very abundant . All members of the genus Scytodes spit a sticky gum on prey and potential threats , and this can immobilise a Portia long enough for the Scytodes to wrap the Portia in silk and then bite it . Around Los Baños , P. labiata instinctively detours round the back of S. pallida that is not carrying eggs while with plucking the web in a way that makes S. pallida believe the threat is in front of it . P. labiata prefers to stalk a female S. pallida carrying eggs , as then S. pallida is reluctant to drop the eggs in order to spit , and in this case P. labiata sometimes uses a direct attack . In areas where S. pallida is absent , the local members of P. labiata do not use this combination of plucking other spiders ' webs to deceive the prey and detouring for a stab in the back . 
 A test in 2001 showed that four jumping species take nectar , either by sucking it from the surface of flowers or biting the flowers with their fangs . The spiders fed in cycles of two to four minutes , then groomed , especially their chelicerae , before another cycle . A more formal part of the test showed that 90 juvenile jumping spiders , including P. labiata , generally prefer to suck from blotting soaked with a 30 % solution of sugar in water rather than paper soaked with pure water . The authors suggest that , in the wild , nectar may be a frequent , convenient way to get some nutrients , as it would avoid the work , risks and costs ( such as making venom ) . Jumping spiders can benefit from amino acids , lipids , vitamins and minerals normally found in nectar . 
 A test in a deliberately artificial environment explored P. labiata ′ s ability to solve a novel problem by trial and error . A little island was set up in the middle of a miniature atoll , and the space between with them was filled with water . The gap was too wide for the spiders to jump all the way , and the spiders ' options were to leap and then swim or to swim only . The testers encouraged some specimens by using a small scoop to make waves toward the atoll when the spiders chose the option the testers preferred ( leap and then swim for some spiders , and swim only for others ) , and discouraged some specimens by making waves back toward the island when the spiders chose the option the testers did not want – in other words , the testers " rewarded " one group for " successful " behaviour and " penalised " the other group for " unwanted " behaviour . : 284 – 286 Specimens from Sagada almost always repeated the first option they tried , even when that was unsuccessful . When specimens from Los Baños were unsuccessful the first time , about three quarters switched to the other option , irrespective of whether the first attempt was by leaping and then swimming or by swimming only . : 287 – 288 
 = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = 
 Before courtship , a male Portia spins a small web between boughs or twigs , and he hangs under that and ejaculates on to it . : 467 He then soaks the semen into reservoirs on his pedipalps , : 581 – 583 which are larger than those of females . : 572 – 573 
 Females of many spider species , including P. labiata , : 33 : 517 emit volatile pheromones into the air , and these generally attract males from a distance . : 36 The silk draglines of female jumping spiders also contain pheromones , which stimulate males to court females and may give information about each female 's status , for example whether the female is juvenile , subadult or mature . : 43 Pheromones may help to find jumping spiders ' nests , which are usually hidden under rocks or in rolled leaves , making them difficult to be seen . : 36 
 Portias sometimes use " propulsive displays " , with which a member threatens a rival of the same species and sex , and unreceptive females also threaten males in this way . : 343 A propulsive display is a series of sudden , quick movements including striking , charging , ramming and leaps . : 455 
 A laboratory test showed how males of P. labiata minimise the risk of meeting each other , by recognising fresh pieces with blotting paper , some containing their own silk draglines and some containing another male 's . Males also were attracted by fresh blotting paper containing females ' draglines , while females do not response to fresh blotting paper containing males ' draglines . This suggested that the males usually search for females , rather than vice versa . Neither sex responded to one week @-@ old blotting paper , irrespective of whether it contained males ' or females ' draglines . A similar series of tests showed that P. fimbriata from Queensland showed the same patterns of responses between the sexes . 
 Among P. labiata and some other Portias , when adults of the same species but opposite sexes recognise each other , they display at 10 to 30 centimetres . Males usually wait for 2 to 15 minutes before starting a display , but sometimes a female starts a display first . : 461 
 A female P. labiata that sees a male may approach slowly or wait . The male then walks with erect and displaying by waving his legs and palps . If the female does not run away , she gives a propulsive display first . If the male stands his ground and she does not ran away or repeat the propulsive display , he approaches and , if she is mature , they copulate . : 461 – 464 If the female is sub @-@ adult ( one moult from maturity ) , a male may cohabit in the female 's capture web . : 467 Portias usually mate on a web or on a dragline made by the female . : 518 P. labiata typically copulates for about 100 seconds , : 465 while other genera can take several minutes or even several hours . : 518 : 465 
 Females of P. labiata and P. schultzi try to kill and eat their mates during or after copulation , by twisting and lunging . The males wait until the females have hunched their legs , making this attack less likely . Males also try to abseil from a silk thread to approach from above , but females may manoeuvre to get the higher position . If the female moves at all , the male leaps and runs away . : 343 
 Before being mature enough to mate , females of P. labiata and also P. schultzi mimic adult females to attract males as prey . 
 P. labiata females are extremely aggressive to other females , trying to invade and take over each other 's webs , which often results in cannibalism . A laboratory test showed how they minimise the risk of meeting each other , by recognising pieces with blotting paper containing their own silk draglines and pieces contain other P. labiata females ' draglines . If obstacles make it impossible to see whether the other is physically present , she avoids blotting paper containing the other 's draglines , but moves with no constraint if she can see that the other female is not around . <unk> seem to act as territory marks , much as many mammals identify conspecifics by scent marking . P. labiata females also avoid rival females of higher fighting ability and spend more time around less powerful fighters . A laboratory test collected samples of the draglines of equal @-@ sized females and then pitted some of them in contests . Other females avoided the draglines of the victors , and spent the majority of their time on draglines of the losers . Similar tests showed that females of P. fimbriata from Australia and P. schultzi from Kenya do not avoid draglines of a powerful fighter . : 753 
 In P. labiata and in some other species , contests between males usually last only 5 to 10 seconds , and only their legs make contact . : 466 Contests between Portia females are violent : 518 and embraces in P. labiata typically take 20 to 60 seconds . These occasionally include grappling that sometimes breaks a leg , but more usually one female lunges at the other . Sometimes one knocks the other on her back and the other may be killed and eaten if she does not right herself quickly and run way . If the loser has a nest , the winner takes over and eats any eggs there . : 466 – 467 
 When hunting , mature females of P. labiata , P. africana , P. fimbriata and P. schultzi emit olfactory signals that reduce the risk that any other females , males or juveniles of the same species may contend for the same prey . The effect inhibits aggressive mimicry against a prey spider even if the prey spider is visible , and also if the prey is inhabiting any part of a web . If a female of one of these Portias smells a male of the same species , the female stimulates the males to court . These Portia species do not show this behaviour when they receive olfactory signals from members of other Portia species . 
 P. labiata usually lays eggs on dead , brown leaves about 20 millimetres long , suspended near the top of its capture web , and then cover the eggs with a sheet of silk . If there is no dead leaf available , the female will make a small horizontal silk platform in the capture web , lay the eggs on it , and then cover the eggs . : 434 – 435 
 Portia females have never been seen eating their own eggs , but in nature females with eggs of their own have been seen eating eggs of other females of the same species . In a test , P. labiata females did not eat their eggs if the testers put them in other female 's nests , showing that the test females could identify their own eggs , possibly by chemical means . When the test females and their eggs were restored to their own nests and other females ' eggs were also placed in the same nest , the test females ate neither their own eggs nor the " foreign " ones . In nature a female is unlikely to find foreign eggs in her nest , and it might be safest for females to avoid any eggs in their own nests . 
 For moulting , all Portias spin a horizontal web whose diameter is about twice the spider 's body length and is suspended only 1 to 4 millimetres below a leaf . The spider lies head down , and often slides down 20 to 30 millimetres during moulting . : 496 Portias spin a similar temporary web for resting . : 513 
 = = Ecology = = 
 P. labiata is found in Sri Lanka , India , Burma ( Myanmar ) , Malaysia , Singapore , Java , Sumatra and the Philippines . : 425 : 103 @-@ 105 
 The populations of P. labiata in Los Baños and in Sagada , both in the Philippines , have different environments : Los Baños is a low @-@ lying tropical rainforest where there are many species of spiders , some of which are especially dangerous to P. labiata ; and Sagada is at higher altitude , with pine @-@ forest and fewer species of spiders , none of which are as dangerous to P. labiata . The Los Baños variant has a slightly wider repertoire of tactics . : 283 – 284 
 In the Philippines , P. labiata does not prey on ants , : 45 – 46 but is preyed on by the ants Oecophylla smaragdina and Odontomachus sp . ( species uncertain ) , : 47 and a solitary Odontomachus has been seen attacking a P. labiata . : 50 In a test the ant <unk> vagans usually killed single @-@ handed a P. labiata . : 52 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 P. labiata is one of 17 species in the genus Portia as of May 2011 . This species has been named <unk> fimbriatus ( Hasselt , 1882 ; misidentification ) , Linus <unk> ( Thorell , 1887 ) , Linus <unk> ( Thorell , 1890 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Thorell , 1892 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Simon , 1903 ) and Portia labiata ( Wanless , 1978 ) , and the last name has been used since then . 
 Portia is in the subfamily Spartaeinae , which is thought to be primitive . : 491 Molecular phylogeny , a technique that compares the DNA of organisms to reconstruct the tree of life , indicates that Portia is a member of the clade Spartaeinae , that Spartaeinae is basal ( quite similar to the ancestors of all jumping spiders ) , that Portia ′ s closest relative is the genus Spartaeus , and that the next closest are Phaeacius and Holcolaetis . : 53 
 = Strange Overtones = 
 " Strange Overtones " is a song recorded by David Byrne and Brian Eno , written by the duo with Leo Abrahams . It was released on August 4 , 2008 by means of free download as the lead single from Byrne 's and Eno 's second collaborative studio album Everything That Happens Will Happen Today ( 2008 ) . " Strange Overtones " is an uptempo electronic gospel song , and its lyrics explore the themes of humanity overcoming technology that are central to the album . " Strange Overtones " was well received by critics , and was downloaded 40 @,@ 000 times in its first three days of release . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 While discussing the 2006 remix of My Life in the Bush of Ghosts at a dinner party , Eno suggested finishing some songs that he had written but that did not have lyrics . Byrne visited Eno 's studio to listen to the demos and the two decided to collaborate to finish writing the songs . They continued working on the tracks in New York City and London , with regular e @-@ mail correspondence to finish the composition . Multi @-@ instrumentalist and previous Eno collaborator Leo Abrahams performed guitar , percussion instruments , and piano in his London home studio and played guitar with Byrne on one occasion . Abrahams would continue working on the tracks in his home studio through May 2008 , with all collaborations being carried on via e @-@ mail . 
 " Strange Overtones " is the first single off the album Everything That Happens Will Happen Today . The track was released for free on August 4 , 2008 , as a DRM @-@ free MP3 available only through the album 's website . This is part of the unorthodox Internet @-@ based marketing scheme the two used to promote the album , inspired by the success of Radiohead 's 2007 album In Rainbows and the self @-@ promotional strategies of Nine Inch Nails for the albums Year Zero , Ghosts I – IV , and The Slip . In September 2008 , Jon Yeo created a music video for the track featuring the paintings of Eno . 
 A live recording of the song also appeared on Everything That Happens Will Happen on This Tour – David Byrne on Tour : Songs of David Byrne and Brian Eno , released on May 11 , 2009 . The song was also featured on the soundtrack album to Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps , along with several other David Byrne compositions . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Eno has also said the album is about " paint [ ing ] a picture of the human trying to survive in an increasingly digital world ; " themes that are explored in this song . " Strange Overtones " has been described as " a song about writing a song " — the subject of the song struggles to write innovative music , but is overheard by a neighbor using beats that are " twenty years old . " In terms of the genre of music , both Byrne and Eno have called it " electronic Gospel " — the backing tracks are the kind of electronic music for which Eno is known , paired with hopeful and inspiring lyrics from Byrne — this song in particular features an uptempo backing track . Eno had been thinking about Gospel for several years , but couldn 't write lyrics to hopeful songs . 
 Eno considers the album " [ S ] <unk> that combines something very human and fallible and personal , with something very electronic and mathematical sometimes . " And they tried to " make that picture of the human still trying to survive in an increasingly complicated digital world ... It 's quite easy to make just digital music and it 's quite easy to make just human music , but to try and make a combination is sort of , exciting , I think . " Byrne considered his job as lyricist to " bring more humanity " to Eno 's instrumentals , which can be " cold and academic . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song was downloaded over 40 @,@ 000 times in its first three days of availability . One of the earliest reviews for " Strange Overtones " was on the August 11 , 2008 , episode of NPR 's All Songs Considered . The Los Angeles Times called the track " intimate " and Stereogum echoed this by labeling it " warm " ; it also received a positive review from Rolling Stone . 
 Pitchfork Media gave the song several <unk> , including a positive review in their discussion of Everything That Happens Will Happen Today and naming the song number 11 track of 2008 — including appearances on eight editors ' end of the year lists — and placing number 297 on the Top 500 Tracks of the 2000s . Pitchfork also solicited the opinions of musicians for their favorite albums and songs of the year and The Watson Twins proclaimed " Strange Overtones " one of the best songs of 2008 . <unk> 's Top 89 of 2009 featured the song on two editor 's lists . Mark Wheat of NPR named it one of the top 10 songs of 2009 . 
 Ranking 60th for the year , this song was one of several from Everything That Happens Will Happen Today which appeared on The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop singles poll for 2008 — " Life Is Long " placed 337 , " My Big Nurse " was 350 , " Everything That Happens " ended up at 748 , and " I Feel My Stuff " reached 942 . In addition , a vote was cast for " Strange Undertones " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Leo Abrahams – guitars , bass guitar , <unk> <unk> , programming , co @-@ production 
 David Byrne – vocals , rhythm guitar , production , composition 
 Brian Eno – backing vocals , organ solo , <unk> piano , keyboards , programming , production , composition 
 Steve Jones – delay guitar 
 Mauro <unk> – bongo , conga , tambourine 
 Seb Rochford – live drums 
 Robert Wyatt – frame drum solo 
 = Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter = 
 Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter ( Japanese : <unk> VS . ストリートファイター , Hepburn : Māvuru Sūpā Hīrōzu bāsasu Sutorīto Faitā ) is a crossover fighting video game developed and published by Capcom . It is the sequel to X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter and the second installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series . The game was first released as an arcade game in 1997 . It then received ports to the Sega Saturn in 1998 and the PlayStation in 1999 . 
 The gameplay and aesthetics of Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter remain similar to X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . Each player selects two characters to compete in a one @-@ on @-@ one tag team fight , attempting to defeat the opposing team . The game replaces most of the X @-@ Men cast from the previous installment with characters from other Marvel properties . In addition , it introduces a new gameplay mechanic known as the " Variable Assist " , which would be used in future Marvel vs. Capcom titles . 
 Much like its predecessor , the game received generally positive reviews for its gameplay , sprite animations , and character roster . The Sega Saturn version , utilizing the 4MB RAM expansion cartridge , was praised for being an arcade @-@ perfect conversion . Due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation , tag team battles were , once again , removed from its port , resulting in more mixed critical reception . A sequel , Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes , was released in 1998 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter is the second installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series of 2D fighting games . It utilizes the same one @-@ on @-@ one tag team format previously employed in X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . The player chooses a team of two fighters , each sporting their own life gauge ; at the start of the match , the first selected character is controlled by the player , while the second character remains off @-@ screen and acts as support . Using a combination of joystick movements and button presses , the player must execute various moves to deplete the opposing team 's life gauges . The first player to completely drain the opponent 's health is declared the winner . If the timer reaches zero , the player that possesses the most health wins . 
 The most notable gameplay change in Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter is the addition of the " Variable Assist " . With the Variable Assist , the player can summon their off @-@ screen character to perform a special move without changing their currently @-@ controlled character , opening new possibilities for combos during battle and greatly expanding the role of the secondary character . The ability to use assists would later become a signature gameplay element used in several future installments of the Marvel vs. Capcom series . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 The arcade , Sega Saturn , and PlayStation versions of Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter share Arcade Mode and Versus Mode . In Arcade Mode , the player fights waves of artificial intelligence @-@ controlled teams , culminating in a final battle against the boss character , Apocalypse , who previously appeared in X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . Upon defeating Apocalypse in the console versions , the player must win against a second boss character , Cyber @-@ Akuma . The PlayStation version includes three exclusive game modes : Training , Hero Battle , and Cross Over . Hero Battle is an endurance mode which pits the player against the characters that they did not select . In Cross Over , the player and the computer opponent fight with the same team of characters ; if the player is victorious , then the computer swaps one character from both teams . The PlayStation port also features a Gallery Mode containing promotional and character artwork , which are unlocked by completing various goals . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter features a roster of 17 playable fighters , with nine characters from the Street Fighter universe and eight characters from the Marvel Universe . All of the X @-@ Men characters featured in X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter , with the exception of Cyclops and Wolverine , are replaced with characters from other Marvel Comics properties , such as Captain America , Spider @-@ Man , and the Hulk . Most of the Street Fighter characters from the previous game also return , with the exception of Cammy and Charlie ( although Charlie is actually still in the game as a palette swapped secret character named " Shadow " ) , who are replaced by Dan and Sakura . The Japanese arcade and console versions of Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter include an exclusive character named Norimaro ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) . Norimaro is an original character created and owned by Japanese comedian Noritake <unk> , who represents neither Marvel nor Capcom . Due to licensing issues involving the character , Norimaro is not available in international releases of the game . In addition to the 17 immediately playable characters , the roster also contains six secret characters . The secret characters are palette swaps of existing fighters with different moveset properties , such as " Dark Sakura " and " Mecha @-@ Zangief " , as well as recreations of U.S. Agent and Mephisto , based on Captain America 's and Blackheart 's sprites and moves , respectively . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 As with X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter , Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter was initially developed for the CP System II arcade system board , which debuted in Japanese arcades in 1997 . The game received a port to the Sega Saturn , exclusive to Japan , on October 22 , 1998 . The Sega Saturn port supported the 4MB RAM expansion peripheral , allowing the developers to create a conversion which retained the original frame rates and tag team system . The game was then ported to the PlayStation in February 1999 . Due to the console 's limited RAM capacity , the tag team format was switched to the more traditional round format used in other fighting game series , such as Street Fighter . To compensate for the removal of tag team gameplay , several new game modes , such as Hero Battle and Cross Over , were implemented . 
 According to former Capcom USA community manager and fighting game advisor Seth Killian , one of the primary goals for Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter was to " tone down the insanity " that occurred onscreen when compared to X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . The developers also sought to achieve balance within the character roster ; the previous title had gained a reputation for being " broken " , with characters having access to one or more infinite combos . These changes , however , were met with negative reception from fans , who criticized the game for offering less freedom . This ultimately led to Capcom recognizing the theme of insanity as the hallmark of the series and using it as a focus for future Marvel vs. Capcom installments . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The critical reception of Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter was generally positive to mixed . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot praised the Sega Saturn port for its gameplay , character roster , graphics , sprite animations , and additional RAM support , labeling it an " arcade @-@ perfect conversion " . However , Gerstmann faulted the game for being a " near @-@ carbon copy " of X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . While the PlayStation port also received praise for its gameplay and character roster , it attracted numerous criticisms , many of which stemmed from issues related to the console 's memory restrictions . GameSpot , IGN , and Game Revolution all reprimanded the game for removing the original version 's tag team @-@ based gameplay . Randy Nelson of IGN stated that the lack of tag team fights negated one of the major elements that made Capcom 's Vs. series stand apart , resulting in a game that was " nothing truly special or different " . Ryan Mac Donald of GameSpot expressed disappointment over the port 's lower graphical quality and cut animation frames . Game Informer also complained about experiencing instances of slowdown . However , despite the criticisms , reviewers claimed the game as an improvement over the critically panned PlayStation port of X @-@ Men vs. Street Fighter . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel to Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , titled Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes , was released for arcades in Japan on January 23 , 1998 . The game expands its character roster beyond the Street Fighter series to include other Capcom video game franchises , such as Darkstalkers and Mega Man . While its gameplay remains similar , Clash of Super Heroes removes the " Variable Assist " feature in favor of a new system . It was ported to the Dreamcast and PlayStation , which were released from 1999 through 2000 . A high @-@ definition version of the game was also released in 2012 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 as part of the Marvel vs. Capcom Origins compilation . 
 = Four Corners Monument = 
 The Four Corners Monument marks the quadripoint in the Southwestern United States where the states of Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and Utah meet . It is the only point in the United States shared by four states , leading to this area 's being called the Four Corners region . The monument also marks the boundary between two semi @-@ autonomous Native American governments , the Navajo Nation , which maintains the monument as a tourist attraction , and the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe Reservation . 
 The origins of the state boundaries marked by the monument occurred just prior to , and during , the American Civil War , when the United States Congress acted to form governments in the area to combat the spread of slavery to the region . When the early territories were formed , their boundaries were designated along meridian and parallel lines . Beginning in the 1860s , these lines were surveyed and marked . These early surveys included some errors , but even so , the markers placed became the legal boundaries , superseding the written descriptions of geographical meridians and parallels . This includes the Four Corners Monument , which has been legally established as the corner of the four states . 
 = = Monument = = 
 The monument where " visitors can simultaneously straddle the territory of four states " is maintained as a tourist attraction by the Navajo Nation Parks and Recreation Department . Unlike many other attractions based on what are primarily political boundaries , such as the Berlin Wall , Four Corners Monument is an example of a political boundary that is a tourist destination in its own right . The monument consists of a granite disk embedded with a smaller bronze disk around the point , surrounded by smaller , appropriately located state seals and flags representing both the states and tribal nations of the area . Circling the point , starting from north , the disk reads with two words in each state " Here meet in freedom under God four states " . Around the monument , local Navajo and Ute artisans sell souvenirs and food . An admission fee is required to view and photograph the monument . The monument is a popular tourist attraction despite its remote and isolated location . As early as 1908 , people traveled long distances to take pictures of family and friends at the monument in Twister @-@ like poses , sitting on the disk , in a circle of friends or family around the disk , or for couples to kiss directly over the disk . 
 = = Location = = 
 The monument is located on the Colorado Plateau west of U.S. Highway 160 , approximately 40 miles ( 64 km ) southwest of Cortez , Colorado . The monument is centered at 36 ° 59 ′ 56 @.@ 31 ″ N 109 ° 02 ′ 42 @.@ 62 ″ W. In addition to the four states , two semi @-@ autonomous American Indian tribal governments have boundaries at the monument , the Navajo Nation and the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe Reservation , with the Ute Mountain tribal boundaries coinciding with Colorado 's boundaries at the monument . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The nearby community of Teec Nos Pos receives 8 @.@ 46 inches of rain and 2 inches of snow annually . 
 = = History = = 
 The area now called Four Corners was initially American Indian land and beginning in the 16th century it was claimed by Spain as part of New Spain . Following Mexico 's independence from Spain , the area was governed by Mexico until being ceded to the United States by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848 following the United States ' victory in the Mexican – American War . The first boundary which would become part of the monument was set as part of the Compromise of 1850 , which created the New Mexico Territory and Utah Territory . The border between the two territories was congressionally defined as the 37th parallel north by the 31st United States Congress . In 1861 , the 36th United States Congress transferred land previously allocated to the Utah Territory , to the newly created Colorado Territory . The Colorado Territory 's southern border would remain as the 37th parallel north , but a new border — between the Colorado and Utah Territories — was declared to be the 32nd meridian west from Washington . This line was derived from the reference used at the time , the Washington meridian . 
 In 1860 , just prior to the outbreak of the American Civil War , a group of people in the southern portion of New Mexico Territory passed a resolution condemning the United States for creating such a vast territory with only a single , small government in place at Santa Fe . They claimed by doing so the U.S. had ignored the needs of the southern portion , left them without a functional system of law and order , and allowed the situation to deteriorate into a state of chaos and near anarchy . The group declared secession from the United States and announced their intent to join the Confederate States of America under the name of the Arizona Territory . The U.S. Congress responded in 1863 by creating another Arizona Territory with different , but partially overlapping boundaries . The Confederate boundaries split New Mexico along an east – west line , the 34th parallel north , allowing for a single state connection from Texas to the Colorado River . This would give the Confederacy access to California and the Pacific coast . The Union definition split New Mexico along a north – south line , the 32nd meridian west from Washington , which simply extended the boundary between Colorado and Utah southward . The Union plan eventually became reality , and this created the quadripoint at the modern Four Corners . After the split , New Mexico resembled its modern form , with only slight differences . 
 = = = Surveying the boundaries = = = 
 After the Civil War , efforts began to survey and mark the actual borders . In 1868 , the General Land Office ( GLO ) had Ehud N. Darling survey and set markers along the border between the Colorado and New Mexico Territories ( the 37th parallel north ) ; this border has become known as the " Darling Line " . In 1875 , another GLO surveyor , Chandler Robbins , surveyed and marked the border between the Arizona and New Mexico Territories ( the 32nd meridian west of Washington ) . Robbins began near the Mexico – United States border , and worked his way north marking the border every so often . Near the 37th parallel north he intersected the Darling Line , and here he erected a sandstone shaft . This sandstone shaft marked today 's location of the Four Corners Monument . 
 In 1878 , Rollin J. Reeves surveyed and marked the border between the newly created State of Colorado and the Utah Territory . Reeves located the sandstone shaft marker placed by Robbins at today 's Four Corners Monument . He then began to survey and mark the border between Colorado and Utah from this point northward . In 1901 , Howard B. Carpenter surveyed and marked the border between Arizona and Utah , completing the survey of borders making up the Four Corners Monument . 
 The results of these surveys and the markers placed were later accepted as the legal boundaries between the various states . 
 = = = The marker 's transformation into a monument = = = 
 By 1899 , the sandstone shaft marker placed by Chandler Robbins in 1875 had been disturbed and broken , so it was replaced with a new stone by two U.S. Surveyors , Hubert D. Page and James M. Lentz . In 1912 , a simple cement pad was poured around the marker . The first modern Navajo government convened in 1923 in an effort to organize and regulate an increasing amount of oil exploration activities on Navajo lands , and they would play a big role in the monument 's further development . In 1931 , Everett H. Kimmell , another U.S. Surveyor , found this newer stone had broken too and he replaced it with a brass disc marker set in cement . In 1962 , the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Indian Affairs poured an elevated cement pad around the 1931 brass marker ; this pad included the state border lines and names in tile . The monument was completely rebuilt in 1992 , and the 1931 brass marker was replaced with a disc shaped aluminum @-@ bronze plate set in granite . The monument was again rebuilt in 2010 , although the disc shaped plate from 1992 remained in place . 
 = = = <unk> controversy = = = 
 Since the early 20th century , controversies have arisen regarding the accuracy of the monument 's placement . After the initial surveys , it was found that the borders did not always exactly follow the lines of meridian and parallel as had been intended . This is due to the primitive surveying technology available at the time . This discrepancy left the four states asking if the correct borders were the exact lines of meridian and parallel ( and if new , more accurate , surveys needed to be done ) , or if the markers placed during the initial surveys were now the actual border . This issue was resolved when New Mexico sued Colorado in 1919 , and in 1925 the Supreme Court ruled that the markers placed during the initial surveys were the actual borders , even if the markers were off in some locations ( this includes the Four Corners Monument ) . Today 's legal description of these border lines are based on the original markers , and not the written description of the borders created when the territories were formed . Because of this , the borders between these states are not perfectly straight and often zigzag . One example is the border between Colorado and Utah , where in one area the border jogs west about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from where it was intended to be placed . Because this error occurred in the original survey — which superseded the written description ( being simply the 32nd meridian west of Washington ) , the border set out by the markers remains the border between the two states . ( 38 ° 16 ′ 34 ″ N 109 ° 03 ′ 38 ″ W ) 
 In 2009 this issue was again brought to the forefront due to American media reports that the monument was placed 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) west of its intended location . These reports were quickly corrected after it was discovered that sources had forgotten that when the initial surveys were conducted that the Washington meridian was used . This meridian has an offset from the modern reference , the Prime Meridian , which has been used in the United States since 1912 . This offset is often missed by those not familiar with the history of American surveying . 
 Even after the mistakes in the reports were discovered , a spokesperson for the U.S. National Geodetic Survey admitted the monument is placed 1 @,@ 807 feet ( 551 m ) east of where modern surveyors would mark the point . However , he defended the accuracy of the original survey , stating surveyors " nailed it " considering the primitive tools of the day . Pointing out the achievement given the conditions , he further stated , " Their ability to replicate that exact point — what they did was phenomenal , what they did was spot on . " He concluded by stating that any claims of errors in the location of the monument are irrelevant . Once a survey commissioned to establish a boundary has been accepted by the involved parties , the survey markers are legally binding , regardless of any error that is later discovered . Similar statements were issued by the Navajo Nation , defending their work in maintaining and promoting the monument . In addition , general U.S. land principles , law , and the Supreme Court have established that the location of the monument is the legal corner of the four states . 
 = = = Similar places = = = 
 Canadian four corners 
 No Man 's Heath 
 Tres <unk> 
 Triple Frontier 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 = SM UB @-@ 42 = 
 SM UB @-@ 42 was a Type UB II submarine or U @-@ boat for the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. UB @-@ 42 operated in the Mediterranean and the Black Seas during the war . She was broken up at Malta in 1920 . 
 UB @-@ 42 was ordered in July 1915 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in September . UB @-@ 42 was 36 @.@ 90 m ( 121 ft 1 in ) in length and displaced between 270 and 305 tonnes ( 266 and 300 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She was equipped to carry a complement of four torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and had an 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 97 in ) deck gun . As part of a group of six submarines selected for Mediterranean service , UB @-@ 42 was broken into railcar sized components and shipped to Pola where she was assembled , launched and commissioned in March 1916 . 
 In 21 patrols during the war , UB @-@ 42 sank ten ships of 15 @,@ 925 gross register tons ( GRT ) , captured one 97 @-@ ton vessel as a prize , and damaged Veronica a British Acacia @-@ class sloop . In October 1916 , UB @-@ 42 delivered five Georgians who had gold to help finance a Georgian independence movement . After the surrender of the Ottoman Empire in late October 1918 , UB @-@ 42 fled to Sevastopol , where she was surrendered in November . UB @-@ 42 was taken to Malta , where she was broken up in 1920 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The German UB II design improved upon the design of the UB I boats , which had been ordered in September 1914 . In service , the UB I boats were found to be too small and too slow . A major problem was that , because they had a single propeller shaft / engine combo , if either component failed , the U @-@ boat became almost totally disabled . To rectify this flaw , the UB II boats featured twin propeller shafts and twin engines ( one shaft for each engine ) , which also increased the U @-@ boat 's top speed . The new design also included more powerful batteries , larger torpedo tubes , and a deck gun . As a UB II boat , U @-@ 47 could also carry twice the torpedo load of her UB I counterparts , and nearly ten times as much fuel . To contain all of these changes the hull was larger , and the surface and submerged displacement was more than double that of the UB I boats . 
 The German Imperial Navy ordered UB @-@ 42 from AG Weser of Bremen on 31 July 1915 as one of a series of six UB II boats ( numbered from UB @-@ 42 to UB @-@ 47 ) . UB @-@ 42 was 36 @.@ 90 metres ( 121 ft 1 in ) long and 4 @.@ 37 metres ( 14 ft 4 in ) abeam . She had a single hull with saddle tanks and had a draught of 3 @.@ 75 metres ( 12 ft 4 in ) when surfaced . She displaced 305 tonnes ( 300 long tons ) while submerged but only 272 tonnes ( 268 long tons ) on the surface . 
 The submarine was equipped with twin Daimler diesel engines and twin electric motors — for surfaced and submerged running , respectively — that drove one propeller shaft . UB @-@ 42 had a surface speed of up to 9 @.@ 06 knots ( 16 @.@ 78 km / h ; 10 @.@ 43 mph ) and could go as fast as 5 @.@ 71 knots ( 10 @.@ 57 km / h ; 6 @.@ 57 mph ) while underwater . The U @-@ boat could carry up to 28 tonnes ( 28 long tons ) of diesel fuel , giving her a range of 7 @,@ 030 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 020 km ; 8 @,@ 090 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . Her electric motors and batteries provided a range of 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) while submerged . 
 UB @-@ 42 was equipped with two 50 @-@ centimeter ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry four torpedoes . The U @-@ boat was also armed with one 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) Uk L / 30 deck gun . 
 UB @-@ 42 was laid down on 3 September 1915 . As one of six U @-@ boats selected for service in the Mediterranean while under construction , UB @-@ 42 was broken into railcar @-@ sized components and shipped overland to the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pola . Shipyard workers from Weser assembled the boat and her five sisters at Pola , where she was launched on 4 March 1916 . 
 = = Service career = = 
 SM UB @-@ 42 was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy on 23 March 1916 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Fritz Wernicke . UB @-@ 42 , Wernicke 's first U @-@ boat command , was assigned to the Navy 's Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) . Although the flotilla was based in Pola , the site of the main Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy base , boats of the flotilla operated out of the Austro @-@ Hungarian base at Cattaro which was located farther south and closer to the Mediterranean . German U @-@ boats typically returned to Pola only for repairs . The first months of service for UB @-@ 42 proved unsuccessful ; the U @-@ boat sank no ships while in the Pola Flotilla . 
 After Germany 's conquest of Romania ( see Romania during World War I ) , the German Imperial Navy had sufficient fuel oil for submarines located in the Black Sea . UB @-@ 42 and three of her sister ships in the Pola Flotilla were ordered to Constantinople and , en route , had to navigate through the Dardanelles , which had been heavily mined by the Allies in the middle of 1916 . UB @-@ 42 joined the Constantinople Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote der Mittelmeerdivision in Konstantinopal ) on 16 August . 
 The German submarines in the Black Sea accomplished little , sinking only six ships between August 1916 and the end of the year . UB @-@ 42 sank half of the six in September and October . On 3 September , Wernicke and UB @-@ 42 achieved their first success when they sank the Russian transport Peter Darcy in the Black Sea . The 731 @-@ ton ship was headed from <unk> to Odessa when torpedoed by UB @-@ 42 . The 150 @-@ ton Russian vessel St. <unk> was sunk at the entrance to <unk> Bay on 5 October , and the 2 @,@ 891 @-@ ton <unk> was sunk two weeks later off Cape <unk> . 
 In April 1917 , UB @-@ 42 was operating in the Mediterranean when she made attacks on three ships . On 14 April , Wernicke torpedoed the British Acacia @-@ class sloop HMS Veronica 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) off Alexandria , damaging the 1 @,@ 200 t vessel . Two days later , UB @-@ 42 sank the 86 @-@ ton Egyptian sailing ship off Gaza and , a week after that , sank a 15 @-@ ton Italian sailing vessel , Boro , east of Rhodes in the Aegean Sea . 
 On 14 May , Wernicke was succeeded by Kapitänleutnant Kurt Schwarz as commander of UB @-@ 42 . The 27 @-@ year @-@ old Schwarz , who had previously commanded the Type UB I boat UB @-@ 14 , led UB @-@ 42 to sink her largest ship , <unk> , on 24 June . The 8 @,@ 912 @-@ ton former Leyland Line steamer was in use as a troopship , carrying 800 troops and horses when Schwarz sent her down 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ; 4 @.@ 6 mi ) southeast of Skyros in the Aegean . Three of <unk> 's crewmen died in the attack and , according to R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast , " splendid discipline " among the embarked troops was the sole reason that none were lost . 
 In early October , UB @-@ 42 had returned to the Black Sea , when she was ordered to deliver five Georgians with gold to finance a Georgian independence movement . While remaining in the Black Sea , UB @-@ 42 sank the sailing ships Agios Georgios on 10 October , and Francesco <unk> in November . On 22 November , she torpedoed the 1 @,@ 086 @-@ ton <unk> while the latter was at anchor off the Georgian coast . UB @-@ 46 also shelled Tuapse while in the northern Black Sea . 
 Kapitänleutnant Erich von Rohrscheidt assumed command of UB @-@ 42 on 6 April 1918 , and six week later , led the U @-@ boat in capturing the motor sailing vessel <unk> as a prize six weeks later off Novorossisk . In September , Kapitänleutnant Hans Georg <unk> ( who had succeeded Herbert Nolde after his two @-@ month stint as commander of UB @-@ 42 ) led the U @-@ boat in sinking her final ship . On the night of 7 / 8 September , the 1 @,@ 833 @-@ ton Italian steamer Vicenza was sent down south of Salonica . UB @-@ 42 's commanding officer was changed twice more before the end of the war , but the submarine sank no more ships . 
 After the signing of the Armistice of Mudros on 30 October ended the war for the Ottoman Empire , the four remaining U @-@ boats of the Constantinople Flotilla — UB @-@ 14 , UB @-@ 42 , UC @-@ 23 , and UC @-@ 37 — fled to Sevastopol . There they were surrendered on 26 November . UB @-@ 42 was broken up at Malta in 1920 . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = John Emilius Fauquier = 
 Air Commodore John Emilius " Johnny " Fauquier DSO & Two Bars , DFC ( March 19 , 1909 – April 3 , 1981 ) was a Canadian aviator and Second World War Bomber Command leader . He commanded No. 405 Squadron RCAF and later No. 617 Squadron RAF ( the Dambusters ) over the course of the war . A bush pilot , prior to the war , he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force as a flight instructor in 1939 . He then joined 405 Squadron in 1941 and would fly operationally for the rest of the war , taking a drop in rank on one occasion to return to active command . During his three tours of operation he participated in Operation Hydra and dozens of other sorties over Europe . 
 = = Early years = = 
 John Emilius " Johnny " Fauquier was born at Ottawa , Ontario on March 19 , 1909 , educated at Ashbury College and then entered the investment business at Montreal , Quebec where he joined a flying club . After earning his commercial pilot 's licence he formed Commercial Airways at Noranda , Quebec and prior to the Second World War had flown some 3 @,@ 000 hours as pilot in command on bush operations . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 He joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1939 as a flight lieutenant , completed an advanced course and served until mid @-@ 1941 as instructor of British Commonwealth Air Training Plan instructors . After a short period in England at a glider and paratrooper training center , he was posted to No. 405 Squadron RCAF . On returning in difficult weather conditions after bombing Berlin with the squadron on the night of November 7 , 1941 , he was forced to land his aircraft on a non @-@ operational airfield , and as a result was temporarily suspected of being a spy by the Home Guard . 
 By February 1942 , Fauquier had been promoted to acting wing commander and given command of the squadron . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) for gallantry . Shortly afterwards he was transferred from operations to the RCAF 's Overseas Headquarters for staff duties . He then served a short term with No. 6 Group before once more taking command of No. 405 Squadron in February 1942 . 
 During Operation Hydra in August 1943 , a bombing raid on a German military research facility at Peenemünde , he acted as deputy master bomber , making 17 passes over the target . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) in September 1943 , in part for his leadership during the raid . Soon after that raid he was promoted to acting group captain of that squadron , which had become a member of No. 8 ( Pathfinder ) Group . 
 During January 1944 , he flew 38 sorties , completing his second tour of operations with No. 405 Squadron . He was then awarded a Bar to his DSO . 
 After promotion to acting air commodore — a rank precluded from operational flying — he was Mentioned in Despatches in December 1944 . He then voluntarily reverted to group captain so that he might begin a third tour of operations , this time as commanding officer of No. 617 Squadron RAF ( the Dambusters squadron ) , which he led from December until the end of the war . Under his command the Dambusters conducted raids against submarine pens , viaducts and other targets . 
 With the end of the war in Europe , he was awarded a second Bar to his DSO for his command of 617 Squadron . Spencer Dunmore , a historian and novelist , remembers Fauquier in his history of Canada 's Air Force during World War II : 
 There is no doubt that Fauquier was one of the toughest of commanders . He saw his job as getting every available aircraft on the target on every night of operations and had no patience with any incompetence or inefficiency that might compromise that goal . ... The ground crews thought the world of him , because he thought the world of them and never took them for granted , always remembering to take them bottles of beer or other treats if they had worked particularly hard . Many considered him Canada 's greatest bomber pilot . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 After the war Fauquier returned to private business . He was inducted into Canada 's Aviation Hall of Fame in 1974 . 
 On July 4 , 1964 Fauquier traveled to Calgary , Alberta with the Minister of Defence Paul Hellyer , to observe the last official RCAF flight of an Avro Lancaster . This Lancaster , KB @-@ 976 , was captained by F / L Lynn Garrison with F / L Ralph <unk> as his co @-@ pilot . Other crew members were Captain E.J. McGoldrick , F / O Brian B. McKay , and Jimmy Sutherland , a wartime Lancaster flight engineer . 
 John Fauquier died on Friday April 3 , 1981 . 
 = September 1948 Florida hurricane = 
 The September 1948 Florida hurricane was the most intense tropical cyclone to make landfall in the state since the 1935 Labor Day hurricane . The fourth hurricane and third major hurricane of the season , this storm developed from a tropical wave over the Caribbean Sea on September 18 . Early the next day , the system strengthened into a hurricane while moving westward . Thereafter , it curved northwestward and continued to deepen . By September 20 , the system turned northward and later that day made landfall in Zapata Peninsula , Cuba as a Category 3 hurricane on the modern day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Another landfall occurred in Cuba early the next day to the south of Güines . Severe destruction was reported on the island , with winds up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) observed in Havana . Over 700 buildings were destroyed . Ten deaths occurred and damage totaled at least $ 2 million ( 1948 USD ) , while other sources estimate " several million dollars . " 
 After emerging into the Straits of Florida on September 21 , the storm resumed intensification , before striking near Boca Chica Key , Florida with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . By early on September 22 , the system peaked as a Category 4 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , another landfall occurred near Chokoloskee , Florida at the same intensity . Severe damage was reported in the state due to strong winds . The storm was considered the worst in Key West since the 1919 Florida Keys hurricane . Throughout the state , 1 @,@ 200 homes were severely damage or destroyed , while 40 businesses were demolished and 237 suffered impact . Throughout Florida , there were three fatalities and approximately $ 12 million ( 1948 USD ) in damage , over half of which was inflicted on crops . The storm rapidly weakened while crossing the state and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean as only a Category 1 hurricane later on September 22 . Slight fluctuations in intensity occurred before the hurricane became extratropical early on September 24 , while located northwest of Bermuda . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave – an elongated trough of low pressure – was detected moving through the Leeward Islands on September 14 . The system acquired a circulation while situated between Grand Cayman and Jamaica on September 18 . Thus , a tropical storm developed at 06 : 00 UTC . With initial sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , the storm quickly intensified while heading westward , and became a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale early on September 19 . Later that day , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane and then a Category 3 hurricane only six hours after . The hurricane turned northward on September 20 and made landfall on the Zapata Peninsula of Cuba with winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) at 22 : 00 UTC . With the storm continuing to move northward , it made another landfall in Cuba at 01 : 00 UTC the following day near Güines , <unk> Province . Emerging into the Straits of Florida early on September 21 , the hurricane weakened somewhat to a minimal Category 3 hurricane while moving across Cuba . 
 The hurricane restrengthened slightly on September 21 , before making landfall near Boca Chica Key , Florida at 17 : 00 UTC , with sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Around that time , the storm 's eye was only 10 mi ( 16 km ) in diameter . However , it deepened further and became a Category 4 hurricane early on September 22 . At 05 : 00 UTC , the system attained its peak intensity with a maximum sustained wind speed of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . Simultaneously , it struck near Chokoloskee , Florida . Due to the storm 's barometric pressure at the time , it was the most intense tropical cyclone landfall in Florida since the 1935 Labor Day hurricane . Several locations reported an " eye " , leading some meteorologists at the time to suggest that the storm had multiple circulations , though others theorized that dry air pockets existed between the rainbands . The hurricane rapidly weakened while moving northeastward across the state and was only a Category 1 hurricane upon emerging into the Atlantic Ocean near Jensen Beach late on September 22 . Slight re @-@ intensification occurred the following day , with the storm becoming a moderate Category 2 hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC . Nonetheless , it began losing tropical characteristics and transitioning into an extratropical cyclone early on September 24 , while located about 330 miles ( 530 km ) northwest of Bermuda . The remnants accelerated to the east @-@ northeastward and continued to weaken , before dissipating hundreds of miles east of Newfoundland on September 26 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Offshore Grand Cayman , the British steamer <unk> , with 72 people aboard , encountered the hurricane on September 19 . The ship ran aground in seas that were " as rough as hell " . They were safely rescued by a United States Coast Guard tugboat on September 20 . 
 Strong winds were reported on Cuba , with sustained winds up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) observed in Havana . Damage was particularly severe in that city and Matanzas . Almost 700 buildings were destroyed . Damage on the island totaled " several million dollars " , with some sources reporting at least $ 2 million . There were ten deaths and at least 200 injuries in Cuba . 
 In preparation for the storm , the American Red Cross opened 213 shelters , which were collectively occupied by 38 @,@ 323 people . Officials prepared two trains at Fort Pierce to evacuate residents living along Lake Okeechobee . Many residents in the area sought higher ground , but most refused to evacuate via the trains . Strong winds lashed Florida , with a sustained wind speed of 122 mph ( 196 km / h ) observed at the Naval Air Station Key West , before the anemometer blew away . There , 30 commercial and private aircraft were destroyed . Winds de @-@ roofed some homes and businesses nearby . Tides reached about 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above mean low water . The hurricane was considered the worst in Key West since 1919 . About 3 – 5 in ( 76 – 127 mm ) of rain fell on the Florida Keys . 
 In Homestead , a tornado destroyed a farmhouse and overturned a 3 @,@ 000 lb ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) truck . Two deaths occurred in Miami ; a woman was electrocuted by a broken wire , while a man was presumably blown off a 5 @-@ story building . Tides in the city reached 4 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) above mean low water , causing inundation of the bayfront and smashing large breakers and small crafts against the shore and piers . In the neighborhood of Coconut Grove , docking facilities , piers , and houseboats were severely damaged . Strong winds downed palm trees , which littered the streets of Lummus Park . The road to the <unk> Bridge in Miami Beach was washed away . Additionally , heavy rainfall caused flooding , with 10 to 11 in ( 250 to 280 mm ) of precipitation in some areas . Around Lake Okeechobee , an average of 8 in ( 200 mm ) of rainfall was observed . Clewiston was inundated with 2 to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water , while LaBelle was submerged for several days . Pasture lands were flooded , drowning some cattle and prompting a massive evacuation of herds to higher ground . Widespread damage to crops , particularly citrus and tropical fruits , was also reported along east coast of Florida as far north as the Indian River . 
 Throughout Florida , a total of 39 homes were destroyed , while 1 @,@ 161 others were severely damaged . Further , 40 buildings were demolished and 237 suffered impact . Three deaths were reported in Florida . Additionally , there were 45 injuries requiring hospitalization . Overall , damage in the state totaled about $ 12 million , with $ 5 million inflicted to property , $ 6 @.@ 5 million to crops , $ 300 @,@ 000 million to electrical services , and $ 200 @,@ 000 to roadway infrastructure , including bridges . 
 = Momentum Deferred = 
 " Momentum Deferred " is the fourth episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . Screenwriters Zack Stentz and Ashley Edward Miller wrote the episode , and co @-@ executive producer Joe Chappelle directed it . 
 The episode followed the theft of cryogenically @-@ frozen heads by shapeshifters from the parallel universe in their search for a specific head , while the Fringe team attempts to prevent this . Meanwhile , Olivia struggles to remember her conversation with William Bell ( guest actor Leonard Nimoy ) that took place in the season one finale . " Momentum Deferred " marked the first appearances of guest actors Theresa Russell , Sebastian Roché , and Ryan McDonald . 
 It first aired on October 8 , 2009 in the United States , and was watched by more than 6 @.@ 02 million viewers . The episode received generally positive reviews , with many critics praising the new revelations about the shapeshifters , the parallel universe , as well as the much @-@ anticipated conversation between Olivia and William Bell . In January 2013 , IGN ranked it as the third best episode of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A shipment of heads stored in cryogenic storage is hijacked , though one of the hijackers is killed by a guard , and bleeds a mix of blood and mercury , identifying him as a shapeshifter from the parallel universe . The Fringe division discovers an undamaged device they believe is used by the shapeshifters to take another 's identity . Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) gives the device to Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) at Massive Dynamic ; with the intact device , they can use it to examine the device of the first shapeshifter that tried to kill Olivia in the episode " A New Day in the Old Town " . They are unaware that this shapeshifter has taken the form of Olivia 's partner , Charlie ( Kirk Acevedo ) , ordered to find out what she learned from William Bell ( Leonard Nimoy ) when she was temporarily taken to the parallel universe . 
 Walter ( John Noble ) remembers that one of his former patients Rebecca Kibner ( Theresa Russell ) , while under a heavy dose of mind @-@ altering drugs , had witnessed events in the parallel universe including the presence of the shapeshifters . To try to learn more , they approach Rebecca and ask for her help , who is happy to participate . After outfitting her with electrodes and injecting her with more drugs , Walter starts the process by clanging a bell ; to everyone 's surprise , this causes Olivia to pass out . 
 The bell has caused Olivia to recall her conversation with Bell in the parallel universe . There , Bell warned Olivia of a " great storm " that was coming , and that she must stop a man who is trying to open a gateway between the two universes , providing Olivia with an icon symbol and a hand @-@ written name to remember . Walter and Peter help revive Olivia who immediately demands to see Nina . As Olivia leaves , Walter returns with Rebecca to her home . 
 Nina , initially doubtful that Olivia met Bell , recognizes the " great storm " phrase , and attempts to help Olivia in any way possible . As Olivia recounts the name of another cryogenics facility from Bell 's note , she receives a text message from Charlie warning her that Nina is the shapeshifter . She leaves and regroups with Charlie , but in a side alley , is alerted by her phone that Massive Dynamic 's analysis of the first device was completed , and reveals Charlie as the shapeshifter . Too late , Olivia realizes she has told Charlie the location of the cryogenics facility , and Charlie relays this to another agent . After a brief fight for her life , Olivia shoots and kills the shapeshifter . Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) helps to comfort Olivia that she had to kill the man she thought was Charlie . At the episode 's conclusion , the head with Bell 's symbol is reattached to the body of a shapeshifter . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " Momentum Deferred " was written by screenwriters Zack Stentz and Ashley Edward Miller . In the first several drafts of the episode , it was initially called " This is the Night Mail , " which was based on a poem by W.H. Auden . The episode completed the " gun arc " storyline , which began with Olivia hurtling out of her SUV in the season premiere and being too weak to control her gun during her physical recovery , and ended with the killing of the shapeshifter posing as Charlie Francis . Miller and Stentz elaborated , " I think it 's Jeff Pinkner who described the first several episodes as the gun arc . Because really the gun played out until Olivia was whole again . Her actions with the gun in all of those episodes symbolized where she was on the journey . And it culminates in her being able to use it to kill someone who looks exactly like her best friend . " 
 Co @-@ executive producer Joe Chappelle worked as the episode director . He commented , " I was so looking forward to directing <unk> because it was a payoff of a full season and three episodes of work . You 've been laying all this groundwork of information for all the characters and the backstory . The actors loved doing it because they 're earned moments . " 
 The episode was shot in Vancouver during the summer , where temperatures were over 100 degrees Fahrenheit . Executive producer Jeff Pinkner commented that despite the heat , guest actor Leonard Nimoy " was doing pages and pages of dialogue , and he handled it like a pro , " while co @-@ star Joshua Jackson joked that " [ Nimoy 's ] wife said he practices biofeedback , so he knows how to control his body temperature " . Chappelle called the episode " intriguing because it 's a summation of everything that came before it , so we 're resolving a lot of issues and a lot of questions . But it 's also a springboard into the rest of the season " . Actor John Noble , who played Walter Bishop , called it " probably one of our strongest and densest episodes " because it " changes the whole direction of the show " . 
 Not knowing when his next billed episode would be , Nimoy said in an interview before " Momentum Deferred " aired that he 's " waiting to see what these terribly imaginative writers come up with for the future . I ’ m expecting that I probably will be going back to work for them before too much longer . I 'm looking forward to what they send me on the page " . After shooting the episode , Pinkner said " We want him back as much as he wants to come back " . Nimoy 's next appearance occurred six episodes later , in " Grey Matters " . As a reference to a brief appearance by Nimoy 's character William Bell , sound editor Bruce Tanis was instructed to create bells as a recurring motif in the scene when Bell encounters Olivia and gives her vital information about the parallel universe . Tanis explained that because he couldn 't put the sound of bells in everything , he " took some dry ice recordings and pitched them down considerably and reverbed them to become ringing tones that I played underneath the whole scene " . Tanis also used some " reversed " ship 's bells as well as crystal glass rubs in order to make Bell 's office sound like multiple layers of glass and bell sounds ; he referred to the scene as " a little ominous " but not " too cliche " . 
 Prop master Rob Smith joined the series during its second season , and had to quickly learn about all the gadgets featured in Fringe 's debut season . Smith was asked to create a " neural stimulator " in the script to " Momentum Deferred " , but " didn ’ t really know the episodes well enough to say , ‘ Oh , ok , that ’ s exactly what it is . ’ So I talked to the director , who had been on season 1 , and he goes , ‘ Oh , I don ’ t know , it ’ s just something that goes on the guy ’ s head ' . " Smith discovered that the headpiece in question had been rented during the first season , causing him to recreate the prop over one weekend . He called this process " a little bit stressful . " The gadget , Smith explained , was important because it " defined the way that Walter works . He ’ s this mad scientist who takes conventional science and then puts his own twist on it , as it were . And then the thing that struck me about that one was that it made me uncomfortable to look at it . " Smith added , " It ’ s one of those things that people love and hate about Fringe , it puts your [ sic ] out of your comfort zone . That ’ s sort of what I was trying to say about Walter … there ’ s kind of a bird ’ s nest of wires everywhere , and then they end up on the guy ’ s head , and from that he can tell what the guy ’ s thinking . It ’ s quite cool . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Momentum Deferred " marked the first appearance of guest actor Sebastian Roché as Thomas Jerome Newton , a new recurring villain from the parallel universe often referred to as the " Omega Man " . Newton was named in honor of English musician David Bowie , who played a character with the same name in the film The Man Who Fell to Earth . German actor Thomas Kretschmann was originally cast for the part , but was unable to be a recurring character due to a scheduling conflict . Though uncredited , Kretschmann briefly did some shooting on the set of " Momentum Deferred " ; Kretschmann was originally in Newton 's one scene in the episode , at the end when they show a sewn @-@ up head , but Roché 's head instead appears . 
 Near the end of the first season in late May 2009 , actor Kirk Acevedo announced he was " fired " off of the show from his Facebook page . Executive producer Jeff Pinkner denied it soon after , explaining that " like all things on Fringe , there is more to this story than meets the eye " and reminded viewers that an alternate version of his character had already appeared in a first season episode . Later that summer at Comic @-@ Con in July he reiterated that " rumors of Charlie 's demise are premature , " and at the August Television Critics Association press tour he commented about Charlie possibly showing up in the previously visited parallel universe . " Momentum Deferred " marked the actor 's last appearance in the prime universe . In response to why the character was killed off , Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello reported that the " storyline dictated . Charlie wasn 't going to have much to do this season , and rather than waste Kirk 's time , they cut him loose " . The character 's doppelganger from the parallel universe returned in the season finale " Over There " . 
 Despite initial reports stating guest actress Theresa Russell would be playing a recurring character , the episode marked her only appearance as an adult version of the character . Russell plays Rebecca Kibner , a former test subject and love interest of Walter 's ; a younger version played by actress Tegan Moss is seen in the season premiere " A New Day in the Old Town " . In the DVD audio commentary , the writers explained that when they were looking for an actress to play the character , the casting director April Webster , acting on Jeff Pinkner 's instructions , called Kibner both " a blessing and a curse , " because the writers wanted to explore the burden of what it meant to be special . One writer explained Kibner and Walter 's past relationship had not been a long term affair , but instead more of a " little fling " . The episode also marked the first appearance of Canadian actor Ryan McDonald as recurring character Brandon Fayette , a Massive Dynamic scientist . According to the episode 's writers , the character is based on a man who works at the production company Bad Robot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Momentum Deferred " aired to an estimated 6 @.@ 02 million viewers in the United States , with a 2 @.@ 1 / 6 rating for adults 18 – 49 . This rating helped Fox increase 39 % in the rating share from the previous year on their Thursday night shows . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Josh Wigler from MTV loved the revelations from the conversation with William Bell , along with the appearance of shapeshifters . He thought the episode was Fringe " at its absolute finest , " as the " mystery @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week and the overarching plot worked in complete harmony with one another , proving that Fringe is entirely capable of delivering on both a serialized and episodic basis " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker praised guest actor Leonard Nimoy 's " terrific , coolly @-@ controlled performance , " and wrote that he continued " to admire the way Fringe can mind @-@ meld its scientific fiction with workplace @-@ family drama and light comedy , juggling an increasing number of characters and subplots , while still maintaining a strong narrative through @-@ line " . The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode a B + , explaining that the episode was much better than the previous week and also praising the introduction of two new characters and the long awaited meeting between Olivia and William Bell . Murray concluded his review somewhat negatively , " If the whole episode had maintained the " yes we 're aware this is kinda <unk> " tone of that one great line , I 'd have bumped it up one more notch to the A @-@ level . I 'm holding back only because " Momentum Deferred " was such an info @-@ dump , and played a fraction too soberly " . 
 Writing for Mania.com , Stephen Lackey thought the alternate universe plotline was risky because it had the potential to cause Fringe to " mak [ e ] a complex plot convoluted by taking off in flights of fancy with the writing and forgetting what has been written before , " but he does not believe that point has been reached yet . He also thought the meeting between Olivia and Bell " wasn 't as epic as it has been teased , " but enjoyed the " fascinating " cliffhanger at the end , ultimately calling it a " good " episode . Website blogger io9 listed " Momentum Deferred " as one of the " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to get into the show . In January 2013 , IGN ranked the episode as the third best of the series , explaining that " the early seasons of Fringe specialized in putting Olivia in dire circumstances and letting her fight her way out like a she @-@ boss . ' Momentum Deferred ' was one of those episodes , and it brought more exciting moments than most series get in a whole season . " 
 = 2008 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 2008 Giro d 'Italia was the 91st running of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . It began in Palermo on 10 May and ended in Milan on 1 June . Twenty @-@ two teams entered the race , which was won by Spaniard Alberto Contador of the Astana cycling team . Second and third respectively were Italians Riccardo Riccò and Marzio Bruseghin . 
 Contador first took the race lead after the second mountain stage , to <unk> , by finishing nearly fifteen minutes ahead of previous race leader Gabriele Bosisio . The race 's overall classification had been headed for several days beforehand by Giovanni Visconti , who participated in a breakaway in the sixth stage which won him sufficient time to hold the race leader 's pink jersey for more than a week . In the race 's final week , Contador faced stern challenges from Riccò and defending Giro champion Danilo Di Luca . Though Contador did not win any stage , his performances were consistently strong enough to remain ahead through to the conclusion of the race . 
 Team CSF Group – Navigare appeared to perform quite well in the race , coming away with four stage wins and victory in the mountains classification and the Trofeo Fast Team . In August 2008 , mountains classification winner Emanuele Sella was announced to have tested positive for methoxy polyethylene glycol @-@ <unk> beta ( better known as Mircera , an erythropoietin derivative ) at an out @-@ of @-@ competition control held by the Union Cycliste Internationale ( UCI ) . He subsequently admitted his doping , and named teammate Matteo Priamo as his supplier . Both riders were subsequently suspended . Though as of April 2010 no definitive positive results have come to light from samples taken during the Giro , <unk> of those samples has reportedly revealed six to seven presumptive positives for Mircera . Riccò , who tested positive for the drug at the 2008 Tour de France , is among those suspected of having given positive tests in the Giro , as is Sella . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty @-@ two teams participated in the 2008 Giro . These included 16 UCI ProTour teams , and six UCI Professional Continental teams . Of the 18 ProTour teams , the two left out were Bouygues <unk> and Crédit Agricole . Two other ProTour teams , Astana and Team High Road , were left off the first list of teams announced by RCS Sport , the organizers of the Giro . This list also included a further Professional Continental team , NGC Medical – OTC Industria Porte , which was later excluded . Astana and Team High Road were both later added , with Astana 's invitation coming just six days before the event began . 
 The 22 teams who took part in the race were : 
 = = Race previews and favorites = = 
 The 2008 Giro featured an assortment of contenders for the overall victory . Defending champion Danilo Di Luca had faced potential bans which would have kept him out of the race , after investigations into his involvement with the Oil for Drugs scandal and an irregular doping test given after stage 17 of the 2007 Giro d 'Italia , either of which could have resulted in a two @-@ year suspension . Though he was suspended for three months because of Oil for Drugs , he was cleared by the Italian National Olympic Committee of any wrongdoing in the 2007 Giro , and was thus permitted to start . 
 The late invitation of Astana to the race provided three potential contenders : 2007 Tour de France winner Alberto Contador , third @-@ place finisher from that race Levi Leipheimer , and Andreas Klöden . One analysis of pre @-@ race favorites considered Klöden to be the strongest of them , while another considered Contador to be the race 's biggest favorite after his wins at the recently run Vuelta al País Vasco and Vuelta a Castilla y León . Both Di Luca and Contador had strong domestiques ( support riders ) by their sides , with Di Luca joined by two @-@ time Giro d 'Italia champion Paolo Savoldelli , Gabriele Bosisio , and Alessandro <unk> , and Contador by Leipheimer and Klöden . Other riders named as overall contenders included Denis Menchov , Gilberto Simoni , Vincenzo Nibali , Riccardo Riccò , Mauricio Soler , Marzio Bruseghin , Emanuele Sella , Evgeni Petrov , Franco Pellizotti , and Juan Manuel <unk> . <unk> 's odds @-@ on favorite was Klöden . 2004 Giro d 'Italia winner Damiano Cunego chose to skip the race to better prepare for the Tour de France , adding to speculation that this would be the first Giro since 1996 to feature a non @-@ Italian winner . 
 Six stages were classified as flat and likely to be contested by sprinters . Italian sprinter Alessandro Petacchi , who had notably won nine stages in the 2004 race , did not plan to enter this Giro because of bouts with influenza and bronchitis which hindered his training . He was later suspended from the sport , and his contract with Team Milram terminated , as a result of his controversial doping case from the 2007 Giro . Sprinters identified as being favorites in the bunch finishes that the Giro would offer included Alexandre <unk> , Dimitry Muravyev , Enrico Gasparotto , Maximiliano <unk> , Robert Förster , Mark Cavendish , André Greipel , Daniele Bennati , Paolo Bettini , Graeme Brown , Robbie McEwen , Julian Dean , Erik Zabel , and Alberto <unk> . <unk> was withdrawn by his team CSF Group – Navigare the day before the race began after a positive doping test , though he would later be cleared of any wrongdoing . His name remained on the start list , and he was not replaced , meaning CSF Group – Navigare entered the race with only eight riders instead of the customary nine . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The race began for the second year in succession with a team time trial on one of Italy 's islands , in this case Sicily ( in 2007 it had been Sardinia ) . The route contained only four stages that were officially deemed mountain stages , but several of the seven intermediate stages contained selective climbs . The Giro had four time trials , three of which were individual and one a team event . Six stages were classified as flat . 
 The sixth stage was originally scheduled to be 265 km ( 165 mi ) in length , but it was shortened the day before it was to be run . This decision was made because many riders in the race had become upset over the lengths of transfers from the end of one stage to the beginning of the next and that this afforded them little rest to prepare for such long stages . The 34 km ( 21 mi ) Circuito del Gargano was eliminated . 
 Of the four official mountain stages , three ended with climbs : stage 14 to Alpe di <unk> , stage 15 to Passo Fedaia , and stage 19 to <unk> . Stage 20 earned its mountain designation by way of the Passo di Gavia and the Passo del Mortirolo , respectively the highest point reached and the steepest climb of this year 's Giro . Two other stages had summit arrivals , stage 7 to <unk> and the demanding stage 16 climbing time trial to Plan de Corones , the summit of which the Giro had never before visited . It was hoped that the number of time trials , including one on the race 's last day , would keep the race hotly contested to the end . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro started with a team time trial in Sicily . There was pre @-@ race speculation that this stage would result in an American rider wearing the pink jersey for the first time in twenty years , as Slipstream – Chipotle , Team CSC , and Astana were among the biggest favorites to win and all had strong American time trialists on their squads . The victory went to Slipstream – Chipotle , which put their team leader , American Christian Vande Velde , in the first pink jersey . With a hilly stage ahead on day two of the Giro , Vande Velde 's race lead was far from secure . He lost it to Franco Pellizotti , who finished sufficiently ahead of Vande Velde on the stage to take a lead of a single second in the overall classification . Pellizotti retained the race lead for the next three days , as those stages were flat and were contested by sprinters , with the overall favorites finishing together with the peloton in each . 
 The sixth stage was shortened from its original length of 265 km ( 165 mi ) to 231 @.@ 6 km ( 143 @.@ 9 mi ) . This was still the race 's second @-@ longest stage , and it featured a breakaway which shook up the race standings . Eleven riders finished nearly twelve minutes in front of the peloton , and reigning Italian national road race champion Giovanni Visconti assumed the race lead , by a margin of less than one second over fellow breakaway member Matthias Russ . Russ had begun the stage 13 seconds ahead of Visconti in the overall classification , but with Visconti gaining seven seconds on Russ at the finish line and six in <unk> on the stage 's intermediate sprint , the young Italian became the next to wear the pink jersey . Visconti and his team Quick @-@ Step ably defended the jersey for nine days , keeping it through the hilly seventh and eighth stages , as well as in the individual time trial in stage 11 and in three flat stages . Visconti eventually lost the lead on stage 14 , the Giro 's first stage categorized as high mountain , as he finished more than eighteen minutes behind stage winner Emanuele Sella . The race lead passed to Gabriele Bosisio after that stage , but he was unable to hold it the next day , finishing fifteen minutes behind Sella , again the stage winner . It was on this stage that Alberto Contador took the lead that he would never relinquish . 
 Contador faced repeated challenges from Riccardo Riccò and Danilo Di Luca in the race 's final week . They were separated by less than a minute after stage 15 , and though Di Luca would falter slightly in the Giro 's second individual time trial , the time gap among the three of them was just 21 seconds heading in to the Giro 's final mountain stage . Di Luca faltered further in that last mountain stage , losing almost five minutes and any chance to repeat as Giro champion , but Contador and Riccò finished together and were separated by only four seconds going into the Giro 's final stage , another individual time trial . Contador 's superior time trial skills provided the difference in the Giro 's finale . Though he finished 11th on the stage , he gained more than two minutes over Riccò , winning the Giro overall without taking any individual stage . 
 Emanuele Sella of CSF Group – Navigare won three stages in the race 's final week and took a convincing victory in the mountains classification , leading it for the entire race . His subsequent positive tests and confessions to the use of performance @-@ enhancing drugs outside the Giro cast serious doubt on the legitimacy of these results , however . Daniele Bennati was nearly as dominant in winning the points classification , taking three stage wins and six other top @-@ ten finishes . He led the classification after every stage except the second and eighth , which were both won by Riccò , who thereby gained the mauve jersey for one day on two separate occasions . Though Riccò was never able to take the overall race lead , he was the winner of the youth classification , taking the white jersey from Visconti when he lost the overall lead and holding it through the conclusion of the race . That jersey had also previously passed over the shoulders of Chris Anker Sørensen and Morris <unk> . 
 Five teams repeated as stage winners . Four individual riders won multiple stages . In addition to Sella 's three victories in the final week , the riders who won more than once were Riccardo Riccò in stages 2 and 8 , Daniele Bennati in stages 3 , 9 , and 12 , and Mark Cavendish in stages 4 and 13 . Tinkoff Credit Systems also won multiple stages , with Pavel Brutt in stage 5 and Vasil Kiryienka in stage 19 , after both figured into early morning breakaway groups . 
 Slipstream – Chipotle , Lampre , LPR Brakes – Ballan , <unk> – Androni , and Team CSC all won one stage apiece . Slipstream – Chipotle won the opening team time trial , Lampre rider Marzio Bruseghin won the Giro 's first individual time trial , LPR Brakes – Ballan rider Gabriele Bosisio won stage 7 from a morning escape , <unk> – Androni 's Alessandro Bertolini took stage 11 from a breakaway , and Team CSC veteran Jens Voigt was the winner of stage 18 . 
 Success was achieved by only a handful of teams , meaning that other teams did not achieve much in the race . Though they nearly took the race lead with Matthias Russ in stage 6 , Gerolsteiner had just two riders finish the race , and were never otherwise close to a notable result . Euskaltel – Euskadi had only four riders finish the race . Two other ProTour teams , Cofidis and Française des Jeux , similarly failed to be at all competitive in the Giro . None of them would return to the Giro in 2009 ; Gerolsteiner folded in 2008 after being unable to locate a new sponsor while Euskaltel – Euskadi , Cofidis , and Française des Jeux all made it known that they did not wish to participate and were thus declined invitations . 
 = = = Doping = = = 
 Several notable riders in the Giro were announced to have tested positive for banned performance @-@ enhancing drugs after the race concluded . Prominent amongst them was CSF Group – Navigare rider Emanuele Sella , a triple stage winner , winner of the mountains classification , and a key rider to CSF Group – Navigare 's victory in the teams classification . It was announced on 5 August that Sella had tested positive for <unk> polyethylene glycol @-@ <unk> beta , better known as Mircera , a third @-@ generation form of the banned blood booster erythropoietin . At the time the Giro was run , the test for Mircera was still in development . An out @-@ of @-@ competition control was taken on 23 July , just days after positives from the 2008 Tour de France had come to light , and samples were sent to labs in Paris for analysis . UCI President Pat McQuaid said that Sella had been targeted in the control and that " [ i ] t wasn 't rocket science " to conclude that Sella 's performances in the Giro could have been artificially enhanced . 
 Sella confessed his doping to the Italian National Olympic Committee ( CONI ) and named teammate Matteo Priamo , also a stage winner in this Giro , as his supplier . Though Priamo never tested positive for anything , and though the Italian National Anti @-@ Doping tribunal originally exonerated him , the Court of Arbitration for Sport ruled , upon appeal by CONI , that he should be suspended for four years . 
 Riccardo Riccò , a double stage winner and the best young rider , tested positive for Mircera during the Tour de France , and was subsequently expelled with his team Saunier Duval – Scott . This control was taken just days before the one at which Sella gave his positive . Since it took place during the Tour de France , Riccò 's results from that race have been removed , but the results for Sella , Priamo , and Riccò all still stand as no positive tests from controls taken during the Giro have come to light . Riccò claims to have only taken the drug before the Tour , but there has been speculation that his performances in the Giro were not legitimate . Sella has similarly confessed to taking the drug while not confessing to have used it during the Giro . 
 After repeated positives over the summer , including tests from Leonardo Piepoli and Bernhard Kohl at the Tour de France , and Davide Rebellin and Stefan Schumacher from the 2008 Olympic Games , the UCI has sought to have samples taken during the Giro retested . In October 2009 , it was announced that six to seven riders from this Giro had presumptive positives , while further untestable doping involving ozone was also suspected . In total , 82 samples were retested , and the presumptive positives have been compared to values stored at an anti @-@ doping lab in Lausanne , Switzerland . The identities of those riders who tested positive have not yet been revealed . It is believed that Rebellin and Sella are among the riders to have presumptive positives . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2008 Giro d 'Italia , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass start stages , the leader received a pink jersey . This classification is considered the most important of the Giro d 'Italia , and the winner is considered the winner of the Giro . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a mauve jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage . The stage win awarded 25 points , second place awarded 20 points , third 16 , fourth 14 , fifth 12 , sixth 10 , and one point less per place down the line , to a single point for 15th . In addition , some points could be won in intermediate sprints . 
 There was also a mountains classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the mountains classifications , points were won by reaching the top of a mountain before other cyclists . Each climb was categorized , either first , second , or third category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorized climbs . The highest point in the Giro ( called the Cima Coppi ) , which in 2008 was the Passo di Gavia in Stage 20 , afforded still more points than the other first @-@ category climbs . 
 The fourth was the young rider classification which awarded a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1983 were eligible . 
 There were also two classifications for teams . The first is the Trofeo Fast Team . In this classification , the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage are added , and the team with the lowest time is leading team . The Trofeo Super Team is a team points classification , with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points ( 20 for first place , 19 for second place and so on , down to a single point for 20th ) for their team . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Minor classifications = = = 
 Other less well @-@ known classifications were awarded during the Giro , whose leaders did not receive a special jersey . These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour . Each mass start stage had one intermediate sprint , awarding points to the Expo Milano 2015 classification . These sprints gave bonus seconds towards the general classification , points towards the regular points classification , and also points towards the Expo Milano 2015 classification . This award was known in previous years as the Intergiro , and was previously time @-@ based , awarding a blue jersey . CSF Group – Navigare rider Fortunato Baliani won this classification . 
 Additional minor classifications included the combativity classification , which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints , mountain passes and stage finishes . Mountains classification winner Emanuele Sella took this award . The Azzurri d 'Italia classification was based on finishing order , but points were only awarded to the top three finishers in each stage . Like the overall points classification , it was Liquigas ' Daniele Bennati who won this . Also , the Trofeo Fuga <unk> rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field , each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stays clear . Along with the Expo Milano 2015 , Fortunato Baliani also finished first in this classification . Additionally , teams were on occasion given penalty points for technical infringements . Lampre avoided any penalties , and so was the winner of the Fair Play classification . 
 = The Albums 2000 – 2010 = 
 The Albums 2000 – 2010 is a box set by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue . It was released by Parlophone Records on 12 July 2011 . The five @-@ disc box set was released in Europe , and Australasia , and included all of Minogue 's studio albums from the years 2000 to 2010 ; Light Years ( 2000 ) , Fever ( 2001 ) , Body Language ( 2003 ) , X ( 2007 ) , and Aphrodite ( 2010 ) . The cover sleeve for the album consisted of fragments from the original artworks inserted into Minogue 's silhouette from her cover for Fever ( 2002 ) . The Albums 2000 – 2010 marked Minogue 's first box set collection until her October 2012 release , K25 : Time Capsule . 
 Upon its release , The Albums 2000 @-@ 2010 received positive reception from most of the reviewers , who complimented the overall packaging of the box set and her releases through Parlophone . Some of the critics were unimpressed with the exclusion of her work from the PWL and Deconstruction period . The box set charted on the UK Albums Chart at number 37 , and on the Scottish Albums Chart at number 40 . 
 = = Background and packaging = = 
 It was first announced on Minogue 's official website in May 2011 that EMI would be releasing a five @-@ CD box set . The set includes every previous studio album Minogue had released from 2000 up until 2010 ; the original versions of Light Years ( 2000 ) , Fever ( 2001 ) , Body Language ( 2003 ) , X ( 2007 ) , and Aphrodite ( 2010 ) , with each disc housed in a cardboard sleeve . The cardboard sleeves contain the original album artwork and one image from each album photo shoot imprinted inside the cardboard sleeve , without the album or Minogue 's logo imprinted . Each box set features a 15 " x 10 " poster that features the credits and album artworks of the original albums . Inside the box , each of the albums represent a significant colour to which is displays on the front : Light Years is light blue , Fever is white , Body Language is black , X is red , and Aphrodite is navy blue . 
 The box set carries out the original first press releases of each album , meaning that the hidden track from Light Years , " Password " , is featured on the box set , and all released singles from each album use their single edit , and not the album edit . The only song to be absent is the bilingually @-@ altered tracks for Minogue 's single , " Your Disco Needs You " , which appeared as a bonus track on Light Years in different regions . It was her first greatest hits box set to be released ; in October 2012 , to commemorate her twenty @-@ fifth year in music business , she released her second , all @-@ singles box set , K25 : Time Capsule . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Albums 2000 – 2010 received positive reviews from most reviewers . A writer from The Sun awarded the box set a perfect five star rating , stating " Whether you like hot @-@ pant Kylie , indie Kylie , girl @-@ next @-@ door Kylie or dark Kylie , there 's something for every Kylie fan in this special box @-@ set . Made up of five albums and celebrating ten years of tunes , we challenge you to get them out of your head . " Scott Harrah from <unk> awarded the album four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , but did not review the box set ; instead , he reviewed each album individually because " all [ albums ] are so different in both sound and concept . " Jon O 'Brien from AllMusic awarded the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars , labelling her earlier work as " infectious " . Despite being critical towards the lack of inclusion of her 1994 – 1998 Deconstruction work , and the inclusion of her albums , X , and Aphrodite , he concluded " Kylie has yet to make that one essential album , and the going @-@ through @-@ the @-@ motions nature of her later releases suggests her time may have passed , but this box set still contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all @-@ time premier pop princesses . " 
 Writing in retrospect for Daily Express , reviewer Simon Gage was critical of Minogue 's lack of musical progression , charisma , and thought that she lacked a " great voice " . He stated " There are dodgy tracks and the “ voice ” , more processed than a tinned pea , does start to grate but it ’ s still pretty good . " He awarded the box set three stars . British journalist Paul Du Noyer reviewed the box set , and complimented Minogue 's Parlophone work as " ambiguous pop " . However , he stated " There ’ s a lot of ambitious pop in here , but no conceptual overreach . Not even her experience of breast cancer was allowed to surface in Kylie ’ s subsequent material : lyrically , it was straight back to business . It seems unlikely such a 20 @-@ year lucky streak could be sustained without a lot of shrewd decisions by Minogue herself . So it seems that everyone is right after all : Kylie is A Good Thing , and here is just enough of it . " 
 In the United Kingdom , the box set debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on the UK Albums Chart , becoming Minogue 's nineteenth album entry since her debut album , Kylie ( 1987 ) . The box set stayed in for one week on the top 100 chart . The Albums 2000 @-@ 2010 also debuted at number forty on the Scottish Albums Chart for a sole week . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = <unk> diet = 
 The ketogenic diet is a high @-@ fat , adequate @-@ protein , low @-@ carbohydrate diet that in medicine is used primarily to treat difficult @-@ to @-@ control ( refractory ) epilepsy in children . The diet forces the body to burn fats rather than carbohydrates . Normally , the carbohydrates contained in food are converted into glucose , which is then transported around the body and is particularly important in fueling brain @-@ function . However , if there is very little carbohydrate in the diet , the liver converts fat into fatty acids and ketone bodies . The ketone bodies pass into the brain and replace glucose as an energy source . An elevated level of ketone bodies in the blood , a state known as ketosis , leads to a reduction in the frequency of epileptic seizures . 
 The original therapeutic diet for paediatric epilepsy provides just enough protein for body growth and repair , and sufficient calories to maintain the correct weight for age and height . This classic ketogenic diet contains a 4 : 1 ratio by weight of fat to combined protein and carbohydrate . This is achieved by excluding high @-@ carbohydrate foods such as starchy fruits and vegetables , bread , pasta , grains and sugar , while increasing the consumption of foods high in fat such as nuts , cream and butter . Most dietary fat is made of molecules called long @-@ chain triglycerides ( LCTs ) . However , medium @-@ chain triglycerides ( MCTs ) — made from fatty acids with shorter carbon chains than LCTs — are more ketogenic . A variant of the classic diet known as the MCT ketogenic diet uses a form of coconut oil , which is rich in MCTs , to provide around half the calories . As less overall fat is needed in this variant of the diet , a greater proportion of carbohydrate and protein can be consumed , allowing a greater variety of food choices . 
 The classic therapeutic ketogenic diet was developed for treatment of paediatric epilepsy in the 1920s and was widely used into the next decade , but its popularity waned with the introduction of effective anticonvulsant drugs . In the mid @-@ 1990s , Hollywood producer Jim Abrahams , whose son 's severe epilepsy was effectively controlled by the diet , created the Charlie Foundation to promote it . Publicity included an appearance on NBC 's Dateline programme and ... First Do No Harm ( 1997 ) , a made @-@ for @-@ television film starring Meryl Streep . The foundation sponsored a multicentre research study , the results of which — announced in 1996 — marked the beginning of renewed scientific interest in the diet . 
 Almost half of children and young people with epilepsy who have tried some form of this diet saw the number of seizures drop by at least half , and the effect persists even after discontinuing the diet . The most common adverse effect is constipation , affecting about 30 % of patients — this was due to fluid restriction , which was once a feature of the diet , but this led to increased risk of kidney stones , and is no longer considered beneficial . There is some evidence that adults with epilepsy may benefit from the diet , and that a less strict regimen , such as a modified Atkins diet , is similarly effective . Clinical trials and studies in animal models ( including C. elegans ) suggest that ketogenic diets provide neuroprotective and disease @-@ modifying benefits for a number of adult neurodegenerative disorders . As of 2012 , there is limited clinical trial data in these areas , and , outside of paediatric epilepsy , use of the ketogenic diet remains at the research stage . 
 = = Epilepsy = = 
 Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders after stroke , and affects at least 50 million people worldwide . It is diagnosed in a person having recurrent unprovoked seizures . These occur when cortical neurons fire excessively , <unk> , or both , leading to temporary disruption of normal brain function . This might affect , for example , the muscles , the senses , consciousness , or a combination . A seizure can be focal ( confined to one part of the brain ) or generalised ( spread widely throughout the brain and leading to a loss of consciousness ) . Epilepsy may occur for a variety of reasons ; some forms have been classified into epileptic syndromes , most of which begin in childhood . Epilepsy is considered refractory ( not yielding to treatment ) when two or three anticonvulsant drugs have failed to control it . About 60 % of patients will achieve control of their epilepsy with the first drug they use , whereas about 30 % do not achieve control with drugs . When drugs fail , other options include epilepsy surgery , vagus nerve stimulation and the ketogenic diet . 
 = = History = = 
 The ketogenic diet is a mainstream therapy that does not use pharmaceutical drugs , which was developed to reproduce the success and remove the limitations of the non @-@ mainstream use of fasting to treat epilepsy . Although popular in the 1920s and 30s , it was largely abandoned in favour of new anticonvulsant drugs . Most individuals with epilepsy can successfully control their seizures with medication . However , 20 – 30 % fail to achieve such control despite trying a number of different drugs . For this group , and for children in particular , the diet has once again found a role in epilepsy management . 
 = = = Fasting = = = 
 Physicians of ancient Greece treated diseases , including epilepsy , by altering their patients ' diet . An early treatise in the Hippocratic Corpus , On the Sacred Disease , covers the disease ; it dates from c . 400 BC . Its author argued against the prevailing view that epilepsy was supernatural in origin and cure , and proposed that dietary therapy had a rational and physical basis . In the same collection , the author of Epidemics describes the case of a man whose epilepsy is cured as quickly as it had appeared , through complete abstinence of food and drink . The royal physician Erasistratus declared , " One inclining to epilepsy should be made to fast without mercy and be put on short rations . " Galen believed an " attenuating diet " might afford a cure in mild cases and be helpful in others . 
 The first modern study of fasting as a treatment for epilepsy was in France in 1911 . Twenty epilepsy patients of all ages were " detoxified " by consuming a low @-@ calorie vegetarian diet , combined with periods of fasting and purging . Two benefited enormously , but most failed to maintain compliance with the imposed restrictions . The diet improved the patients ' mental capabilities , in contrast to their medication , potassium bromide , which dulled the mind . 
 Around this time , Bernarr Macfadden , an American exponent of physical culture , popularised the use of fasting to restore health . His disciple , the osteopathic physician Hugh Conklin , of Battle Creek , Michigan , began to treat his epilepsy patients by recommending fasting . Conklin conjectured that epileptic seizures were caused when a toxin , secreted from the Peyer 's patches in the intestines , was discharged into the bloodstream . He recommended a fast lasting 18 to 25 days to allow this toxin to dissipate . Conklin probably treated hundreds of epilepsy patients with his " water diet " and boasted of a 90 % cure rate in children , falling to 50 % in adults . Later analysis of Conklin 's case records showed 20 % of his patients achieved freedom from seizures and 50 % had some improvement . 
 Conklin 's fasting therapy was adopted by neurologists in mainstream practice . In 1916 , a Dr McMurray wrote to the New York Medical Journal claiming to have successfully treated epilepsy patients with a fast , followed by a <unk> and sugar @-@ free diet , since 1912 . In 1921 , prominent endocrinologist H. Rawle <unk> reported his experiences to the American Medical Association convention . He had seen Conklin 's success first @-@ hand and had attempted to reproduce the results in 36 of his own patients . He achieved similar results despite only having studied the patients for a short time . Further studies in the 1920s indicated that seizures generally returned after the fast . Charles Howland , the parent of one of Conklin 's successful patients and a wealthy New York corporate lawyer , gave his brother John a gift of $ 5 @,@ 000 to study " the ketosis of starvation " . As professor of paediatrics at Johns Hopkins Hospital , John Howland used the money to fund research undertaken by neurologist Stanley Cobb and his assistant William G. Lennox . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 In 1921 , Rollin Woodyatt reviewed the research on diet and diabetes . He reported that three water @-@ soluble compounds , β @-@ hydroxybutyrate , acetoacetate and acetone ( known collectively as ketone bodies ) , were produced by the liver in otherwise healthy people when they were starved or if they consumed a very low @-@ carbohydrate , high @-@ fat diet . Russel Wilder , at the Mayo Clinic , built on this research and coined the term ketogenic diet to describe a diet that produced a high level of ketone bodies in the blood ( <unk> ) through an excess of fat and lack of carbohydrate . Wilder hoped to obtain the benefits of fasting in a dietary therapy that could be maintained indefinitely . His trial on a few epilepsy patients in 1921 was the first use of the ketogenic diet as a treatment for epilepsy . 
 Wilder 's colleague , paediatrician <unk> Peterman , later formulated the classic diet , with a ratio of one gram of protein per kilogram of body weight in children , 10 – 15 g of carbohydrate per day , and the remainder of calories from fat . Peterman 's work in the 1920s established the techniques for induction and maintenance of the diet . Peterman documented positive effects ( improved alertness , behaviour and sleep ) and adverse effects ( nausea and vomiting due to excess ketosis ) . The diet proved to be very successful in children : Peterman reported in 1925 that 95 % of 37 young patients had improved seizure control on the diet and 60 % became seizure @-@ free . By 1930 , the diet had also been studied in 100 teenagers and adults . Clifford <unk> , also from the Mayo Clinic , reported that 56 % of those older patients improved on the diet and 12 % became seizure @-@ free . Although the adult results are similar to modern studies of children , they did not compare as well to contemporary studies . <unk> concluded that adults were least likely to benefit from the diet , and the use of the ketogenic diet in adults was not studied again until 1999 . 
 = = = <unk> and decline = = = 
 During the 1920s and 1930s , when the only anticonvulsant drugs were the sedative bromides ( discovered 1857 ) and phenobarbital ( 1912 ) , the ketogenic diet was widely used and studied . This changed in 1938 when H. Houston Merritt and Tracy Putnam discovered phenytoin ( <unk> ) , and the focus of research shifted to discovering new drugs . With the introduction of sodium valproate in the 1970s , drugs were available to neurologists that were effective across a broad range of epileptic syndromes and seizure types . The use of the ketogenic diet , by this time restricted to difficult cases such as Lennox – Gastaut syndrome , declined further . 
 = = = MCT diet = = = 
 In the 1960s , it was discovered that medium @-@ chain triglycerides ( MCTs ) produce more ketone bodies per unit of energy than normal dietary fats ( which are mostly long @-@ chain triglycerides ) . MCTs are more efficiently absorbed and are rapidly transported to the liver via the hepatic portal system rather than the lymphatic system . The severe carbohydrate restrictions of the classic ketogenic diet made it difficult for parents to produce palatable meals that their children would tolerate . In 1971 , Peter <unk> devised a ketogenic diet where about 60 % of the calories came from the MCT oil , and this allowed more protein and up to three times as much carbohydrate as the classic ketogenic diet . The oil was mixed with at least twice its volume of skimmed milk , chilled , and sipped during the meal or incorporated into food . He tested it on twelve children and adolescents with intractable seizures . Most children improved in both seizure control and alertness , results that were similar to the classic ketogenic diet . Gastrointestinal upset was a problem , which led one patient to abandon the diet , but meals were easier to prepare and better accepted by the children . The MCT diet replaced the classic ketogenic diet in many hospitals , though some devised diets that were a combination of the two . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 The ketogenic diet achieved national media exposure in the US in October 1994 , when NBC 's Dateline television programme reported the case of Charlie Abrahams , son of Hollywood producer Jim Abrahams . The two @-@ year @-@ old suffered from epilepsy that had remained uncontrolled by mainstream and alternative therapies . Abrahams discovered a reference to the ketogenic diet in an epilepsy guide for parents and brought Charlie to John Freeman at Johns Hopkins Hospital , which had continued to offer the therapy . Under the diet , Charlie 's epilepsy was rapidly controlled and his developmental progress resumed . This inspired Abrahams to create the Charlie Foundation to promote the diet and fund research . A multicentre prospective study began in 1994 , the results were presented to the American Epilepsy Society in 1996 and were published in 1998 . There followed an explosion of scientific interest in the diet . In 1997 , Abrahams produced a TV movie , ... First Do No Harm , starring Meryl Streep , in which a young boy 's intractable epilepsy is successfully treated by the ketogenic diet . 
 By 2007 , the ketogenic diet was available from around 75 centres in 45 countries , and less restrictive variants , such as the modified Atkins diet , were in use , particularly among older children and adults . The ketogenic diet was also under investigation for the treatment of a wide variety of disorders other than epilepsy . 
 = = Efficacy = = 
 The ketogenic diet reduces seizure frequency by more than 50 % in half of the patients who try it and by more than 90 % in a third of patients . Three @-@ quarters of children who respond do so within two weeks , though experts recommend a trial of at least three months before assuming it has been ineffective . Children with refractory epilepsy are more likely to benefit from the ketogenic diet than from trying another anticonvulsant drug . There is some evidence that adolescents and adults may also benefit from the diet . 
 = = = Trial design = = = 
 Early studies reported high success rates : in one study in 1925 , 60 % of patients became seizure @-@ free , and another 35 % of patients had a 50 % reduction in seizure frequency . These studies generally examined a cohort of patients recently treated by the physician ( what is known as a retrospective study ) and selected patients who had successfully maintained the dietary restrictions . However , these studies are difficult to compare to modern trials . One reason is that these older trials suffered from selection bias , as they excluded patients who were unable to start or maintain the diet and thereby selected from patients who would generate better results . In an attempt to control for this bias , modern study design prefers a prospective cohort ( the patients in the study are chosen before therapy begins ) in which the results are presented for all patients regardless of whether they started or completed the treatment ( known as intent @-@ to @-@ treat analysis ) . 
 Another difference between older and newer studies is that the type of patients treated with the ketogenic diet has changed over time . When first developed and used , the ketogenic diet was not a treatment of last resort ; in contrast , the children in modern studies have already tried and failed a number of anticonvulsant drugs , so may be assumed to have more difficult @-@ to @-@ treat epilepsy . Early and modern studies also differ because the treatment protocol has changed . In older protocols , the diet was initiated with a prolonged fast , designed to lose 5 – 10 % body weight , and heavily restricted the calorie intake . Concerns over child health and growth led to a relaxation of the diet 's restrictions . Fluid restriction was once a feature of the diet , but this led to increased risk of constipation and kidney stones , and is no longer considered beneficial . 
 = = = Outcomes = = = 
 A study with an intent @-@ to @-@ treat prospective design was published in 1998 by a team from the Johns Hopkins Hospital and followed @-@ up by a report published in 2001 . As with most studies of the ketogenic diet , there was no control group ( patients who did not receive the treatment ) . The study enrolled 150 children . After three months , 83 % of them were still on the diet , 26 % had experienced a good reduction in seizures , 31 % had had an excellent reduction and 3 % were seizure @-@ free . At twelve months , 55 % were still on the diet , 23 % had a good response , 20 % had an excellent response and 7 % were seizure @-@ free . Those who had discontinued the diet by this stage did so because it was ineffective , too restrictive or due to illness , and most of those who remained were benefiting from it . The percentage of those still on the diet at two , three and four years was 39 % , 20 % and 12 % respectively . During this period the most common reason for discontinuing the diet was because the children had become seizure @-@ free or significantly better . At four years , 16 % of the original 150 children had a good reduction in seizure frequency , 14 % had an excellent reduction and 13 % were seizure @-@ free , though these figures include many who were no longer on the diet . Those remaining on the diet after this duration were typically not seizure @-@ free but had had an excellent response . 
 It is possible to combine the results of several small studies to produce evidence that is stronger than that available from each study alone — a statistical method known as meta @-@ analysis . One of four such analyses , conducted in 2006 , looked at 19 studies on a total of 1 @,@ 084 patients . It concluded that half the patients achieved a 50 % reduction in seizures and a third achieved a 90 % reduction . 
 A systematic review in 2012 found and analysed four randomized controlled trials of ketogenic diet in children and young people with epilepsy , as well as six prospective and five retrospective studies . The trials were done among children and young people for whom drugs failed to control their seizures , and only one of the trials compared a group assigned to ketogenic diet with a group not assigned to one . The other trials compared types of diets or ways of introducing them to make them more tolerable . Nearly 40 % of the children and young people had half or fewer seizures with the diet compared with the group not assigned to the diet . Only about 10 % were still on the diet after a few years . Adverse effects such as hunger and loss of energy in that trial were common , with about 30 % experiencing constipation . 
 = = Indications and contra @-@ indications = = 
 The ketogenic diet is indicated as an adjunctive ( additional ) treatment in children with drug @-@ resistant epilepsy . It is approved by national clinical guidelines in Scotland , England and Wales and reimbursed by nearly all US insurance companies . Children with a focal lesion ( a single point of brain abnormality causing the epilepsy ) who would make suitable candidates for surgery are more likely to become seizure @-@ free with surgery than with the ketogenic diet . In the UK , the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence advises that the diet should not be recommended for adults with epilepsy . About a third of epilepsy centres that offer the ketogenic diet also offer a dietary therapy to adults . Some clinicians consider the two less restrictive dietary variants — the low glycemic index treatment and the modified Atkins diet — to be more appropriate for adolescents and adults . A liquid form of the ketogenic diet is particularly easy to prepare for , and well tolerated by , infants on formula and children who are tube @-@ fed . 
 Advocates for the diet recommend that it be seriously considered after two medications have failed , as the chance of other drugs succeeding is only 10 % . The diet can be considered earlier for some epilepsy and genetic syndromes where it has shown particular usefulness . These include <unk> syndrome , infantile spasms , myoclonic @-@ <unk> epilepsy and tuberous sclerosis complex . 
 A survey in 2005 of 88 paediatric neurologists in the US found that 36 % regularly prescribed the diet after three or more drugs had failed ; 24 % occasionally prescribed the diet as a last resort ; 24 % had only prescribed the diet in a few rare cases ; and 16 % had never prescribed the diet . There are several possible explanations for this gap between evidence and clinical practice . One major factor may be the lack of adequately trained dietitians , who are needed to administer a ketogenic diet programme . 
 Because the ketogenic diet alters the body 's metabolism , it is a first @-@ line therapy in children with certain congenital metabolic diseases such as pyruvate dehydrogenase ( E1 ) deficiency and glucose transporter 1 deficiency syndrome , which prevent the body from using carbohydrates as fuel , leading to a dependency on ketone bodies . The ketogenic diet is beneficial in treating the seizures and some other symptoms in these diseases and is an absolute indication . On the other hand , it is absolutely contraindicated in the treatment of other diseases such as pyruvate carboxylase deficiency , porphyria and other rare genetic disorders of fat metabolism . A person with a disorder of fatty acid oxidation is unable to metabolise fatty acids , which replace carbohydrates as the major energy source on the diet . On the ketogenic diet , their body would consume its own protein stores for fuel , leading to ketoacidosis , and eventually coma and death . 
 = = Interactions = = 
 The ketogenic diet is usually initiated in combination with the patient 's existing anticonvulsant regimen , though patients may be weaned off anticonvulsants if the diet is successful . There is some evidence of synergistic benefits when the diet is combined with the vagus nerve stimulator or with the drug <unk> , and that the diet may be less successful in children receiving phenobarbital . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 The ketogenic diet is not a benign , holistic or natural treatment for epilepsy ; as with any serious medical therapy , there may be complications . These are generally less severe and less frequent than with anticonvulsant medication or surgery . Common but easily treatable short @-@ term side effects include constipation , low @-@ grade acidosis and hypoglycaemia if there is an initial fast . Raised levels of lipids in the blood affect up to 60 % of children and cholesterol levels may increase by around 30 % . This can be treated by changes to the fat content of the diet , such as from saturated fats towards polyunsaturated fats , and , if persistent , by lowering the ketogenic ratio . Supplements are necessary to counter the dietary deficiency of many micronutrients . 
 Long @-@ term use of the ketogenic diet in children increases the risk of slowed or stunted growth , bone fractures and kidney stones . The diet reduces levels of insulin @-@ like growth factor 1 , which is important for childhood growth . Like many anticonvulsant drugs , the ketogenic diet has an adverse effect on bone health . Many factors may be involved such as acidosis and suppressed growth hormone . About 1 in 20 children on the ketogenic diet will develop kidney stones ( compared with one in several thousand for the general population ) . A class of anticonvulsants known as carbonic anhydrase inhibitors ( topiramate , <unk> ) are known to increase the risk of kidney stones , but the combination of these anticonvulsants and the ketogenic diet does not appear to elevate the risk above that of the diet alone . The stones are treatable and do not justify discontinuation of the diet . Johns Hopkins Hospital now gives oral potassium citrate supplements to all ketogenic diet patients , resulting in a sevenfold decrease in the incidence of kidney stones . However , this empiric usage has not been tested in a prospective controlled trial . Kidney stone formation ( nephrolithiasis ) is associated with the diet for four reasons : 
 Excess calcium in the urine ( hypercalciuria ) occurs due to increased bone <unk> with acidosis . Bones are mainly composed of calcium phosphate . The phosphate reacts with the acid , and the calcium is excreted by the kidneys . 
 Hypocitraturia : the urine has an abnormally low concentration of citrate , which normally helps to dissolve free calcium . 
 The urine has a low pH , which stops uric acid from dissolving , leading to crystals that act as a nidus for calcium stone formation . 
 Many institutions traditionally restricted the water intake of patients on the diet to 80 % of normal daily needs ; this practice is no longer encouraged . 
 In adults , common side effects include weight loss , constipation , raised cholesterol levels and , in women , menstrual irregularities including amenorrhoea . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 The ketogenic diet is a medical nutrition therapy that involves participants from various disciplines . Team members include a registered paediatric dietitian who coordinates the diet programme ; a paediatric neurologist who is experienced in offering the ketogenic diet ; and a registered nurse who is familiar with childhood epilepsy . Additional help may come from a medical social worker who works with the family and a pharmacist who can advise on the carbohydrate content of medicines . Lastly , the parents and other caregivers must be educated in many aspects of the diet for it to be safely implemented . 
 Implementing the diet can present difficulties for caregivers and the patient due to the time commitment involved in measuring and planning meals . Since any unplanned eating can potentially break the nutritional balance required , some people find the discipline needed to maintain the diet challenging and unpleasant . Some people terminate the diet or switch to a less demanding diet , like the modified Atkins diet ( MAD ) or the low @-@ glycemic index treatment ( LGIT ) diet , because they find the difficulties too great . 
 = = = Initiation = = = 
 The Johns Hopkins Hospital protocol for initiating the ketogenic diet has been widely adopted . It involves a consultation with the patient and their caregivers and , later , a short hospital admission . Because of the risk of complications during ketogenic diet initiation , most centres begin the diet under close medical supervision in hospital . 
 At the initial consultation , patients are screened for conditions that may <unk> the diet . A dietary history is obtained and the parameters of the diet selected : the ketogenic ratio of fat to combined protein and carbohydrate , the calorie requirements and the fluid intake . 
 The day before admission to hospital , the proportion of carbohydrate in the diet may be decreased and the patient begins fasting after his or her evening meal . On admission , only <unk> and caffeine @-@ free fluids are allowed until dinner , which consists of " eggnog " restricted to one @-@ third of the typical calories for a meal . The following breakfast and lunch are similar , and on the second day , the " eggnog " dinner is increased to two @-@ thirds of a typical meal 's caloric content . By the third day , dinner contains the full calorie quota and is a standard ketogenic meal ( not " eggnog " ) . After a ketogenic breakfast on the fourth day , the patient is discharged . Where possible , the patient 's current medicines are changed to carbohydrate @-@ free formulations . 
 When in the hospital , glucose levels are checked several times daily and the patient is monitored for signs of symptomatic ketosis ( which can be treated with a small quantity of orange juice ) . Lack of energy and lethargy are common but disappear within two weeks . The parents attend classes over the first three full days , which cover nutrition , managing the diet , preparing meals , avoiding sugar and handling illness . The level of parental education and commitment required is higher than with medication . 
 Variations on the Johns Hopkins protocol are common . The initiation can be performed using outpatient clinics rather than requiring a stay in hospital . Often there is no initial fast ( fasting increases the risk of acidosis and hypoglycaemia and weight loss ) . Rather than increasing meal sizes over the three @-@ day initiation , some institutions maintain meal size but alter the ketogenic ratio from 2 : 1 to 4 : 1 . 
 For patients who benefit , half achieve a seizure reduction within five days ( if the diet starts with an initial fast of one to two days ) , three @-@ quarters achieve a reduction within two weeks , and 90 % achieve a reduction within 23 days . If the diet does not begin with a fast , the time for half of the patients to achieve an improvement is longer ( two weeks ) but the long @-@ term seizure reduction rates are unaffected . Parents are encouraged to persist with the diet for at least three months before any final consideration is made regarding efficacy . 
 = = = Maintenance = = = 
 After initiation , the child regularly visits the hospital outpatient clinic where he or she is seen by the dietitian and neurologist , and various tests and examinations are performed . These are held every three months for the first year and then every six months thereafter . Infants under one year old are seen more frequently , with the initial visit held after just two to four weeks . A period of minor adjustments is necessary to ensure consistent ketosis is maintained and to better adapt the meal plans to the patient . This fine @-@ tuning is typically done over the telephone with the hospital dietitian and includes changing the number of calories , altering the ketogenic ratio , or adding some MCT or coconut oils to a classic diet . Urinary ketone levels are checked daily to detect whether ketosis has been achieved and to confirm that the patient is following the diet , though the level of ketones does not correlate with an anticonvulsant effect . This is performed using ketone test strips containing nitroprusside , which change colour from buff @-@ pink to maroon in the presence of acetoacetate ( one of the three ketone bodies ) . 
 A short @-@ lived increase in seizure frequency may occur during illness or if ketone levels fluctuate . The diet may be modified if seizure frequency remains high , or the child is losing weight . Loss of seizure @-@ control may come from unexpected sources . Even " sugar @-@ free " food can contain carbohydrates such as <unk> , sorbitol , starch and fructose . The sorbitol content of suntan lotion and other skincare products may be high enough for some to be absorbed through the skin and thus negate ketosis . 
 = = = Discontinuation = = = 
 About 20 % of children on the ketogenic diet achieve freedom from seizures , and many are able to reduce the use of anticonvulsant drugs or eliminate them altogether . Commonly , at around two years on the diet , or after six months of being seizure @-@ free , the diet may be gradually discontinued over two or three months . This is done by lowering the ketogenic ratio until urinary ketosis is no longer detected , and then lifting all calorie restrictions . This timing and method of discontinuation mimics that of anticonvulsant drug therapy in children , where the child has become seizure free . When the diet is required to treat certain metabolic diseases , the duration will be longer . The total diet duration is up to the treating ketogenic diet team and parents ; durations up to 12 years have been studied and found beneficial . 
 Children who discontinue the diet after achieving seizure freedom have about a 20 % risk of seizures returning . The length of time until recurrence is highly variable but averages two years . This risk of recurrence compares with 10 % for <unk> surgery ( where part of the brain is removed ) and 30 – 50 % for anticonvulsant therapy . Of those that have a recurrence , just over half can regain freedom from seizures either with anticonvulsants or by returning to the ketogenic diet . Recurrence is more likely if , despite seizure freedom , an electroencephalogram ( EEG ) shows epileptiform spikes , which indicate epileptic activity in the brain but are below the level that will cause a seizure . Recurrence is also likely if an MRI scan shows focal abnormalities ( for example , as in children with tuberous sclerosis ) . Such children may remain on the diet longer than average , and it has been suggested that children with tuberous sclerosis who achieve seizure freedom could remain on the ketogenic diet indefinitely . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Classic = = = 
 The ketogenic diet is calculated by a dietitian for each child . Age , weight , activity levels , culture and food preferences all affect the meal plan . First , the energy requirements are set at 80 – 90 % of the recommended daily amounts ( RDA ) for the child 's age ( the high @-@ fat diet requires less energy to process than a typical high @-@ carbohydrate diet ) . Highly active children or those with muscle spasticity require more calories than this ; immobile children require less . The ketogenic ratio of the diet compares the weight of fat to the combined weight of carbohydrate and protein . This is typically 4 : 1 , but children who are younger than 18 months , older than 12 years , or who are obese may be started on a 3 : 1 ratio . Fat is energy @-@ rich , with 9 kcal / g ( 38 kJ / g ) compared to 4 kcal / g ( 17 kJ / g ) for carbohydrate or protein , so portions on the ketogenic diet are smaller than normal . The quantity of fat in the diet can be calculated from the overall energy requirements and the chosen ketogenic ratio . Next , the protein levels are set to allow for growth and body maintenance , and are around 1 g protein for each kg of body weight . Lastly , the amount of carbohydrate is set according to what allowance is left while maintaining the chosen ratio . Any carbohydrate in medications or supplements must be subtracted from this allowance . The total daily amount of fat , protein and carbohydrate is then evenly divided across the meals . 
 A computer program such as <unk> may be used to help generate recipes . The meals often have four components : heavy whipping cream , a protein @-@ rich food ( typically meat ) , a fruit or vegetable and a fat such as butter , vegetable oil or mayonnaise . Only low @-@ carbohydrate fruits and vegetables are allowed , which excludes bananas , potatoes , peas and corn . Suitable fruits are divided into two groups based on the amount of carbohydrate they contain , and vegetables are similarly divided into two groups . Foods within each of these four groups may be freely substituted to allow for variation without needing to recalculate portion sizes . For example , cooked broccoli , Brussels sprouts , cauliflower and green beans are all equivalent . Fresh , canned or frozen foods are equivalent , but raw and cooked vegetables differ , and processed foods are an additional complication . Parents are required to be precise when measuring food quantities on an electronic scale accurate to 1 g . The child must eat the whole meal and cannot have extra portions ; any snacks must be incorporated into the meal plan . A small amount of MCT oil may be used to help with constipation or to increase ketosis . 
 The classic ketogenic diet is not a balanced diet and only contains tiny portions of fresh fruit and vegetables , fortified cereals and calcium @-@ rich foods . In particular , the B vitamins , calcium and vitamin D must be artificially supplemented . This is achieved by taking two sugar @-@ free supplements designed for the patient 's age : a multivitamin with minerals and calcium with vitamin D. A typical day of food for a child on a 4 : 1 ratio , 1 @,@ 500 kcal ( 6 @,@ 300 kJ ) ketogenic diet comprises : 
 Breakfast : egg with bacon 
 28 g egg , 11 g bacon , 37 g of 36 % heavy whipping cream , 23 g butter and 9 g apple . 
 Snack : peanut butter ball 
 6 g peanut butter and 9 g butter . 
 Lunch : tuna salad 
 28 g tuna fish , 30 g mayonnaise , 10 g celery , 36 g of 36 % heavy whipping cream and 15 g lettuce . 
 Snack : keto yogurt 
 18 g of 36 % heavy whipping cream , 17 g sour cream , 4 g strawberries and artificial sweetener . 
 Dinner : cheeseburger ( no bun ) 
 22 g minced ( ground ) beef , 10 g American cheese , 26 g butter , 38 g cream , 10 g lettuce and 11 g green beans . 
 Snack : keto custard 
 25 g of 36 % heavy whipping cream , 9 g egg and pure vanilla flavouring . 
 = = = MCT oil = = = 
 Normal dietary fat contains mostly long @-@ chain triglycerides ( LCT ) . Medium @-@ chain triglycerides are more ketogenic than LCTs because they generate more ketones per unit of energy when metabolised . Their use allows for a diet with a lower proportion of fat and a greater proportion of protein and carbohydrate , leading to more food choices and larger portion sizes . The original MCT diet developed by Peter <unk> in the 1970s derived 60 % of its calories from MCT oil . Consuming that quantity of MCT oil caused abdominal cramps , diarrhoea and vomiting in some children . A figure of 45 % is regarded as a balance between achieving good ketosis and minimising gastrointestinal complaints . The classical and modified MCT ketogenic diets are equally effective and differences in tolerability are not statistically significant . The MCT diet is less popular in the United States ; MCT oil is more expensive than other dietary fats and is not covered by insurance companies . 
 = = = Modified Atkins = = = 
 First reported in 2003 , the idea of using a form of the Atkins diet to treat epilepsy came about after parents and patients discovered that the induction phase of the Atkins diet controlled seizures . The ketogenic diet team at Johns Hopkins Hospital modified the Atkins diet by removing the aim of achieving weight loss , extending the induction phase indefinitely , and specifically encouraging fat consumption . Compared with the ketogenic diet , the modified Atkins diet ( MAD ) places no limit on calories or protein , and the lower overall ketogenic ratio ( approximately 1 : 1 ) does not need to be consistently maintained by all meals of the day . The MAD does not begin with a fast or with a stay in hospital and requires less dietitian support than the ketogenic diet . Carbohydrates are initially limited to 10 g per day in children or 20 g per day in adults , and are increased to 20 – 30 g per day after a month or so , depending on the effect on seizure control or tolerance of the restrictions . Like the ketogenic diet , the MAD requires vitamin and mineral supplements and children are carefully and periodically monitored at outpatient clinics . 
 The modified Atkins diet reduces seizure frequency by more than 50 % in 43 % of patients who try it and by more than 90 % in 27 % of patients . Few adverse effects have been reported , though cholesterol is increased and the diet has not been studied long term . Although based on a smaller data set ( 126 adults and children from 11 studies over five centres ) , these results from 2009 compare favourably with the traditional ketogenic diet . 
 = = = Low glycemic index treatment = = = 
 The low glycemic index treatment ( LGIT ) is an attempt to achieve the stable blood glucose levels seen in children on the classic ketogenic diet while using a much less restrictive regimen . The hypothesis is that stable blood glucose may be one of the mechanisms of action involved in the ketogenic diet , which occurs because the absorption of the limited carbohydrates is slowed by the high fat content . Although it is also a high @-@ fat diet ( with approximately 60 % calories from fat ) , the LGIT allows more carbohydrate than either the classic ketogenic diet or the modified Atkins diet , approximately 40 – 60 g per day . However , the types of carbohydrates consumed are restricted to those that have a glycemic index lower than 50 . Like the modified Atkins diet , the LGIT is initiated and maintained at outpatient clinics and does not require precise weighing of food or intensive dietitian support . Both are offered at most centres that run ketogenic diet programmes , and in some centres they are often the primary dietary therapy for adolescents . 
 Short @-@ term results for the LGIT indicate that at one month approximately half of the patients experience a greater than 50 % reduction in seizure frequency , with overall figures approaching that of the ketogenic diet . The data ( coming from one centre 's experience with 76 children up to the year 2009 ) also indicate fewer side effects than the ketogenic diet and that it is better tolerated , with more palatable meals . 
 = = = Prescribed formulations = = = 
 Infants and patients fed via a gastrostomy tube can also be given a ketogenic diet . Parents make up a prescribed powdered formula , such as <unk> , into a liquid feed . <unk> feeding avoids any issues with palatability , and bottle @-@ fed infants readily accept the ketogenic formula . Some studies have found this liquid feed to be more efficacious and associated with lower total cholesterol than a solid ketogenic diet . <unk> is a nutritionally complete food containing milk protein and is supplemented with amino acids , fat , carbohydrate , vitamins , minerals and trace elements . It is used to administer the 4 : 1 ratio classic ketogenic diet in children over one year . The formula is available in both 3 : 1 and 4 : 1 ratios , either <unk> or in an artificially sweetened vanilla flavour and is suitable for tube or oral feeding . Other formula products include <unk> and <unk> . Alternatively , a liquid ketogenic diet may be produced by combining Ross <unk> Free soy formula with <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Worldwide = = = 
 There are theoretically no restrictions on where the ketogenic diet might be used , and it can cost less than modern anticonvulsants . However , fasting and dietary changes are affected by religious and cultural issues . A culture where food is often prepared by grandparents or hired help means more people must be educated about the diet . When families dine together , sharing the same meal , it can be difficult to separate the child 's meal . In many countries , food labelling is not mandatory so calculating the proportions of fat , protein and carbohydrate is difficult . In some countries , it may be hard to find sugar @-@ free forms of medicines and supplements , to purchase an accurate electronic scale , or to afford MCT oils . 
 Jewish dietary laws prevent mixing meat and milk in one dish . In Asia , the normal diet includes rice and noodles as the main energy source , making their elimination difficult . Therefore , the MCT @-@ oil form of the diet , which allows more carbohydrate , has proved useful . In India , religious beliefs commonly affect the diet : some patients are vegetarians , will not eat root vegetables or avoid beef . The Indian ketogenic diet is started without a fast due to cultural opposition towards fasting in children . The low @-@ fat , high @-@ carbohydrate nature of the normal Indian and Asian diet means that their ketogenic diets typically have a lower ketogenic ratio ( 1 : 1 ) than in America and Europe . However , they appear to be just as effective . 
 In many developing countries , the ketogenic diet is expensive because dairy fats and meat are more expensive than grain , fruit and vegetables . The modified Atkins diet has been proposed as a lower @-@ cost alternative for those countries ; the slightly more expensive food bill can be offset by a reduction in pharmaceutical costs if the diet is successful . The modified Atkins diet is less complex to explain and prepare and requires less support from a dietitian . 
 = = Mechanism of action = = 
 = = = Seizure pathology = = = 
 The brain is composed of a network of neurons that transmit signals by propagating nerve impulses . The propagation of this impulse from one neuron 's synapse to another is typically controlled by neurotransmitters , though there are also electrical pathways between some neurons . Neurotransmitters can inhibit impulse firing ( primarily done by γ @-@ aminobutyric acid , or GABA ) or they can excite the neuron into firing ( primarily done by glutamate ) . A neuron that releases inhibitory neurotransmitters from its terminals is called an inhibitory neuron , while one that releases excitatory neurotransmitters is an excitatory neuron . When the normal balance between inhibition and excitation is significantly disrupted in all or part of the brain , a seizure can occur . The GABA system is an important target for anticonvulsant drugs , since seizures may be discouraged by increasing GABA synthesis , decreasing its breakdown , or enhancing its effect on neurons . 
 The nerve impulse is characterised by a great influx of sodium ions through channels in the neuron 's cell membrane followed by an efflux of potassium ions through other channels . The neuron is unable to fire again for a short time ( known as the refractory period ) , which is mediated by another potassium channel . The flow through these ion channels is governed by a " gate " which is opened by either a voltage change or a chemical messenger known as a ligand ( such as a neurotransmitter ) . These channels are another target for anticonvulsant drugs . 
 There are many ways in which epilepsy occurs . Examples of pathological physiology include : unusual excitatory connections within the neuronal network of the brain ; abnormal neuron structure leading to altered current flow ; decreased inhibitory neurotransmitter synthesis ; ineffective receptors for inhibitory neurotransmitters ; insufficient breakdown of excitatory neurotransmitters leading to excess ; immature synapse development ; and impaired function of ionic channels . 
 = = = Seizure control = = = 
 Although many hypotheses have been put forward to explain how the ketogenic diet works , it remains a mystery . <unk> hypotheses include systemic acidosis ( high levels of acid in the blood ) , electrolyte changes and hypoglycaemia ( low blood glucose ) . Although many biochemical changes are known to occur in the brain of a patient on the ketogenic diet , it is not known which of these has an anticonvulsant effect . The lack of understanding in this area is similar to the situation with many anticonvulsant drugs . 
 On the ketogenic diet , carbohydrates are restricted and so cannot provide for all the metabolic needs of the body . Instead , fatty acids are used as the major source of fuel . These are used through fatty @-@ acid oxidation in the cell 's mitochondria ( the energy @-@ producing parts of the cell ) . Humans can convert some amino acids into glucose by a process called gluconeogenesis , but cannot do this for fatty acids . Since amino acids are needed to make proteins , which are essential for growth and repair of body tissues , these cannot be used only to produce glucose . This could pose a problem for the brain , since it is normally fuelled solely by glucose , and most fatty acids do not cross the blood – brain barrier . Fortunately , the liver can use long @-@ chain fatty acids to synthesise the three ketone bodies β @-@ hydroxybutyrate , acetoacetate and acetone . These ketone bodies enter the brain and substitute for glucose . Medium @-@ chain fatty acids <unk> and <unk> acids can cross the barrier and be used by the brain . 
 The ketone bodies are possibly anticonvulsant in themselves ; in animal models , acetoacetate and acetone protect against seizures . The ketogenic diet results in adaptive changes to brain energy metabolism that increase the energy reserves ; ketone bodies are a more efficient fuel than glucose , and the number of mitochondria is increased . This may help the neurons to remain stable in the face of increased energy demand during a seizure , and may confer a neuroprotective effect . 
 The ketogenic diet has been studied in at least 14 rodent animal models of seizures . It is protective in many of these models and has a different protection profile than any known anticonvulsant . Conversely , <unk> , not used clinically as an antiepileptic , exhibits experimental anticonvulsant properties in adult rats comparable to the ketogenic diet . This , together with studies showing its efficacy in patients who have failed to achieve seizure control on half a dozen drugs , suggests a unique mechanism of action . 
 <unk> suppress epileptic seizures , but they neither cure nor prevent the development of seizure susceptibility . The development of epilepsy ( epileptogenesis ) is a process that is poorly understood . A few anticonvulsants ( valproate , levetiracetam and benzodiazepines ) have shown antiepileptogenic properties in animal models of epileptogenesis . However , no anticonvulsant has ever achieved this in a clinical trial in humans . The ketogenic diet has been found to have antiepileptogenic properties in rats . 
 Recently , a saturated medium @-@ chain fatty acid called <unk> acid ( C10 ) has shown promise in both the control of seizures and of neurodegeneration . <unk> acid is a major constituent of the MCT ketogenic diet , and the authors suggest its action may be through inducing mitochondrial biogenesis and helping provide more ATP to maintain the resting membrane potential of the neuron . 
 = = Other applications = = 
 The ketogenic diet may be a successful treatment for several rare metabolic diseases . Case reports of two children indicate that it may be a possible treatment for <unk> , a type of brain tumour . Autism , depression , migraine headaches , polycystic ovary syndrome and diabetes mellitus type 2 have also been shown to improve in small case studies . There is evidence from uncontrolled clinical trials and studies in animal models that the ketogenic diet can provide symptomatic and disease @-@ modifying activity in a broad range of neurodegenerative disorders including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , Alzheimer 's disease and Parkinson 's disease , and may be protective in traumatic brain injury and stroke . 
 Because tumor cells are inefficient in processing ketone bodies for energy , the ketogenic diet has also been suggested as a treatment for cancer , including glioma , as well as multiple sclerosis and other neurological disorders . 
 A 2013 review said that there is enough suggestion of potential benefit from ketogenic diets in cancer therapy that establishing clinical trials is probably warranted . At present the only evidence of benefit is anecdotal , but designing effective trials to measure the effect of adopting a ketogenic diet could prove challenging . 
 In March 2009 , <unk> was approved as a medical food by the US Food and Drug Administration for the " dietary management of the metabolic processes and nutritional requirements associated with mild to moderate Alzheimer 's disease " . Glucose metabolism by the brain is impaired in Alzheimer 's disease , and it is proposed that ketone bodies may provide an alternative energy source . <unk> is a powdered form of a medium @-@ chain triglyceride , specifically <unk> triglyceride . 
 = 1993 Independence Bowl = 
 The 1993 Independence Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Indiana Hoosiers at Independence Stadium in Shreveport , Louisiana on December 31 , 1993 . The 18th edition of the Independence Bowl was the final contest of the 1993 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season for both teams , and ended in a 45 – 20 victory for Virginia Tech . The game was the first bowl victory for Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer and began a record streak of 23 consecutive bowl appearances for Virginia Tech . 
 The 1993 Independence Bowl kicked off at 12 : 30 p.m. EST on December 31 amid sunny skies and 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) temperatures . Indiana took an early 7 – 0 lead , but Virginia Tech responded , taking a 14 – 7 lead with two touchdowns — one late in the first quarter , and the other early in the second . Indiana closed the gap to 14 – 13 with two field goals in the second . In the final 23 seconds of the first half , however , Virginia Tech scored an additional 14 points . Tech 's defense recovered and returned a fumble 20 yards for a touchdown , then blocked a 51 @-@ yard field goal attempt and returned the ball 80 yards for the first blocked @-@ kick touchdown in Virginia Tech history . After a scoreless third quarter , Virginia Tech scored 17 points in the fourth quarter to secure an insurmountable lead . Indiana scored one more touchdown and brought the game 's final score to 45 – 20 . 
 The game paid $ 700 @,@ 000 to each team in exchange for their participation . The official attendance for the game was 33 @,@ 819 . Maurice DeShazo of Virginia Tech was named the game 's offensive most valuable player ( MVP ) , while Antonio Banks , also of Virginia Tech , was named the game 's defensive MVP . 
 Several Independence Bowl records were set during the game , some of which still stand . Indiana 's Thomas Lewis returned eight punts in the game and earned 177 receiving yards , including the third @-@ longest pass in Independence Bowl History — a 75 @-@ yard reception from quarterback John Paci . Hokie Kicker Ryan Williams set the record for the most extra points in an Independence Bowl game with six , a mark that was tied during the 1995 Independence Bowl . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 = = = Indiana = = = 
 Indiana was coached by Bill Mallory , who would go on to accumulate the winningest record in IU football history . The Indiana Hoosiers football team ended the 1992 college football season with a record of 5 – 6 , and prior to the 1993 season was picked to finish no better than eighth in the 11 @-@ team Big Ten conference during the regular season . From the start , however , Indiana set out to upset those expectations . Indiana raced out to a 3 – 0 record in the first three games of the season , with the third win coming against Southeastern Conference opponent Kentucky . 
 In the fourth week of the season , however , Indiana suffered its first loss : a 27 – 15 conference defeat at the hands of No. 22 Wisconsin . The Hoosiers recovered from the setback , however , and won their next four games — all of which were against Big Ten opponents . The fourth of those victories came against the Michigan State Spartans , who had replaced Wisconsin at the No. 22 spot in the country . Indiana held the Spartans scoreless in a tough defensive battle , earning a 10 – 0 victory . With a 7 – 1 record , Indiana appeared to be in position to compete for the Big Ten championship , but consecutive losses to highly ranked Penn State and Ohio State put an end to any thoughts of a championship . The Hoosiers ended the season with a 24 – 17 win over traditional rival Purdue and accepted a bid to the Independence Bowl . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies football team ended the 1992 college football season with a record of 2 – 8 – 1 . Some Tech fans called for Tech head coach Frank Beamer 's firing after the worst Tech football season since 1987 , but Tech athletic director Dave Braine refused to do so . After a shakeup that saw several assistant coaches replaced and new defensive and offensive formations implemented , Tech players and coaches promised a " complete turnaround " for the 1993 season . 
 In the first two games of the season , Tech followed through on that promise , winning 33 – 16 and 63 – 21 against Bowling Green and Pittsburgh , respectively . A loss to No. 3 Miami followed , but a victory over Maryland in the game that followed gave Tech a 3 – 1 record , already better than its 1992 win total . After a close loss at No. 14 West Virginia that was determined by a missed last @-@ second field goal by Tech placekicker Ryan Williams , the Hokies won five of their last six regular @-@ season games . These wins included victories over Big East opponent Syracuse and No. 23 Virginia , Tech 's traditional rival . With an 8 – 3 regular @-@ season record and ranked No. 22 in the country by the Associated Press , Tech was extended an invitation to the Independence Bowl , its first bowl bid since the 1986 Peach Bowl . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 The matchup of No. 21 Indiana and No. 22 Virginia Tech was the first matchup of ranked teams in Independence Bowl history . Despite that fact , the bowl had difficulty selling tickets for the game . Slightly more than 33 @,@ 000 tickets were sold by the day of the game , far less than the stadium 's 50 @,@ 459 @-@ seat capacity . In exchange for their participation in the game , each team received $ 700 @,@ 000 , the minimum payout required by the NCAA at that time . Spread bettors favored Virginia Tech to win by three points . The matchup was Indiana 's first time playing Virginia Tech , and was the first time Virginia Tech played any team from the Big Ten . 
 Virginia Tech 's turnaround from a 2 – 8 – 1 season in 1992 was the largest single @-@ season turnaround in school history and was the second @-@ best in the country that year . Tech hoped to improve upon a 1 – 4 all @-@ time record in bowl games , while Indiana hoped to do likewise for its 3 – 4 historical bowl @-@ game record . In the week prior to the game , bad weather in Virginia caused travel delays that prevented many fans and the Virginia Tech marching band from arriving at the game early . Two days prior to the Independence Bowl , Tech was shocked by the death of Dr. Richard Bullock , who served as the team 's physician from 1971 to 1988 . Bullock designed a special football neck protector worn by players during the 1980s and 1990s before being phased out in favor of more advanced padding . 
 = = = Indiana offense = = = 
 Indiana 's offense averaged 21 @.@ 6 points and 320 total yards per game during the regular season , good enough for ninth in the Big Ten . As a whole , the Hoosiers accumulated 3 @,@ 818 yards of offense before the Independence Bowl . 2 @,@ 156 yards of this total were passing yards and came through the air , while the remaining 1 @,@ 662 yards were gained by Indiana 's running backs and fullbacks on the ground . 
 Indiana quarterback John Paci was the cornerstone of Indiana 's offense , and completed 133 of 258 passes for 1 @,@ 796 yards and eight touchdowns during the regular season . During the team 's regular @-@ season game against Penn State , Paci completed the longest passing play in Indiana history , completing a 99 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Thomas Lewis for a touchdown . That play in part helped make Paci 's performance against Penn State the fourth @-@ highest single @-@ game passing total for an Indiana quarterback in school history . Paci suffered a separated shoulder during the regular season , but despite the injury , he was predicted to start at quarterback against Virginia Tech and undergo surgery following the Independence Bowl . 
 Paci 's favorite passing target was wide receiver Thomas Lewis , who completed the regular season having caught 55 passes for 1 @,@ 058 yards and seven touchdowns . Lewis ' 1 @,@ 058 receiving yards were the second most ever accumulated by an Indiana player , and his 285 receiving yards in the Hoosiers ' game against Penn State were the most in a single game by an Indiana player in school history . On the ground , Indiana 's offense was led by running back Jermaine Chaney , who finished the regular season with 186 carries for 716 yards and six touchdowns . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's offense was ranked 11th nationally in scoring , averaging 36 @.@ 4 points per game , and 10th in rushing offense , averaging 242 @.@ 8 yards per game . The totals were the most recorded to that point by a Virginia Tech offense . That high @-@ ranking rushing attack was led by Dwayne Thomas , who accumulated 1 @,@ 130 yards and 11 touchdowns during the regular season . Thomas ' 11 touchdowns were the most for a Tech running back since 1969 . Thomas was ably assisted by a capable offensive line anchored by center Jim Pyne , who earned consensus All @-@ America honors in recognition of his performance . By being named to every All @-@ America team in the country , Pyne became the first consensus All @-@ American in Virginia Tech history . 
 Tech quarterback Maurice DeShazo was also a major part of the record @-@ breaking Tech offense . DeShazo threw 22 touchdown passes during the regular season , setting what was then a school record . He completed 129 of 230 passes for 2 @,@ 080 yards and seven interceptions in addition to the touchdown record . DeShazo 's favorite target passing the ball was wide receiver Antonio Freeman , who set a Tech record with nine touchdown receptions during the regular season . Freeman caught 32 passes for 644 yards in addition to the touchdown mark . 
 = = = Indiana defense = = = 
 The Hoosiers ' defense was ranked seventh in scoring defense , allowing an average of just 13 @.@ 8 points per game . In overall defense , Indiana was ranked 10th , allowing just 303 @.@ 3 yards per game . In total , the Hoosiers allowed 3 @,@ 654 yards ; 1 @,@ 997 of these were passing yards , while the remaining 1 @,@ 657 were rushing yards . 
 One of the stars of that IU defense was defensive tackle <unk> McCormack , who led the Hoosiers in sacks with seven . Another important defensive player was linebacker Alfonzo Thurman , whose 108 tackles during the regular season were the most of any Indiana player . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense allowed a Big East @-@ worst 2 @,@ 761 passing yards and permitted an average of 388 total yards per game , fifth @-@ worst in the conference . Linebacker Ken Brown had the most tackles of any Tech defender , accumulating 113 during the course of the regular season . Two Tech players tied for the most interceptions on the team . Torrian Gray and Antonio Banks each had three interceptions during the regular season . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 1993 Independence Bowl kicked off at 12 : 30 p.m. EST on December 31 , 1993 , at Independence Stadium in Shreveport , Louisiana . Official attendance estimates indicate a crowd of 33 @,@ 819 , but many seats in the 50 @,@ 459 @-@ seat stadium were empty , indicating a smaller @-@ than @-@ official crowd . The game was broadcast on ESPN in the United States , and Joel Meyers , Rick Walker , and Mike Mayock were the broadcasters . Weather at kickoff was sunny and 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Indiana received the Virginia Tech kickoff in the end zone for a touchback and began the first drive of the game at their 20 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the game , Indiana rushed up the middle for a six @-@ yard gain . After Paci threw an incomplete pass , he attempted to scramble for the first down but was tackled one yard short . Indiana punted the ball , and after a block @-@ in @-@ the @-@ back penalty against Virginia Tech , the Hokies began their first possession at their 15 @-@ yard line . After a five @-@ yard false start penalty on Tech 's first play , Hokie running back Dwayne Thomas rushed the ball for a 10 @-@ yard gain , making up twice the yardage lost to the penalty . Tech 's second play was another rush by Thomas , who ran to the Tech 27 @-@ yard line for the game 's first first down . Once there , DeShazo completed two consecutive passes , pushing Tech to their 45 @-@ yard line . Tech was able to continue the advance across midfield and into Indiana territory , but the Hoosiers ' defense stiffened and denied Tech another first down . After a Hokie punt , Indiana began its second offensive drive at its 15 @-@ yard line . 
 Indiana 's first play on the new drive was stopped for a loss , and the Hoosiers were forced to punt after a short gain was nullified by a Paci sack on third down . The kick was a short one , and Tech began its second drive from IU 's 49 @-@ yard line . The first play was stopped for no gain , DeShazo threw two incomplete passes , and Virginia Tech punted after going three and out . Indiana recovered the ball at its 23 @-@ yard line , where their offense began work . A five @-@ yard false start penalty against the Hoosiers pushed them back , and Indiana was stopped for little gain on the first two plays of its drive . On the third play , however , Paci connected on a 75 @-@ yard pass to Thomas Lewis , who ran into the end zone for a touchdown and the game 's first points . Following the extra point kick , Indiana had a 7 – 0 lead with 5 : 36 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Virginia Tech returned Indiana 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff to its 27 @-@ yard line , and Tech 's offense returned to the field hoping to answer the Hoosiers ' score . Two rushes by Thomas gave Tech a first down near the 40 @-@ yard line . Aided by a penalty against Indiana , Tech gained another first down in the Hoosiers ' side of the field with a pass by DeShazo . A 15 @-@ yard late @-@ hit penalty against Indiana gave Tech another first down and pushed the Hokies to the Indiana 31 @-@ yard line . Tech continued to drive with runs from DeShazo , Thomas , and fullback Joe Swarm . Inside the Indiana 10 @-@ yard line , Tech was stopped for losses on consecutive plays before DeShazo connected on a 14 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Thomas . The extra point was good , and with nine seconds remaining in the first quarter , Virginia Tech tied the game at 7 – 7 . 
 Indiana fielded Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff and returned it to their 25 @-@ yard line . The Hoosiers attempted a long pass , but the throw fell incomplete and the quarter came to an end with the score still tied at 7 – 7 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 Indiana began the second quarter in possession of the ball and facing a second down at its 25 @-@ yard line . After a rushing play was stopped for a loss and Paci was forced to throw the ball away to avoid a sack , Indiana punted for the first time in the second quarter . Tech resumed offense at its 41 @-@ yard line . DeShazo completed a pass to the Indiana 47 @-@ yard line , then a 25 @-@ yard toss to Cornelius Wright , who carried it to the Indiana 22 . Swarm carried the ball for a first down inside the Indiana 10 @-@ yard line , and two plays later , he carried it across the goal line for Virginia Tech 's second touchdown of the game . Following the extra point , Tech took a 14 – 7 lead with 11 : 14 remaining in the first half . 
 Indiana 's Jermaine Chaney fielded the post @-@ score kickoff and returned it 51 yards , setting up Indiana inside Tech territory . On the Hoosiers ' first play , Paci completed a 34 @-@ yard pass to tight end Ross Hales for Indiana 's second first down of the game . Just outside the Tech 10 @-@ yard line , Indiana was stopped short and prevented from scoring a touchdown . Indiana 's head coach sent in placekicker Bill <unk> , whose 26 @-@ yard kick soared through the uprights and cut Virginia Tech 's lead to 14 – 10 with 8 : 47 remaining before halftime . 
 Tech returned Indiana 's post @-@ score kickoff to the 22 @-@ yard line , where the Hokie offense returned to action . Tech picked up nine yards on a pass from DeShazo , but two plays later , DeShazo threw his first interception of the game as Indiana 's Mose Richardson jumped in front of a Tech pass . Following the turnover , Indiana 's offense began work from the Virginia Tech 31 @-@ yard line . The Hoosiers picked up a first down rushing the ball , but a holding call on first down pushed Indiana away from the end zone . Following the penalty , Virginia Tech 's defense prevented the Hoosiers gaining another first down , and IU was forced to attempt another field goal . As before , <unk> ' kick — this one a 40 @-@ yard attempt — was good , and Indiana sliced Tech 's lead to a single point , 14 – 13 , with 5 : 25 remaining in the first half . 
 The Hokies returned the post @-@ score kickoff to their 20 @-@ yard line , and Tech 's offense began work . Thomas gained a first down with three consecutive runs , then the Hokies fumbled when a backwards pass from DeShazo fell incomplete . Indiana recovered the ball , and the turnover allowed the Hoosiers ' offense to start work from the Tech 25 @-@ yard line . On Indiana 's first play , however , Virginia Tech cornerback <unk> Drakeford intercepted Paci 's pass . Following the turnover , Tech 's offense started work at its 20 @-@ yard line . The Hokies picked up a first down through the air , then DeShazo scrambled for another . A 10 @-@ yard holding penalty pushed Tech backward , and the Hokies were forced to punt the ball away . 
 Indiana 's offense began play from the Hoosiers ' 34 @-@ yard line following the kick . Paci scrambled for several yards , then completed a pass for a first down at the 50 @-@ yard line . On the next play , however , Paci fumbled the ball , which bounced into the hands of Tech defensive end Lawrence Lewis , who returned it 20 yards for a touchdown . The score and extra point gave Tech a 21 – 13 lead with 23 seconds remaining before halftime . Virginia Tech 's post @-@ score kickoff was returned to the Tech 42 @-@ yard line , potentially setting up an Indiana field goal try before halftime . Paci completed a pass to the 36 @-@ yard line , and the few seconds remaining in the first half apparently ran off the clock before Indiana could use its final timeout to stop the clock . 
 Virginia Tech players and coaches attempted to leave the field , only to be informed that Indiana called a timeout with one second remaining . Despite Tech head coach Frank Beamer 's protests , Indiana 's <unk> was able to return to the field to attempt a 51 @-@ yard goal . The kick was blocked and the ball recovered by Tech 's Antonio Banks , who returned it 80 yards for a touchdown . The score , which came with no time remaining on the clock , gave Tech a 28 – 13 lead at halftime . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Virginia Tech kicked off to Indiana to begin the game , Indiana kicked off to Virginia Tech to begin the second half . In response to the celebration following the 80 @-@ yard touchdown prior to halftime , Virginia Tech was assessed two 15 @-@ yard unsportsmanlike conduct penalties . Indiana kicked off from the Tech 40 @-@ yard line , and the ball was downed at the Virginia Tech 11 @-@ yard line . A false @-@ start penalty against the Hokies didn 't prevent them from gaining a first down on a pass from DeShazo to Swarm . Swarm picked up another first down on his own , advancing the ball to the Tech 38 @-@ yard line with a rush up the middle . Tech continued to advance the ball with Thomas , Swarm and DeShazo rushing the ball and picking up first downs . Now on the Indiana side of the field , DeShazo attempted a deep pass , but the ball was intercepted by Indiana cornerback Jason Orton . 
 Following the turnover , Indiana 's offense began work at its 32 @-@ yard line . Despite the opportunity presented by the interception , the Hoosiers were unable to gain a first down and punted back to Virginia Tech . Tech 's Steve Sanders returned the kick to the Tech 27 @-@ yard line , and Tech 's offense returned to the field . The Hokie offense was no more successful than Indiana 's had been , and Tech punted after going three and out . Following the kick and a short return , the Hoosiers began work at their 41 @-@ yard line . After being stopped for no gain on two consecutive plays , Paci completed a long pass to Tech 's 40 @-@ yard line for the Hoosiers ' first first down of the second half . Indiana continued advancing the ball via short passes , but came up one yard short of a first down . Instead of punting on fourth down , Indiana attempted to gain the first down via a rush up the middle . Tech 's defense held fast , and Indiana turned the ball over after failing to gain the needed yard . 
 Indiana 's defense also held fast on the next possession , and Tech was unable to gain a first down following the turnover . Tech 's punt was returned to the Indiana 38 @-@ yard line , where the Hoosier offense returned to the field . At first , the Hoosiers were successful moving the ball as they picked up a first down in Tech territory via a pass from Paci . The success was short @-@ lived , however , as the Hoosiers were unable to gain a first down once on the Tech side of the field and had to punt . Sanders returned the kick to the Tech 21 @-@ yard line , where Tech began its third possession of the second half . Tech picked up a first down via two DeShazo passes , but couldn 't gain another . Tech 's punt was downed at the Indiana 20 @-@ yard line , and Indiana 's offense began work with 3 : 02 remaining in the quarter . 
 Indiana earned a first down with two rushes , but as before , Tech 's defense stiffened and refused to allow a second as Tech 's Bernard Basham sacked Paci for a loss . Indiana 's punt was fair caught at the Tech 30 @-@ yard line as the quarter came to an end . With one quarter remaining in the game and neither team having scored in the third quarter , the score remained 28 – 13 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech began the fourth quarter in possession of the ball with a first down at its 30 @-@ yard line . The Hokie drive fizzled , as had most of the offense in the third quarter , after DeShazo was sacked for a big loss on third down . Indiana returned the Tech punt to its 43 @-@ yard line , and Indiana brought in its backup quarterback , Chris Dittoe , to lead the offense . After being sacked on his first play , Dittoe completed a pass to near midfield , making up the yardage that had been lost on the sack . Despite that gain , Indiana couldn 't make up the yardage lost to the sack and appeared to be ready to punt the ball . Instead , the Hoosiers faked the punt and threw a pass to an undefended Indiana player who dropped the ball . Following the turnover , Virginia Tech 's offense started work at the Indiana 49 @-@ yard line . After being stopped short on two rushes , DeShazo completed a 42 @-@ yard pass to Antonio Freeman , who raced down the field and into the end zone . The extra point was good , and with 9 : 37 remaining in the game , Tech took a 35 – 13 lead . 
 Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was downed in the end zone for a touchback , and Indiana 's offense started work at its 10 @-@ yard line after a Hoosier penalty . On the first play of Indiana 's drive , Dittoe was sacked and fumbled the ball , which rolled into the arms of a Virginia Tech defender . The Hokie offense quickly returned to the field and Tech 's Tommy Edwards scored on the first play after being set up at the Indiana five @-@ yard line after the turnover . The extra point gave Tech a 42 – 13 lead with 9 : 21 remaining . 
 Indiana 's offense started at its 20 @-@ yard line after a touchback on the kickoff . Dittoe threw two incomplete passes , was sacked , and the Hoosiers punted after going three and out . The Indiana punt was a poor one , flying out of bounds at the Indiana 28 @-@ yard line and giving Tech excellent field position . With a large lead secured , Virginia Tech backup quarterback Jim Druckenmiller came into the game for the Hokies , who were unable to gain a first down . Despite failing to advance the ball 10 yards , the excellent starting field position allowed Tech kicker Ryan Williams to attempt a 42 @-@ yard field goal , his longest kick of the season . The kick sailed through the uprights , and Tech extended its lead to 45 – 13 with exactly six minutes remaining in the game . 
 Following a touchback , Indiana 's offense started from its 20 @-@ yard line . The Hoosiers picked up a first down with two short rushes , then Dittoe completed a first @-@ down pass to Lewis and advanced the ball into Tech territory . On his second play in Tech territory , Dittoe completed a long pass to Lewis for Indiana 's first touchdown of the second half . The score cut Virginia Tech 's lead to 45 – 20 , but with only 4 : 26 remaining in the game , the odds were long against Indiana challenging Tech 's lead in a serious fashion . The Hoosier kickoff went out of bounds , and the Hokie offense began a drive from its 35 @-@ yard line . Virginia Tech began running out the clock , executing rushing plays and staying in bounds to maximize the amount of time run off the game clock . Tech was unable to get a first down , and the Hokie punt was returned to the Indiana 29 @-@ yard line . Indiana was stopped on three consecutive plays and appeared to be punting the ball . As they had earlier in the game , however , the Hoosiers executed a trick play , snapping the ball to linebacker Alfonzo Thurman instead of the punter . Thurman ran forward for 37 yards — the Hoosiers ' longest run of the game — and a first down . Despite the gain and a 15 @-@ yard pass interference penalty against Tech , Indiana was unable to score . Time ran out in the fourth quarter , and Virginia Tech earned the 45 – 20 victory . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Virginia Tech quarterback Maurice DeShazo was named the game 's offensive most valuable player . DeShazo completed 19 of his 33 pass attempts for two touchdowns , 193 yards , and two interceptions . DeShazo 's favorite passing target , wide receiver Antonio Freeman , finished the game with five catches for 66 yards and a touchdown . Running back Dwayne Thomas , Tech 's second @-@ leading receiver , had four catches for 27 yards and a touchdown . He also led Tech 's offense on the ground , carrying the ball 24 times for 65 yards . Fullback Joe Swarm was the second @-@ leading rusher for the Hokies , accumulating 40 yards on nine carries . 
 Indiana 's offense outgained the Hokies through the air and finished with 276 passing yards , its second @-@ highest total that season . Starting quarterback John Paci completed 10 of 22 passes for 171 yards and a touchdown , while backup quarterback completed 7 of 14 passes for 105 yards and a touchdown . Both players ' favorite target was Thomas Lewis , who finished the game leading all receivers with six catches for 177 yards and two touchdowns . On the ground , the Hoosiers were led by linebacker Alfonzo Thurman , who , although a defensive player , ran for 37 yards on a fake punt . 
 Virginia Tech 's defense performed well overall against the Hoosiers . The 20 rushing yards allowed by the Tech defense were the fewest permitted all season . In addition , the Hokie defense accumulated seven sacks and four tackles for loss . The seven sacks were the most for Tech that season , and Indiana 's 11 first downs also were the fewest Tech allowed that season . The Hokie defense also performed well on an individual level . Antonio Banks and Torrian Gray each had nine tackles , tying for the most of any player in the game . Banks also had a fumble recovery for a touchdown , an interception , and a pass breakup . For these accomplishments , he was named the game 's defensive MVP . Tech linebacker Ken Brown finished with eight tackles . 
 The Hoosiers ' defense had some success stopping Tech behind the line of scrimmage , accumulating seven tackles for loss during the course of the game . Indiana cornerback Mose Richardson had nine tackles and one interception , leading the Hoosiers in tackles , and teammate Chris Dyer came in second for IU with seven . 
 The block of Bill <unk> ' 51 @-@ yard field goal attempt by Tech defensive lineman Jeff Holland prior to halftime was the 36th blocked kick in Frank Beamer 's seven years as Tech head coach . The 80 @-@ yard touchdown return of the blocked kick by Antonio Banks was the first such touchdown in Virginia Tech history . 
 Virginia Tech set several then @-@ records during the game . Its 21 second @-@ quarter points were the most ever scored in that quarter , and tied the record for most points in any quarter . It set the Independence Bowl record for most points scored , and tied the record for fewest first downs allowed . Some records set during the game still stand . Indiana 's Thomas Lewis returned a record eight punts in the game and earned 177 receiving yards , including the third @-@ longest pass in Independence Bowl History — a 75 @-@ yard reception from quarterback John Paci . Hokie Kicker Ryan Williams set the record for the most extra points in an Independence Bowl game with six , a mark that was tied during the 1995 Independence Bowl . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's victory was just its second bowl win in school history and brought the Hokies to a final 1993 record of 9 – 3 . Indiana 's loss took it to 8 – 4 , one win short of tying a nine @-@ win season in 1967 that featured an appearance in the Rose Bowl . Tech 's win was also its first televised victory since 1990 . Despite those accolades , the victory failed to move the Hokies up in the AP poll , which kept Tech at No. 22 in the final ranking of the season . 
 At the time , Tech officials viewed the victory as a turning point for the program . Virginia Tech president Paul Torgersen said , " Incredible . ... A very fine job . We 've turned it around . No question , we 've turned it around . " Later observers also concurred , pointing to the game as the start of Virginia Tech 's 23 @-@ season bowl appearance streak , which included a trip to the national championship game . 
 Indiana , which had appeared in bowl games six times in the eight years prior to the Independence Bowl , suffered after the loss . Indiana went 6 – 5 in the 1994 season , and head coach Bill Mallory was fired after two consecutive losing seasons in 1995 and 1996 . The Hoosiers would not appear in a bowl again until the 2007 season , when they played in the 2007 Insight Bowl . 
 Several players from each team later went on to play in the National Football League . Tech center Jim Pyne played for nine years in the NFL before becoming an assistant coach in the league . He subsequently had his number retired by Virginia Tech , becoming just the fourth player in Tech history to be honored in that fashion . 
 = Denis Smith ( footballer ) = 
 Denis Smith ( born 19 November 1947 ) is an English former professional footballer and manager . He made 531 appearances in all competitions in 15 seasons as a player in the Football League , and as a manager took charge for 1 @,@ 195 competitive matches . 
 Born in Meir , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , he joined local club Stoke City as an amateur in 1964 , making his first team debut in September 1968 . A hard @-@ tackling defender , he soon established himself in the first team , playing in a centre @-@ back partnership with Alan Bloor for much of his career . Stoke enjoyed one of the most successful periods of their history during his time at the club , as he helped Stoke to win the League Cup in 1972 , featuring in successive FA Cup semi @-@ finals in 1971 and 1972 and helping the club to successive fifth @-@ place finishes in the First Division in 1973 – 74 and 1974 – 75 . His bravery as a player meant that he also entered the Guinness Book of Records as the most injured man in football , although he was never able to fully recover after breaking his leg for the fifth time in his career in March 1975 . He did manage to continue to play competitive football , and helped Stoke to win promotion from the Second Division in 1978 – 79 . He missed the entire 1980 – 81 season due to injury , and left the club in May 1982 . 
 He began his management career at York City in May 1982 , having played for the club on loan the previous season . He led the club to the Fourth Division title in 1983 – 84 , totalling five seasons at the club . He took charge of Sunderland in May 1987 , and took the club to the Third Division title in 1987 – 88 , before getting the club promoted from the Second Division in 1989 – 90 . Sacked by Sunderland in December 1991 , he took charge at Bristol City three months later . He steered the club away from relegation in 1992 – 93 , but was sacked in January 1993 after falling out with the club 's directors . He was appointed manager of Oxford United in September 1993 , and though he was unable to avoid relegation in 1993 – 94 , he led the club to promotion from the Second Division in 1995 – 96 . He switched clubs to West Bromwich Albion in December 1997 , remaining in charge for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons before he was sacked in July 1999 . 
 He returned to manage Oxford in February 2000 , and steered the club away from relegation in 1999 – 2000 before resigning in October 2000 . In October 2001 he was appointed manager of Wrexham , but was unable to steer the club away from relegation in 2001 – 02 . He won promotion from the Third Division at the first attempt in 2002 – 03 , but Wrexham entered administration in December 2004 and the resulting points deduction saw them relegated once more . Despite the financial problems he managed the club to the Football League Trophy title in 2005 , in addition to two successive FAW Premier Cup wins in 2002 and 2003 . He was sacked in January 2007 , months after the club exited administration . He married in October 1967 and has three children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Denis Smith was born in Meir , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , the second youngest of seven siblings . At just three years old he formed his own gang , stating in his autobiography that " if we wanted to play in the sandpit we played in the sandpit " , and continued to lead his gang through junior and senior years at Sandon Road Junior School . Despite being involved with gangs since his early childhood he grew out of the culture by the age of ten , and as a teenager formed friendships outside of his local council estate . He turned down the chance to sit the eleven plus exam as local grammar school Longton High was a rugby @-@ playing school , and so instead attended Queensbury Road School , with whom he won the Stoke Schools Trophy ; he also played for the Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent Schoolboys ( who were coached by former England international Dennis <unk> ) . At the age of 15 he became Staffordshire County boxing champion . 
 He was only 5 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) at the age of 14 , but a late growth spurt took him to just under six foot , and was therefore tall enough to play centre @-@ back as a professional footballer . He was offered an apprenticeship by Portsmouth , but turned it down as he wanted to sign for his local club Stoke City , who initially were not willing to take him on as an apprentice . They only allowed him to train with the ' A ' team twice a week as an amateur whilst he initially worked as a plumber 's mate , and later as a factory worker at Stone Lotus . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Stoke City = = = 
 Smith signed for Stoke City in September 1966 after telling manager Tony Waddington that he was going to sign a contract at another club ; though Waddington was not keen on Smith 's hard @-@ tackling style , he did not want to lose the young player . At the age of 18 he faced Leeds United 's FWA Footballer of the Year Bobby Collins in a reserve game , and despite Collins going as far as to punch him in the face Smith managed to last the entire match without backing down in an extremely physical contest . However , for a period Waddington banned Smith from playing against first team players in training as he feared Smith would injure one of his players . He made his first team debut in the Football League against Arsenal in September 1968 , and was given the task of man @-@ marking Bobby Gould . He gave away a penalty after fouling Jon <unk> , which Terry Neill converted for the only goal of the game , but otherwise made a solid debut . However , in his second game he gave away two penalties in a 3 – 1 defeat away to Ipswich Town , and had to wait five months for another first team appearance . In March 1969 , Alan Bloor picked up a knock and Smith returned to the starting line @-@ up in a 5 – 1 defeat to Leeds , failing in his task to man mark Mick Jones , who claimed a hat @-@ trick . Despite the poor start to his senior career , he managed to finish the 1968 – 69 season with 14 First Division appearances to his name , and was occasionally used as an emergency striker . 
 Smith established himself in the Stoke defence in 1969 – 70 , forming a centre @-@ back partnership with Alan Bloor in between full @-@ backs Jackie Marsh and Mike Pejic . Smith was the aggressive and highly physical defender , complimented by Bloor who tended to stay further back and use his intelligence to read the game and clean up any mistakes Smith made . Smith claimed his first goal for the club on 17 September 1969 , in a 3 – 1 win over West Bromwich Albion ( West Brom ) at the Hawthorns . Stoke reached the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup in 1970 – 71 , and Smith played in the fourth round victory over Huddersfield Town despite suffering from a fractured ankle . He scored the only goal of the game in the fifth round replay away to Ipswich . He also scored a " freak goal " from a deflected Peter Storey clearance in the semi @-@ final against Arsenal on 27 March 1971 , but Stoke lost the replay four days later . 
 Stoke reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final for a second successive season in 1971 – 72 , again being knocked out by Arsenal in a replay . He had scored in the quarter @-@ final victory over Manchester United and pressured Arsenal 's Peter Simpson into scoring an own goal in the original semi @-@ final game . However , John Radford was the hero of the tie as he played as an emergency goalkeeper in the first game following an injury to Bob Wilson , and then scored the winning goal in the replay . Stoke found greater success in the League Cup , beating Southport , Oxford United ( after a replay ) , Manchester United ( after two replays ) , Bristol Rovers and West Ham United ( after three replays ) to reach the 1972 League Cup Final against Chelsea . He scored two goals during the run , but was knocked out whilst scoring against Bristol Rovers in the quarter @-@ final , and missed some weeks with concussion . He returned to play in the final , man @-@ marking Peter Osgood in a game which Stoke won 2 – 1 to win their first major trophy . 
 Despite the cup success and arrival of new signing Geoff Hurst , Stoke laboured to a 15th @-@ place finish in 1972 – 73 . Smith blamed the car crash and subsequent injury to Gordon Banks in October 1972 as the cause for the club 's mid @-@ season slump , which compounded an already poor start to the season . Any concerns over relegation disappeared though with six victories in the final eight league games . After a poor start to 1973 – 74 , Waddington signed Alan Hudson in January 1974 to help revive the club 's fortunes . The defence also improved , as Smith helped to ensure only two goals were conceded in the last nine games of the season as Stoke finished fifth . On 23 February 1974 , Smith scored the winning goal against Leeds to end their opponent 's 29 @-@ game unbeaten run . Leeds went on to have a £ 250 @,@ 000 bid for Smith turned down by Stoke in the summer . 
 Stoke made a push for the title in 1974 – 75 . They also competed in the UEFA Cup against Dutch side Ajax , and Smith scored in a 1 – 1 draw at the Victoria Ground , though Stoke would lose the tie on away goals . Smith scored the only goal of the game against Leicester City on 30 November 1974 to take Stoke top of the table . However , Smith broke his leg for the fifth time in his career making a red @-@ card challenge on Mick Lambert in a 2 – 1 defeat to Ipswich on 18 March 1975 ; he was the fourth Stoke player to break a leg that season . Stoke ended the season again in fifth place , picking up just two points from their final three games to finish four points behind champions Derby County . 
 He underwent an operation to remove cartilage in his knee in November 1975 , and his recovery was not entirely successful . He later admitted that after returning to match fitness from the injury he was only ever able to play at " half pace " . His long @-@ term replacement was young defender Alan Dodd . The club also faced a major decline following a gale which severely damaged the Victoria Ground 's Butler Street stand , and a lack of adequate insurance cover left a significant repair bill meaning the club had to sell Alan Hudson , Jimmy Greenhoff , Mike Pejic , Sean <unk> and Ian Moores to fund the repair ; Eric Skeels and John Ritchie also retired . Waddington filled in the gaps left by these players with youngsters , and it also meant that Smith could continue to be a regular for the club despite his reduced mobility . Waddington was sacked in March 1976 , and new manager George Eastham failed to prevent Stoke from being relegated at the end of 1976 – 77 . Following relegation he formed another good partnership , this time with Mike Doyle , which helped Stoke gain promotion in 1978 – 79 under new manager Alan Durban . Smith claimed his two seasons in the Second Division were " boring " , as even with his reduced mobility few attackers in the division posed too much of a threat for him . 
 A pre @-@ season injury kept him out of the entire 1980 – 81 season , during which time he coached the reserves . In this time he converted Steve Bould from a striker into a centre @-@ back . Smith returned from injury in 1981 – 82 , and featured regularly early in the season , and by the time another injury forced him out of the team , Stoke were sitting in 18th @-@ place . He joined York City , who were struggling in the Fourth Division , on a one @-@ month loan in March 1982 . He debuted in a 3 – 1 home defeat to Hull City on 16 March 1982 , and scored once for York , in a 4 – 2 loss away to Wigan Athletic on 2 April . Smith made seven appearances while on loan at York , and exerted his influence on the team by organising the defence ; he commented that " They had been crying out for an older head like me " . He was recalled by Stoke manager Richie Barker as the defence struggled in his absence , and Smith re @-@ established himself in the team as they avoided relegation . He was handed a free transfer to York in May 1982 . He said that if he had been offered a coaching role at Stoke he would have stayed , but that Barker wanted him gone as he saw him as a threat to his position . In total , Smith made 493 appearances for Stoke , a club record for a centre @-@ back . 
 = = = Style of play = = = 
 During Smith 's 14 seasons with Stoke , he became known for his fearless mentality which led to him sustaining a large number of injuries . These included five broken legs , breaking his nose four times , a cracked ankle , broken collar bone , chipped spine , breaking most of his fingers and toes and needing more than 200 stitches . The sequence saw him named in the Guinness Book of Records as the most injured man in football . Early into his career Smith soon developed a reputation as a " hard player " , who would launch himself at opponents determined to either block a shot and win the ball , which is how he picked up most of his injuries . He was known as Stoke 's " hitman " , and relished going toe to toe with the biggest and most feared opposition players . 
 He would generally man @-@ mark the opposition 's playmaker or major goalscoring threat . He was a highly effective tackler , able to either flatten opposition players or to quickly take the ball off their toes . After the tackle from behind was outlawed he adapted to the rule change by making hard challenges from the side . Manager Tony Waddington said that " His qualities were his tackling strength and his courage . On the ball he just did what he could do , but he also had a tremendous ability to read the game . " 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = York City = = = 
 He moved into management with York as player @-@ manager ahead of 1982 – 83 , accepting the position on 12 May 1982 . He described the set up at Bootham Crescent on his arrival as a " shambles " , as training consisted entirely of running and was devoid of any actual coaching . He signed veteran players Roger Jones ( goalkeeper ) , Alan Hay ( defender ) and Ricky Sbragia ( defender ) , as well as young Stoke defender Chris Evans , which including Smith himself meant a complete change in the club 's back line . He brought in striker Viv Busby as a player @-@ coach . He then made 6 ft 1 in ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) 26 @-@ year @-@ old striker Keith Walwyn his priority , and encouraged Walwyn to use his natural physical presence to become a greater threat in front of goal and unlock his potential . Smith retired from playing after steering York to a seventh @-@ place in 1982 – 83 , in which he made 36 appearances and scored 4 goals . He signed Sheffield United 's John MacPhail on a free transfer as a replacement for himself . 
 In his second season as York manager , 1983 – 84 , he signed another former teammate , energetic midfielder Sean <unk> . Smith was named as the division 's Manager of the Month for March 1984 after York won five and drew one of their six league games . He guided York to the Fourth Division title and promotion into the Third Division , with Walwyn scoring 25 goals and earning a place in the PFA Team of the Year alongside strike partner John Byrne , who scored 27 goals . York finished with 101 points , 16 points ahead of runners @-@ up Doncaster Rovers . 
 Early in 1984 – 85 York were beaten by Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) in the League Cup , but Byrne impressed QPR manager Alan Mullery enough to earn a £ 100 @,@ 000 move to Loftus Road . Smith spent half of this sum ( a club record ) on Aldershot forward Dale Banton , who went on to score 49 goals in 138 games for the club . He also released winger Brian Pollard , but found that the man he signed in his place , Gary Nicholson , was not able to replicate Pollard 's form . York started the season well and another of his signings , Keith Houchen ( £ 15 @,@ 000 ) , scored a hat @-@ trick in a 7 – 1 win over Gillingham in November 1984 . On 26 January 1975 , he guided York to victory over Arsenal in the FA Cup fourth round . In the next round York came from behind to draw 1 – 1 at home with Liverpool , before losing 7 – 0 away at Anfield . 
 York again drew Liverpool in the FA Cup fifth round in 1985 – 86 , and took the lead through Gary Ford only to concede a stoppage time equaliser . Tony Canham scored at Anfield and York had a second goal disallowed before York <unk> to a 3 – 1 defeat in extra time . York lost only three home league games all season , but missed out on promotion after finishing seventh . In the summer of 1986 he sold MacPhail to Bristol City for £ 15 @,@ 000 , whilst many of the veteran players he signed when he first came to the club were coming to the end of their careers . The 1986 – 87 season was disappointing for York as they were knocked out of the FA Cup by non @-@ League team Caernarfon Town and ended the season in 20th @-@ place . They did though manage to beat Chelsea 1 – 0 in the League Cup , but lost the return fixture at Stamford Bridge 3 – 0 . Smith ended up falling out with the club 's directors , who invested money in the club 's facilities rather than on players , and released goalkeeper Andy Leaning against his wishes . 
 = = = Sunderland = = = 
 In May 1987 , Smith was appointed manager at Sunderland , who had just been relegated into the Third Division for the first time in their history . York were unwilling to release him from his contract for less than £ 20 @,@ 000 compensation , and Sunderland would only go as far as pay £ 10 @,@ 000 . Smith agreed to a £ 40 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ year contract that meant if he failed to win promotion with Sunderland in his first season he would pay the extra £ 10 @,@ 000 compensation himself . He brought his York coaching staff with him : Viv Busby , Malcolm Crosby , and Roger Jones . He also signed former York player John MacPhail to shore up the defence , who captained the side and scored 16 goals ( including 10 penalties ) in his maiden season at Roker Park . He signed right @-@ back John Kay , whilst remaining satisfied with existing left @-@ back Reuben <unk> , centre @-@ back Gary Bennett and goalkeeper Iain <unk> . In midfield he played a youthful combination of Gordon Armstrong , Paul Lemon , Gary Owers and Paul Atkinson , alongside the more experienced defensive midfielder Steve Doyle . He sold Mark Proctor to Sheffield Wednesday for £ 275 @,@ 000 . He signed young and pacey York striker Marco Gabbiadini for £ 80 @,@ 000 and played him alongside the experienced Eric Gates ; the pair scored 42 goals between them in 1987 – 88 . A 7 – 0 win over Southend United started a run of 15 league games unbeaten , though in the second half of the campaign a run of just 2 wins in 10 games set them back . Smith bought Swansea City winger Colin Pascoe in March 1988 , and oversaw a run of seven wins in the final eight games to secure the Third Division championship and promotion with a record 101 points . 
 Injuries to Kay and Lemon hindered Sunderland at the start of 1988 – 89 , and they took until 1 October 1988 to register their first win back in the Second Division . He signed burly striker Billy Whitehurst to act as a " battering @-@ ram " , who proved to be an effective player despite being a heavy binge drinker . He spent a club record £ 500 @,@ 000 on goalkeeper Tony Norman , though <unk> and Whitehurst were traded as part @-@ exchange on the fee . Sunderland improved and ended the season in 11th @-@ place . 
 He signed experienced forward Paul Bracewell for 1989 – 90 , who partnered an increasingly effective Gabbiadini , and spent £ 130 @,@ 000 on Portsmouth left @-@ back Paul Hardyman . He introduced the exceptionally talented teenage winger Kieron Brady to the first team , but was unable to discipline the precocious teenager , and Brady never realised his full potential . Sunderland reached the play @-@ offs , and faced rivals Newcastle United in the semi @-@ final , securing passage into the final with a 2 – 0 victory at St James ' Park . They lost 1 – 0 to Swindon Town in the play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium . However , Swindon were found guilty of financial irregularities and remained in the Second Division , whilst Sunderland took their place in the First Division . 
 Having been promoted weeks after the end of the previous season and not being granted an increased wage budget , Smith felt he had a tough job in keeping Sunderland in the top @-@ flight in 1990 – 91 . He allowed Gates and MacPhail to leave on free transfers in order to free up money to bring in new players . He spent £ 350 @,@ 000 on Portsmouth defender Kevin Ball and took midfielder Peter Davenport from rivals Middlesbrough ; Ball would prove to be a success , though Smith admitted in his autobiography that signing Davenport had been a mistake that left him unable to bring in any further players , as his small budget was spent . He was given further funds in February 1991 as Sunderland were engaged in a relegation battle , and Smith spent £ 225 @,@ 000 on midfielder Brian Mooney , who had a limited impact due to injuries . On the final day of the season Sunderland had to better Luton Town 's result at home to Derby in their game against Manchester City at Maine Road , but they lost 3 – 2 and were relegated back into the Second Division . 
 In the summer of 1991 , Stoke chairman Peter Coates offered Smith the vacant management position at the club , but Smith decided that potentially being sacked by his hometown club would be too intense an experience emotionally , and chose to stay loyal to Sunderland . This was despite finances being tight at Sunderland as the club saved the money to build the Stadium of Light . However , after just 4 wins in the opening 14 games of 1991 – 92 , Smith decided to sell star striker Gabbiadini to Crystal Palace for £ 1 @.@ 8 million in order to raise funds to improve the squad . He then spent £ 350 @,@ 000 on Celtic left @-@ back Anton Rogan and brought in strikers Don Goodman ( £ 900 @,@ 000 from West Bromwich Albion ) and John Byrne ( £ 225 @,@ 000 from Brighton & Hove Albion ) . Smith was sacked on 30 December 1991 , with Sunderland lying 17th in the Second Division . His former assistant Malcolm Crosby took Sunderland to the 1992 FA Cup Final , in which they were beaten by Liverpool . 
 = = = Bristol City = = = 
 Smith was only out of work for nine weeks before being appointed manager of Bristol City on 9 March 1992 . He succeeded Jimmy Lumsden , who left the club second @-@ from @-@ bottom in the Second Division . Smith felt the team lacked pace , so signed 20 @-@ year @-@ old striker Andy Cole on loan from Arsenal . Dariusz <unk> scored both goals against Wolverhampton Wanderers ( Wolves ) in Smith 's second game in charge to provide City with their first win in three months . They then won 3 – 1 against Smith 's former club Sunderland , with Cole scoring the first of his 8 goals in 12 appearances during his loan spell . Smith successfully steered the club out of the relegation zone at the end of 1992 – 93 with a run of eight games unbeaten , and paid a club record £ 500 @,@ 000 to secure Cole 's services on a permanent basis . He further paid £ 250 @,@ 000 for Everton midfielder Raymond <unk> and signed West Ham United striker Leroy Rosenior . 
 Smith rebuilt the defence for 1993 – 94 , signing right @-@ back Brian Mitchell and centre @-@ back David Thompson , and oversaw a mixed start to the season . City won four straight home games but also lost 5 – 1 to West Ham , 5 – 0 at Newcastle , and most significantly 4 – 0 to local rivals Bristol Rovers at Twerton Park . He found it difficult to control the club 's talented and popular players , as <unk> regularly got into trouble in his social life and skilled left @-@ winger Junior Bent was unwilling to deliver crosses as regularly as Smith demanded . He tried to sell Bent but was unable to have the deal sanctioned by the club 's directors . His relationship with the board was poor and he found himself regularly undermined and sensitive boardroom discussions were leaked . He also tried to sell Cole in order to provide funds to restructure the first team but again the board refused to sanction the deal . He was sacked on 21 January 1993 following a run of 10 matches without a victory , and his assistant Russell Osman was appointed as his successor . 
 = = = Oxford United = = = 
 Smith made a return to management with Oxford on 10 September 1993 , and the following day led them to a 4 – 2 victory over his former club Bristol City . A victory over another former club , Stoke , took Oxford off the bottom of the Second Division , but a sequence of just 2 wins in 17 games left them in great danger of relegation . He signed goalkeeper Phil Whitehead on loan from Barnsley , signed striker John Byrne ( £ 50 @,@ 000 from Millwall ) for the third time in his career , and then made what he later said was the best signing of his career by bringing in defender Matt Elliott from Scunthorpe United for £ 170 @,@ 000 . Oxford were boosted by these arrivals and briefly exited the relegation zone , also claiming an FA Cup giant @-@ killing over Leeds at Elland Road after Jim Magilton scored the winning goal in extra time . However , after the game Magilton moved to Southampton for a £ 600 @,@ 000 fee . Oxford had struggled in the league during their FA Cup run and were 15 points short of safety with 16 games to play , but were aided by £ 60 @,@ 000 signing Paul Moody , who , despite arriving in February 1994 , managed to finish as the club 's top @-@ scorer with 12 goals in 15 games . His arrival kick @-@ started the club 's fightback , and Oxford closed the 15 points gap in just 9 games . However , a difficult run @-@ in left Oxford needing to beat Notts County on the last day of the season and hope results elsewhere went their way , and though they beat County their relegation rivals also claimed victories and Oxford were relegated . 
 The sale of star midfielder Joey Beauchamp to West Ham for a club record £ 1 million allowed Smith money to spend in the transfer market , and he spent £ 100 @,@ 000 each on Norwich City midfielder David Smith and Sunderland striker David Rush . Oxford formed a strong promotion push in 1994 – 95 , but were knocked out of the FA Cup in the first round by non @-@ League Marlow . In February 1995 , he spent £ 60 @,@ 000 on Hartlepool United 's Phil Gilchrist , who would form a highly effective centre @-@ back partnership with Elliott . Oxford finished the season in seventh place , six points outside the play @-@ offs . In November 1995 , Smith re @-@ signed Beauchamp for £ 300 @,@ 000 , who continued his excellent form after returning to his native Oxfordshire . The next month he brought in striker Martin Aldridge on a free transfer . The club were 14th in January 1996 , but lost only once in their last 17 games of 1995 – 96 in a tremendous second half of the season that saw them climb 12 places to win promotion as runners @-@ up . At the end of the season , Smith became a director of the club . 
 In order to strengthen for 1996 – 97 , Smith signed striker Nigel Jemson and spent £ 100 @,@ 000 on Leyton Orient defender Darren Purse . In order to finance these deals he sold Chris Allen to Nottingham Forest for £ 450 @,@ 000 . Oxford knocked Premier League side Sheffield Wednesday out of the League Cup en route to a fourth round exit . Oxford were fifth in the table in December 1996 , but chairman Robin Herd resigned amidst financial problems at the club , and work on the new stadium came to a halt as the club debt reached £ 13 million . Smith raised funds by selling Elliott to Leicester for £ 1 @.@ 7 million , and signed veteran defender Chris Whyte on a free transfer as a short @-@ term replacement . Oxford finished the season in 17th place , but the club 's financial situation became ever bleaker . Numerous players were sold , though Smith was allowed to spend £ 170 @,@ 000 on defender Phil Whelan . Smith left the Manor Ground mid @-@ way through 1997 – 98 with Oxford 16th in the league , and his assistant Crosby managed to maintain the club 's mid @-@ table position at the end of the season . 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 Smith was appointed manager of West Brom on a three @-@ year contract on 24 December 1997 , with Oxford receiving around £ 100 @,@ 000 in compensation . He had a mixed start to his time at the Hawthorns as Albion fell from promotion contenders to a tenth @-@ place finish in 1997 – 98 , but recorded victories over local rivals Wolves and Stoke . 
 In preparation for 1998 – 99 , he signed athletic Derby centre @-@ back Matt Carbon for £ 800 @,@ 000 , Blackpool striker James Quinn for £ 500 @,@ 000 , and Manchester City defender Jason van <unk> for £ 50 @,@ 000 . He also brought in winger Mark Angel , midfielders Mario <unk> and Enzo Maresca , and striker Fabian de Freitas . However , the player who had the greatest impact for West Brom was young striker Lee Hughes , who had been signed before Smith 's arrival but only made his first start under Smith . Aside from Maresca , many of Smith 's signings had little impact , and supporters criticised him for allowing popular goalkeeper Alan Miller and strikers Andy Hunt and Bob Taylor to leave the club . West Broom started the season well with Hughes in tremendous form , but a slump in form in March 1999 left them ending up in 12th place . Smith was sacked on 27 July 1999 , just a week before the start of 1999 – 2000 . 
 = = = Return to Oxford = = = 
 On 3 February 2000 , Smith was appointed manager of Oxford for the second time in his career , with the club 21st in the Second Division . He re @-@ signed striker Nigel Jemson from Ayr United , and kept Oxford in the division as they ended 1999 – 2000 in 20th place , one place and one point above the relegation zone . He signed a one @-@ year contract extension in the summer of 2000 , but fell out with chairman Firoz Kassam . He later admitted that the signings he made on a limited budget , which included Ian McGuckin , Andy Scott and Rob Quinn , were not good enough . Smith resigned on 2 October 2000 after a terrible start to 2000 – 01 , a season which ended in Oxford being relegated in last place . He continued to work as a scout for the club under David Kemp and then Mark Wright . 
 = = = Wrexham = = = 
 Smith returned to management on 8 October 2001 with Wrexham on a two @-@ year contract , replacing Brian Flynn who had resigned after 12 years in charge , with the club 23rd in the Second Division . He was tasked with keeping the club steady whilst it struggled with financial problems . He decided to cut back on the club 's youth coaching spending , and as a result Wrexham 's youth structure was downgraded from an Academy to a Centre of Excellence . He signed goalkeeper Marius <unk> , midfielder Jim Whitley , and gave striker Hector Sam his debut , but failed to keep Wrexham away from the relegation zone . With relegation confirmed , new signing Lee Jones scored all five goals in a 5 – 0 win over Cambridge United , leaving cause for optimism at the Racecourse Ground . 
 He signed wing @-@ back Paul Edwards and held on to most of his key players for the 2002 – 03 season . Wrexham had a good start to the season and Smith won the Manager of the Month award for September 2002 after a sequence of four wins and two draws . A slump followed but Wrexham recovered from a poor October 2002 after coming from behind to beat Bournemouth on 9 November , as strikers Andy Morrell and Lee Trundle formed a good partnership , with Jones an impact substitute . Wrexham dropped out of the play @-@ off places following a sequence of draws in March 2003 , but new signing Scott Green scored both goals in a 2 – 0 win over Hartlepool United on 18 March , the first of a sequence of eight victories that took Wrexham into the third automatic promotion place with four games to go . They held on to the position to secure promotion from the Third Division at the first attempt . Wrexham also beat Newport County 6 – 1 in the final of the FAW Premier Cup to secure an important £ 100 @,@ 000 in prize money . Smith was named as the Manager of the Month for April and 2003 , before winning the League Managers Association 's Third Division Manager of the Season award . 
 Smith lost Morrell and Trundle on free transfers , and replaced them with Chris Armstrong and Chris Llewellyn . The club 's financial problems meant that players went unpaid at the start of 2003 – 04 , although they remained in the play @-@ off places in December 2003 . However , a hairline fracture to Shaun Pejic left Smith short of defenders and the promotion challenge ebbed away to a mid @-@ table finish . Wrexham retained the FAW Premier Cup though with a 4 – 1 victory over Rhyl . However , Smith made himself unpopular with supporters after refusing to endorse their campaign to oust controversial chairman Alex Hamilton . 
 Writing in his autobiography , Smith described 2004 – 05 " the most harrowing , distressing footballing time of my life " as the club entered administration with debts of £ 2 @.@ 6 million . Wrexham became the first club to be deducted 10 points for entering administration and were subsequently relegated from League One , eight points short of safety despite new signing Juan Ugarte scoring 23 goals . Despite the financial trouble Wrexham managed to win the Football League Trophy , knocking out Notts County , Stockport County , Chester City , Hereford United and Oldham Athletic en route to the final against Southend United at the Millennium Stadium . The final was settled in extra time , with Ugarte and Darren Ferguson securing a 2 – 0 victory . The club earned £ 250 @,@ 000 in prize money and the first national trophy in Wrexham 's history . 
 Smith turned down the managerial role at Blackpool to remain in place at Wrexham for 2005 – 06 . He signed goalkeeper Michael Ingham , defenders David Bayliss and Lee Roche , and strikers Lee McEvilly and Jonathan Walters , whilst <unk> brothers Marc and Mike Williams . However , Wrexham struggled in the league , despite on loan striker Matt Derbyshire scoring 10 goals in 16 appearances . They finished the season 13th in League Two , having won only one of their last nine games . The last game of the season was a 1 – 1 draw with former club Oxford , which sent Oxford out of the Football League . 
 Wrexham exited 18 @-@ months of administration at the start of 2006 – 07 , and started the season with an eight @-@ match unbeaten run , including a 4 – 1 win over Championship club Sheffield Wednesday in the League Cup . However , a 5 – 0 defeat at Accrington Stanley triggered a run of bad results that Smith was unable to turn around . With Wrexham hovering above the relegation zone in 18th @-@ place , Smith was sacked on 11 January 2007 . He is one of only 24 people to have managed over 1 @,@ 000 professional matches in English football . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He married childhood sweetheart Kate in October 1967 . Their first child Paul was born in April 1969 , and was named after teammate Paul <unk> , who had died six months earlier . They had two further children : Becky , and Tom ( born 1978 ) . Smith released his autobiography , Just One Of Seven , in November 2008 . He writes a weekly column for The Sentinel and is occasionally a commentator on Stoke matches for BBC Radio Stoke . In July 2011 , he re @-@ joined Stoke on a part @-@ time basis as a mentor for young Academy players needing guidance off the pitch . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 Stoke City 
 Football League Second Division third @-@ place promotion : 1978 – 79 
 Football League Cup winner : 1972 
 Watney Cup winner : 1973 – 74 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 York City 
 Football League Fourth Division champion : 1983 – 84 
 Sunderland 
 Football League Third Division champion : 1987 – 88 
 Football League Second Division promotion : 1989 – 90 
 Oxford United 
 Football League Second Division promotion : 1995 – 96 
 Wrexham 
 FAW Premier Cup winner : 2003 , 2004 
 Football League Third Division third @-@ place promotion : 2002 – 03 
 Football League Trophy winner : 2005 
 Individual 
 Football League Fourth Division Manager of the Month : March 1984 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Month : September 2002 , April 2003 
 Football League Third Division Manager of the Season : 2002 – 03 
 = British Open Championship Golf = 
 British Open Championship Golf is a 1997 sports video game developed and published by Looking Glass Technologies . A simulation of The Open Championship , it allows the player to engage in multiple forms of golf , including stroke play and <unk> . The player competes at reproductions of the Royal Troon Golf Club and the Old Course at St. Andrews as and against famous golfers of the time . Announcer commentary is provided by actor Michael Bradshaw and Wide World of Sports host Jim McKay . 
 British Open Championship Golf was the third self @-@ published game released by Looking Glass Technologies . It was directed by Rex Bradford , designer of the early golf title Mean 18 . The team sought to create an accurate simulation of tournament golf play , which they felt was missing in the genre . To achieve this goal , they focused on recreating the atmosphere of a tournament , and included reactive crowds and announcers . The game was placed in competition with popular golf series such as Links and PGA Tour . 
 The game was a major commercial failure , and Looking Glass ceased its self @-@ publishing operations after its release . Despite this , it was generally well reviewed by critics , who praised Jim McKay 's commentary and the game 's graphics and atmosphere . Criticism was leveled against its lack of multiplayer or course creation functionality , and some reviewers found fault with its brevity . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 British Open Championship Golf is a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) video game that simulates golf , a sport in which players attempt to hit a ball into a hole with as few strokes as possible . In particular , the game is based on The Open Championship , the oldest tournament in golf . The player may compete as a pre- or self @-@ created amateur golfer or as one of eight celebrity athletes , including Sandy Lyle , Vijay Singh and Ian Baker @-@ Finch . Three modes of play — Practice , Match and Tournament — are available . Practice and Match are non @-@ binding preparatory modes : the former allows the player to practice each hole of a course , and the latter engages the player in a pre @-@ tournament match of stroke play , match play or <unk> . In the Tournament mode , the player competes in The Open Championship , which consists of four 18 @-@ hole matches . 
 Before making a shot , the player may select a club and adjust the general direction of the swing . As with other golf games , a " swing meter " is used to simulate the act of swinging the club . The player clicks three times : first to initiate the backswing , which causes a timing indicator to move along the meter ; second to begin the downswing ; and third to " snap " the shot , which determines accuracy . Changes in the timing of these clicks alter the shot . A red section on the far end of the swing meter represents <unk> , which negatively affects shots . The crowd reacts to the player 's shots , and Tournament mode features announcer commentary that analyzes the match overall ; it can frame the player 's current performance in the light of past shots . 
 The player may choose one of two courses : the Royal Troon Golf Club and the Old Course at St. Andrews . The player 's caddie provides information about the pitfalls and idiosyncrasies of each course . The game simulates the strong wind and weather typical of the courses ' real @-@ world counterparts , which lie near the seaside . The player may adjust environmental aspects such as weather , wind speed and the wetness of the soil . During a match , the player uses information on the heads @-@ up display to determine such factors as wind speed and direction , the ball 's distance from the flag and the height difference between the ball and the hole . 
 = = Development = = 
 Looking Glass Technologies began developing British Open Championship Golf in 1995 . The project was led by Rex Bradford , designer of the influential 1986 golf title Mean 18 . He had also worked on earlier Looking Glass games , such as Terra Nova : Strike Force Centauri . Bradford decided to revisit the golf genre because he felt that other games did not recreate the structure or capture the atmosphere of golf tournaments ; he complained that golf titles took place on " The Lonely Planet of Golf " . The team sought to fill this perceived void by more accurately simulating the tournament experience , with a particular focus on crowds , commentary , atmosphere and the caddie . Bradford believed that these elements recreated " the television @-@ style ambiance of being in that moment . " Graphically , a focus was placed on buildings and animated objects , in order to make up for the less spectacular nature of links courses . The game 's environments were generated with the same <unk> techniques used to create the landscapes in the company 's earlier Flight Unlimited . The team 's reproduction of the Old Course at St. Andrews was the first ever authorized for a video game . 
 Looking Glass officially announced British Open Championship Golf on July 18 , 1996 . Coinciding with this news , the company launched a website to cover The Open Championship of 1996 ; it detailed both current events and the history of the tournament and its courses . According to Bradford , the company was " hoping to make a splash " with the game , which was placed in competition with popular series such as Links and PGA Tour . He noted the quality of these titles , and stated that , had the team not been trying to innovate , they would not have attempted to compete in the genre . Looking Glass revealed in November 1996 that Jim McKay , host of the Wide World of Sports , would provide color commentary for the game . Actor Michael Bradshaw was hired as the play @-@ by @-@ play announcer . The pair recorded more than 5 @,@ 000 lines of dialogue in total . In January 1997 , Looking Glass and Eidos Interactive announced a four @-@ year partnership . As a result , British Open Championship Golf was distributed and marketed in North America and published in Europe by Eidos . However , like Flight Unlimited and Terra Nova , the game was self @-@ published in North America by Looking Glass . In March 1997 , near the end of the game 's development , part of the team moved to Thief : The Dark Project ; this included Mark <unk> , who became that game 's lead artist . British Open Championship Golf was released on April 30 , 1997 . That May , Looking Glass collaborated with golf website <unk> to host a " Virtual British Open " tournament . Players competed in the game to win a trip to The Open Championship in Scotland , complete with " air fare , hotel accommodations and spending money . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 British Open Championship Golf was a commercial failure . Following its release , Looking Glass ceased self @-@ publishing operations and closed a division of the company , laying off a group of employees that included Warren Spector . Writing for Maximum PC , T. Liam McDonald called the game " a costly bomb that bled the company . " Looking Glass employee Tim Stellmach later characterized it as " a disaster " . However , it was generally well received by critics . A reviewer for Next Generation Magazine hailed it as " one of the best golf games in years " , praising the atmosphere and calling the graphics " among the best ... around . " The writer cited the game 's lack of a course editor as its main downside , and summarized , " If you are looking for a golf simulation , this one delivers . " PC Magazine 's Shane Mooney cited it as the best of eight golf titles reviewed in the magazine 's September 1997 issue — a group that included Jack Nicklaus 4 , Links LS 1998 and PGA Tour Pro . He highlighted its " outstanding graphics " and detailed course reproductions , and noted that it " [ immerses ] players in a realistic tournament atmosphere . " The writer considered the inclusion of only two courses to be the game 's " one major drawback " . 
 Jeff Guinn of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram called its graphics " exceptional " , and considered the game to be " far from the traditional aim / swing links pseudo @-@ challenge . " However , he found the game extremely difficult , thanks to its faithful reproductions of the challenging Old Course and Royal Troon . As a result , he considered the game to be ultimately " too much of a good thing . " A writer for the Telegraph @-@ Herald praised its courses , and stated that its gameplay was a " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art simulation " . The reviewer believed that the tournament atmosphere had been " re @-@ created faithfully . " Gary Whitta of PC Gamer US praised the game 's graphics and atmosphere . While he liked its gameplay , he noted that it lacked the genre refinements seen in Links LS , a decision he believed would appeal to genre novices but not to veterans . He disliked Michael Bradshaw 's commentary , but praised Jim McKay 's for " adding much to the overall feel . " Ending his review , Whitta summarized it as " one of the most user @-@ friendly , accessible , atmospheric and attractive golf games out there " . 
 Peter Smith of Computer Games Magazine found the game 's swinging mechanics challenging , and noted that " making a dead @-@ on accurate shot much more difficult than in any of the other golf games out there . " He found the mechanics of the putting green to be badly designed , which he cited as " an incredibly serious flaw that takes British Open Championship Golf out of contention for the gold cup . " Ultimately , he recommended Links LS and Jack Nicklaus 4 over the game , but suggested that future installments or patches might fix the issues . Computer Gaming World 's Scott A. May wrote that " the game is solid , but ... somewhat unspectacular " compared to Jack Nicklaus 4 and Links LS . He stated that the links courses gave the game " a somewhat desolate look and feel " , and that , " Historic or not , the scenery is downright dull " . The reviewer considered Jim McKay 's commentary and the simulated physics to be the game 's high points , and he believed that , " More so than any other golf sim , the reactive crowd and interactive caddie are ... totally integrated into play . " He summarized the game as " a very good simulation " that was somewhat deflated by its lack of multiplayer , course editing and match replays . 
 = Dragon 's Egg = 
 Dragon 's Egg is a hard science fiction novel written by Robert L. Forward and published in 1980 . In the story , Dragon 's Egg is a neutron star with a surface gravity 67 billion times that of Earth , and inhabited by cheela , intelligent creatures the size of a sesame seed who live , think and develop a million times faster than humans . Most of the novel , from May to June 2050 , chronicles the cheela civilization beginning with its discovery of agriculture to advanced technology and its first face @-@ to @-@ face contact with humans , who are observing the hyper @-@ rapid evolution of the cheela civilization from orbit around Dragon 's Egg . 
 The novel is regarded as a landmark in hard science fiction . As is typical of the genre , Dragon 's Egg attempts to communicate unfamiliar ideas and imaginative scenes while giving adequate attention to the known scientific principles involved . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 = = = The neutron star = = = 
 Half a million years ago and 50 light @-@ years from Earth , a star in the constellation Draco turns supernova , and the star 's remnant becomes a neutron star . The radiation from the explosion causes mutations in many Earth organisms , including a group of <unk> that become the ancestors of Homo sapiens . The star 's short @-@ lived plasma jets are <unk> @-@ sided because of anomalies in its magnetic field , and set it on a course passing within 250 astronomical units of the Sun . In 2020 CE , human astronomers detect the neutron star , call it " Dragon 's Egg " , and in 2050 they send an expedition to explore it . 
 The star contains about half of a solar mass of matter , compressed into a diameter of about 20 kilometers ( 12 miles ) , making its surface gravity 67 billion times that of Earth . Its outer crust , compressed to about 7 @,@ 000 kg per cubic centimeter , is mainly iron nuclei with a high concentration of neutrons , overlaid with about 1 millimeter ( 0 @.@ 039 inches ) of white dwarf star material . The atmosphere , mostly iron vapor , is about 5 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 inches ) thick . The star shrinks slightly as it cools , causes the crust to crack and produce mountains 5 to 100 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 20 to 3 @.@ 94 inches ) high . Large volcanos , formed by liquid material oozing from deep cracks , can be many centimeters high and hundred meters in diameters , and will eventually collapse , causing <unk> . 
 Around 3000 BC Dragon 's Egg cools enough to allow a stable equivalent of " chemistry " , in which " compounds " are constructed of nuclei bound by the strong force , rather than of Earth 's atoms bound by the electromagnetic force . As the star 's chemical processes are about one million times faster than Earth 's , self @-@ replicating " molecules " appear shortly and life begins on the star . As the star continues to cool , more complex life evolves , until plant @-@ like organisms appear around 1000 BC . One lineage of these later became the first " animals " , the earliest of these stealing seedpods from sessile organisms and some later lineages becoming predators . 
 The adults of the star 's most intelligent species , called cheela ( no flexion for gender or number ) , have about the same mass as an adult human . However , the extreme gravity of Dragon 's Egg compresses the cheela to the volume of a sesame seed , but with a flattened shape about 0 @.@ 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 020 inches ) high and about 5 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 20 inches ) in diameter . Their eyes are 0 @.@ 1 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 0039 inches ) wide . Such minute eyes can see clearly only in ultraviolet and , in good light , the longest wavelengths of the X @-@ ray band . 
 = = = Growth of civilization = = = 
 In 2032 , a cheela develops the race 's first weapon and tactics while overcoming a dangerous predator . In November 2049 a human expedition to Dragon 's Egg starts building orbital facilities . The rest of the story , including almost the whole history of cheela civilization , spans from 22 May 2050 to 21 June 2050 . By humans ' standards , a " day " on Dragon 's Egg is about 0 @.@ 2 seconds , and a typical cheela 's lifetime is about 40 minutes . 
 One clan organizes the first cheela agriculture , which brings predictable food supply but provokes grumbling about the repetitive work . Shortly after , a volcano emerges in the area , and the clan invents the first sledge to carry food from more distant sources . However , within a few generations the volcano pollutes the soil . One clan leads its population on a long , arduous journey to new territory that is fertile and uninhabited . Although one genius invents mathematics to calculate and measure the band 's food supply , the situation is desperate and the clan 's survival depends on the self @-@ sacrifice of the oldest members . 
 Over the course of generations , the cheela come to worship the humans ' spacecraft as a god , and their records of its satellites ' movements cause them to develop writing . Several generations later , the cheela build an arena to accommodate thousands of worshippers . The humans notice this novel and very regular feature , conclude that intelligent beings inhabit the star , and use a laser to send simple messages . <unk> astronomers gradually realize that these are diagrams of the spaceships , its satellites and its crew – impossibly spindly creatures , who communicate with frustrating slowness , and are apparently almost 10 % as long as the cheela 's great arena . A cheela engineer proposes to send messages to the humans . As her attempts to transmit from the civilization 's territory are ineffective , she travels to a mountain range to transmit directly under the spacecraft – conquering the fear of heights that is instinctive for flattened creatures living in 67 billion g . The humans recognize her message and realize that the cheela live a million times faster than humans . 
 Since real time conversations are impossible , the humans send sections of the expedition 's library . After reading an astronomy article , a cheela realizes that the supernova half a million human years ago created both their races . Many cheela generations later , but only a few hours for humans , <unk> develop gravity manipulation . A few generations later , a cheela spacecraft visits the human one . Although they still need extreme gravity fields to survive , the cheela can now control them precisely enough for both races to see each other face @-@ to @-@ face in safety . The cheela have decided that transferring their technologies , now far advanced of humans ' , would stunt humanity 's development . However the cheela leave clues in several challenging locations , before going their separate ways . 
 = = Development history = = 
 Writer Robert L. Forward described being inspired by astronomer Frank Drake 's suggestion in 1973 that intelligent life could inhabit neutron stars . Physical models in 1973 implied that Drake 's creatures would be microscopic . By the time Forward was outlining the book , newer models indicated that the cheela would be about the size of sesame seeds . Later Forward found an earlier letter in which he discussed the idea of high @-@ gravity life in the Sun with science fiction novelist Hal Clement . 
 Forward was the scientist and Larry Niven the author in a tutorial on science fiction writing , and later that evening Forward and Niven agreed to collaborate on a novel on aliens on a neutron star . However , Niven soon found himself too busy with Lucifer 's Hammer , on which he was already co @-@ writing with Jerry Pournelle . Forward wrote the first draft himself , but several publishers suggested the story should be rewritten by Niven or Pournelle – who were still busy . Finally editor Lester del Rey provided comments that guided Forward through two rewrites , and del Rey then bought the novel . Forward described the work as " a textbook on neutron star physics disguised as a novel " . 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 In English : 
 In other languages : 
 = = Literary significance and reception = = 
 Science fiction critic John Clute wrote that the novel " generates a sense of wonder that is positively joyous " , saying it was " a romance of science " . Chris <unk> described it as " a minor classic of science fiction – one that shows off both the best and worst elements of hard SF . ... the ideas definitely come first . " He found the writing of the human cast dull , but appreciated Forward 's ability to share his fascination with the cheela and to create communications between races that lived at vastly different speeds . 
 Lambourne , <unk> and Shortland consider that the research and detailed construction of the scenario make Dragon 's Egg an excellent example of hard science fiction . Scientist Seth Shostak described the book 's science as " fanciful but impossible to dismiss " . 
 John Pierce also regarded Dragon 's Egg as hard science fiction at its best , while Forward 's later novel Martian Rainbow ( 1991 ) was the genre at its worst . Both novels have cardboard human characters , but this does not matter in Dragon 's Egg , where the focus is on the deeper personalities of the cheela characters . The novel even makes readers care about the fate of an unsympathetic cheela ruler , whose rejuvenation treatment fails catastrophically . Pierce wrote that the best works of this genre create a literary experience , but one of an unusual kind . Instead of offering a metaphor for a reality the reader already recognizes , they create new realities in which the reader is caught up . 
 Robert Lambourne regards Forward , especially in Dragon 's Egg , as the successor of Hal Clement , whose Mission of Gravity exemplifies the most strongly science @-@ based science fiction . In Lambourne 's opinion hard science fiction authors like Clement , Forward and their successors have been relatively few but have strongly influenced both the genre 's evolution and the public 's perception of the genre . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Dragon 's Egg won the 1981 Locus Award for First Novel and placed 14th in Locus ' SF Novel category . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 1985 Forward published <unk> , a sequel to Dragon 's Egg . Lambourne , <unk> and Shortland consider <unk> ’ s scientific background as rigorous as Dragon 's Egg 's . In this novel , a <unk> disrupts cheela civilization , while humans aboard the spacecraft Dragon Slayer deal with their own problems . 
 = Project Stormfury = 
 Project Stormfury was an attempt to weaken tropical cyclones by flying aircraft into them and seeding with silver iodide . The project was run by the United States Government from 1962 to 1983 . 
