 The hypothesis was that the silver iodide would cause supercooled water in the storm to freeze , disrupting the inner structure of the hurricane . This led to the seeding of several Atlantic hurricanes . However , it was later shown that this hypothesis was incorrect . It was determined most hurricanes do not contain enough supercooled water for cloud seeding to be effective . Additionally , researchers found that unseeded hurricanes often undergo the same structural changes that were expected from seeded hurricanes . This finding called Stormfury 's successes into question , as the changes reported now had a natural explanation . 
 The last experimental flight was flown in 1971 , due to a lack of candidate storms and a changeover in NOAA 's fleet . More than a decade after the last modification experiment , Project Stormfury was officially canceled . Although a failure in its goal of reducing the destructiveness of hurricanes , Project Stormfury was not without merit . The observational data and storm lifecycle research generated by Stormfury helped improve meteorologists ' ability to forecast the movement and intensity of future hurricanes . 
 = = Hypothesis = = 
 Cloud seeding was first attempted by Vincent Schaefer and Irving Langmuir . After witnessing the artificial creation of ice crystals , Langmuir became an enthusiastic proponent of weather modification . Schaefer found that when he dumped crushed dry ice into a cloud , precipitation in the form of snow resulted . 
 With regard to hurricanes , it was hypothesized that by seeding the area around the eyewall with silver iodide , latent heat would be released . This would promote the formation of a new eyewall . As this new eyewall was larger than the old eyewall , the winds of the tropical cyclone would be weaker due to a reduced pressure gradient . Even a small reduction in the speed of a hurricane 's winds would be beneficial : since the damage potential of a hurricane increased as the square of the wind speed , a slight lowering of wind speed would have a large reduction in destructiveness . 
 Due to Langmuir 's efforts , and the research of Schaefer at General Electric , the concept of using cloud seeding to weaken hurricanes gathered momentum . Indeed , Schaefer had caused a major snowstorm on December 20 , 1946 by seeding a cloud . This caused GE to drop out for legal reasons . Schaefer and Langmuir assisted the U.S. military as advisors for Project Cirrus , the first large study of cloud physics and weather modification . Its most important goal was to try to weaken hurricanes . 
 = = Project Cirrus = = 
 Project Cirrus was the first attempt to modify a hurricane . It was a collaboration of the General Electric Corporation , the US Army Signal Corps , the Office of Naval Research , and the US Air Force . After several preparations , and initial skepticism by government scientists , the first attempt to modify a hurricane began on October 13 , 1947 on a hurricane that was heading west to east and out to sea . 
 An airplane flew along the rainbands of the hurricane , and dropped nearly 180 pounds ( 82 kilograms ) of crushed dry ice into the clouds . The crew reported " Pronounced modification of the cloud deck seeded " . It is not known if that was due to the seeding . Next , the hurricane changed direction and made landfall near Savannah , Georgia . The public blamed the seeding , and Irving Langmuir claimed that the reversal had been caused by human intervention . Cirrus was canceled , and lawsuits were threatened . Only the fact that a system in 1906 had taken a similar path , as well as evidence showing that the storm had already begun to turn when seeding began , ended the litigation . This disaster set back the cause of seeding hurricanes for eleven years . 
 = = Between the projects = = 
 The United States Weather Bureau 's National Hurricane Research Project , founded in 1955 , had as one of its objectives to investigate the scientific validity of hurricane modification methods . To this end , silver iodide dispensers were tested in Hurricane Daisy in August 1958 . The flares were deployed outside of the hurricane eyewall , so this was an equipment test rather than a modification experiment . The equipment malfunctioned in all but one of the flights , and no conclusive data was acquired . 
 The first seeding experiment since the Cirrus disaster was attempted on September 16 , 1961 , into Hurricane Esther by NHRP and the United States Navy aircraft . Eight cylinders of silver iodide were dropped into Esther 's eyewall , and winds were recorded as weakening by 10 percent . The next day , more seeding flights were made . This time , the silver iodide did not fall into the eyewall , and no reduction in windspeed was observed . These two results were interpreted as making the experiment a " success " . 
 The seedings into Hurricane Esther led to the establishment of Project Stormfury in 1962 . Project Stormfury was a joint venture of the United States Department of Commerce and the United States Navy . 
 = = Project BATON = = 
 The objective of Project BATON was the analysis of the life history of thunderstorms . A Department of Defense research activity supported by the Advanced Research Project Agency , Project BATON sought to expand understanding of storm physics as an aid to weather forecasting , fire prevention , and , possibly , for artificially controlling the weather . Dr. Helmut <unk> , as an employee of the U.S , Army Signal Research and Development Laboratory , and Dr. Paul McReady of Meteorology Research , Inc . , were joint leaders of the Project BATON team . 
 During the 1962 July – August storm season in Flagstaff , Arizona , the scientists , selected " guinea pig " storms , and seeded them with chemicals . Effects were thoroughly analyzed from the ground and from the air with time @-@ lapse motion picture cameras , stereo still cameras , storm radar , lightning detectors , and airborne heat sensors . Among the agents inserted in selected clouds were " condensation nuclei " which temporarily increased the number of water droplets in the cloud , and pulverized dry ice , which turns a portion of the cloud to fine snow crystals that remain aloft . The utilization of these agents facilitated study of a storm 's characteristics . 
 = = Project <unk> begins = = 
 Robert Simpson became its first director , serving in this capacity until 1965 . There were several guidelines used in selecting which storms to seed . The hurricane had to have a less than 10 percent chance of approaching inhabited land within a day ; it had to be within range of the seeding aircraft ; and it had to be a fairly intense storm with a well @-@ formed eye . The primary effect of these criteria was to make possible seeding targets extremely rare . 
 No suitable storms formed in the 1962 season . Next year , Stormfury began by conducting experiments on cumulus clouds . From August 17 to 20 of that year , experiments were conducted in 11 clouds , of which six were seeded and five were controls . In five of the six seeded clouds , changes consistent with the working hypothesis were observed . 
 On August 23 , 1963 , Hurricane Beulah was the site of the next seeding attempt . It had an indistinct eyewall . In addition , mistakes were made , as the seedings of silver iodide were dropped in the wrong places . As a consequence , nothing happened . The next day , another attempt was made , and the <unk> hit their targets . The eyewall was observed to fall apart and be replaced by another eyewall with a larger radius . The sustained winds also fell by twenty percent . All in all , the results of the experiments on Beulah were " encouraging but inconclusive . " 
 In the six years after Beulah , no seedings were conducted for several different reasons . In 1964 , measurement and observation equipment was not ready to be used . The year after that , all flights were used for additional experimentation in non @-@ hurricane clouds . 
 Joanne Simpson became its director beginning in 1965 . While out to sea in August of the 1965 Atlantic hurricane season , Stormfury meteorologists decided that Hurricane Betsy was a good candidate for seeding . However , the storm immediately swung towards land , and on September 1 , the planned flights were canceled . For some reason , the press was not notified that there were no seedings , and several newspapers reported that it had begun . As Betsy passed close to the Bahamas and smashed into southern Florida , the public and Congress thought that seeding was underway and blamed Stormfury . It took two months for Stormfury officials to convince Congress that Betsy was not seeded , and the project was allowed to continue . A second candidate , Hurricane Elena , stayed too far out to sea . 
 After Betsy , two other hurricanes came close to being seeded . Hurricane Faith was considered a likely candidate , but it stayed out of range of the seeding planes . That same year , recon flights were conducted into Hurricane Inez , but there were no seedings . Both the 1967 and 1968 seasons were inactive . Because of that , there were no suitable seeding targets in either of those two seasons . 
 Dr. R. Cecil Gentry became the director of Stormfury in 1968 . There were no more near @-@ seedings until 1969 . In the interim , equipment was improved . What once was the primitive method of hand @-@ dumping dry ice was replaced with rocket canisters loaded with silver iodide , and then gun @-@ like devices mounted on the wings of the airplanes that fired silver iodide into the clouds . Observation equipment was improved . Additional reconnaissance data was utilized to modify the working hypothesis . The new theory took cumulus towers outside the eyewall into account . According to the revised theory , by seeding the towers , latent heat would be released . This would trigger the start of new convection , which would then cause a new eyewall . Since the new eyewall was outside the original one , the first eyewall would be choked of energy and fall apart . In addition , since the new eyewall was broader than the old one , the winds would be lower due to a less sharp pressure difference . 
 Hurricane Debbie in 1969 provided the best opportunity to test the underpinnings of Project Stormfury . In many ways it was the perfect storm for seeding : it did not threaten any land ; it passed within range of seeding aircraft ; and was intense with a distinct eye . On August 18 and again on August 20 , thirteen planes flew out to the storm to monitor and seed it . On the first day , windspeeds fell by 31 % . On the second day , windspeeds fell by 18 % . Both changes were consistent with Stormfury 's working hypothesis . Indeed , the results were so encouraging that " a greatly expanded research program was planned . " Among other conclusions was the need for frequent seeding at close to hourly intervals . 
 The 1970 and 1971 seasons provided no suitable seeding candidates . Despite this , flights were conducted into Hurricane Ginger . Ginger was not a suitable storm for seeding , due to its diffuse , indistinct nature . The seeding had no effect . Ginger was the last seeding done by Project Stormfury . 
 = = After the seedings = = 
 Atlantic hurricanes meeting all of the criteria were extremely rare , which made duplication of the " success " reached with Hurricane Debbie extremely difficult . Meanwhile , developments outside of meteorology hindered the cause of hurricane modification . 
 In the early 1970s , the Navy withdrew from the project . Stormfury began to refocus its efforts on understanding , rather than modifying , tropical cyclones . At the same time , the Project 's aircraft were nearing the end of their operational lifetimes . At the cost of $ 30 million ( year unknown ) two Lockheed P @-@ 3 's were acquired . Due to the rarity of Atlantic hurricanes meeting the safety requirements , plans were made to move Stormfury to the Pacific and experiment on the large number of typhoons there . This action required many of the same safety requirements as in the Atlantic , but had the advantage of a much higher number of potential subjects . 
 The plan was to begin again in 1976 , and seed typhoons by flying out of Guam . However , political issues blocked the plan . The People 's Republic of China announced that it would not be happy if a seeded typhoon changed course and made landfall on its shores , while Japan declared itself willing to put up with difficulties caused by typhoons because that country got more than half of its rainfall from tropical cyclones . 
 Similar plans to operate Stormfury in the eastern north Pacific or in the Australian region also collapsed . 
 = = Failure of the working hypothesis = = 
 Multiple eyewalls had been detected in very strong hurricanes before , including Typhoon Sarah and Hurricane Donna , although the double eyes were usually seen in very intense systems . Double eyewalls were also seen post @-@ seeding in some of the seeded storms . At the time however , the only known times that rapid changes in eyewall diameter , other than during presumably successful seedings , was during rapid changes in intensity . It remained controversial whether the seedings caused the secondary eyewalls or whether it was just a natural cycle . Basically , if eyewall changes similar to those observed in seeded hurricanes were rare in unseeded tropical cyclones , it would provide powerful evidence that Project Stormfury was successful . Conversely , if such changes were common in unseeded systems , it would throw doubt on the very hypothesis and assumptions driving Project Stormfury . 
 Data and observations began to accumulate that debunked Stormfury 's working hypothesis . Beginning with Hurricanes Anita and David , flights by Hurricane Hunter aircraft encountered events similar to what happened in " successfully " seeded storms . Anita itself had a weak example of a concentric eyewall cycle , and David a more dramatic one . In August 1980 , Hurricane Allen passed through the Atlantic , Caribbean , and Gulf of Mexico . It also underwent changes in the diameter of its eye and developed multiple eyewalls . All this was consistent with the behavior that would have been expected of Allen had it been seeded . Thus , what Stormfury was accomplishing by seeding was also happening on its own . 
 Other observations in Hurricanes Anita , David , Frederic , and Allen also discovered that tropical cyclones have very little supercooled water and a great deal of ice crystals . The reason that tropical cyclones have little supercooled water is that the updrafts within such a system are too weak to prevent water from either falling as rain or freezing . As cloud seeding needed supercooled water to function , the lack of supercooled water meant that seeding would have no effect . 
 Those observations called the basis for Project Stormfury into question . In the middle of 1983 , Stormfury was finally canceled after the hypothesis guiding its efforts was invalidated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the sense of weakening hurricanes to reduce their destructiveness , Project Stormfury was a complete failure because it did not distinguish between natural phenomena in tropical cyclones and the impact of human intervention . Millions of dollars had been spent trying to do the impossible . In the end , " [ Project ] <unk> had two fatal flaws : it was neither <unk> nor statistically feasible . " 
 In addition , Stormfury had been a primary generator of funding for the Hurricane Research Division . While the project was operational , the HRD 's budget had been around $ 4 million ( 1975 USD ; $ 16 million 2008 USD ) , with a staff of approximately 100 people . Today , the HRD employs 30 people and has a budget of roughly $ 2 @.@ 6 million each year . 
 However , Project Stormfury had positive results as well . Knowledge gained during flights proved invaluable in debunking its hypotheses . Other science resulted in a greater understanding of tropical cyclones . In addition , the Lockheed P @-@ 3 's were perfectly suitable for gathering data on tropical cyclones , allowing improved forecasting of these monstrous storms . Those planes are still used by the NOAA today . 
 Cuban president Fidel Castro has alleged that Project Stormfury was an attempt to weaponize hurricanes . 
 = Ramón Ramírez ( Dominican pitcher ) = 
 Ramón Santo Ramírez ( born August 31 , 1981 ) is a Dominican relief pitcher for the Tigres de Quintana Roo of the Mexican Baseball League . He stands 5 feet 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 80 m ) and weighs 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) . He pitched for the Hiroshima Toyo Carp in Nippon Professional Baseball ( NPB ) , and the Colorado Rockies , Kansas City Royals , Boston Red Sox , San Francisco Giants , New York Mets and Baltimore Orioles in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He bats and throws right @-@ handed . He throws a fastball , a changeup , and a slider . 
 Ramírez was signed by the Texas Rangers in 1996 , as an infielder . After one season in their minor leagues , he was released . He spent the next three years learning how to pitch before joining the Hiroshima Toyo Carp 's Dominican academy in 2000 . He pitched in two games with the Carp in 2002 and was signed by the New York Yankees in 2003 . He spent 2 @.@ 5 years in their minor leagues before getting traded to the Colorado Rockies in the middle of the 2005 season . Shortly after the 2006 season started , Ramírez was called up by the Rockies , and he went on to have a successful rookie season for them . In 2007 , he had an 8 @.@ 31 ERA with the Rockies and spent time on the disabled list and in the minor leagues . Before the 2008 season , he was traded to the Kansas City Royals . After one season with the Royals , he was traded to the Boston Red Sox . In 2009 , his seven wins were tied for third among relief pitchers in the American League . After an inconsistent start to the 2010 season , Ramírez was traded to the San Francisco Giants . He posted a 0 @.@ 67 ERA with the Giants , helping them reach the playoffs . He gave up runs in 4 of the 5 playoff games he pitched in , but the Giants won their first World Series since 1954 . In 2011 , Ramírez posted a career @-@ best 2 @.@ 62 ERA and was traded to the New York Mets after the season . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Texas Rangers = = = 
 On December 27 , 1996 , the Texas Rangers signed Ramírez as an infielder , believing him to be 16 instead of 15 . After one season with their Dominican affiliate , he was released on June 4 , 1998 . 
 = = = Hiroshima Toyo Carp = = = 
 After being released by the Rangers , Ramírez got a job at a Coca @-@ Cola bottling plant while learning how to pitch . In 2000 , he attended the Hiroshima Toyo Carp 's academy in the Dominican Republic , and he appeared in two games for the Carp in 2002 . He gave up one run in three innings while striking out three batters and walking two , and he was posted in 2003 . The winning bid was placed by the New York Yankees , who signed him on March 5 , 2003 , and assigned him to their minor league system . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Ramírez began his minor league career in 2003 with the Tampa Yankees of the single @-@ A advanced Florida State League . After he had a 2 – 8 record , a 5 @.@ 21 earned run average ( ERA ) , 21 strikeouts , and 21 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 14 starts , he was promoted to the Trenton Thunder of the Double @-@ A Eastern League . With the Thunder , he had a 1 – 1 record , a 1 @.@ 69 ERA , 21 strikeouts , and 21 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in four games ( three starts ) , and this earned him a promotion to the Columbus Clippers of the triple @-@ A International League . In two games ( one start ) with Columbus , he had an 0 – 1 record , a 4 @.@ 50 ERA , five strikeouts , and six innings pitched . He finished his first minor league season with a 3 – 10 record , a 4 @.@ 43 ERA , 96 strikeouts , and 101 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 20 games ( 18 starts ) . 
 In 2004 , Ramírez began the year with Columbus . After he had an 0 – 3 record , an 8 @.@ 50 ERA , 17 strikeouts , and 18 innings pitched in four starts , he was demoted to Trenton on May 1 . On August 17 , he allowed just two hits in a 4 – 1 complete game victory over the Norwich Navigators while setting a team record by retiring the last 24 hitters he faced . With Trenton , Ramírez had a 4 – 6 record , a 4 @.@ 62 ERA , two complete games , 128 strikeouts , and 115 innings pitched in 18 starts . His combined minor league totals were a 4 – 9 record , a 5 @.@ 14 ERA , two complete games , 145 strikeouts , and 133 innings pitched in 22 starts . 
 Ramírez began the 2005 season with Columbus again . After he had a 1 – 3 record , a 5 @.@ 33 ERA , 23 strikeouts , and 25 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in six starts for the Clippers , he was demoted to Trenton for the second year in a row . At Trenton , he had a 6 – 5 record , a 3 @.@ 84 ERA , 82 strikeouts , and 89 innings pitched in 15 starts . On July 28 , the Yankees traded Ramírez and Eduardo Sierra to the Colorado Rockies for Shawn Chacón . 
 = = = Colorado Rockies = = = 
 After being acquired by the Rockies , Ramírez was assigned to the Tulsa Drillers of the double @-@ A Texas League . He made three starts with the Drillers before getting moved to the bullpen . In 9 games ( 3 starts ) with Tulsa , Ramírez had a 2 – 1 record , a 5 @.@ 33 ERA , 23 strikeouts , and 25 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His combined minor league totals were a 9 – 9 record , a 4 @.@ 39 ERA , 131 strikeouts , and 141 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 Ramírez began 2006 with the Colorado Springs Sky Sox of the triple @-@ A Pacific Coast League . After throwing a scoreless inning for Colorado Springs , he was called up by the Rockies on April 12 when Mike <unk> was placed on the disabled list . He made his debut on April 14 , pitching two scoreless innings in a 10 – 8 loss to the Philadelphia Phillies . Five days later , he singled against Chan Ho Park in his first major league at bat in a 13 – 4 loss to the San Diego Padres . On April 25 , he pitched 2 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings and got his first major league win in a 7 – 6 victory over the Phillies . Ramírez began his career with 15 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in 11 games , which set a Rockies record for longest streak by a reliever to begin a career . It was the longest streak by a reliever to start a career since Jeremy Fikac threw 16 scoreless innings to start his career in 2001 . Ramírez 's streak ended on May 15 , when he allowed three runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning and got his first career loss against the Los Angeles Dodgers , who won 5 – 4 . On August 15 , he set a career high with four innings pitched in the longest game in Rockies history , an 18 @-@ inning game against the Arizona Diamondbacks . He gave up a run in the 18th and suffered a loss in the 2 – 1 defeat . He had a 2 @.@ 88 ERA in his first 47 games , but he posted a 5 @.@ 09 ERA over his final 14 games , raising his season ERA to 3 @.@ 46 . On September 30 , in his final game of the season , he pitched 1 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings and got the win in a 14 @-@ inning , 11 – 9 victory over the Chicago Cubs . Ramírez finished the season with a 4 – 3 record , a 3 @.@ 46 ERA , 61 strikeouts , and 67 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 61 games . His 61 games were the third @-@ most by a Rockies ' rookie pitcher , behind Steve Reed ( 64 in 1993 ) and Javier López ( 75 in 2003 ) . 
 Ramírez began the 2007 season with seven straight scoreless appearances for the Rockies . On April 21 , he was placed on the disabled list ( DL ) ( retroactive to May 18 ) with a sprained right elbow . He returned from the DL on May 15 . After stretching his scoreless start to eight games , he posted a 22 @.@ 24 ERA over his next seven games . On May 20 , he gave up a career @-@ high five runs in 2 ⁄ 3 innings and got the loss in a 10 – 5 defeat to the Kansas City Royals . On June 7 , he was optioned to Colorado Springs as Josh Fogg came off the disabled list . Ramírez was recalled on July 20 to replace Tom Martin , who was designated for assignment . After six games , he was returned to Colorado Springs as Ryan Speier was called up . A week later , he was recalled when Willy Taveras was placed on the disabled list , but he was returned to the minors two days later after appearing in one game . On September 8 , he was called up and placed on the 60 @-@ day disabled list with elbow inflammation so the Rockies could put Josh Newman on their roster . Ramírez finished the season with a 2 – 2 record , an 8 @.@ 31 ERA , 15 strikeouts , and 17 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 22 games . He did not allow an earned run in 11 road games , but he had a 17 @.@ 28 ERA in 11 games at Coors Field . Although he did not pitch in the playoffs for the Rockies at all ( since he was injured ) , he was still presented with an NL Championship ring . At Colorado Springs , Ramírez had a 4 – 0 record , a 2 @.@ 28 ERA , 35 strikeouts , and 27 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 25 games . 
 = = = Kansas City Royals = = = 
 Ramírez was traded to the Kansas City Royals on March 26 , 2008 , for a player to be named later ( Jorge de la Rosa ) . He posted a 0 @.@ 66 ERA through his first 13 games with the Royals , but his ERA rose to 3 @.@ 49 after he posted a 6 @.@ 14 ERA in his next 13 games . Over his final 45 games , he had a 2 @.@ 08 ERA . On June 25 , in a 7 – 3 victory over Colorado ( his former team ) , Ramírez threw two pitches behind <unk> Torrealba of the Rockies . Ramírez said he was not trying to hit Torrealba , and he was not ejected from the game or disciplined , but some of the Rockies players claimed that Ramírez had thrown at Torrealba intentionally . On July 20 , he got his first win since May 21 of the previous year in an 8 – 7 victory over the Chicago White Sox , despite blowing the lead by giving up two runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings . Ten days later , he pitched 1 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings and was charged with the win in a 4 – 3 victory over the Oakland Athletics , helping the Royals sweep the Athletics in Oakland for the first time since 1988 . By September , he had replaced Ron <unk> as Joakim Soria 's setup man . He pitched in 71 games for the Royals with a 2 @.@ 64 ERA . On September 4 , in the second game of a doubleheader , Ramírez notched his first career save against the Athletics in a 9 – 6 victory . Ramírez finished the year with a 3 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 64 ERA , one save , 70 strikeouts , and 71 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 71 games . He was one of three major league pitchers to give up two or fewer home runs in over 70 innings ( along with Roy Corcoran and Jason Grilli ) , and he was one of the American League ( AL ) pitchers to have an ERA under 3 @.@ 00 with at least 70 innings pitched and 70 strikeouts ( along with Francisco Rodríguez and Matt Thornton ) . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox = = = 
 On November 19 , Ramírez was traded to the Boston Red Sox for outfielder Coco Crisp . On April 24 , 2009 , he pitched a scoreless inning for the Red Sox and earned the win in an 11 @-@ inning 5 – 4 victory over the New York Yankees . He began his Red Sox tenure with 15 straight scoreless innings spanning 13 games from April 8 to May 3 . On May 14 , he pitched a season @-@ high 2 2 ⁄ 3 innings , giving up no runs in a 12 @-@ inning , 5 – 4 loss to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . He struck out a season @-@ high four batters and allowed a run in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings on July 9 in an 8 – 6 loss to the Royals . Ramírez finished the season with a 7 – 4 record , a 2 @.@ 84 ERA , 52 strikeouts , and 69 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His seven wins were tied for third among AL relief pitchers and trailed only Alfredo Aceves ( 10 ) and Craig Breslow ( 8 ) . Ramírez reached the playoffs for the first time in his career , as the Red Sox won the Wild Card . In Game 1 of the American League Division Series ( ALDS ) , he gave up two runs without recording an out in his only playoff appearance , a 5 – 0 loss to the Angels . The Angels went on to sweep the Red Sox in three games . 
 On April 27 , 2010 , Ramírez got his first save since 2008 in a 2 – 1 win over the Baltimore Orioles , since Red Sox manager Terry Francona wanted to rest closer Jonathan Papelbon . He was charged with a loss on July 20 after pitching 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings when Michael Bowden allowed an inherited runner to score in the 10th inning of a 5 – 4 loss to the Athletics . Two days later , he got a save in a 13 @-@ inning , 8 – 6 win over the Seattle Mariners . Ramírez had an 0 – 3 record , a 4 @.@ 46 ERA , 2 saves , 31 strikeouts , and 41 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched with the Red Sox through July 31 , the trade deadline . That day , he was traded to the San Francisco Giants for Dan <unk> . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 Ramírez got his only win of the year by pitching a scoreless inning on September 21 in a 1 – 0 victory over the Cubs . He got a save against the Diamondbacks on September 30 , since Giants ' manager Bruce Bochy wanted to rest closer Brian Wilson , in a 4 – 1 victory . Ramírez posted a 1 – 0 record , an 0 @.@ 67 ERA , 15 strikeouts , and 27 innings pitched in 25 games for the Giants as they won the National League ( NL ) West and reached the playoffs for the first time since 2003 . For the entire season , Ramírez had a 1 – 3 record , a 2 @.@ 99 ERA , 46 strikeouts , and 69 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 69 games . Ramírez 's only appearance in the NLDS against the Atlanta Braves came in Game 2 on October 8 , when he gave up a home run to Rick Ankiel in the 11th inning and was charged with a loss ( the Giants ' only loss of the series ) in the 5 – 4 defeat . In Game 2 of the NL Championship Series , Ramírez gave up two runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning as the Giants lost 6 – 1 to the Phillies . In Game 5 , the Giants ' other loss in the series , he gave up a run in 2 ⁄ 3 innings as the Giants lost 4 – 2 . On October 27 , in Game 1 of the World Series , he gave up two runs in 1 ⁄ 3 inning , but the Giants defeated the Rangers 11 – 7 . He pitched 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in Game 3 on October 30 , but the Giants lost 4 – 2 . However , that was the Giants ' only loss of the series , as they defeated Texas in five games and won their first World Series since 1954 . 
 Ramírez earned a save on April 6 , 2011 , by pitching 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning to escape a bases @-@ loaded situation in the Giants ' 8 – 4 win over the Padres . On June 18 , he pitched a season @-@ high 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings , allowing no runs in a 4 – 2 loss to Oakland . He allowed a season @-@ high four runs in 2 ⁄ 3 innings and took the loss on June 30 in an 11 @-@ inning , 5 – 2 defeat to the Cubs . On August 5 , in an eventual 9 – 2 loss to Philadelphia , Ramírez hit Shane Victorino with a pitch , and a brawl started . Ramírez was subsequently ejected from the game . Afterwards , Philadelphia talk @-@ show host Tony Bruno sparked controversy by posting on his Twitter account that Ramírez was an illegal alien , although he later removed the post . On September 4 , Ramírez struck out four batters but gave up a run in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings in a 4 – 1 loss to the Diamondbacks . Two days later , he got his final save of the year when he threw a scoreless 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in a 6 – 4 victory over San Diego . In 66 games that season , Ramírez had a 3 – 3 record , a 2 @.@ 62 ERA , four saves , 66 strikeouts , and 68 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = New York Mets = = = 
 On December 7 , the Giants traded Ramírez and Andrés Torres to the New York Mets for Ángel Pagán . Ramírez avoided arbitration with the Mets by signing a one @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 65 million contract with them on January 17 , 2012 . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( second stint ) = = = 
 Ramírez signed a minor league contract with the Giants in 2013 , but he was released on March 22 after posting an 11 @.@ 25 ERA in spring training . He was re @-@ signed and appeared in 6 games for the Giants before being designated for assignment . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Rays = = = 
 On July 1 , 2013 Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Tampa Bay Rays organization . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners = = = 
 On January 2 , 2014 , Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Seattle Mariners . On April 29 , he was released after allowing 5 runs in less than 5 innings in AAA . 
 = = = Baltimore Orioles = = = 
 On May 30 , 2014 , Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Baltimore Orioles . 
 On June 30 , 2014 , Ramirez made his Orioles debut in the ninth inning against the Texas Rangers , relieving Ubaldo Jiménez after pitching 8 innings only allowing 1 run pass . This was not a save opportunity since the Orioles were winning 7 @-@ 1 in Baltimore . He allowed one walk and had two strikeouts . He helped Jimenez get his first win at Camden Yards of the 2014 Major League Baseball season . Ramírez had never met the Orioles manager Buck Showalter before his debut with the Orioles which has never happened to Buck in his Career . He was designated for assignment on July 6 , 2014 . 
 = = = Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim = = = 
 On December 13 , 2015 , Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Angels . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Ramírez throws three pitches : a fastball , a changeup , and a slider . His fastball ranges from 92 to 94 mph , and Ramírez considers it his best pitch . His changeup and slider have been described as " above @-@ average " on scouting reports . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ramírez is friends with José Mesa . Mesa helped teach Ramírez English , helped teach him how to pitch , and translated for him in 2006 while both were with the Rockies . After Mesa signed with the Detroit Tigers in 2007 , Ramírez still remained in contact with him . Ramírez enjoys Christian music , and he sings it at his house . He often donates baseball equipment to children who need it , and in 2006 the Rockies recognized him for this by making him their Roberto Clemente Award nominee . 
 = Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " = 
 " Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " " is the fifteenth episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 21 , 1999 . After Homer purchases a Canyonero , he discovers he bought the model intended for women , so he gives the vehicle to Marge . Despite disliking it at first , Marge grows fond of it , and quickly develops clear road rage against other motorists . The episode was written by David M. Stern and directed by Mark Kirkland . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the Simpson family watch a poor talent show display by the teachers , they are in a hurry to leave . Homer sees Krusty driving a Canyonero and decides to purchase one . Homer purchases the sport utility vehicle , but is soon disappointed after discovering he bought the " F @-@ series " , intended for women . Embarrassed to drive it , he gives the vehicle to Marge . Marge dislikes it at first due to its size and features , but quickly becomes fond of it , and develops road rage . Later , when traveling around town , Marge is given a traffic ticket by Chief Wiggum and is ordered to take a defensive driving course . While driving away from the class , she accidentally drives the Canyonero into the prison and loses her driving privileges . 
 Homer , Bart , and Lisa take a trip to the zoo . Homer accidentally causes the rhinoceroses to go berserk and escape . The police request Marge to use the large SUV to stop the rhinoceroses who have escaped the zoo . Marge first declines , until she sees her family in danger . Marge agrees to assist the police and succeeds in rounding up the animals , but learns there is one missing and sees Homer being carried off by the rhinoceros . She chases the angry rhino into a construction site and deliberately crashes the vehicle , making it burst into flames . The rhino instinctively attempts to stamp out the fire , and Homer escapes and the Rhino is returned to the zoo . Marge credits her success to Stone Phillips and the whole family praises NBC . During the end credits , Homer praises FOX at gunpoint and he is shot when he praises CBS . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea behind the episode came from a study performed that showed women had more cases of road rage than men . The names of the other car salesmen on the board in the car garage are friends of Mike Scully from high school . The road rage film which Chief Wiggum shows during the road rage class was originally titled " Screaming Yellow Honkers " . The road rage film was originally to have been presented by Troy McClure , but voice actor Phil Hartman died the previous year . The group of people running out of the zoo , before Homer , Bart , and Lisa , are caricatures of Mike Scully , his wife , and his children , who are also seen running behind Kent Brockman 's news report . The Fox Broadcasting Company executives were displeased with the positive references to NBC made near the end of the episode . As a compromise , the writers added in the sequence during the end credits where Homer reads a statement that disparages NBC and praises FOX ( and briefly praises CBS ) . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In an attempt to stop the rhinos , Homer shouts " Jumanji ! " , a reference to the film Jumanji . Marge mentions Dateline NBC and former anchor Stone Phillips . Ms. Krabappel does a balloon dance singing " Fever " , a 1958 hit for Peggy Lee . The other teachers parody songs from Fame . Singer Courtney Love is advertised on a box of Wheaties breakfast cereal . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " " finished 43rd in ratings for the week of February 15 – 21 , 1999 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Ally McBeal and The X @-@ Files . 
 Peter Brown of If notes in his review of The Simpsons ' tenth season that " Marge Simpson in : " Screaming Yellow Honkers " , alongside " Lard of the Dance " , " Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken " , and " Homer Simpson in : " Kidney Trouble " " as " some of the best episodes of the season " . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote in their review of the episode : " very clever , very dry humour and showcasing the last person you might expect to suffer road rage . Some lovely moments ( Marge losing patience with Agnes and Kearney is great ) , especially her drive across the cornfield . Sadly the Canyonero doesn 't survive the experience of this episode , which would have been nice , if only to see Marge regularly at the wheel rather than Homer . " 
 = Lower limbs venous ultrasonography = 
 Ultrasonography of leg veins is a risk @-@ free , non @-@ invasive procedure that uses ultrasound technology to give information about the anatomy , physiology and pathology of both the superficial and the deep venous systems , ( SVS ) and ( DVS ) . It is indicated mainly on the study of two pathologies : venous thrombosis and venous insufficiency . As with heart ultrasound ( echocardiography ) studies , venous ultrasonography requires an understanding of hemodynamics in order to give useful examination reports . In chronic venous insufficiency ( CVI ) , <unk> examination is of most benefit ; in confirming varicose disease , making an assessment of the hemodynamics , and charting the progression of the disease and its response to treatment . It has become the reference standard for examining the condition and hemodynamics of the lower limb veins . 
 Particular veins of the ( DVS ) and the ( SVS ) are looked at . The great saphenous vein ( GSV ) is a superficial vein which connects with the small saphenous vein ( SSV ) to drain into the common femoral vein ( CFV ) . Perforator veins drain superficial veins into the deep veins . Three anatomic compartments are described ( as networks ) , ( N1 ) containing the deep veins , ( N2 ) containing the perforator veins , and ( N3 ) containing the superficial veins , known as the saphenous compartment , . This compartmentalisation makes it easier for the examiner to systematize and map . The GSV can be located in the saphenous compartment where together with the Giacomini vein and the accessory saphenous vein ( ASV ) an image resembling an eye , known as the ' eye sign ' can be seen . The ASV which is often responsible for varicose veins , can be located at the ' alignment sign ' , where it is seen to align with the femoral vessels . Together with the GSV and the CFV these three veins create an image called the ' Mickey Mouse ' sign . The examination report will include details of the deep and the superficial vein systems , and their mapping . The mapping is drawn on paper and then drawn on the patient before surgery . 
 The use of ultrasonography in a medical application was first used in the late 1940s in the United States . This use was soon followed in other countries with further research and development being carried out . The first report on Doppler ultrasound as a diagnostic tool for vascular disease was published in 1967 @-@ 1968 . Rapid advances since then in electronics , has greatly improved ultrasound transmission tomography . 
 = = Indications = = 
 The purpose of this examination is focused mainly on the study of two pathologies ; venous thrombosis and venous insufficiency . It allows the examiner to evaluate the gross anatomy of the superficial and deep venous networks as well as the blood flow direction , which is crucial in determining vein pathology . It has become the reference standard used in the assessment of the condition and hemodynamics of the veins of the lower limbs . The normal physiological blood flow is anterograde , flowing from the periphery towards the heart , so that the evidence of an opposite , retrograde flow might indicate a pathology . The presence of a reflux is likewise of note ; a reflux when not isolated in a vein ( as simply retrograde ) , means that the blood flow is bi @-@ directional where once the flow had been only anterograde . 
 The procedure should not be used without a medical indication , such as with a reason to expect that a person is at heightened risk of having deep vein thrombosis . This screening is not effective at diagnosing DVT in the absence of other indications that the patient may have this condition . A common example of overuse of this procedure is the practice of performing ultrasonography routinely on patients without indication after knee replacement or hip replacement . 
 = = Risks = = 
 There are no contraindications for this examination . Ultrasonography does not involve the use of ionizing radiation , and the procedure is harmless and can be safely used on anybody of any age . A World Health Organization ( WHO ) report published in 1998 supports this . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 No preparation is normally necessary for this examination , but if a complementary study of abdominal veins is also required , the patient will be asked to fast for 12 hours beforehand . The sensitivity and specificity measurements are around 90 % . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The ultrasound equipment must be of sufficiently high quality in order to give a correct image processing result , which can then provide invaluable information , mainly at the superficial level . It must be able to provide both color and Doppler imaging ; technologies that developed alongside the development of ultrasound . The use of Doppler measurements which trace the echoes of the generated soundwaves received by the probe , enable the direction and the velocity of the blood flow , to be depicted . The overlay of color onto the Doppler information lets these images be seen more clearly . The choice of a probe will depend on the depth needed to be studied . For example , the superficial venous system ( SVS ) can be very well examined using a high frequency probe of 12 MHz . For patients who have thick adipose tissue a probe of 7 @.@ 5 MHz will be required . Deep veins require probes of around 6 MHz whilst the abdominal vessels are better studied with probes of between 4 and 6 MHz . In summary , three probes are needed together with a top level scanner . Also , the proper use of the scanner calls for a high level of expertise , so that the examiner must be well qualified and experienced in order to give effective results . In contrast to arterial ultrasonography the wall of the vein is not relevant and importance is given to the hemodynamic conclusions that the examiner can obtain in order to provide a valuable report . ( <unk> is the study of blood flow and of the laws that govern the circulation of blood in the blood vessels ) . It follows that the examiner knowledge of venous hemodynamics is crucial , which can be a real barrier to a radiologist untrained in this field , who might wish to carry out these examinations . Specialized training in venous ultrasonography is not undertaken in some countries , which undermines best practice , mainly when varicose veins need to be examined . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Ultrasonography is based on the principle that sound can pass through human body tissues and is reflected by the tissue interfaces in the same way that light can reflect back on itself , from a mirror . Tissue in the body will offer varying degrees of resistance , known as acoustic impedance , to the path of the ultrasound beam . When there is a high impedance difference between two tissues , the interface between them will strongly reflect the sound . When the ultrasound beam meets air , or solid tissue such as bone , their impedance difference is so great that most of the acoustic energy is reflected making it impossible to see any underlying structures . The examiner will see just a shadow , instead of the image expected . Air will impede sound waves which is why a gel is used . The gel prevents air bubbles from forming between the probe , and the patient 's skin and so helps the conduction of the sound waves from the transducer into the body . The watery medium also helps to conduct the sound waves . Liquids , including blood have a low impedance , which means that little energy will be reflected and no visualization possible . One of the important exceptions is that when the blood flow is very slow it can in fact be seen , in what is termed " spontaneous contrast " . 
 This technology is widely used in confirming venous pathology diagnoses . The imaging capability needed , was made possible with the developments of Doppler and color Doppler . Doppler measurements using Doppler effect can show the direction of the blood flow and its relative velocity and color Doppler is the provision of color to help interpret the image , showing for example , the blood flow towards the probe in one color and that flowing away another . Whilst the equipment itself is costly , the procedure is not . Apart from the scanner , different probes are required according to the depth to be studied . A gel is used with the probe to make a good acoustic impedance contact . The training and expertise of the examiner is important because of the many technical complications that can present . Venous anatomy for example , is not constant , for example a patient 's vein layout of the right limb is not identical to that of the left limb . 
 The probe is an ultrasonic sensor , generally known as a transducer , which functions to send and receive acoustic energy . The emission is generated on piezoelectric crystals by the piezoelectric effect . The reflected ultrasound is received by the probe , transformed into an electric impulse as voltage and sent to the engine for signal processing and conversion to an image on the screen . The depth reached by the ultrasound beam is dependent on the frequency of the probe used . The higher the frequency the lesser the depth reached . 
 = = Procedure = = 
 Where either superficial or deep thrombosis is suspected , this examination can be performed with the patient lying down . For an evaluation of varicose veins , the patient will need to be in an upright position to enable a proper study of blood flow direction 
 = = = Deep vein thrombosis = = = 
 Unlike arterial ultrasonography , venous ultrasonography is carried out with the probe in a transversal position , ( perpendicular to the vein axis ) . All collateral veins are better detected this way , including perforator veins , but of most importance is the detection of venous thrombosis . The most reliable sign of thrombosis ( even when a good image and color is present ) is the absence of compressibility . However , if the probe is parallel to the vein axis , when the examiner compresses it , the probe can slide to the right or to the left giving a false negative for thrombosis as the probe has moved away and the vein will not then be evident . Nevertheless , when the examiner needs to show the head thrombus in a printout , the probe will be presented parallel to the vein axis . 
 A very recently formed thrombus is not very solid , it will have a low <unk> , and will be seen as a black area in the gray @-@ scale image and will be hardly visible . When the examiner uses color , the imaging is not much improved . A thrombus may not be evident in the scan . Also a vein lumen may show echoes without the presence of a thrombus . The location of the thrombus and its detail will inform of the seriousness of the condition . In a deep vein thrombosis ( DVT ) , or in a superficial vein thrombosis where the thrombus is floating , an emergency situation will be indicated . If the thrombus is near to the sapheno @-@ femoral junction there will be a high risk of a pulmonary embolism occurring . 
 The inability to compress the vein is one of the more reliable indications of venous thrombosis . There is a simplified technique called " compression ultrasonography " which can be used for quick DVT diagnosis , but this is limited to the common femoral vein and the popliteal vein . It is invaluable in an emergency situation and is performed just by vein compression using transducer pressure . 
 Compression ultrasonography has both high sensitivity and specificity for detecting proximal DVT but only in symptomatic patients . Results are not reliable when the patient is <unk> and must be checked carefully . For example , in high risk post @-@ operative patients , mainly after orthopedic surgery where there is already lower limb pain and edema following surgery , <unk> can be localized in the calf veins and often these are not completely occlusive . 
 = = = Venous insufficiency = = = 
 Venous insufficiency results when the normal functioning of the valves , which serve to keep blood flowing to the heart and to prevent reflux , become damaged and incompetent . This incompetence will result in an insufficient <unk> through the affected vein or veins . In varicose veins the valves are damaged or missing and the insufficiency will be chronic . When the valves are damaged blood leaks and pools in the legs and feet . 
 The procedure requested , for an investigation into the hemodynamic changes in a patient with chronic venous insufficiency ( CVI ) , which results in chronic venous disease , is quite different from an examination request made for suspected deep vein thrombosis . For a DVT investigation there is a need for guidance as to what to look for and to the intended treatment . An investigation performed with the intention of treating the patient by vein stripping or laser therapy for example is very different from the examination performed with the intention of executing a CHIVA . This French originated procedure is also spelt out as conservative hemodynamic treatment for chronic venous insufficiency . A CHIVA is an ultrasound guided , minimally invasive surgery strategic for the treatment of varicose veins , performed under local anaesthetic . 
 Unlike the arterial ultrasound study , when the <unk> studies venous insufficiency , the vein wall itself has no relevance and attention will be focused on the direction of blood flow . The objective of the examination is to see how the veins drain . In this way , venous ultrasonography has at times become a hemodynamic examination which is reserved for experienced <unk> who have completed hemodynamic studies and training and have acquired a deep knowledge of this subject . 
 Also , unlike the arterial ultrasound examination , blood velocity in veins has no diagnostic meaning . Veins are a draining system similar to a low pressure hydraulic system , with a laminar flow and a low velocity . This low velocity is responsible for the fact that we can only detect it spontaneously with the Doppler effect on the proximal and larger femoral and iliac veins . Here the flow is either modulated by the respiratory rhythm or is continuous in cases where the flow is high . The thinner veins do not have a spontaneous flow . However , in some circumstances the blood flow is so slow that we can see some <unk> material moving within the vein , in " spontaneous contrast " . This material can easily be mistaken for a thrombus , but can also easily be discounted by testing the vein 's compressibility . 
 To evidence the blood flow velocity there are some techniques that the examiner can use to accelerate blood flow and show valvular function : 
 Manual squeezing and releasing - the examiner can compress the vein below the probe which will push the blood in its normal anterograde direction . On releasing the pressure if the valves are incompetent the flow will appear as a retrograde flow or reflux , greater than 0 @.@ 5 sec . 
 Paraná maneuver , makes use of a proprioceptive reflex to test venous muscle pump induced flow . ( <unk> refers to a response to a perceived stimulus especially with regard to movement and position of the body ) . A slight push to the waist , triggers a muscle contraction in the leg , in order to maintain posture . This maneuver is very useful for studying deep vein flow and detecting valvular incompetence , mainly at the popliteal vein level , ( above the back of the knee ) . It is used when legs are painful or very <unk> ( swollen with fluid ) . 
 Flexing the toes and feet and extending on tiptoes , can all be very useful in detecting perforator vein incompetence . These movements unleash a muscle contraction which compresses deep veins . If a perforator valve is incompetent then a reflux from the deep to the superficial through the perforator vein will be registered . 
 Valsalva maneuver - when the patient performs this maneuver , he or she , increases intra @-@ abdominal venous pressure . If the great saphenous valve at the sapheno @-@ femoral junction is incompetent , a reflux will appear . 
 Normal blood flow is anterograde ( going to the heart ) , and from superficial to deep veins via perforator veins . However , there are two exceptions : firstly , the great saphenous vein ( GSV ) collaterals , ( the veins that run parallel ) , drain the abdominal wall and have a flow from top to bottom so that when an examiner tests the sapheno @-@ femoral junction , a false positive diagnosis might be made ; secondly , in the flow from the sole of the foot venous network around 10 % drains to the dorsal venous arch of the foot , going therefore against the norm , from deep to superficial veins . 
 Attention will be focused on the direction of the blood flow in both of the venous systems , and in the perforator veins , as well as being focused on shunt detection . A shunting of blood from the thigh veins back into the lower leg veins will give a reflux situation . The veins most often found to be incompetent are the saphenous veins and the perforators communicating with the deep veins of the thigh . 
 = = = Technical difficulties = = = 
 Venous ultrasonography of the lower limbs is the most demanding of the medical complementary examinations . It is dependent on the examiner 's expertise and training , and the interpretation of the results is subjective and reliant on an understanding of venous hemodynamics . ( A mapping does help the reproducibility and the inter @-@ observer agreement of this examination ) . The examination is made even more difficult because there can be dilated veins without insufficiency , ( by hyper @-@ debit ) , and non dilated but incompetent veins . Moreover , veins can be <unk> incompetent in summer but then be normal in winter . Also , by definition of insufficiency , ( insufficient blood flow ) blood may be seen to flow freely in both directions , anterograde and retrograde between two valves . Another problem when dealing with the superficial venous system , is that venous anatomy is not constant ; the position of veins can vary in different patients ; also in the same patient the right lower limb is not identical to the left lower limb . As a further complication to the examination , where venous insufficiency is evidenced , the examination needs to be done with the probe in the transversal position but the mapping must be done showing the veins in their longitudinal aspect . This demands a rapid extrapolation by the physician from the transversal images seen to the longitudinal drawing needed . The dynamic maneuvers also need to be well executed . The need of a specialized training is mandatory which is a huge problem for many countries today . 
 = = Particular details = = 
 = = = Great saphenous vein = = = 
 The great saphenous vein , ( GSV ) a superficial vein , is the longest vein in the body . It has its origin in the dorsal venous arch of the foot , a superficial vein which connects the small saphenous vein with the GSV . It travels up the leg and medial side of the thigh to reach the groin , where it drains into the common femoral vein . Along the length of the GSV , it receives numerous tributaries , ( from the subcutaneous layer ) and drains into the deep veins via the perforator veins . When seen in a scan , the GSV and the Giacomini vein , together with the accessory saphenous vein ( ASV ) , form an image resembling an eye which is referred to as the " eye sign " or " eye image " . . All veins which are between the skin and the superficial fascia are tributaries and all veins which cross the deep fascia to join the deep venous system are perforator veins . 
 Three anatomic compartments can be described , as networks : 
 NI contains the deep veins , also known as the deep compartment . 
 N2 contains the perforator veins . 
 N3 contains the superficial veins also known as the saphenous compartment . 
 Some authors describe one more compartment N4 , containing collaterals which form a bypass between two distinct points of the same vein . This compartmentalization is useful in an <unk> examination because it makes systematization , mapping execution , and any surgery strategic , easier . 
 Being protected between two fascias , the superficial veins belonging to compartment N3 very rarely become sinuous . So that when a sinuous vein is detected , the <unk> will suspect that it is a tributary . The sapheno @-@ femoral junction is tested by the Valsalva maneuver with the use of color Doppler being helpful at this stage . 
 = = = Accessory saphenous vein = = = 
 The accessory saphenous vein ( ASV ) , either anterior or posterior , is an important GSV collateral frequently responsible for varicose veins located on the anterior and lateral aspect of the thigh . The anterior ASV is more anterior than the ASV and is outside the femoral vessels plan . The two veins terminate in a common trunk near the groin , the sapheno @-@ femoral junction . Here , the ASV can be located aligned with the femoral vessels at the " alignment sign " . Also , at the groin it can be seen at the outside of the great saphenous vein , and together with the common femoral vein ( CFV ) these three create an image , the so @-@ called " Mickey Mouse sign " . Some authors , inspired by this sign ( presented for the first time at CHIVA 's 2002 meeting in Berlin ) , described a " Mickey Mouse view " at the groin , an image formed by the common femoral vein , the GSV and the superficial femoral artery . When the ASV is incompetent , its flow becomes retrograde and tries to drain in the superior fibular perforator , at the side of the knee , or sometimes it runs down towards the ankle to drain in the inferior fibular perforator . 
 = = = Small saphenous vein = = = 
 The small saphenous vein ( SSV ) , runs along the posterior aspect of the leg as far as the popliteal region , in the upper calf . Here it enters the popliteal space which is located between the two heads of the <unk> muscle where it usually drains above the knee joint in the popliteal vein or a little less often in the great saphenous vein ( GSV ) or other deep muscular veins of the thigh . The use of ultrasonography has allowed a number of variations to be shown at this level ; when no contact is made with the popliteal vein it might be seen to drain in the GSV , at a variable level ; or , it may merge with the Giacomini vein and drain in the GSV at the superior 1 / 3 of the thigh . It can also but rarely , drain in the vein of the <unk> ( thigh muscle ) ( shown below ) . Usually though , it connects with a perforator vein at its middle 1 / 3 . To check for insufficiency , the Paraná maneuver is very useful . 
 = = = Giacomini vein = = = 
 The Giacomini vein mostly acts as a bypass between the GSV and SSV territories . Usually its flow is in the normal anterograde direction , from bottom to top . However it can become retrograde without pathology . For example , after a GSV stripping , laser ablation or after its ligation at the sapheno @-@ femoral junction , the Giacomini vein will drain into the SSV , with a retrograde flow . When there is a GSV thrombosis or other cause of insufficiency , the Giacomini vein can divert the blood flow to the SSV and from there to the popliteal vein . Where surgery , other than stripping or laser ablation is intended , the examiner will make reference to the blood flow direction in this vein , as it will be of importance . 
 = = = Perforator veins = = = 
 Perforator veins play a very special role in the venous system , carrying blood from superficial to deep veins . During the muscular <unk> their valves close and stop any blood flow coming from the deep to the superficial veins . When their valves become insufficient , they are responsible for a rapid deterioration in existing varicose disease and for the development of venous ulcers . Detection of insufficient perforators is important because they need to be <unk> . However , the detection of competent ones is as important because they may be used strategically in new techniques of conservative surgery , for example a minimally invasive CHIVA . The ultrasonography report will include insufficient and continent perforators , which will also be shown on venous mapping . To test these veins properly , the examiner will need to use some techniques like the Paraná maneuver , toe and foot flexion , and hyper @-@ extension on tip toes . 
 = = Examination report = = 
 After performing this examination , the physician writes a report in which some points are crucial : 
 The condition of the deep vein system ( DVS ) , its permeability and compressibility , and whether it is continent or insufficient ; 
 The permeability and compressibility of the superficial vein system ( SVS ) , the presence or absence of superficial insufficiency , and in which veins or vein segments ; 
 Which perforator veins are continent or insufficient ; 
 The presence or absence of shunts ; 
 Mapping the insufficient veins , flux direction , shunts , and perforators . 
 This enables surgeons to plan interventions , in a stage known as virtual dissection . Drawn on paper , after the examination , it will be drawn over the patient 's skin before surgery . 
 = = History = = 
 The Doppler effect was first described by Christian Doppler in 1843 . Nearly forty years later in 1880 , the piezoelectric effect was discovered and confirmed by Pierre and Jacques Curie . Both of these findings were used in the development of ultrasonography . The first ultrasound was applied to the human body for medical purposes by Dr. George Ludwig , University of Pennsylvania , in the late 1940s . 
 The use of ultrasonography in medicine soon followed in different locations around the world . In the mid @-@ 1950s more research was undertaken by Professor Ian Donald et al . , in Glasgow , which advanced the practical technology and applications of ultrasound . In 1963 , in France , L. <unk> started on his thesis , which was presented in 1964 , and used pulsed Doppler for blood flow calculation as its subject . This was followed up by <unk> in 1969 . Dr. Gene <unk> and the bio @-@ engineering group at the University of Washington who conducted research on Doppler ultrasound as a diagnostic tool for vascular disease , published their first work in 1967 . The first report published about the venous system appeared around 1967 @-@ 1968 . 
 From the 1960s commercially available systems were introduced . Soon , other advances in electronics and piezoelectric materials enabled further improvements which meant that ultrasound was quickly adopted for use in medicine due to its rapid , accurate diagnostic capabilities which offered the possibility of prompt treatment . Alongside the improving imaging technology , acoustic Doppler <unk> and medical ultrasonography color Doppler were developed , which have had a significant impact on many specialties , including radiology , obstetrics , gynecology , <unk> and cardiology , and have provided even greater scope for ultrasound investigations . Since 1970 , real @-@ time scanners and pulsed Doppler , have enabled the use of ultrasound to study the function of the venous system . The first demonstration of color Doppler was achieved by Geoff Stevenson . Further progress in the 1970s was made with the arrival of the microchip , and the ensuing exponential increase in processing power has meant the development of fast and powerful systems . These systems involving digital <unk> and greater signal enhancement , have introduced new methods of interpreting and displaying data . 
 Rapid technical advancements in transmission tomography made possible the very good specificity and sensitivity capability of this technique , enabling the possibility of properly seeing the superficial tissues . Hemodynamic study began in France in 1985 , when C. <unk> , first described the conservative treatment for venous insufficiency , known as CHIVA . 
 = Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on River = 
 The Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on River , also known as the Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on or the Second Phase Campaign Western Sector ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Dì Èr Cì Zhàn Yì Xī Xiàn ) , was a decisive battle in the Korean War , and it took place from November 25 to December 2 in 1950 , along the Ch 'ongch 'on River Valley in the northwestern part of North Korea . In response to the successful Chinese First Phase Campaign against the United Nations forces , General Douglas MacArthur launched the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive to evict the Chinese forces from Korea and to end the war . Anticipating this reaction , the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army Commander Peng Dehuai planned a counteroffensive , dubbed the " Second Phase Campaign " , against the advancing UN forces . 
 Hoping to repeat the success of the earlier First Phase Campaign , the Chinese 13th Army first launched a series of surprise attacks along the Ch 'ongch 'on River Valley on the night of November 25 , 1950 , effectively destroying the Eighth United States Army 's right flank while allowing Chinese forces to move rapidly into UN rear areas . In the subsequent battles and withdrawals during the period of November 26 to December 2 , 1950 , although the US Eighth Army managed to avoid being surrounded by Chinese forces , the Chinese 13th Army were still able to inflict heavy losses onto the retreating UN forces which had lost all cohesion . In the aftermath of the battle , the US Eighth Army 's heavy losses forced all UN forces to evacuate North Korea and to withdraw to the 38th parallel . 
 = = Background = = 
 Well , if they go fast enough , maybe some of them can be home by Christmas . 
 In the wake of the United Nations ( UN ) forces ' successful landing at Inchon and the subsequent destruction of the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) by mid @-@ 1950 , the Eighth United States Army crossed the 38th parallel and advanced rapidly towards the Sino @-@ Korean border . Alarmed by this development , China 's Chairman Mao Zedong ordered the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army ( PVA ) to intervene in Korea and to launch the First Phase Campaign against the UN forces . Between October 25 and November 4 , 1950 , the PVA 13th Army surprised and defeated the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) II Corps and the US 1st Cavalry Division in a series of battles around Onjong and Unsan , destroying the right flank of the US Eighth Army while forcing the UN forces to retreat back to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . Although Chinese forces were able to break through the UN line , logistics difficulties forced the Chinese to withdraw on November 5 , 1950 . 
 Despite the success of the Chinese First Phase Campaign , the UN planners still believed that China had not intervened in Korea on a large scale . The suddenness of the Chinese withdrawal in the face of a victory further reinforced this belief . Working on the assumption that only 30 @,@ 000 Chinese troops could remain hidden in the hills , General Douglas MacArthur ordered the bombing of the bridges over the Yalu River in an effort to cut off Chinese reinforcements . Confident that the UN air force could detect and disrupt any troop movements across the Yalu River , MacArthur launched the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive on November 24 to rout the remaining Chinese and North Korean forces and to end the Korean War . 
 Unknown to the UN planners , however , there were already 180 @,@ 000 Chinese troops stationed in Korea , with more reinforcements infiltrating across the border . Although the PVA was ordered to maintain a defensive posture in North Korea until Soviet weapons could arrive in the spring of 1951 , its earlier successes convinced the Chinese leadership that the PVA was capable of turning the tide of UN advance . Encouraged by the fact that the UN did not know their true numbers , PVA Commander Peng Dehuai outlined the Second Phase Campaign , a counteroffensive aimed at pushing the UN forces back to a line half way between Ch 'ongch 'on River and Pyongyang . As a part of a deception plan to further reinforce the weak appearance of Chinese forces , Peng ordered all units to rapidly retreat north while releasing POWs along the way . With 230 @,@ 000 troops at his disposal and another 150 @,@ 000 heading to the Chosin Reservoir , Peng authorized the start of the Second Phase Campaign on November 22 , 1950 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Location , terrain and weather = = = 
 The battle was fought along the UN front line around the Ch 'ongch 'on River and its tributaries , which is located 50 mi ( 80 km ) south of the Sino @-@ Korean border . The UN front line stretched horizontally from the Korean west coast to the Taebaek Mountains in central Korea , while the Ch 'ongch 'on River crosses into the north of the UN line at the town of Kujang @-@ dong . From west to east , a series of towns , such as Chongju , Yongsan @-@ dong , Ipsok , Kujang @-@ dong , Tokchon , and Yongwon dot the front line , and connecting those towns are a series of road junctions located at Sinanju , Anju , Kunu @-@ ri and Pukchang @-@ ni . A road runs south from Kunu @-@ ri into Sunchon and eventually into Pyongyang , and it would later become the main retreat route for the UN forces stationed at the center of the front line . The hilly terrains on the northern bank of the Ch 'ongch 'on River formed a defensive barrier that allowed the Chinese to hide their presence while dispersing the advancing UN forces . The battle was also fought over one of the coldest Korean winters in 100 years , with temperatures dropped to as low as − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) . 
 = = = Forces and strategies = = = 
 Acting on MacArthur 's instructions , General Walton Walker of the Eighth Army started the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive at 10 a.m. on November 24 , 1950 . With a reconstituted ROK II Corps placed on the Eighth Army 's right flank , the advance was led by the US I Corps to the west , US IX Corps in the center , and the ROK II Corps to the east . The three UN Corps advanced cautiously in a continuous front line in order to prevent more ambushes similar to the Chinese First Phase Campaign , but the lack of manpower stretched the UN forces to the limit . Except for the strong Chinese resistances against the ROK II Corps , the Eighth Army met little opposition , and the line between Chongju to Yongwon was occupied on the night of the November 25 . 
 Despite the lack of manpower , the US Eighth Army had three and half times the firepower of the opposing Chinese forces . The US Fifth Air Force , which was responsible for the air support , also had little opposition due to the lack of anti @-@ aircraft weapons by the Chinese . Boosted by a Thanksgiving feast with roasted turkeys on the eve of the advance , the morale was high among the UN ranks , and home by Christmas and Germany by spring was in everyone 's mind . The high morale , however , caused a degradation of troop discipline , and most of the soldiers had discarded their equipment and ammunition supply before the battle . A rifle company from the US IX Corps , for example , started its advance with most of the helmets and bayonets thrown away , and there were on average less than one grenade and 50 rounds of ammunition carried per man . Because the UN planners did not foresee that the war would be dragged into a winter campaign , all elements of the Eighth Army started the offensive with a shortage of winter clothing . 
 While the Eighth Army was advancing , the PVA 13th Army was hiding in the mountains with the 50th and 66th Corps to the west , the 39th and the 40th Corps in the center and the 38th and 42nd Corps to the east . Anticipating the UN advances , the Chinese planned a series of counterattacks to catch the Eighth Army off guard . Hoping to repeat the success of the earlier First Phase Campaign , the 38th and 42nd Corps would first attack the ROK II Corps and to destroy the UN right flank , then cut behind the UN lines . At the same time , the 39th and 40th Corps would hold the US IX Corps in place while preventing any reinforcements to the ROK II Corps . The 50th and 66th Corps would stay behind and check the advances of the US I Corps . 
 Although the PVA 13th Army had a nominal strength of 230 @,@ 000 men , its actual strength during the battle could be as low as 150 @,@ 000 men . The PVA 66th Corps , for example , had only 6 @,@ 600 men per division at the start of the battle , as opposed to the expected 10 @,@ 000 men per division . There were also only one firearm available for every three Chinese soldiers , and the rest were employed as grenade throwers . Because most of the Chinese howitzers and guns were left behind in Manchuria , mortars were the only artillery support available for the Chinese . For the counteroffensive , the average Chinese soldier were issued with only five days worth of rations and ammunition , and resupply could only be obtained by scavenging on the battlefield . To compensate for its shortcomings , the Chinese relied extensively on night attacks and infiltrations in order to avoid the UN firepower . The primitive logistics system had also allowed the Chinese to maneuver over the rough hilly terrains , thus enabled them to by @-@ pass the UN defenses and to surround the isolated UN positions . Because the Chinese had captured large numbers of Nationalist weapons during the Chinese Civil War , most of the Chinese weapons were composed of US made small arms such as the Thompson submachine gun , the M1 Garand rifle , the M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle , the bazooka and the M2 mortar . 
 = = Battle = = 
 As the US Eighth Army stopped its advance on the afternoon of November 25 , 1950 , the PVA 13th Army commenced the Second Phase Campaign . A massive frontal attack was launched against the entire UN line from Yongsan @-@ dong to Yongwon . To the west , the ROK 1st Infantry Division of the US I Corps was attacked by the PVA 66th Corps at Yongsan @-@ dong . In the center , strong probing actions by the PVA 39th and 40th Corps were carried out against the US IX Corps at Ipsok and Kujang @-@ dong . In the east , the PVA 38th and 42nd Corps broke through ROK II Corps ' line at Tokchon and Yongwon . The Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive was completely stalled on the morning of November 26 . 
 = = = Actions at Tokchon and Yongwon = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Battle of Onjong , the Chinese recognized the ROK II Corps as the most vulnerable unit of the Eighth Army . Besides lacking the firepower of their US counterpart , the ROK II Corps also held the most difficult terrain on the UN right flank . At 10 a.m. on November 24 , the ROK 7th Infantry Division on the II Corps ' left flank attacked north from Tokchon . At the same time , the ROK 8th Infantry Division on the II Corps ' right flank advanced north from Yongwon . The stubborn defenses by the PVA 38th and 42nd Corps soon ground the Korean advances to a halt , and the continuous fighting for the next two days failed to create any gains for the Koreans . During the advances , the Chinese defenses managed to create a wedge in the center of the ROK 7th Infantry Division , forcing the division to commit most of its reserves on the front line . Meanwhile , the ROK 6th Infantry Division in the II Corps ' rear could only offer its 2nd Infantry Regiment as the corps ' reserve due to the earlier losses at Onjong . 
 As the Koreans were preparing their defensive positions on the dusk of November 25 , the two Chinese corps were mobilizing for a decisive counterattack against the Eighth Army 's right flank . The PVA 38th Corps planned to attack in full force against the ROK 7th Infantry Division 's center and right flank , while two divisions from the 42nd Corps started to march through the hills in order to bypass the ROK 8th Infantry Division 's right flank . Given the importance of this assault , Han Xianchu , one of Peng 's deputies , personally commanded the 38th and 42nd Corps for the rest of the battle . 
 The PVA 38th Corps landed the first blow against the ROK II Corps at 5 p.m. on November 25 . Aided by total surprise , the PVA 113th Division of the 38th Corps first shattered the ROK 7th Infantry Division 's Reconnaissance Company on the division 's right flank , creating a 0 @.@ 5 mi ( 800 m ) gap between the ROK 7th and 8th Infantry Division . Simultaneously , the PVA 114th Division of the 38th Corps attacked the center @-@ right of the ROK 7th Infantry Division , pushing the ROK 5th and 8th Infantry Regiment back in the process . When the ROK 7th Infantry Division 's center and right were in complete chaos , the PVA 112th and the 113th Division of the 38th Corps slipped past the UN lines and advanced towards Tokchon . With only one battalion in reserve to check the Chinese divisions , the Tokchon garrison and the ROK 7th Infantry Division headquarters were soon surrounded and attacked by the two Chinese divisions at 4 a.m. on November 26 . Under heavy pressures from the PVA 114th Division , the ROK 5th and 8th Infantry Regiment tried to fall back to Tokchon , but the Chinese ambushes in the rear scattered the unsuspecting Koreans . On the afternoon of November 26 , Tokchon was captured by the Chinese , and the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment on the ROK 7th Infantry Division 's left flank drifted westward and joined the US 2nd Infantry Division . 
 While the ROK 7th Infantry Division was being annihilated at Tokchon by the PVA 38th Corps , the ROK 8th Infantry Division was also being routed , at Yongwon by the PVA 42nd Corps . With the PVA 125th Division tying down the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment at Yongwon , the 124th and the 126th Division tried to infiltrate the ROK 8th Infantry Division 's rear by marching through the hills east of Yongwon . At 1 p.m. on November 25 , the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment to the ROK 8th Infantry Division 's rear spotted the two Chinese divisions at Maengsan , 20 km ( 12 mi ) south of the Yongwon . Surprised by this development , the ROK 8th Infantry Division ordered the 16th Infantry Regiment to block the Chinese advance while the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment were retreating from Yongwon . But before the order could be carried out , the Chinese struck first after learning their trap had been discovered . As the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment were retreating from Yongwon early in the morning of November 26 , the PVA 125th Division ambushed both ROK regiments , forcing the Koreans to abandon their heavy equipment and to scatter into the hills . Meanwhile , following the bonfires made by the Koreans for the cold weather , the PVA 124th Division overran a battalion from the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment and attacked the ROK 8th Infantry Division 's command post at Maengsan . With the entire division dispersed , the ROK 8th Infantry Division headquarters and the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment broke out of Maengsan on November 27 and retreated from the battlefield . 
 During the chaos of the battle , Major General Yu Jai Hung of the ROK II Corps did not receive news from the front line until midnight of November 25 — five hours after the Chinese had entered the Korean rear . Responding to the crisis , Hung committed the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment of the 6th Infantry Division to block the Chinese divisions . As the 2nd Infantry Regiment marched towards the front on the morning of November 26 , the PVA 113th Division intercepted the regiment and destroyed its command post , scattering the ROK II Corps ' entire reserve in the process . With most the ROK II Corps ' units destroyed by November 27 , the UN right flank had fallen to the Chinese . 
 Although the UN aerial reconnaissance observed on November 27 that the Chinese forces on the UN right flank were moving rapidly into the Eighth Army 's rear , Walker still ordered the rest of the Eighth Army to continue the offensive north . Convinced that the collapse of the ROK II Corps was merely a small counterattack by the Chinese , Walker ordered the US I and IX Corps to shift eastward in order to cover the ROK II Corps ' sector . By that time , however , the US I and IX Corps had already suffered heavy losses from the Chinese counteroffensive at Kujang @-@ dong , Ipsok and Yongsan @-@ dong . 
 = = = Actions at Kujang @-@ dong = = = 
 On the left of the ROK 7th Infantry Division , ROK II Corps , the US 2nd Infantry Division of the IX Corps was placed in the path of a major Chinese supply line . During the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive , US 9th Infantry Regiment led the division 's advance northward along the Ch 'ongch 'on River , while the US 38th Infantry Regiment was placed on the division 's right flank . The offensive started with little resistance against the US 2nd Infantry Division , although the 9th Infantry Regiment was stalled by Chinese defenses at Hill 219 , north of Kujang @-@ dong on November 25 . In order to renew the offensive on the next day , the 23rd Infantry Regiment of the US 2nd Infantry Division was moved into the rear of the 9th Infantry Regiment . At the same time , the 38th Infantry Regiment had arrived at <unk> @-@ dong , a town on the road between Kujang @-@ dong and Tokchon . When the aerial reconnaissance detected an increase in Chinese activities , the 38th Infantry Regiment 's A Company was sent on a patrol into Chinese territory . 
 To ensure the success of the Chinese counterattack against ROK II Corps , the PVA 40th Corps was assigned the mission of protecting the PVA 38th Corps ' flank against the US 2nd Infantry Division . To accomplish this mission , the PVA 119th Division of the 40th Corps would first attack <unk> @-@ dong and to prevent the Americans from reinforcing the Koreans . The 120th Division would then fight its way across the Ch 'ongch 'on River and tie down the bulk of the US 2nd Infantry Division . Finally , the 118th Division would flank the Americans from the west and capture Kujang @-@ dong from the rear . 
 On the night of the Chinese counteroffensive , the PVA 120th Division first accidentally stumbled upon the US 9th Infantry Regiment on the northern bank of the Ch 'ongch 'on River . The surprise encounter between the two sides soon left the 9th Infantry Regiment with only three rifle companies combat effective . Unaware that the 1st Battalion of the US 23rd Infantry Regiment had pulled up behind the US 61st Field Artillery Battalion , four Sharp Sword Companies from the PVA 359th Regiment of the 120th Division proceeded to cross the river and attacked the US artillery positions . Although the 61st Battalion was routed by surprise , the US 23rd Infantry Regiment quickly knocked out two of the unsuspecting Chinese companies . The surviving Chinese troops drifted eastward and occupied a hill named Chinaman 's Hat , enabling the Chinese to overlook the entire 23rd Infantry Regiment 's positions . 
 While the PVA 120th Division commenced its attack on the US 2nd Infantry Division 's center , the PVA 119th Division was also trying to drive a wedge between Kujang @-@ dong and Tokchon . In a series of confusing battles between the PVA 119th Division and the US 38th Infantry Regiment , the patrolling A Company of the 38th Infantry Regiment was first splintered under Chinese attacks . Adding to the confusion , Chinese reconnaissance teams resorted to sweet musics and dancing to lure the Americans into exposing their positions , and the resulting Chinese counter fire caused the loss of the G Company on the 38th Infantry Regiment 's center . The Chinese had also penetrated the 38th Infantry Regiment 's left flank , blocking the regiment 's retreat route in the process . By the morning of November 26 , Chinese troops were spotted all around the 38th Infantry Regiment . 
 The Chinese promptly withdrew as the morning came on November 26 , and a counterattack by the 38th Infantry Regiment later reopened the road to the rear . When the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment of the ROK 7th Infantry Division suddenly appeared in the 38th Infantry Regiment 's sector , Colonel George B. Peploe of the 38th Infantry Regiment realized the right flank of the US 2nd Infantry Division and the entire Eighth Army had collapsed . Under orders from Major General Laurence B. Keiser , commander of the US 2nd Infantry Division , Colonel Peploe immediately took command of the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment while trying to refuse his right flank . At the same time , Colonel Paul L. Freeman of the 23rd Infantry Regiment had also tried to lead his regiment to capture Chinaman 's Hat , but without much success . 
 The Chinese immediately renewed their attacks on the night of November 26 . A counterattack from Chinaman 's Hat soon captured the 23rd Infantry Regiment 's command post . On the 23rd Infantry Regiment 's left , the 9th Infantry Regiment 's G Company was also overran by the attacking Chinese forces , forcing Colonel Charles C. Sloane Jr. to withdraw the remnants of his regiment across the river . Chinese ambushes in the rear then decimated the rest of the 9th Infantry Regiment . To the US 2nd Infantry Division 's right , Commander Wen <unk> of the PVA 40th Corps ordered the 119th Division to destroy the 38th Infantry Regiment in order to protect the Chinese breakthrough on the UN right flank . The ferocious fighting soon forced the 38th Infantry Regiment to fight its way back to Kujang @-@ dong in order to rejoin the division . 
 Although Walker did not cancel the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive on November 27 , Keiser ordered his division to withdraw to Kujang @-@ dong . Before Keiser 's order was complete on November 28 , Walker instructed Major General John B. Coulter of the IX Corps to set up a new defensive line at Kunu @-@ ri — 20 mi ( 32 km ) south of the US 2nd Infantry Division . Full scale retreat of the US 2nd Infantry Division started on the night of November 27 , with the Chinese attacking everywhere against the Americans . As the division 's convoy tried to move south , they were met with machine gun and mortar fire from numerous Chinese roadblocks in the rear . Chinese bazooka teams had also knocked out several vehicles while others were trying to swarm the tanks and to lob grenades into the hatch . With some losses , the US 2nd Infantry Division broke through the PVA 118th Division 's blockade and arrived at Kunu @-@ ri on the night of November 28 . 
 = = = Actions at Ipsok = = = 
 For the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive , US 25th Infantry Division of the IX Corps advanced on the left of the US 2nd Infantry Division along the Kuryong River , one of the northern tributaries of the Ch 'ongch 'on River . On November 24 , the 25th Infantry Division started its offensive at the city of <unk> , south of Ipsok . To lead the offensive , five companies of infantry , armor and artillery were drawn from the 25th Infantry Division to form a special task force named " Task Force Dolvin " . With Task Force Dolvin leading the offensive on the eastern bank of the Kuryong River , the US 24th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was placed on division 's right to maintain contact with the 2nd Division , while the US 35th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was on the western bank of the river advancing from Yongsan @-@ dong to Unsan . The 27th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was located in the division 's rear as reserves . 
 Because of the earlier UN defeat at the Battle of Unsan , the US 25th Infantry Division expected to encounter heavy Chinese resistance during its advance . But the Chinese screening forces withdrew with the American advance . Aside from the harassing fire , the US 25th Infantry Division did not encounter strong resistance along the way . Ipsok was captured by Task Force Dolvin on November 24 , and several American POWs from the Unsan battle were also recovered at the town . When Task Force Dolvin proceeded to capture a series of hills north of Ipsok on the next day , Chinese resistance started to stiffen . During the hill battles on the afternoon of November 25 , the Eighth Army Ranger Company of Task Force Dolvin suffered heavy losses against the Chinese defenses , and the task force stopped its advance at dusk . 
 While the US 25th Infantry Division was advancing , the opposing PVA 39th Corps was waiting for instructions from the PVA High Command . But the Chinese still conducted a series of probing actions against the American positions on the night of November 25 . The Chinese patrols soon destroyed the rest of the Ranger Company , while numerous Chinese reconnaissance teams disguised as Americans infiltrated Task Force Dolvin 's positions . On the right of Task Force Dolvin , the mountainous terrains scattered US 24th Infantry Regiment while blocking most of its radio transmissions . Upon learning the destruction of the Ranger Company , Major General William B. Kean of the US 25th Infantry Division sent the 2nd Battalion of the 27th Infantry Regiment to reinforce Task Force Dolvin . He also sent the assistant division commander Brigadier General <unk> Wilson to command of the task force , renaming the task force " Task Force Wilson " . 
 After the successful attack against the Eighth Army 's right flank , the PVA High Command gave the go ahead for the 39th Corps to attack the US 25th Infantry Division on November 26 . The PVA 115th Division of the 39th Corps was immediately mobilized for an assault against Task Force Wilson and the US 24th Infantry Regiment , while the 116th and 117th Division were moving to attack Ipsok and to cut the American retreat route . The crushing attack soon left the task force decimated and reeling . The PVA 347th Regiment of the 115th Division first met the C Company on the task force 's center , and after the sharp encounter most of the C Company 's men were missing in action . On the right flank , the 115th Division attacked the task force 's B Company . Met with waves of Chinese suicide bombers , the B Company was reduced to 26 soldiers out of the original 200 . Some Chinese snipers and infiltrators even managed to reach Task Force Wilson 's command post , resulting in the death of the task force 's executive officer . As the entire task force 's line collapsing , the E Company sleeping at the task force 's rear was pushed to the front line . Although the tank fire from the E Company stopped the Chinese advance , the company was reduced to just one platoon after the battle . Chinese forces in the rear had also attacked the task force 's artillery at Ipsok , preventing fire support during the night . In the aftermath of the night battle , the task force found itself surrounded , and the Chinese troops were chanting in all directions against the Americans . When Wilson tried to evacuate the wounded , Chinese roadblocks ambushed the medical convoy just south of the 2nd Battalion 's perimeter . 
 With only the 2nd Battalion of Task Force Wilson remaining combat effective on the morning of November 27 , Wilson ordered the task force to withdraw to Ipsok . Under heavy air cover , the 2nd Battalion broke through PVA 348th Regiment 's roadblock and reached <unk> on the afternoon . Meanwhile , the US 24th Infantry Regiment had lost contact with most of its units , and the regiment commander Colonel John T. Corley could only collect one battalion from his regiment on the morning of November 27 . On November 28 , Walker shifted the US I Corps eastward by attaching the US 25th Infantry Division to the US I Corps , while ordering the 25th Infantry Division to withdraw to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . With the US 35th Infantry Regiment rejoining the 25th Infantry Division after the battle at Yongsan @-@ dong , the 25th Infantry Division withdrew south and Task Force Wilson was dissolved by Kean on November 28 . 
 = = = Actions at Yongsan @-@ dong = = = 
 After an extensive refit in the aftermath of the Unsan battle , ROK 1st Infantry Division was placed on the US I Corps right flank at Yongsan @-@ dong on November 20 . As part of the Home @-@ by @-@ Christmas Offensive , the ROK 1st Infantry Division was to advance north and to capture the town of Taechon while the US 35th Infantry Regiment of the US 25th Infantry Division was advancing north from Yongsan @-@ dong on the Korean right flank . At the same time , the US 24th Infantry Division of the US I Corps would advance towards Chongju on the ROK 1st Infantry Division 's left flank . 
 On the morning of November 24 , the ROK 1st Infantry Division advanced towards the town of Taechon with its 11th and 12th Infantry Regiment on point . Although Chinese booby traps and mortar fire tried to delay the Koreans along the way , the 1st Infantry Division still managed to envelope the town by the dusk of November 24 . But unknown to the Koreans , the 1st Infantry Division was marching into a Chinese assembly area , and the resistance around Taechon immediately increased as the result . On the night of November 24 , the defending PVA 66th Corps counterattacked the Koreans with infantry and cavalry charges , and the Chinese and Korean troops were soon locked in a seesaw battle from November 25 to 26 . 
 As the battle around Taechon dragged into the night of November 26 , the ROK 11th Infantry Regiment on the division 's right became disorganized . Brigadier General Paik Sun Yup of the ROK 1st Infantry Division soon brought up the 15th Infantry Regiment from his reserve to relieve the 11th Infantry Regiment . After receiving news on the Chinese attack against the 25th Division across the Kuryong River , Paik had also directed his division to defend against the upcoming Chinese counteroffensive . As the morning came on November 27 , the Chinese troops around Taechon did not stop their assault even under punishing UN air strikes , and some of the attacks spilled into US 24th Infantry Division 's area . Upon noticing their flank was buckling , the US 24th Infantry Division and the US 35th Infantry Regiment started the retreat southward to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . 
 At 1 p.m. on November 27 , Peng ordered the PVA 66th Corps to destroy the ROK 1st Infantry Division before the Koreans could retreat to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . On the evening of November 27 , the PVA 66th Corps launched a massive attack against the ROK 1st Infantry Division , the US 5th Regimental Combat Team of the 24th Infantry Division and the US 35th Infantry Regiment . After midnight , the Chinese attacks broke through the Korean lines and captured Yongsan @-@ dong , resulting in the loss of the ROK 11th , 15th and US 35th Infantry Regiment 's command posts . The ROK 11th and 15th Infantry Regiment were soon scattered while the retreating US 35th Infantry Regiment was blocked at Yongsan @-@ dong with Chinese forces attacking from behind . Under heavy pressure , the US 35th Infantry Regiment fought its way through the town and rejoined the US 25th Division on the afternoon of November 28 . At the same time , Paik rallied the broken ROK regiments and recaptured Yongsan @-@ dong . The ROK 1st Infantry Division held the town against the subsequent Chinese attacks until it withdrew from the battle on November 29 . 
 = = = Actions at Kunu @-@ ri = = = 
 Kunu @-@ ri is a crossroad village on the northern bank of the Kaechon River , one of Ch 'ongch 'on River 's southern tributaries . As the Chinese counteroffensive grew in strength against the Eighth Army 's center , Kunu @-@ ri had become a major bottleneck for the US IX Corps ' retreat . In an effort to stabilize the front on November 28 , Walker ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to retreat from Kujang @-@ dong and to set up a new defensive line at Kunu @-@ ri . The importance of Kunu @-@ ri was also noted by the Chinese , and on November 27 , Peng instructed the PVA 38th Corps to cut the US IX Corps retreat route . The PVA 114th Division of the 38th Corps would capture Kunu @-@ ri by marching westward on the road from Tokchon , while the PVA 112th Division would follow on a parallel route through the hills north of the road . 
 With the US 2nd Infantry Division still at engaged at Kujang @-@ dong , Coulter ordered the Turkish Brigade in the IX Corps reserve to block the Chinese advance . On the night of November 27 , the Turks took up defensive position at <unk> to the east of Kunu @-@ ri . They were soon met with the PVA 342nd Regiment from the 114th Division . The ensuing battle between the Chinese regiment and the brigade 's advance battalion continued for much of the November 28 , resulting 400 Turkish casualties . As dusk came on November 28 , the Turkish Brigade tried to retreat 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) west to <unk> @-@ ri to set up stronger defensive positions , but the PVA 342nd Regiment caught up with the brigade and attacked its rear , completely surrounding the brigade . With communications cut between the brigade and the Turkish headquarters , the PVA 340th and the 342nd Regiment from the 114th Division then fragmented the brigade during the night battle . The trapped Turks broke out of the Chinese encirclement on the morning of November 29 and the brigade was attached to the US 2nd Infantry Division . 
 Although the Turkish Brigade was crippled by the Chinese , its delaying action allowed the US 2nd Infantry Division to secure Kunu @-@ ri on the night of November 28 . With the US 23rd Infantry Regiment setting up defensive positions to the north of Kunu @-@ ri on the morning of November 29 , the US 38th Infantry Regiment tried to occupy the hills to the northeast of Kunu @-@ ri . But the American soon found the PVA 112th Division had already occupied the hills . The 38th Infantry Regiment was then forced to occupy a lower position at 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away from the Chinese . At the same time , the remnants of the Turkish Brigade joined up with the US 38th Infantry Regiment , covering the regiment 's right flank on the northern bank of the Kaechon River . 
 On the afternoon of November 28 , MacArthur started to recognize that a crisis was growing in Korea . With the start of the Battle of Chosin Reservoir on November 27 , MacArthur gathered his field commanders , including Walker , for a conference in Tokyo . During the conference , MacArthur learned about the situation on the Eighth Army 's right flank and judged that the Eighth Army was in great danger . He instructed Walker to withdraw from the battle before the Chinese could surround the Eighth Army . After the conference at November 29 , Walker ordered all Eighth Army units to retreat to a new line around Sunchon , 30 mi ( 48 km ) south of Kunu @-@ ri . 
 Following Walker 's orders , most of the Eighth Army 's major units promptly broke contact with the Chinese and withdrew , but the US 2nd Infantry Division was forced to stay at Kunu @-@ ri in order to hold off the Chinese forces on the Eighth Army 's right flank . By the time the 2nd Infantry Division tried to withdraw on the night of November 29 , the two Chinese divisions attacked the US 38th Infantry Regiment . The PVA 112th Division first struck the 38th Infantry Regiment on the left flank , but the American defenses held firm , forcing the Chinese to go on the defensive . Meanwhile , the PVA 114th Division attacked the Turkish Brigade and the right flank of the 38th Infantry Regiment . The Chinese outflanked the Turks by attacking along the southern bank of the Kaechon River , then crossed the river in the UN rear areas . Upon noticing this development , Brigadier General <unk> <unk> of the Turkish Brigade ordered a withdrawal , leaving the right flank of the 38th Infantry Regiment completely uncovered . By the dusk of November 29 , Chinese had cut the road between the 38th Infantry Regiment and Kunu @-@ ri , and the Americans had to retreat by infiltrating the Chinese lines . At 4 a.m. on November 30 , the 38th Infantry Regiment crossed the Kaechon River under the cover of the 23rd Infantry Regiment and Kunu @-@ ri was under Chinese control . 
 = = = The Gauntlet = = = 
 In the aftermath of the ROK II Corps ' collapse on November 27 , Peng immediately ordered the PVA 38th Corps to cut the road between Kunu @-@ ri and Sunchon in the US IX Corps rear , while the PVA 42nd Corps would surround the entire Eighth Army by rushing south through Pukchang @-@ ni and capture Sunchon . At the same day , Walker shifted the Eighth Army 's line eastward by attaching the US 1st Cavalry Division and the Anglo @-@ Australian 27th Commonwealth Infantry Brigade to the US IX Corps . The US 1st Cavalry Division would contain the Chinese breakthrough at Pukchang @-@ ni , while the 27th Commonwealth Brigade secured the road between Kunu @-@ ri and Sunchon . 
 With the new orders on November 28 , the US 5th Cavalry Regiment of the 1st Cavalry Division left Kunu @-@ ri to rejoin the division to the northeast of Sunchon . With the US 5th Cavalry Regiment absent and the 8th Cavalry Regiment still recovering from the earlier losses from the battle at Unsan , Major General Hobart Gay of the US 1st Cavalry Division placed the US 7th Cavalry Regiment to the south of Pukchang @-@ ni , behind the remnants of the ROK 6th Infantry Division . Lacking reinforcements , the ROK 6th Infantry Division was quickly routed by the PVA 42nd Corps on the night of November 28 . Chinese forces then attacked the 7th Cavalry Regiment under the cover of the fleeing Korean soldiers and refugees pouring into the American front . Under Gay 's order , the 7th Cavalry Regiment withdrew southwest to the town of <unk> @-@ ni on the morning of November 29 , and the Chinese resumed the drive southward . A fierce battle between the PVA 125th Division and the 7th Cavalry Regiment broke out during the night of November 29 , but by the morning of November 30 the PVA 42nd Corps ' advance was halted . 
 The PVA 38th Corps , on the other hand , was marching towards the Kunu @-@ ri — Sunchon road virtually unopposed . On 7 a.m. at November 28 , the PVA 113th Division of the 38th Corps occupied the town of Samo @-@ ri , placing it right in the path of the 5th Cavalry Regiment and besides the Kunu @-@ ri — Sunchon road . An hour and half later , the advance platoon from the 5th Cavalry Regiment was ambushed and destroyed . With its advance blocked , the 5th Cavalry Regiment tried to dislodge the Chinese garrison , but it was forced to turn back by the afternoon . The 113th Division then occupied the valley containing the Kunu @-@ ri — Sunchon road at that night and blocked the retreat route of the US 2nd Infantry Division . Upon receiving the news on November 29 , 1st Battalion , Middlesex Regiment , part of 27th Brigade , tried to clear the valley from the south , but the attack was halted due to the lack of heavy weapons . 
 One of the first victims of the new Chinese roadblock was a convoy from the Turkish Brigade , and it was ambushed on the night of November 28 . A military police patrol was sent to investigate , but most of its members were killed by the morning . With the battle still raging at Kunu @-@ ri , the news of the Chinese roadblock reached the US 2nd Infantry Division on November 29 . Keiser sent the Reconnaissance Company and the remnants of the 9th Infantry Regiment to dislodge the Chinese , but the roadblock held firm even with a platoon of tanks attacking it . With the battle at Kunu @-@ ri ended by the night of November 29 , the PVA 112th Division joined the 113th Division and the roadblock grew to 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) in depth . 
 The 2nd Infantry Division , however , did not know the strength of the roadblock on the night of November 29 . At the same time , the US 25th Infantry Division Military Police mistakenly reported that the alternative retreat route from Kunu @-@ ri to Anju was also blocked by Chinese . Later , Coulter ordered Keiser to withdraw by breaking the roadblock with the 27th Commonwealth Brigade . On the early morning of November 30 , Keiser made the decision to withdraw through the valley . 
 On the morning of November 30 , the 9th Infantry Regiment led the withdrawal by attacking the roadblock . Four tanks were first sent down the road and the Chinese held their fire . Encouraged by this development , Colonel Sloane ordered the 9th Infantry Regiment to press forward , but Chinese machine gun and mortar fire immediately stopped the advance at 9 a.m. The ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment attached to the 2nd Infantry Division was sent to reinforce the US 9th Infantry Regiment , but it was routed by friendly fire . With no contacts between the American commands and the British units , the Middlesex Regiment advanced to the south end of the valley without attacking the roadblock . Believing that the roadblock was short and the British were attacking up the road , Keiser ordered the 2nd Infantry Division to run through the blockade at 10 a.m. 
 As the 2nd Infantry Division entered the valley , later known as the " Gauntlet " , the Chinese machine guns delivered punishing fire while mortar shells saturated the road . The length of the roadblock caught the 2nd Infantry Division by surprise , and the road was soon filled with wrecked vehicles and wounded and dead soldiers . Those who tried to take cover in the ditches were promptly left behind by the convoy rushing south , and unit cohesion instantly evaporated . During the day , the air cover tried to suppress the Chinese positions with some success , but with no air cover at night , the Chinese attack intensified . Finally , the Chinese blocked the road completely by destroying the US 38th and 503rd Artillery Battalion of the 2nd Infantry Division , and the immobilized artillery pieces forced the rest of the division to abandon all vehicles and to retreat by hiking through the hills . At the rear of the division , Colonel Freeman attempted to save his 23rd Infantry Regiment by retreating through the Kunu @-@ ri — Anju road . In one of the last acts of the battle , the 23rd Infantry Regiment fired off its stock of 3 @,@ 206 artillery shells within 20 minutes , and the massive barrage shocked the Chinese troops from following the regiment . The last stragglers from the US 2nd Infantry Division finally arrived at Sunchon on December 1 , and by December 2 the Eighth Army had completely lost contact with the Chinese . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the aftermath of the battle , US Eighth Army 's casualty number exceeded 11 @,@ 000 in the first count . A large number of documents , including all records from the US 2nd Infantry Division and the US 24th Infantry Regiment , were lost during the battle , and this made it difficult for historians to either analyze the events in detail or to assess the exact battle damage and losses incurred . However , it was later approximated that the US 2nd Infantry Division had suffered 4 @,@ 037 casualties , and most of its artillery pieces , 40 percent of its signal equipment , 45 percent of its crew @-@ served weapons , 30 percent of its vehicles were lost during the battle . Thus , the US 2nd Infantry Division was deemed to be crippled , and Keiser was relieved from command by the end of the battle . The other US unit that had reported significant losses was the US 25th Infantry Division with 1 @,@ 313 casualties . The Turkish Brigade had also reported 936 casualties with 90 percent equipment , 90 percent vehicle and 50 percent artillery losses , and the brigade was rendered combat ineffective . The South Korean casualties could not be estimated due to the complete absence of South Korean records during the first half of the Korean War , but according to Paik , the ROK II Corps ' headquarters was forced to disband in the aftermath of the battle . As for Chinese losses , Peng estimated 45 @,@ 000 casualties by the end of the battle , and the official Chinese history attributed 20 @,@ 000 casualties to combat , while the rest were attributed to the lack of adequate winter clothing and the lack of food . For its role in setting up the Gauntlet against the US 2nd Infantry Division , the PVA 38th Corps was awarded the title " Ten Thousand Years Corps " by Peng on December 1 , 1950 . 
 With the US 2nd Infantry Division , the Turkish Brigade and the ROK II Corps out of action , the US Eighth Army was reduced to just two corps , composed of four divisions and two brigades . Meanwhile , the over @-@ extended Chinese logistics system had also left the victorious 13th Army half @-@ starved and incapable of any further offensive operations . But during the chaotic UN retreats , no reconnaissance was conducted to determine the state of the Chinese forces . As the result , Walker ordered the Eighth Army to abandon North Korea on December 3 , much to the surprise of the Chinese commanders . The following 120 mi ( 190 km ) withdrawal to the 38th parallel is often referred to as " the longest retreat in US military history . " Aside from extremely low morale after the battle , the entire Eighth Army was also gripped with " bug out fever " during the retreat , and a song called the " <unk> Boogie " was composed to commemorate the Eighth Army 's defeat . Walker died two days before the Christmas of 1950 , and Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway assumed the command of the US Eighth Army . At the UN , all hopes for a unified Korea were abandoned , and a ceasefire at the 38th parallel was proposed to China on December 11 , 1950 . 
 Having decisively won the battle and once again turned the tide of the war in favor of the Communists , the Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on River represented the peak of the Chinese military 's performance in Korea . However , Mao interpreted the UN ceasefire as a weakness that China should further exploit . Against advice from Peng and other senior military leaders , Mao ordered the PVA to invade South Korea — a mission that was beyond the Chinese military 's abilities while breaking the fragile Chinese supply lines . Recognizing the Chinese difficulties , Ridgway then led the Eighth Army to inflict severe losses on the PVA during the Chinese offensives of 1951 . 
 = Winter War = 
 The Winter War ( Finnish : <unk> , Swedish : <unk> , Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ , tr . <unk> <unk> ) was a military conflict between the Soviet Union and Finland in 1939 – 1940 . It began with the Soviet invasion of Finland on 30 November 1939 ( three months after the outbreak of World War II ) , and ended with the Moscow Peace Treaty on 13 March 1940 . The League of Nations deemed the attack illegal and expelled the Soviet Union from the League on 14 December 1939 . 
 The Soviet Union ostensibly sought to claim parts of Finnish territory , demanding — amongst other concessions — that Finland cede substantial border territories in exchange for land elsewhere , claiming security reasons , primarily the protection of Leningrad , which was only 32 km ( 20 mi ) from the Finnish border . ( Though the border that was " only 32 km ( 20 mi ) " from Leningrad was the end of a narrow finger of coastline about 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) long by 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) wide ; most of the Finnish border was more than 50 km ( 31 mi ) from Leningrad . ) Finland refused and the USSR invaded the country . Many sources conclude that the Soviet Union had intended to conquer all of Finland , and use the establishment of the puppet Finnish Communist government and the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact 's secret protocols as proof of this , while other sources argue against the idea of a full Soviet conquest . 
 The Soviets possessed more than three times as many soldiers as the Finns , thirty times as many aircraft , and a hundred times as many tanks . The Red Army , however , had been crippled by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge of 1937 . With more than 30 @,@ 000 of its officers executed or imprisoned , including most of those of the highest ranks , the Red Army in 1939 had many inexperienced senior and mid @-@ level officers . Because of these factors , and high morale in the Finnish forces , Finland repelled Soviet attacks for several months , much longer than the Soviets expected . 
 However , after reorganization and adoption of different tactics , the renewed Soviet offensive overcame Finnish defenses at the borders . Finland then agreed to cede more territory than originally demanded by the Soviet Union in 1939 ; the Soviets , having conquered the areas they demanded from Finland but at a cost of heavier losses in troops than anticipated , accepted this offer . 
 Hostilities ceased in March 1940 with the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty . Finland ceded territory representing 11 % of its land area and 30 % of its economy to the Soviet Union . Soviet losses were heavy , and the country 's international reputation suffered . While the Soviet Union did not conquer all Finland , Soviet gains exceeded their pre @-@ war demands . They gained substantial territory along Lake Ladoga , providing a buffer for Leningrad , and territory in northern Finland . Finland retained its sovereignty and enhanced its international reputation . 
 The end of the war cancelled the Franco @-@ British plan to send troops to Finland through northern Scandinavia . Some authors would suggest that the official statement by Sweden , Norway and Denmark of February 1940 , declaring they would not allow British troops to use their territories on their way to Finland , was a factor in Finland 's decision of starting peace talks with Russia . One of the major goals of the projected Franco @-@ British operation had been to take control of northern Sweden 's iron ore and cut its deliveries to Germany . For this reason it was also a major factor in the launching of Operation Weserübung , Nazi Germany 's invasion of Denmark and Norway . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Politics of Finland = = = 
 Until the beginning of the 19th century , Finland constituted the eastern part of the Kingdom of Sweden . In 1809 , to protect their imperial capital , Saint Petersburg , the Russians conquered Finland and converted it into an autonomous buffer state within the Russian Empire . The Grand Duchy of Finland enjoyed wide autonomy within the Empire until the end of the 19th century , when Russia began attempts to assimilate Finland as part of a general policy to strengthen the central government and unify the Empire through Russification . While abortive because of Russia 's internal strife , these attempts ruined Russia 's relations with the Finns and increased support for Finnish self @-@ determination movements . 
 The outbreak of the First World War and the collapse of the Russian Empire during the Russian Revolution and Russian Civil War of 1917 – 1920 gave Finland a window of opportunity ; on 6 December 1917 , the Senate of Finland declared the nation 's independence . The new Bolshevik Russian government was weak , and with the threat of civil war looming Soviet Russia recognized the new Finnish government just three weeks after the declaration of independence . Sovereignty was fully achieved in May 1918 after a short civil war and the expulsion of Bolshevik troops . 
 Finland joined the League of Nations in 1920 , from which it sought security guarantees , but Finland 's primary goal was cooperation with the Scandinavian countries . The Finnish and Swedish militaries engaged in wide @-@ ranging cooperation , but were more focused on the exchange of information and defence planning for the Åland islands than on military exercises , or the stockpiling and deployment of materiel . Nevertheless , the government of Sweden carefully avoided committing itself to Finnish foreign policy . Another Finnish military policy was the top secret military cooperation between Finland and Estonia . 
 The 1920s and early 1930s were a politically unstable time in Finland . The Communist Party of Finland was declared illegal in 1931 , and the <unk> Movement organised anti @-@ communist violence , which culminated in a failed uprising in 1932 . Thereafter the ultra @-@ nationalist Patriotic People 's Movement ( IKL ) had a minor presence — at most 14 seats out of 200 in the Finnish parliament . By the late 1930s , the export @-@ oriented Finnish economy was growing and the nation had almost solved its problems with extreme political movements . 
 = = = Soviet – Finnish relations and politics = = = 
 After the Soviet involvement in the Finnish Civil War in 1918 , no formal peace treaty was signed . In 1918 and 1919 , Finnish volunteer forces conducted two unsuccessful military incursions across the Russian border : the <unk> and <unk> expeditions . In 1920 , Finnish communists based in Soviet Russia attempted to assassinate the former Finnish White Guards Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief General <unk> Mannerheim . On 14 October 1920 , Finland and Soviet Russia signed the Treaty of Tartu , confirming the new Finnish – Soviet border as the old border between the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland and Imperial Russia proper . In addition , Finland received Petsamo , with its ice @-@ free harbour on the Arctic Ocean . Despite the signing of the treaty , relations between the two countries remained strained . The Finnish government allowed volunteers to cross the border to support the East Karelian Uprising in 1921 , and Finnish communists in the Soviet Union continued to prepare for a <unk> and staged a cross @-@ border raid into Finland , called the " Pork mutiny " , in 1922 . 
 In 1932 the Soviet Union signed a non @-@ aggression pact with Finland , which was reaffirmed for a ten @-@ year period in 1934 . However , relations between the two countries remained largely de minimis . While foreign trade in Finland was booming , less than 1 % of Finnish trade was with the Soviet Union . In 1934 , the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations . 
 During Joseph Stalin 's rule , Soviet propaganda painted Finland 's leadership as a " vicious and reactionary Fascist clique " . Marshal C. G. E. Mannerheim and Väinö Tanner , the leader of the Finnish Social Democratic Party , were targeted for particular scorn . With Stalin gaining absolute power through the Great Purge of 1938 , the Soviet Union changed its foreign policy toward Finland in the late 1930s . The Soviet Union began pursuing the reconquest of the provinces of Tsarist Russia lost during the chaos of the October Revolution and the Russian Civil War . The Soviet leadership believed that the old empire had ideal security and territorial possessions , and wanted the newly christened city of Leningrad to enjoy a similar security . 
 = = = Negotiations = = = 
 In April 1938 , an NKVD agent , Boris Yartsev contacted the Finnish foreign minister Rudolf Holsti and Prime Minister <unk> <unk> , stating that the Soviet Union did not trust Germany and that war was considered possible between the two countries . The Red Army would not wait passively behind the border but would rather " advance to meet the enemy " . Finnish representatives assured Yartsev that Finland was committed to a policy of neutrality and that the country would resist any armed incursion . Yartsev suggested that Finland cede or lease some islands in the Gulf of Finland along the seaward approaches to Leningrad ; Finland refused . 
 Negotiations continued throughout 1938 without results . Finnish reception of Soviet entreaties was decidedly cool , as the violent collectivisation and purges in Stalin 's Soviet Union resulted in a poor opinion of the country . In addition , most of the Finnish communist elite in the Soviet Union had been executed during the Great Purge , further tarnishing the Soviet Union 's image in Finland . At the same time , Finland was trying to negotiate a military cooperation plan with Sweden , hoping to jointly defend the Åland Islands . 
 The Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact in August 1939 . The pact was nominally a non @-@ aggression treaty , but it included a secret protocol in which the Eastern European countries were divided into spheres of interest . Finland fell into the Soviet sphere . On 1 September 1939 , Germany began its invasion of Poland and two days later Great Britain and France declared war against Germany . Shortly afterwards ( 17 September 1939 ) , the Soviets invaded eastern Poland . The Baltic states were later forced to accept treaties allowing the Soviets to establish military bases and to station troops on their soil . The government of Estonia accepted the ultimatum , signing the corresponding agreement in September . Latvia and Lithuania followed in October . Unlike the Baltic states , Finland started a gradual mobilisation under the guise of " additional refresher training . " 
 The Soviets had already started an intensive mobilisation near the Finnish border in 1938 – 1939 . However , assault troops thought necessary for the invasion did not begin deployment until October 1939 . Operational plans made in September called for the invasion to start in November . 
 [ source needs translation ] 
 [ source needs translation ] 
 = = = War preparations = = = 
 On 5 October 1939 , the Soviet Union invited a Finnish delegation to Moscow for negotiations . J.K. Paasikivi , the Finnish ambassador to Sweden , was sent to Moscow to represent the Finnish government . The Soviets demanded that the border between the USSR and Finland on the Karelian Isthmus be moved westward to a point only 30 km ( 19 mi ) east of Viipuri and that the Finns destroy all existing fortifications on the Karelian Isthmus . They also demanded the cession of islands in the Gulf of Finland as well as the Kalastajansaarento peninsula . Furthermore , the Finns would have to lease the Hanko Peninsula for thirty years and permit the Soviets to establish a military base there . In exchange , the Soviet Union would cede two municipalities with twice the territory demanded from Finland . Accepting Soviet demands would have forced the Finns to dismantle their defences in Finnish Karelia . 
 The Soviet offer divided the Finnish government , but it was eventually rejected . On 31 October , in the assembly of the Supreme Soviet , Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov announced Soviet demands in public . The Finns made two counteroffers whereby Finland would cede the Terijoki area to the Soviet Union , which would double the distance between Leningrad and the Finnish border , far less than the Soviets had demanded , as well as the islands in the Gulf of Finland . From the Soviet point of view the negotiations were finished . 
 = = = Shelling of Mainila = = = 
 On 26 November 1939 , a border incident was reported near the village of Mainila . A Soviet border guard post had been shelled by an unknown party resulting , according to Soviet reports , in the deaths of four and injuries of nine border guards . Research conducted by several Finnish and Russian historians later concluded that the shelling was carried out from the Soviet side of the border by an NKVD unit with the purpose of providing the Soviet Union with a casus belli and a pretext to withdraw from the non @-@ aggression pact . 
 Molotov claimed that it was a Finnish artillery attack and demanded that Finland apologise for the incident and move its forces beyond a line 20 – 25 km ( 12 – 16 mi ) away from the border . Finland denied responsibility for the attack , rejected the demands , and called for a joint Finnish – Soviet commission to examine the incident . The Soviet Union then claimed that the Finnish response was hostile , renounced the non @-@ aggression pact and severed diplomatic relations with Finland on 28 November . In the following years , Soviet historiography described the incident as a Finnish provocation . Doubt on the official Soviet version was cast only in the late 1980s , in the times of glasnost . However , the issue continued to divide Russian historiography even after the collapse of the Soviet Union . 
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said on 14 March 2013 at a meeting with military historians that Stalin launched the war to " correct mistakes " made in drawing the border with Finland after the 1917 Bolshevik revolution . 
 = = = Soviet political and military offensive = = = 
 On 30 November 1939 , Soviet forces invaded Finland with 21 divisions , totaling some 450 @,@ 000 men , and bombed Helsinki . Later the Finnish statesman J. K. Paasikivi commented that the Soviet attack without a declaration of war violated three different non @-@ aggression pacts : the Treaty of Tartu signed in 1920 , the non @-@ aggression pact between Finland and the Soviet Union signed in 1932 and again in 1934 , and also the Covenant of the League of Nations , which the Soviet Union signed in 1934 . C.G.E. Mannerheim was appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Finnish Defence Forces after the Soviet attack . In further reshuffling , the Finnish government named Risto Ryti as the new prime minister and Väinö Tanner as foreign minister . 
 On 1 December 1939 , the Soviet Union formed a puppet government called the Finnish Democratic Republic , which was headed by O. W. Kuusinen . The government was also called " The Terijoki Government , " after the village of Terijoki , which was the first settlement captured by the advancing Soviet army . After the war , the puppet government was disbanded . From the very outset of the war , working @-@ class Finns stood behind the legal government in Helsinki . Finnish national unity against the Soviet invasion was later called the spirit of the Winter War . 
 At the start of the Winter War , Finland brought up the matter of the Soviet invasion before the League of Nations . The League expelled the Soviet Union on 14 December 1939 and exhorted its members to aid Finland . 
 = = Soviet advance to the Mannerheim Line = = 
 = = = Soviet military plan = = = 
 At the beginning of the war , total victory over Finland was expected within a few weeks . The Red Army had just finished the invasion of eastern Poland at a cost of fewer than 1 @,@ 000 casualties , due to Poland having been attacked by Germany from the west just two weeks prior . Stalin 's expectations of a quick Soviet triumph were backed up by the politician Andrei Zhdanov and military strategist Kliment Voroshilov , but other generals had their doubts . The chief of staff of the Red Army , Boris Shaposhnikov , advocated a serious buildup , extensive logistical and fire support preparations , and a rational order of battle , deploying the army 's best units . Zhdanov 's military commander Kirill Meretskov reported at the start of the hostilities : " The terrain of coming operations is split by lakes , rivers , swamps , and is almost entirely covered by forests ... The proper use of our forces will be difficult " . However , these doubts were not reflected in his troop deployments . Meretskov announced publicly that the Finnish campaign would take at the most two weeks . Soviet soldiers had even been warned not to cross the border into Sweden by mistake . 
 Stalin 's purges had devastated the officer corps of the Red Army ; those purged included three of its five marshals , 220 of its 264 division @-@ level commanders or higher , and 36 @,@ 761 officers of all ranks . Fewer than half of the officers remained in total . They were commonly replaced by soldiers who were less competent but more loyal to their superiors . Furthermore , unit commanders were superseded by a political commissar , who ratified military decisions on their political merits , further complicating the Soviet chain of command . This system of dual command destroyed the independence of commanding officers . 
 After the Battles of Khalkhin Gol , the Soviet high command had divided into two factions . One side was represented by Spanish Civil War veterans General Pavel <unk> representing the Red Air Force , Soviet tank expert General Dmitry Pavlov , and Stalin 's favorite general , Marshal Grigory Kulik , chief of artillery . The other side was led by Khalkhin Gol veterans General Georgy Zhukov ( Red Army ) and General G. P. <unk> ( Red Air Force ) . Under this divided command structure , the lessons of the Soviet Union 's " first real war on a massive scale using tanks , artillery , and aircraft " at <unk> went unheeded . As a result , during the Winter War , Russian BT tanks were less successful and it took the Soviet Union three months and over a million men to do what Zhukov did at Khalkhin Gol in ten days . 
 = = = Soviet order of battle = = = 
 Soviet generals were impressed by the success of the German Blitzkrieg tactics . However , the Blitzkrieg had been tailored to central European conditions with a dense , well @-@ mapped network of paved roads . Armies fighting in central Europe had recognised supply and communications centres , which could be easily targeted by armoured vehicle regiments . Finnish army centres , by contrast , were deep inside the country . There were no paved roads , and even gravel or dirt roads were scarce ; most of the terrain consisted of trackless forests and swamps . Waging a Blitzkrieg in Finland was a highly difficult proposition , and the Red Army failed to meet the level of tactical coordination and local initiative required to execute Blitzkrieg tactics in the Finnish theatre . 
 The Soviet forces were positioned as follows : 
 The 7th Army , comprising nine divisions , a tank corps and three tank brigades , was located on the Karelian Isthmus . Its objective was the city of Viipuri . The force was later divided into the Seventh and 13th armies . 
 The 8th Army , comprising six divisions and a tank brigade , was located north of Lake Ladoga . Its mission was to execute a flanking manoeuvre around the northern shore of Lake Ladoga to strike at the rear of the Mannerheim Line . 
 The 9th Army was positioned to strike into central Finland . It was composed of three divisions with one additional division on its way . Its mission was to thrust westward to cut Finland in half . 
 The 14th Army , comprising three divisions , was based in Murmansk . Its objective was to capture the Arctic port of Petsamo and then advance to the town of Rovaniemi . 
 = = = Finnish order of battle = = = 
 The Finnish strategy was dictated by geography . The frontier with the Soviet Union was more than 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) long but was mostly impassable except along a handful of unpaved roads . In pre @-@ war calculations , the Finnish General Staff , which had established its wartime headquarters at <unk> , estimated seven Soviet divisions on the Isthmus and no more than five along the whole border north of Lake Ladoga . In that case , the manpower ratio would favour the attacker by three to one . The true ratio was much higher ; for example , 12 Soviet divisions were deployed to the north of Lake Ladoga . 
 An even greater problem than lack of soldiers was the lack of materiel ; foreign shipments of anti @-@ tank weapons and aircraft were arriving in small quantities . The ammunition situation was alarming , as stockpiles had cartridges , shells , and fuel only to last 19 – 60 days . The ammunition situation was alleviated somewhat because many Finns were armed with Mosin – Nagant rifles dating from the Finnish Civil War and updated infantry weapons capable of <unk> the 7 @.@ 62 × <unk> cartridges used by Soviet forces . Some Finnish soldiers maintained their ammunition supply by looting the bodies of dead Soviet soldiers . The ammunition shortage meant the Finns could seldom afford counterbattery or saturation fire . Finnish tank forces were operationally non @-@ existent . 
 The Finnish forces were positioned as follows : 
 The Army of the Isthmus was composed of six divisions under the command of Hugo <unk> . The II . Army Corps was positioned on its right flank and the III . Army Corps was positioned on its left flank . 
 The IV . Army Corps was located north of Lake Ladoga . It was composed of two divisions under Juho Heiskanen , who was soon replaced by Woldemar <unk> . 
 The North Finland Group was a collection of Civic Guards , border guards , and drafted reservist units under <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 = = = First battles = = = 
 The Mannerheim Line , an array of Finnish defence structures , was located on the Karelian Isthmus about 30 to 75 km ( 19 to 47 mi ) from the Soviet border . The Red Army soldiers on the Isthmus numbered 250 @,@ 000 facing 130 @,@ 000 Finns . The Finnish command deployed a covering force of about 21 @,@ 000 men in the area in front of the Mannerheim Line in order to delay and damage the Red Army before it reached the line . 
 In combat , the biggest cause of confusion among Finnish soldiers were Soviet tanks . The Finns had few anti @-@ tank weapons and insufficient training in modern anti @-@ tank tactics . However , the favoured Soviet armoured tactic was a simple frontal charge , the weaknesses of which could be exploited . The Finns learned that at close range , tanks could be dealt with in many ways ; for example , logs and crowbars jammed into the bogie wheels would often immobilise a tank . Soon , Finns fielded a better ad hoc weapon , the Molotov cocktail . It was a glass bottle filled with flammable liquids , with a simple hand @-@ lit fuse . Molotov cocktails were eventually mass @-@ produced by the Finnish <unk> corporation and bundled with matches with which to light them . Eighty Soviet tanks were destroyed in the border @-@ zone fighting . 
 By 6 December , all the Finnish covering forces had withdrawn to the Mannerheim Line . The Red Army began its first major attack against the Line in Taipale — the area between the shore of Lake Ladoga , the Taipale river and the <unk> waterway . Along the <unk> sector , the Finns had a slight advantage of elevation and dry ground to dig into . The Finnish artillery had scouted the area and made fire plans in advance , anticipating a Soviet assault . The Battle of Taipale began with a forty @-@ hour Soviet artillery preparation . After the barrage , the Soviet infantry attacked across open ground but was repulsed with heavy casualties . From 6 December to 12 December , the Red Army continued trying to engage using only one division . The Red Army next strengthened its artillery and brought tanks and the 10th Rifle Division to the Taipale front . On 14 December , the bolstered Soviet forces launched a new attack but were pushed back again . A third Soviet division entered the fight but performed poorly and panicked under shell fire . The assaults continued without success , and the Red Army suffered heavy losses . One typical Soviet attack during the battle lasted just an hour but left 1 @,@ 000 dead and 27 tanks strewn on the ice . 
 North of Lake Ladoga on the Ladoga Karelia front , the defending Finnish units relied on the terrain . Ladoga Karelia , as a large forest wilderness , did not have road networks for the modern Red Army . However , the Soviet 8th Army had extended a new railroad line to the border , which could double the supply capability on the front . But on 12 December , the advancing Soviet 139th Rifle Division , supported by the 56th Rifle Division , was defeated by a much smaller Finnish force under Paavo <unk> in Tolvajärvi , the first Finnish victory of the war . 
 In central and northern Finland , roads were few and the terrain hostile . The Finns did not expect large @-@ scale Soviet attacks , but the Soviets sent eight divisions , heavily supported by armour and artillery . The 155th Rifle Division attacked at Lieksa , and further north the 44th attacked at <unk> . The 163rd Rifle Division was deployed at Suomussalmi and charged with cutting Finland in half by marching the Raate Road . In Finnish Lapland , the Soviet 88th and 122nd Rifle Divisions attacked at Salla . The Arctic port of Petsamo was attacked by the 104th Mountain Rifle Division by sea and land , supported by naval gunfire . 
 = = Defence of Finland = = 
 = = = Weather conditions = = = 
 The winter of 1939 – 1940 was exceptionally cold . One location on the Karelian Isthmus experienced a record low temperature of − 43 ° C ( − 45 ° F ) on 16 January 1940 . At the beginning of the war , only those Finnish soldiers who were in active service had uniforms and weapons . The rest had to make do with their own clothing , which for many soldiers was their normal winter clothing with semblance of an insignia added . Finnish soldiers were skilled in cross @-@ country skiing . 
 The cold , snow , forest , and long hours of darkness were factors that the Finns could use to their advantage . The Finns dressed in layers , and the ski troopers wore a lightweight white snow cape . This snow @-@ camouflage made the ski troopers almost invisible as the Finns executed guerrilla attacks against Soviet columns . At the beginning of the war , Soviet tanks were painted in standard olive drab and men dressed in regular khaki uniforms . Not until late January 1940 did the Soviets paint their equipment white and issue <unk> to their infantry . 
 Most Soviet soldiers had proper winter clothes , but this was not the case with every unit . In the battle of Suomussalmi , many Soviet soldiers died of frostbite . The Soviet troops also lacked skill in skiing , so soldiers were restricted to movement by road and were forced to move in long columns . Furthermore , the Red Army lacked proper winter tents , and men had to sleep in improvised shelters . Some Soviet units had frostbite casualties as high as 10 % even before crossing the Finnish border . The cold weather did confer one advantage : Soviet tanks were able to move more easily over frozen terrain and bodies of water , rather than being immobilised in swamps and mud . 
 = = = Finnish tactics = = = 
 In battles from Ladoga Karelia all the way north to the Arctic port of Petsamo , the Finns used guerrilla tactics . The Red Army was superior in numbers and materiel , but the Finns used the advantages of speed , tactics , and economy of force . Particularly on the Ladoga Karelia front and during the battle of Raate road , the Finns isolated smaller portions of numerically superior Soviet forces . With Soviet forces divided into smaller pieces , the Finns could deal with them individually and attack from all sides . 
 For many of the encircled Soviet troops in a pocket ( called a motti in Finnish , meaning a bundle of wood ) , just staying alive was an ordeal comparable to combat . The men were freezing and starving and endured poor sanitary conditions . Historian William R. Trotter describes these conditions thus : " The Soviet soldier had no choice . If he refused to fight , he would be shot . If he tried to sneak through the forest , he would freeze to death . And surrender was no option for him ; Soviet propaganda had told him how the Finns would torture prisoners to death . " 
 = = = Defense of the Mannerheim Line = = = 
 The terrain on the Karelian Isthmus did not allow the exercise of guerilla tactics , so the Finns were forced to resort to the more conventional Mannerheim Line , with its flanks protected by large bodies of water . Soviet propaganda claimed that it was as strong as or even stronger than the Maginot Line . Finnish historians , for their part , have belittled the line 's strength , insisting that it was mostly conventional trenches and log @-@ covered dugouts . 
 The Finns had built 221 strong @-@ points along the Karelian Isthmus , mostly in the early 1920s . Many were extended in the late 1930s . Despite these defensive preparations , even the most fortified section of the Mannerheim Line had only one reinforced concrete bunker per kilometre . Overall , the line was weaker than similar lines in mainland Europe . According to the Finns , the real strength of the line were the " stubborn defenders with a lot of <unk> " – a Finnish idiom roughly translated as " guts , fighting spirit . " 
 On the eastern side of the isthmus , the Red Army attempted to break through the Mannerheim Line in the battle of Taipale . On the western side , Soviet units faced the Finnish line at Summa , near the city of Viipuri , on 16 December . The Finns had built 41 reinforced concrete bunkers in the Summa area , making the defensive line in this area stronger than anywhere else on the Karelian Isthmus . However , because of a mistake in planning , the nearby <unk> swamp had a 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) -wide gap in the line . During the first battle of Summa , a number of Soviet tanks broke through the thin line on 19 December , but the Soviets could not benefit from the situation because of insufficient cooperation between branches of service . The Finns remained in their trenches , allowing the Soviet tanks to move freely behind the Finnish line , as the Finns had no proper anti @-@ tank weapons . However , the Finns succeeded in repelling the main Soviet assault . The tanks , stranded behind enemy lines , attacked the strongpoints at random until they were eventually destroyed , 20 in all . By 22 December , the battle ended in a Finnish victory . 
 The Soviet advance was stopped at the Mannerheim Line . Red Army troops suffered from poor morale and a shortage of supplies , eventually refusing to participate in more suicidal frontal attacks . The Finns , led by General Harald <unk> , decided to launch a counterattack and encircle three Soviet divisions into a motti near Viipuri on 23 December . <unk> 's plan was bold , and it failed . The Finns lost 1 @,@ 300 men , and the Soviets were later estimated to have lost a similar number . 
 = = = Battles in Ladoga Karelia = = = 
 The strength of the Red Army north of Lake Ladoga ( in Ladoga Karelia ) surprised the Finnish General Staff . Two Finnish divisions were deployed there : the 12th Division led by Lauri <unk> and the 13th Division led by Hannu <unk> . They also had a support group of three brigades , bringing their total strength to over 30 @,@ 000 . The Soviets deployed a division for almost every road leading west to the Finnish border . The Eighth Army was led by Ivan Khabarov , who was replaced by Grigori <unk> on 13 December . The Soviets ' mission was to destroy the Finnish troops in the area of Ladoga Karelia and advance into the area between <unk> and Joensuu within 10 days . The Soviets had a 3 : 1 advantage in manpower and a 5 : 1 advantage in artillery , as well as air supremacy . 
 Finnish forces panicked and retreated in front of the overwhelming Red Army . The commander of the Finnish IV Army Corps was replaced by Woldemar <unk> on 4 December . On 7 December , in the middle of the Ladoga Karelian front , Finnish units retreated near the small stream of Kollaa . The waterway itself did not offer protection , but alongside there were ridges up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) high . The battle of Kollaa lasted until the end of the war . A memorable quote , " Kollaa holds " ( Finnish : Kollaa <unk> ) became a legendary motto among the Finns . Further contributing to the legend of Kollaa was the sniper Simo <unk> , dubbed " the White Death " by Soviets , who served in the Kollaa front . To the north , the Finns retreated from <unk> to Tolvajärvi on 5 December and then repelled a Soviet offensive in the battle of Tolvajärvi on 11 December . 
 In the south , two Soviet divisions were united on the northern side of the Lake Ladoga coastal road . As before , these divisions were trapped as the more mobile Finnish units were able to counterattack from the north to flank the Soviet columns . On 19 December , the Finns temporarily ceased their assaults , as the soldiers were exhausted . It was not until the period 6 – 16 January 1940 that the Finns went on the offensive again , cutting Soviet division into smaller groups of different @-@ sized mottis . 
 Contrary to Finnish expectations , the encircled Soviet divisions did not try to break through to the east but instead entrenched . They were expecting reinforcements and supplies to arrive by air . As the Finns lacked the necessary heavy artillery equipment and were short of men , they often did not directly attack mottis they had created ; instead , they worked to eliminate only the most dangerous threats . Often the motti tactic was not applied as part of planned doctrine but as a Finnish adaptation to the behaviour of Soviet troops under fire . 
 In spite of the cold and hunger , the Soviet troops did not surrender easily but fought bravely , often entrenching their tanks to be used as pillboxes and building timber dugouts . Some specialist Finnish soldiers were called in to attack the mottis ; the most famous of them was Major Matti <unk> , or " Motti @-@ Matti , " as he became known . 
 In northern Karelia , Soviet forces were outmanoeuvred at <unk> and Lieksa . The Finns used effective guerrilla tactics , taking special advantage of superior skiing skills and snow @-@ white layered clothing and executing many surprise ambushes and raids . By the end of December , the Soviets decided to retreat and transfer resources to more critical fronts . 
 = = = Suomussalmi – Raate double operation = = = 
 The Suomussalmi – Raate was a double operation , which would later be used by military academics as a classic example of what well @-@ led troops and innovative tactics can do against a much larger adversary . Suomussalmi was a small provincial town of 4 @,@ 000 . The area has long lakes , many wild forests and few roads . The Finnish command believed that the Soviets would not attack here , but the Red Army committed two divisions to the area with orders to cross the wilderness , capture the city of Oulu and effectively cut Finland in two . There were two roads leading to Suomussalmi from the frontier : the northern <unk> road and the southern Raate road . 
 The battle of Raate road , which occurred during the month @-@ long battle of Suomussalmi , resulted in one of the largest losses in the Winter War . The Soviet 44th and parts of the 163rd Rifle Divisions , comprising about 14 @,@ 000 troops , were almost completely destroyed by a Finnish ambush as they marched along the forest road . A small unit blocked the Soviet advance while Finnish Colonel Hjalmar <unk> and his 9th Division cut off the retreat route , split the enemy force into smaller fragments , and then proceeded to destroy the remnants in detail as they retreated . The Soviets suffered 7 @,@ 000 – 9 @,@ 000 casualties , while the Finnish units lost only 400 men . In addition , the Finnish troops captured dozens of tanks , artillery pieces , anti @-@ tank guns , hundreds of trucks , almost 2 @,@ 000 horses , thousands of rifles , and much @-@ needed ammunition and medical supplies . 
 = = = Finnish Lapland = = = 
 In Finnish Lapland , the forests gradually thin out until in the north there are no trees at all . Thus , the area offers more room for tank deployment , but it is vastly underpopulated and experiences copious snowfall . The Finns expected nothing more than raiding parties and reconnaissance patrols , but instead the Soviets sent full divisions . On 11 December , the Finns rearranged the defence of Lapland and detached the Lapland Group from the North Finland Group . The group was placed under the command of Kurt <unk> . 
 In southern Lapland , near the tiny rural village of Salla , the Soviet force advanced with two divisions , the 88th and 112th , totalling 35 @,@ 000 men . In the battle of Salla the Soviets advanced easily to Salla , where the road forked . The northern branch moved toward <unk> while the rest pushed on toward Kemijärvi . On 17 December , the Soviet northern group , comprising an infantry regiment , a battalion , and a company of tanks , was outflanked by a Finnish battalion . The 112th retreated , leaving much of its heavy equipment and vehicles behind . Following this success , the Finns shuttled reinforcements down to the defensive line in front of Kemijärvi . The Soviets hammered the defensive line without success . The Finns counterattacked , and the Soviets were pushed back to a new defensive line where they stayed for the rest of the war . 
 To the north was Finland 's only ice @-@ free port in the Arctic , Petsamo . The Finns did not have the manpower to defend it fully as the main front was down the Karelian Isthmus . In the battle of Petsamo , the Soviet 104th division attacked the Finnish 104th Independent Cover Company . The Finns gave up Petsamo easily and concentrated on delaying actions . The area was treeless , windy , and relatively low , offering little defensible terrain . However , during the winter , the Finns in Lapland had the advantage of almost constant darkness and extreme temperatures . The Finns executed guerrilla attacks against Soviet supply lines and patrols . As a result , the Soviet movements were halted by the efforts of one @-@ fifth as many Finns . 
 = = Soviet breakthrough of the Mannerheim Line = = 
 = = = Red Army reforms and offensive preparations = = = 
 Joseph Stalin was not pleased with the results of the first month of the Finnish campaign . The Red Army had been humiliated . By the third week of the war , Soviet propaganda was working hard to explain the failures of the Soviet army to the populace : blaming bad terrain and harsh climate , and falsely claiming that the Mannerheim Line was stronger than the Maginot Line , and that the Americans had sent 1 @,@ 000 of their best pilots to Finland . Chief of Staff Boris Shaposhnikov was given full authority over operations in the Finnish theatre , and he ordered the suspension of frontal assaults in late December . Kliment Voroshilov was replaced with Semyon Timoshenko as the commander of the Soviet forces in the war on 7 January . 
 The main focus of the Soviet attack was switched to the Karelian Isthmus . Timoshenko and Zhdanov reorganised and tightened control between different branches of service in the Red Army . They also changed tactical doctrines to meet the realities of the situation . All Soviet forces on the Karelian Isthmus were divided into two armies : the 7th and the 13th Armies . The 7th Army , now under Kirill Meretskov , would concentrate 75 % of its strength against the 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) stretch of the Mannerheim Line between Taipale and the <unk> swamp . Tactics would be basic : an armoured wedge for the initial breakthrough , followed by the main infantry and vehicle assault force . The Red Army would prepare by pinpointing the Finnish frontline fortifications . The 123rd Assault Division then rehearsed the assault on life @-@ size mockups . The Soviets shipped massive numbers of new tanks and artillery pieces to the theatre . Troops were increased from ten divisions to 25 – 26 divisions , six or seven tank brigades and several independent tank platoons , totalling 600 @,@ 000 men . On 1 February , the Red Army began a massive offensive , firing 300 @,@ 000 shells into the Finnish line in the first 24 hours of the bombardment . 
 = = = Soviet offensive on the Karelian Isthmus = = = 
 Although the Karelian Isthmus front was less active in January than in December , the Soviets began increasing bombardments , wearing down the defenders and softening their fortifications . During daylight hours , the Finns took shelter inside their fortifications from the bombardments and repaired damage during the night . The situation led quickly to war exhaustion among the Finns , who lost over 3 @,@ 000 men in trench warfare . The Soviets also made occasional small infantry assaults with one or two companies . Because of the shortage of ammunition , Finnish artillery emplacements were under orders to fire only against directly threatening ground attacks . On 1 February , the Soviets further escalated their artillery and air bombardments . 
 Although the Soviets refined their tactics and morale improved , the generals were still willing to accept massive losses in order to reach their objectives . Attacks were screened by smoke , heavy artillery , and armour support , but the infantry charged in the open and in dense formations . Unlike their tactics in December , Soviet tanks advanced in smaller numbers . The Finns could not easily eliminate tanks if infantry troops protected them . After 10 days of round @-@ the @-@ clock artillery barrages , the Soviets achieved a breakthrough on the western Karelian Isthmus in the second battle of Summa . 
 On 11 February , the Soviets had about 460 @,@ 000 men , over 3 @,@ 350 artillery pieces , about 3 @,@ 000 tanks and about 1 @,@ 300 aircraft deployed on the Karelian Isthmus . The Red Army was constantly receiving new recruits after the breakthrough . Opposing them the Finns had eight divisions , totalling about 150 @,@ 000 men . One by one , the defenders ' strongholds crumbled under the Soviet attacks and the Finns were forced to retreat . On 15 February , Mannerheim authorised a general retreat of the Second Corps to the Intermediate Line . On the eastern side of the isthmus , the Finns continued to resist Soviet assaults , repelling them in the battle of Taipale . 
 = = = Peace negotiations = = = 
 Although the Finns attempted to re ‑ open negotiations with Moscow by every means during the war , the Soviets did not respond . In early January , Finnish communist Hella <unk> contacted the Finnish government . She offered to contact Moscow through the Soviet Union 's ambassador to Sweden , Alexandra Kollontai . <unk> departed for Stockholm and met Kollontai secretly at a hotel . Soon Molotov decided to extend recognition to the Ryti – Tanner government as the legal government of Finland and put an end to the puppet Terijoki Government of Kuusinen that the Soviets had set up . 
 By mid @-@ February , it became clear that the Finnish forces were rapidly approaching exhaustion . For the Soviets , casualties were high , the situation was a source of political embarrassment to the Soviet regime , and there was a risk of Franco @-@ British intervention . Furthermore , with the spring thaw approaching , the Soviet forces risked becoming bogged down in the forests . The Finnish foreign minister Väinö Tanner arrived in Stockholm on 12 February and negotiated the peace terms with the Soviets through the Swedes . German representatives , not aware that the negotiations were underway , suggested on 17 February that Finland negotiate with the Soviet Union . 
 Both Germany and Sweden were keen to see an end to the Winter War . The Germans feared losing iron ore fields in northern Sweden and threatened to attack at once if the Swedes granted the Allied forces right of passage . The Germans even had a theoretical invasion plan called the <unk> Nord against Scandinavian countries , which later became the full @-@ blown Operation Weserübung . As the Finnish Cabinet hesitated in the face of the harsh Soviet conditions , Sweden 's King Gustav V made a public statement on 19 February in which he confirmed having declined Finnish pleas for support from Swedish troops . On 25 February , the Soviet peace terms were spelled out in detail . On 29 February , the Finnish government accepted the Soviet terms in principle and was willing to enter into negotiations . 
 = = = Last days of war = = = 
 On 5 March , the Red Army advanced 10 to 15 km ( 6 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 3 mi ) past the Mannerheim Line and entered the suburbs of Viipuri . That same day , the Red Army established a beachhead on the western Gulf of Viipuri . The Finns proposed an armistice on that day , but the Soviets , wanting to keep the pressure on the Finnish government , declined the offer the next day . The Finnish peace delegation went to Moscow via Stockholm and arrived on 7 March . The Soviets made further demands as their military position was strong and improving . On 9 March , the Finnish military situation on the Karelian Isthmus was dire as troops were experiencing heavy casualties . In addition , artillery ammunition supplies were exhausted and weapons were wearing out . The Finnish government , noting that the hoped @-@ for Franco @-@ British military expedition would not arrive in time , as Norway and Sweden had not given the Allies right of passage , had little choice but to accept the Soviet terms . The formal peace treaty was signed in Moscow on 12 March . A cease @-@ fire took effect the next day at noon Leningrad time , 11 a.m. Helsinki time . 
 = = Aerial warfare = = 
 = = = Soviet Air Force = = = 
 The Soviet Union enjoyed air superiority throughout the war . The Soviet Air Force , supporting the Red Army 's invasion with about 2 @,@ 500 aircraft ( the most common of which was the Tupolev SB ) was not as effective as the Soviets might have hoped . The material damage by the bomb raids was slight as Finland did not offer many valuable targets for strategic bombing . Very often , targets were small village depots with little value . The country had only a few modern highways in the interior , therefore making railway systems the main targets for bombers . The rail tracks were cut thousands of times , but they were easy to repair and the Finns usually had trains running again in a matter of hours . The Soviet air force learned from its early mistakes , and by late February they instituted more effective tactics . 
 The largest bombing raid against the capital of Finland , Helsinki , occurred on the first day of the war . The capital was bombed only a few times thereafter . All in all , Finland lost only 5 % of total man @-@ hour production time because of Soviet bombings . Nevertheless , Soviet air attacks affected thousands of civilians , killing 957 , as the Soviets recorded 2 @,@ 075 bombing attacks in 516 localities . The city of Viipuri , a major Soviet objective close to the Karelian Isthmus front , was almost levelled by nearly 12 @,@ 000 bombs . No attacks on civilian targets were mentioned in Soviet radio or newspaper reports . In January 1940 , the Pravda continued to stress that no civilian targets in Finland had been struck , even by accident . 
 = = = Finnish Air Force = = = 
 At the beginning of the war , Finland had a very small air force , with only 114 combat planes fit for duty . Missions were very limited , and fighter aircraft were mainly used to repel Soviet bombers . Strategic bombings could also double as opportunities for military reconnaissance . Old @-@ fashioned and few in number , aircraft could not offer support for Finnish ground troops . In spite of losses , the number of planes in the Finnish Air Force had risen by over 50 % by the end of the war . The Finns received shipments of British , French , Italian , Swedish and American aircraft . 
 Finnish fighter pilots would often fly their motley collection of planes into Soviet formations that outnumbered them 10 or even 20 times . Finnish fighters shot down a confirmed 200 Soviet aircraft , losing 62 of their own . In addition , Finnish anti @-@ aircraft guns brought down more than 300 enemy aircraft . Many times , a Finnish forward air base consisted of a frozen lake , a windsock , a telephone set and some tents . Air @-@ raid warnings were given by Finnish women organised by the Lotta Svärd . In addition to combat , it is estimated that the Soviet air force lost about 400 aircraft because of inclement weather , lack of fuel and tools , and during transportation to the front . The Soviet Air Force flew approximately 44 @,@ 000 sorties during the war . 
 = = Naval warfare = = 
 = = = Naval activity = = = 
 Naval activity during the Winter War was low . The Baltic Sea began to freeze over by the end of December , which made the movement of warships very difficult ; by mid @-@ winter , only ice breakers and submarines could still move . The other reason for low naval activity was the nature of Soviet Navy forces in the area . The Baltic Fleet was a coastal defence force which did not have the training , logistical structure , or landing craft to undertake large @-@ scale operations . The Baltic Fleet possessed two battleships , one heavy cruiser , almost 20 destroyers , 50 motor torpedo boats , 52 submarines , and other miscellaneous vessels . The Soviets used naval bases in Paldiski , Tallinn and Liepāja for their operations . 
 The Finnish Navy was a coastal defence force with two coastal defence ships , five submarines , four gunboats , seven motor torpedo boats , one minelayer and six minesweepers . The two coastal defence ships , <unk> and Väinämöinen , were moved to the harbour in Turku where they were used to bolster the air defences . Their anti @-@ aircraft guns shot down one or two planes over the city , and the ships remained there for the rest of the war . In addition to its role in coastal defence , the Finnish Navy protected the Åland islands and Finnish merchant vessels in the Baltic Sea . 
 Soviet aircraft bombed Finnish vessels and harbours and dropped mines into Finnish seaways . Still , the Finnish merchant ship losses were low ; only five ships were lost to Soviet action . World War II , which had started before the Winter War , proved more costly for the Finnish merchant vessels , with 26 lost due to hostile action in 1939 and 1940 . 
 = = = Coastal artillery = = = 
 In addition to its navy , Finland had coastal artillery batteries to defend important harbors and naval bases along its coast . Most batteries were left over from the Imperial Russian period , with 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) guns being the most numerous . However , Finland attempted to modernize its old guns and installed a number of new batteries , the largest of which featured a 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) gun battery originally intended to block the Gulf of Finland to Soviet ships with the help of batteries on the Estonian side . 
 The first naval battle took place on 1 December , near the island of Russarö , 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) south of Hanko . That day , the weather was fair and the visibility excellent . The Finns spotted the Soviet cruiser Kirov and two destroyers . After the ships were at a range of 24 km ( 13 nmi ; 15 mi ) , the Finns opened fire with 234 mm ( 9 @.@ 2 in ) coastal guns . After five minutes of firing by four coastal guns , the cruiser had been damaged by near misses and retreated . The destroyers remained undamaged , but Kirov suffered 17 dead and 30 wounded . The Soviets already knew the locations of the Finnish coastal batteries , but were surprised by their range . 
 The coastal artillery had a greater effect upon the land war by helping to reinforce the defence in conjunction with army artillery . Two sets of fortress artillery made significant contributions to the early battles on the Karelian Isthmus and in Ladoga Karelia . These were located at <unk> on the eastern isthmus and at <unk> on the northeastern shore of Lake Ladoga . The fortress of Koivisto provided similar support from the southwestern coast of the isthmus . Coastal artillery had the ability to fire high @-@ explosive shells of 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) calibre to a range of 25 km ( 13 nmi ; 16 mi ) . 
 = = Propaganda = = 
 On the first day of war Soviet aircraft bombed Helsinki , inflicting substantial damage and casualties . In response to international criticism , Vyacheslav Molotov stated that the Soviet Air Force was not bombing Finnish cities , but rather dropping humanitarian aid to the starving Finnish population . The Finns , who were not starving , soon ironically dubbed the bombs " Molotov 's bread baskets " , and named the improvised incendiary device that they used to counter Soviet tanks the " Molotov cocktail " , as " a drink to go with the food " . 
 = = Foreign support = = 
 = = = Foreign volunteers = = = 
 World opinion largely supported the Finnish cause , and the Soviet aggression was generally deemed unjustified . The World War had not yet directly affected France , the UK or the United States ; the Winter War was the only real fighting in Europe at that time and thus held major world interest . Several foreign organisations sent material aid , and many countries granted credit and military materiel to Finland . Nazi Germany allowed arms to pass through Sweden to Finland , but after a Swedish newspaper made this fact public , Adolf Hitler initiated a policy of silence towards Finland , as part of improved German – Soviet relations following the signing of the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact . 
 Volunteers arrived from various countries . By far the largest foreign contingent came from neighbouring Sweden , which provided nearly 8 @,@ 760 volunteers during the war . The Swedish Volunteer Corps ( Svenska <unk> ) , formed from the Swedes , the Norwegians ( 727 men ) and the Danes ( 1 @,@ 010 men ) , fought on the northern front at Salla during the last weeks of the war . A Swedish unit of Gloster Gladiators , named " the Flight Regiment 19 " ( <unk> 19 , <unk> ; 19 @.@ <unk> , <unk> ) also participated . Swedish AA @-@ batteries with Bofors 40mm @-@ guns were responsible for the air defence of northern Finland and the city of Turku . Volunteers arrived from Estonia , Italy and Hungary . Also , 350 American nationals of Finnish background volunteered , and 210 volunteers of other nationalities made it to Finland before the war ended . Max Manus , a Norwegian , fought in the Winter War before returning to Norway and achieving fame as a resistance fighter against the Nazi occupation of Norway . In total , Finland received 12 @,@ 000 volunteers , 50 of whom died during the war . 
 = = = Franco @-@ British intervention plans = = = 
 France had been one of the earliest supporters of Finland during the Winter War . The French saw an opportunity to weaken Germany 's major ally if the Finns were to attack the Soviet Union . France had other motives as well , because it preferred to have a major war in a remote part of Europe over one on French soil . France planned to re ‑ arm the Polish exile units and transport them to the Finnish Arctic port of Petsamo . Another scheme was to execute a massive air strike with Turkish cooperation against the Caucasus oil fields . 
 The British , for their part , wanted to block the flow of iron ore from Swedish mines to Germany because the Swedes supplied up to 40 % of Germany 's need . The matter was raised by the British Admiral Reginald Plunkett on 18 September 1939 , and the next day Winston Churchill brought up the subject in the Cabinet . On 11 December , Churchill opined that the British should gain a foothold in Scandinavia with the objective of helping the Finns but without a war on the Soviet Union . Because of the heavy German reliance on Swedish iron , Hitler had made it clear to the Swedish government in December that any Allied troops on Swedish soil would immediately provoke a German invasion . 
 On 19 December , French Prime Minister Édouard Daladier introduced his plan to the General Staff and the British War Cabinet . In his plan , Daladier created linkage between the war in Finland and the iron ore in Sweden . There was a danger of Finland 's collapse under Soviet hegemony . In turn , Nazi Germany could occupy both Norway and Sweden . These two dictatorships could divide Scandinavia between them , as they had already done with Poland . The main motivation of the French and the British was to reduce the German war @-@ making ability . 
 The Military Coordination Committee met the next day in London , and two days later the French plan was put forward . The Supreme War Council elected to send notes to Norway and Sweden on 27 December in which they urged the Norwegians and Swedes to help Finland and offer the Allies their support . Norway and Sweden rejected the offer on 5 January 1940 . The Allies then came up with a new plan , in which they would demand that Norway and Sweden give them right of passage by citing the League of Nations resolution as justification . The expedition troops would disembark at the Norwegian port of Narvik and proceed by rail toward Finland , passing through the Swedish ore fields on the way . This demand was sent to Norway and Sweden on 6 January , but it too was rejected six days later . 
 <unk> but not yet dissuaded from the possibility of action , the Allies formulated a new plan on 29 January . First , the Finns would make a formal request for assistance . Then the Allies would ask Norway and Sweden for permission to move the " volunteers " across their territory . Finally , in order to protect the supply line from German actions , the Allies would send additional units ashore at Namsos , Bergen , and Trondheim . The operation would require 100 @,@ 000 British and 35 @,@ 000 French soldiers with naval and air support . The supply convoys would sail on 12 March and the landings would begin on 20 March . 
 = = Peace of Moscow = = 
 The Moscow Peace Treaty was signed on 12 March 1940 and went into effect the following day . Finland ceded a portion of Karelia — the entire Karelian Isthmus as well as a large swath of land north of Lake Ladoga . The area included Finland 's second largest city of Viipuri , much of Finland 's industrialised territory , and significant parts still held by Finland 's army — all in all , 11 % of the territory and 30 % of the economic assets of pre @-@ war Finland . Twelve percent of Finland 's population , some 422 @,@ 000 Karelians , were evacuated and lost their homes . 
 Finland also had to cede a part of the region of Salla , the Kalastajansaarento peninsula in the Barents Sea , and four islands in the Gulf of Finland . The Hanko Peninsula was leased to the Soviet Union as a military base for 30 years . The region of Petsamo , captured by the Red Army during the war , was returned to Finland according to the treaty . 
 Finnish concessions and territorial losses exceeded those demanded by the Soviets pre @-@ war . Before the war , the Soviet Union demanded that the frontier between the USSR and Finland on the Karelian Isthmus be moved westward to a point only 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) east of Viipuri , Finland 's second @-@ largest city , to the line between Koivisto and <unk> . In addition , the Finns would have to destroy all existing fortifications on the Karelian Isthmus . Finland should also cede to the Soviet Union the islands of Suursaari , <unk> , and Koivisto in the Gulf of Finland . In the north , the Soviets demanded the Kalastajansaarento peninsula . Furthermore , the Finns should lease the Hanko Peninsula to the Soviets for thirty years , and permit the Soviets to establish a military base there . In exchange the Soviet Union would cede Repola and Porajärvi from Eastern Karelia , an area twice as large as the territories demanded from the Finns . 
 In addition to obtaining all of their pre @-@ war demands , the Soviets acquired the entire Karelian Isthmus as well as a large swath of land north of Lake Ladoga . The Soviets also obtained part of the Salla region , while retaining possession of Repola and Porajärvi . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Finnish views = = = 
 The 105 @-@ day war had a profound and depressing effect in Finland . Meaningful international support was minimal and arrived late , and the German blockade had prevented most armament shipments . The 15 @-@ month period between the Winter War and the Continuation War was later called the Interim Peace . 
 After the end of the war , the situation of the Finnish army on the Karelian Isthmus had been the subject of debate in Finland . Orders were already issued to prepare a retreat to the next line of defence in the Taipale sector . Estimates of how long the Red Army could have been held in these kinds of retreat @-@ and @-@ stand operations varied from a few days to a few weeks , or to a couple of months at most . 
 The Karelian evacuees established an interest group <unk> <unk> . The group was to defend Karelian rights and interests and to find a way to return ceded regions of Karelia to Finland . 
 = = = Soviet views = = = 
 During the period between the war and the perestroika in the late 1980s , Soviet historiography leaned solely on Vyacheslav Molotov 's speeches on the Winter War . In his radio speech of 29 November 1939 , Molotov argued that the Soviet Union had tried to negotiate guarantees of security for Leningrad for two months . However , the Finns had taken a hostile stance to " please foreign imperialists " . Finland had undertaken military provocation , and the Soviet Union could no longer hold to non @-@ aggression pacts . According to Molotov , the Soviet Union did not want to occupy or annex Finland ; the goal was purely to secure Leningrad . 
 Another source later used widely in Soviet historiography was Molotov 's speech in front of the Supreme Soviet on 29 March 1940 , in which he blamed Western countries for starting the war and argued that they had used Finland as a proxy to fight the Soviet Union . The Western Allies had furthermore tried to take neutral Sweden and Norway along with them . Thus , the " masterminds " behind the war were the UK and France , but also Sweden , the United States , and Italy , who had issued massive amounts of materiel , money , and men to Finland . According to Molotov , the Soviet Union was merciful in peace terms , as the problem of Leningrad security had been solved . 
 = = = Military consequences = = = 
 The Supreme Military Soviet command met in April 1940 , reviewed the lessons of the Finnish campaign , and recommended reforms . The role of frontline political commissars was reduced and old @-@ fashioned ranks and forms of discipline were reintroduced . Clothing , equipment , and tactics for winter operations were improved . However , not all of these reforms had been completed when the Germans began Operation Barbarossa 15 months later . 
 The same year , Finland and Sweden negotiated a military alliance , but the negotiations ended once it became clear that both Germany and the Soviet Union opposed such an alliance . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 The Winter War was a political success for the Germans . Both the Red Army and the League of Nations were humiliated , and the Allied Supreme War Council had been revealed to be chaotic and powerless . However , the German policy of neutrality was not popular in the homeland , and relations with Italy had suffered badly . After the Peace of Moscow , Germany did not hesitate to move to improve ties with Finland , and within two weeks Finno @-@ German relations were at the top of the agenda . 
 Perhaps more importantly , the very poor performance of the Red Army encouraged Hitler to think that an attack on the Soviet Union would be successful . 
 During the Interim Peace , Finland established close ties with Germany in hopes of a chance to reclaim areas ceded to the Soviet Union . Three days after the beginning of Operation Barbarossa , the Continuation War began . 
 = = = Western Allies = = = 
 The Winter War put in question the organisation and effectiveness of the Red Army as well as the Western Allies . The Supreme War Council was unable to formulate a workable plan , revealing its total unsuitability to make effective war in either Britain or France . This failure led to the collapse of the Daladier government in France . 
 = = = In Finnish and Russian = = = 
 = April 6 – 8 , 2006 tornado outbreak = 
 The April 6 – 8 , 2006 , tornado outbreak was a major tornado outbreak in the central and parts of the southern United States that began on April 6 , 2006 , in the Great Plains and continued until April 8 in South Carolina , with most of the activity on April 7 . The hardest @-@ hit area was Middle Tennessee where several strong tornadoes devastated entire neighborhoods and left ten people dead . The worst damage took place in Gallatin , Tennessee . Other communities north of Nashville were also hard hit . 
 There were 73 tornadoes confirmed across 13 states , with the bulk of them coming on the afternoon and evening of April 7 across the South , particularly in Tennessee . In total , 10 deaths were reported as a result of the tornadoes , and over $ 650 million in damage was reported , of which over $ 630 million was in Middle Tennessee . It was the third major outbreak of 2006 , occurring just days after another major outbreak on April 2 . It was also considered to be the worst disaster event in Middle Tennessee since the Nashville Tornadoes of 1998 on April 16 , 1998 . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 The outbreak took place as a result of a powerful low pressure system over the Midwest that produced a powerful cold front that tracked eastward across the South , which combined with warm , humid air from the Gulf of Mexico to allow severe thunderstorms to form , particularly on April 7 . 
 The Storm Prediction Center issued a high risk for severe weather for both April 6 and 7 in the areas likely to be affected . Conditions were favorable for an extremely strong tornado outbreak on both days . 
 Activity was not as great as expected on April 6 , with only 13 tornadoes confirmed , mostly in Kansas . Several of the tornadoes were damaging , but no fatalities and only a few injuries were reported . The reason for the relatively modest activity was due to the more stable than expected air mass that day over the region , with lower <unk> and less wind shear despite the absence of a cap which would have otherwise allowed a massive outbreak . , 
 Things changed the next day in the South as the system moved eastward , with the cold front entering a more conducive environment . The increased wind shear , combined with the high heat and humidity , allowed tornadoes to begin forming in the late morning and continued throughout the afternoon , evening and even into the overnight hours . By the end of the day , a total of 48 tornadoes developed . Several of them caused significant damage , and even loss of life . The worst tornadoes hit Middle Tennessee , where 12 people were killed . In addition to the tornadoes , there have been many reports of hail as large as softballs and reports of powerful microbursts and straight @-@ line winds , as well as local flooding . Extensive damage was also reported in the northern suburbs of Atlanta , Georgia as the storms reached that area overnight into the early morning of April 8 . 
 Despite a lower risk of activity on April 8 , the severe weather continued in Alabama , South Carolina and Georgia ( mostly in the early morning hours ) with another 13 tornadoes reported before the outbreak finally ended as the system moved offshore into the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Over the three @-@ day period , 73 tornadoes were confirmed . The high number of overall tornadoes is exaggerated , however , by the fact that most were weak F0 or F1 tornadoes . 
 = = Confirmed tornadoes = = 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 On the night after the tornado hit Gallatin , there were many reports of looting in the devastated community . A nightly curfew was required to combat the looting and maintain order in the community . There were a total of 23 arrests made . The United States National Guard was called in after the tornado hit to help with security and the removal of the excessive debris . It would take 10 days for Volunteer State Community College to re @-@ open after the tornado hit . 
 The City of Hendersonville did not have tornado sirens at the time of the tornado , but the city installed some soon after the storm . 
 On September 26 , the Greater Nashville Regional Council awarded the authorities involved in the recovery ( including the municipalities of Sumner County ) the Marshall S. Stuart Memorial Award for outstanding intergovernmental cooperation after the tornado . The quick response by other local authorities , counties and cities was congratulated . 
 In early October , an episode of Extreme Makeover : Home Edition featured a family from Hendersonville that had their home being rebuilt after it was destroyed by the tornado . However , insurance issues plus personal injuries held back the recovery for many , and some neighborhoods have been slow to recover . Nonetheless , many homes have been rebuilt in the area . 
 = = = Images = = = 
 = Suillus sibiricus = 
 Suillus sibiricus is a fungus of the genus Suillus in the Suillaceae family . It is found in mountains of Europe , North America and Siberia , strictly associated with several species of pine tree . Due to its specific habitat and rarity in Europe , it has been selected for inclusion in several regional Red Lists . Its fruit bodies are characterised by having slimy caps in wet weather , which can reach diameters of up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . On the underside of the cap are yellow angular pores that bruise a pinkish to cinnamon colour . The stem is up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) tall and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) wide and typically has a ring , a remnant of the partial veil that covers the fruit body in its early development . In North America , it is commonly called the Siberian slippery jack . Phylogenetic analysis has shown that S. sibiricus is closely related to S. umbonatus and S. americanus , and may in fact be conspecific with the latter species . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and phylogeny = = 
 The species was first described scientifically under the name Ixocomus sibiricus by American mycologist Rolf Singer in 1938 , based on material that was collected under Pinus <unk> var. sibirica in the Altai Mountains of central Asia . In 1945 , he transferred it to Suillus . Alexander H. Smith called the species Boletus sibiricus in 1949 , but this is today considered a synonym . Singer named the subspecies S. sibiricus subsp. helveticus in 1951 , based on material collected by Jules Favre from Switzerland in 1945 . Roy Watling later considered this a nomen nudum — not published with an adequate description , and therefore failing to qualify as a formal scientific name . 
 According to Singer 's 1986 arrangement , S. sibiricus is classified in the subsection Latiporini of section Suillus in the genus Suillus . Section Suillus includes species with glandular dots on the stem , and a partial veil which becomes appendiculate on the cap edge . Characteristics of species in subsection Latiporini include cinnamon @-@ coloured spore prints without an olive tinge , and wide pores on the underside of the cap ( wider than 1 mm when mature ) . Other species in the subsection include S. flavidus , S. umbonatus , S. <unk> , and S. americanus . 
 A phylogenetic analysis of various eastern Asian and eastern North American disjunct Suillus species revealed that S. sibiricus forms a well @-@ supported clade with S. americanus and S. umbonatus ; these relationships are corroborated by a previous analysis ( 1996 ) , which used a larger sampling of Suillus species to determine taxonomic relationships in the genus . Within this clade , S. umbonatus and U.S. S. sibiricus can be separated from the rest of the group . However , the phylogenetic relationships among the tested isolates determined from different methods of analysis are not always consistent and could not be established with confidence . In general , there is little phylogenetic divergence detected in this clade . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body of Suillus sibiricus is a medium @-@ sized bolete . The cap is at first hemispherical and straw yellow , but expands with maturity and finally flattens out becoming darker with reddish brown spots or fibrils . The cap diameter is up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap cuticle is mucilaginous especially when moist and can be peeled off . A partial veil extends from the stem to the cap periphery in immature specimens . In mature specimens , it is obliterated leaving a <unk> ring around the stem and fragments hanging from the cap periphery . The tubes are initially yellow but become brown , adnate or slightly decurrent . The pores are angular , wider than 1 mm in diameter and the same colour as the tubes but stain dirty pink or vinaceous when bruised . The tubes that make up the pores are 7 to 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) long . <unk> can be present and these leave dark brown spots after drying out . 
 The stem is cylindrical , up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) tall and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) wide . It is yellow , becoming pink to red towards the base and covered throughout with granules which become darker as the fruit body matures . The partial veil , and later ring , is cottony , off @-@ white and attached to the top third stem . Because the ring is <unk> ( short @-@ lived ) it is not always present ; it is thought that fruit bodies that develop in dry conditions are less likely to have a ring . The flesh is pale yellow and stains red @-@ brown when bruised . At first firm , with maturity it becomes increasingly soft . The spore deposit is coloured brown . The spores are ellipsoid , sized 9 – 12 by 3 @.@ 8 – 4 @.@ 5 μm , thin @-@ walled , and smooth when seen through a microscope . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 22 – 34 by 5 – 8 μm . The flesh reddens and then blackens when potassium hydroxide solution is applied . With iron ( II ) sulphate solution , the flesh slowly discolours to grey . 
 Suillus sibiricus is reportedly edible , but it is without any commercial or culinary value . It is one of over 200 species of mushrooms frequently collected for consumption in Nepal . Its taste has been described variously by authors as sour ( Europe ) and not distinctive or slightly bitter ( North America ) . Its odour is not distinctive . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 In North America , Suillus americanus has a similar appearance , but a more easterly distribution . It is associated with eastern white pine . Although some authors have tried to distinguish between the two with by using width of the stem , or by differences in fruit body colouration , it is acknowledged that these characteristics are variable , and depend on environmental factors . The phylogenetic analysis of Wu and colleagues ( 2000 ) suggests that the two taxa may be the same , although more samples from different geographical areas will be needed to verify this . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Suillus sibiricus has been recorded in parts of Europe , North America and Siberia . The fungus forms strict ectomycorrhizal associations with pines of the subgenus <unk> . These include Swiss pine ( Pinus <unk> ) in the Alps and Tatras of central Europe , Macedonian pine ( P. <unk> ) in the Balkans , western white pine ( P. monticola ) and limber pine ( P. flexilis ) in the Pacific Northwest of North America , P. banksiana in Quebec , Canada , and Siberian pine ( P. sibirica ) and Siberian dwarf pine ( P. pumila ) in Siberia and the Russian Far East . The range of the fungus is hence limited by the distribution of the host tree . S. sibiricus has also been shown to be able to form ectomycorrhizae with the Himalayan species P. <unk> in pure culture conditions in the laboratory . 
 The fungus is rare in Europe and its distribution typically corresponds with high elevations at or near the alpine tree line . It is found in at least 11 countries , and has been included in the Red List of 8 countries . It is considered critically endangered in the Czech Republic . The European Council for Conservation of Fungi ( <unk> ) has suggested Suillus sibiricus be listed in Appendix II of the Bern Convention . Factors that threaten the habitat of S. sibiricus include deforestation and construction of skiing pistes and other infrastructure for winter sports . 
 The fungus fruits in summer and autumn in Europe , and in western North America where it often occurs abundantly . The North American distribution extends south to Nuevo Leon , Mexico . 
 = Marilena from P7 = 
 Marilena from P7 ( Romanian : Marilena de la P7 ) is a medium @-@ length Romanian film , directed by Cristian Nemescu . First released in 2006 , it was also nominated the same year for the Semaine de la critique section of the 59th Cannes Film Festival . 
 Being Cristian Nemescu 's last completed project , the film stars Mădălina Ghiţescu as Marilena and Gabriel Huian as Andrei . Originally , the film was intended to be used as an exercise , and was not supposed to be longer than seven minutes . In the end , the project evolved to an unusual length of 45 minutes ; the film 's approach also turned from comedy to teenage love . Reception from the public was favorable – it impressed through its unitary view and the way the screenplay , picture and sound combine together into a new and organic way , by using innovative , unusual techniques . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a suburb of Bucharest , a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy , Andrei ( Gabriel Huian ) , together with some of his friends , watches the prostitutes ' show every night from a rooftop and how they are being taken by drivers . The boy falls in love with one of the girls , called Marilena ( Mădălina Ghiţescu ) , and finds out that he needs a decent sum of money in order to approach her . Thus , he steals his father 's ( Gabriel <unk> ) salary and goes to the prostitutes ' meeting place . Marilena 's pimp ( Andi Vasluianu ) is also present , and only agrees to send Marilena and another prostitute with the boy to a nearby pub , where the Rom Elvis is singing ( played by the singer Elvis Romano , who translated Elvis Presley 's lyrics into his own language ) . The prostitutes play with Andrei , telling him that he needs a car in order to date them , then they leave . The boy asks Marilena for her phone number , and she writes something in his hand . 
 Andrei sends a dedication for " Marilena from P7 " , to the local radio station . The prostitute is in an old man 's house , listening to the radio , and the song is Are You Lonesome Tonight ? , sung by Elvis Presley . 
 Among her clients , Marilena falls in love with a man , nicknamed Giani ( Cătălin <unk> ) . One night , however , she spots Giani in his car in front of a store , accompanied by another woman , and becomes very discouraged . 
 Andrei finds a way to get hold of a car and plans to steal his father 's trolleybus . He manages to do so , together with his friends . His father sees him and starts following the boys with another driver , his colleague . Arriving at the prostitutes ' meeting place , the boys cannot find Marilena . Andrei recognizes Giani 's car parked in front of block P7 , so he goes in . 
 Marilena and Giani were in fact in her apartment ; the girl goes to the restroom for a minute . Andrei manages to sneak into the apartment , and watches how , while still talking to Giani , Marilena cuts her jugular vein . After realizing what had happened , Giani becomes frightened and runs away ; the pimp sees him leaving in a rush , so he goes to the apartment to see what happened . Meanwhile , Andrei goes into the room and looks down at Marilena who is lying down , with blood spilled over her . The news about Marilena 's suicide spread fast around the neighborhood . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Lead roles = = = 
 Marilena is played by the Romanian actress Mădălina Ghiţescu ( born July 29 , 1978 ) , became known to the Bucharest public for the roles she played at the Casandra Theater Studio ( Romanian : <unk> de <unk> " Casandra " ) and The Very Small Theater ( Romanian : <unk> <unk> Mic ) . 
 Andrei was played by Gabriel Huian ( untrained actor , previously appearing in a video clip that caught the director 's attention ) . He was Cristian Nemescu 's preferred choice from the beginning , however a rigorous casting still took place . Apparently attracted to Mădălina Ghiţescu , Huian showed a different attitude than that of other candidates , which only convinced the director further . 
 = = = Other roles = = = 
 Mihai , Andrei 's brother played by Cristi <unk> 
 Andrei 's mother played by Aura <unk> 
 Andrei 's father played by Gabriel <unk> 
 The pimp played <unk> Vasluianu 
 Giani played by Cătălin <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = From project to production = = = 
 The film 's idea resulted from a small scale exercise between Nemescu and Liviu <unk> when they were in university in 2003 . The original idea belonged to Cătălin <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; the only part of the original story that was kept is that of a group of boys trying to steal a trolleybus in order to get to some prostitutes . 
 Initially the film was planned as a short fiction , the project evolving during 2005 . At the time , Nemescu also had planned what would later become the feature film California Dreamin ' , impossible to film at that moment , deciding that Marilena from P7 could prove a useful exercise for both director and actors . Thus the screenplay was rewritten and filming started with a very reduced budget of only US $ 14 @,@ 000 , which was collected by Nemescu by participating at various film festivals , with older short fictions . During development , however , the film received new funds , though still modest ones , thus the actors and a part of the team accepted to work for free . 
 Filming also took place in 2005 , near the marketplace of the Bucharest neighborhood Rahova . The chosen area raised a few difficulties related to safety . However , the production benefited from its picturesque view , rendering the scenography and the original music unnecessary . The omnipresent <unk> also found their way into the movie , as background music . 
 In order for the story to go as it should , we needed a ' low @-@ income ' area . At the same time , the place also needed to be visually pleasant , and to meet our needs from the technical point of view – meaning it should be large enough for a trolleybus to fit in , and it should also look plausible . For almost a full week we looked around the whole Bucharest . Being in Rahova , we arrived in a place where there were some blocks painted by Mayor Marian <unk> , and behind those there was a ghetto – yes , that 's the term – but it was a very picturesque place , which was good for what we wanted . 
 For a long period of time the project was entitled Trolley Blues ; Cristian Nemescu gave up this title , worrying that there might be a large discrepancy between the equivocal name and the actual , very direct content of the movie . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The entire filmmaking process was much more complex than that of most Romanian movies made after 1948 . The picture stands out through the use of various effects , such as split @-@ screen , and the use of hand @-@ held filming . 
 The film 's music and sound was also thoroughly post @-@ processed by the project 's sound designer , Andrei Toncu , to improve the quality of the recordings , because the budget did not allow for complex equipment to be used , and for creative interest . The movie 's background music has reduced volume , following the emotional evolution of the characters — Toncu combining the background music ( recorded with , or without intention ) and a series of effects characteristic to electronic music and musique concrète . However , a few distinct moments can be observed in the film 's music , either composed by Andrei Toncu ( Andrei imagining stealing the trolleybus ) , or already existing recordings , edited so that they would integrate into the movie 's atmosphere ( Elvis Presley 's dedication is dynamically equalized to suggest the shift from one radio to another ) . Another scene in which multiple layers of sound were used was the radio show heard in Giani 's car about the breeding of <unk> brassicae butterflies . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Public reception = = = 
 Marilena from P7 participated at the 59th Cannes Film Festival , along with two other Romanian films ( Cătălin <unk> 's The Way I Spent the End of the World and Corneliu <unk> 's 12 : 08 East of Bucharest ) and was nominated for the Semaine de la critique section of the French festival . 
 Very well received by the different categories of the public , from critics to publishers , and simple spectators , Corneliu <unk> 's film ' 12 : 08 East of Bucharest ' [ ... ] Just as well was received , especially by young people , Cristian Nemescu 's movie , ' Marilena from P7 ' ( a melancholic ghetto tragedy , with a stolen trolleybus ... for reaching the girl 's heart , who is a gentle and honest mistress , the story of initiation and the price to pay for wanting to find out faster , what comes with age ) . 
 Cristian Nemescu 's ' Marilena from P7 ' is a medium @-@ length film , which at Cannes was viewed by a hall full of people , and which was intensely applauded . It was also said that it is movie without mistake . A shocking story about a ghetto from the outskirts of Bucharest ( where , for example , an old man , scourged by life , slick and misogynist , plants his little garden on the rooftop of a block ) , with a kid that would do anything - steal his parents ' whole salary or even a trolleybus , for his beloved - and a lively prostitute from P7 . Children actors with an ingenuous talent , and dialogs that fit together perfectly and sound natural , a splendid picture , a big hearted pimp played by Andi Vasluianu , all in one a portion of highest quality cinematography . 
 The Romanian premiere took place on June 4 , 2006 at the Transylvania International Film Festival , in Cluj @-@ Napoca . In Bucharest , a first display of the movie was organized on September 8 , 2006 , in a square established for this purpose on Calea <unk> Street . The public , as well as the critics from the country , received the movie very well , but the difficulty caused by the movie 's unusual duration only allowed for the movie to be on display on a few other occasions . The same problem was encountered when the movie was sent to film festivals outside Romania , being either rejected due to the impossibly of being included in any of the standard categories or included as a short fiction ( for example , at Brooklyn ) . 
 In the summer of 2006 , Nemescu also started the production of California Dreamin ' . The filming took place in the June – August interval . By the end of August , the film was nearing its completion ; on August 24 , 2006 , however , Nemescu and Andrei Toncu ( sound engineer for the new project as well ) died in a car accident in Bucharest . Following the accident , the Romanian public , as well as those from abroad , offered wider attention to the productions of the two <unk> , including Marilena from P7 , their first notable success . One year after the accident , the event was commemorated in the country through various displays , public meetings and debates . On August 24 , 2007 , Marilena from P7 had its premiere at Stockholm during the second Romanian Film Days . Romanian people , from the diaspora , as well as Swedish spectators , were present . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Marilena from P7 was seen by journalists as an attempt to attract attention to various social phenomena ( prostitution , the living conditions in low @-@ income Bucharest neighborhoods , etc . ) , and being presented as a documentary in some scenes . In reality , Nemescu wanted for the public to concentrate on the love story of Andrei : 
 All the scripts I get involved with have an essential story , and give birth to emotions that reach a lot of people 's hearts . So , in this case , the thing that motivated me was the subject itself , the thoughts and emotions of a 13 year old kid who falls in love . I never had any interest to describe a social reality - like prostitution , for example - and the screenplay does not concentrate at all at ' scanning ' the problems of our society . The new , innovating element consists of the child 's emotions , what he feels and the human relations between the two characters . The reality of Romania is there only for decorative purposes , and I am against people struggling to present the ' Romanian dirt ' through movies . 
 I have had roles as a prostitute before . For example , the role I had to play for my graduation exam was from the play ' My Name is <unk> . I Am a Lioness ' , directed by <unk> <unk> , where it was about a prostitute murdering her client . The characters should not be looked at , at a global level , thinking ' They 're just prostitutes , what 's the big deal ? They 're all the same ' . No , first of all they 're humans , and they have a soul . This also is the case of Marilena : if you were to popularize the subject , who is she ? A prostitute and just . But the important thing is who she truly is : how she thinks , what her feelings are . [ ... ] She is a very sensible person , just that the environment in which she lives in stops her from showing this side of her , and hide the fact that she is in love with a certain client . The unusual thing about her is that , despite of the life she has , she trusts people . 
 Marilena from P7 also attracted the critics ' attention due to its use of explicit verbal and visual content . Cristian Nemescu said that this kind of scenes were a necessarily element for the realism of the movie , declaring himself a partisan of explicit content . 
 The film continues to be appreciated for its experimental nature , its camera angles and montage elements being treated in an unusual manner , while the fiction elements of the screenplay hint of magic realism . In this sense , it is important to mention that the days in the film are separated by Andrei 's erotic dreams . In his dreams , the differences between him and Marilena are partially removed , either by lowering the rooftop on which the boy stands to ground level or by debarking the girl from a breast @-@ shaped UFO that scares the neighbors away . Another fictional element is Marilena 's capacity of provoking short circuits , in moments in which she is very emotionally active ( e.g. , when Andrei touches her in the bar 's restroom , or when the whole neighborhood is cut from electricity when she cries near the high voltage electrical box ) . 
 Visually , this is how I thought this moment should have been , the split @-@ screen being mentioned in the script . I felt the need to see everyone at the same time . If they were each at a time , it would not have had the same impact . It was a lot funnier to see all the bitches at the same time , and all the kids ( masturbating ) simultaneously , I like this moment . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 The following list includes the most notable nominations and awards the film received . 
 = Blue iguana = 
 The blue iguana ( Cyclura lewisi ) , also known as the Grand Cayman iguana , Grand Cayman blue iguana or Cayman Island blue iguana , is an endangered species of lizard endemic to the island of Grand Cayman . Previously listed as a subspecies of the Cuban iguana ( Cyclura nubila ) , it was reclassified as a separate species in 2004 because of genetic differences discovered four years earlier . The blue iguana is one of the longest @-@ living species of lizard ( possibly up to 69 years ) . The record is 67 years . 
 The preferred habitat for the blue iguana is rocky , sunlit , open areas in dry forests or near the shore , as the females must dig holes in the sand to lay eggs in June and July . A possible second clutch is laid in September . The blue iguana 's herbivorous diet includes plants , fruits , and flowers . Its coloration is tan to gray with a bluish cast that is more pronounced during the breeding season and more so in males . It is large and heavy @-@ bodied with a dorsal crest of short spines running from the base of the neck to the end of the tail . 
 The fossil record indicates that the blue iguana was abundant before European colonization ; but fewer than 15 animals remained in the wild by 2003 , and this wild population was predicted to become extinct within the first decade of the 21st century . The species ' decline is mainly being driven by predation by feral pets ( cats and dogs ) and indirectly by the destruction of their natural habitat as fruit farms are converted to pasture for cattle grazing . Since 2004 , hundreds of captive @-@ bred animals have been released into a preserve on Grand Cayman run by a partnership headed by the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , in an attempt to save the species . At least five non @-@ profit organizations are working with the government of the Cayman Islands to ensure the survival of the blue iguana . According to the November 9 , 2013 episode of Ocean Mysteries with Jeff Corwin , the conservancy program has released over 700 captive bred Grand Cayman blue iguanas since the 2004 nadir of only 12 remaining animals . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The blue iguana ( Cyclura lewisi ) is endemic to the island of Grand Cayman . The Lesser Caymans iguana has been introduced to Grand Cayman , where it has interbred with that island 's native blue iguana . 
 Its generic name ( Cyclura ) is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( κύκλος ) meaning " circular " and <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " tail " , after the thick @-@ ringed tail characteristic of all Cyclura . Its specific name ( lewisi ) is a Latinized form of the name of the scientist who collected the holotype of this species , Bernard C. Lewis . 
 Its closest relatives are the Cuban iguana ( Cyclura nubila ) and the Northern Bahamian rock iguana ( Cyclura <unk> ) , the three species having diverged from a common ancestor some three million years ago . The species has a low genetic diversity but does not seem to suffer the same lack of vitality that afflicts other such species of rock iguana . One theory is that the species evolved from a single female Cuban iguana ( C. nubila nubila ) with eggs inside her who drifted across the sea , perhaps during a storm . It is distinct from the subspecies found on Little Cayman and Cayman Brac known as C. nubila caymanensis , although it can breed with this subspecies and produce fertile offspring . 
 In 1938 , Bernard C. Lewis of the Institute of Jamaica joined an Oxford University biological expedition to the Cayman Islands . Lewis was able to obtain two blue iguanas , a male and a female , which were later lodged with the British Museum of Natural History . Chapman Grant , in a monograph published in 1940 , formally described the blue iguana for the first time as Cyclura <unk> lewisi . Schwartz and Carey established the trinomial ( Cyclura nubila lewisi ) in 1977 . They held that the blue iguana was a strongly distinct subspecies of the Cuban iguana ( C. nubila ) , the species which it evolved from and can breed with . They emphasized its overall bright blue coloration , and noted that further study could reveal it to be a distinct species . Frederick Burton reclassified the blue iguana as a distinct species in 2004 , after years of research comparing scale counts on the heads of Caribbean iguanas , including those found on Little Cayman , Cayman Brac , Cuba , and the Bahamas , as well as mitochondrial DNA analysis performed by Dr. Catherine Malone , to re @-@ examine the phylogeography of the different species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The blue iguana is the largest native land animal on Grand Cayman with a total nose @-@ to @-@ tail length of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and weighing as much as 30 lb ( 14 kg ) . It may be the heaviest species of iguana and most massive lizard in the Western Hemisphere . Its body length is 20 – 30 inches ( 51 – 76 cm ) with a tail equal in length . The blue iguana 's toes are articulated to be efficient in digging and climbing trees . Although not known to be arboreal , the blue iguana has been observed climbing trees 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) and higher . The male is larger than the female by one third of his body size . The mature male 's skin color ranges from dark grey to turquoise blue , whereas the female is more olive green to pale blue . Young animals tend to be uniformly dark brown or green with faint darker banding . When they first emerge from the nest the neonates have an intricate pattern of eight dark dorsal chevrons from the crest of their necks to their pelvic area . These markings fade by the time the animal is one year old , changing to mottled gray and cream and eventually giving way to blue as adults . The adult blue iguana is typically dark gray matching the karst rock of its landscape . The animal changes its color to blue when it is in the presence of other iguanas to signal and establish territory . The blue color is more pronounced in males of the species . Their distinctive black feet stand in contrast to their lighter overall body color . 
 Blue iguanas are sexually dimorphic ; males are larger and have more prominent dorsal crests as well as larger femoral pores on their thighs , which are used to release pheromones . 
 = = = Eyes and vision = = = 
 The blue iguana 's eyes have a golden iris and red sclera . They have excellent vision , which allows them to detect shapes and motions at long distances . As blue iguanas have only a few rod cells , they have poor vision in low @-@ light conditions . At the same time , they have cells called " double cones " which give them sharp color vision and enable them to see ultraviolet wavelengths . This ability is useful when basking so the animal can ensure that it absorbs enough sunlight in the forms of UVA and UVB to produce vitamin D. 
 Blue iguanas have evolved a white photosensory organ on the top of their heads called the parietal eye ( also known as the third eye , pineal eye or pineal gland ) . This " eye " does not work the same way as a normal eye as it has only a rudimentary retina and lens and thus , cannot form images . It is however sensitive to changes in light and dark and can detect movement . 
 The blue iguana is found only on the island of Grand Cayman . Comparison with other Cyclura species in the region strongly suggests that there was once a coastal population of blue iguanas which was gradually displaced or extirpated by human settlements and the construction of <unk> blue iguana now only occurs inland in natural xerophytic shrubland and along the interfaces between farm clearings , roads , and gardens and closed @-@ canopy dry forest or <unk> interior population is believed to have been attracted to agricultural clearings and fruit farms which provide thermoregulatory opportunities , herbaceous browse , fallen fruit , and nesting soil , but this brought the blue iguana into contact with humans and feral animals . Females often migrate to coastal areas to nest . Blue iguanas released into the Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park on Grand Cayman were <unk> in 2004 to determine ranges for each animal . Females were found to occupy territories of 0 @.@ 6 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 m2 ) and males an average of 1 @.@ 4 acres ( 5 @,@ 700 m2 ) with overlap in common territories , indicating that they choose to maintain a population density of four to five animals per hectare . The blue iguanas occupy rock holes and tree cavities , and as adults are primarily terrestrial . Younger individuals tend to be more arboreal . Hatchlings are preyed upon by the native snake Alsophis <unk> . The adults have no natural predators but can fall victim to feral dogs . They typically reach sexual maturity at three to four years of age . 
 = = Diet and longevity = = 
 Like all Cyclura species , the blue iguana is primarily herbivorous , consuming leaves , flowers , and fruits from over 45 species of plant . This diet is very rarely supplemented with insect larvae , crabs , slugs , dead birds , and fungi . The iguanas are presented with a special problem for osmoregulation : plant matter contains more potassium and as it has less nutritional content per gram , more must be eaten to meet the lizard 's metabolic needs . As they are not capable of creating urine more concentrated than their bodily fluids , they excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric acid salts through a salt gland in the same manner as birds . As a result , they have developed this lateral nasal gland to supplement renal salt secretion by expelling excess potassium and sodium chloride . 
 Longevity in the wild is unknown but is presumed to be many decades . A blue iguana named " Godzilla " captured on Grand Cayman in 1950 by naturalist Ira Thompson was imported to the United States in 1985 by Ramon <unk> and sold to reptile importer and breeder , Tom Crutchfield in 1990 . Crutchfield donated Godzilla to the Gladys Porter Zoo in Brownsville , Texas in 1997 and the lizard remained there until its death in 2004 . Thompson estimated Godzilla to be 15 years of age at the time of his capture . At an estimated 69 years of age ( 54 of which were spent in captivity ) , Godzilla may be the world 's longest @-@ living lizard for which there is reliable record . A closely related Lesser Caymans iguana ( C. nubila caymanensis ) has been documented as living 33 years in captivity . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Mating occurs from May through June . Copulation is preceded by numerous head @-@ bobs on the part of the male , who then circles around behind the female and grasps the nape of her neck . He then attempts to restrain the female in order to maneuver his tail under hers to position himself for intromission . Copulation generally lasts from 30 to 90 seconds , and a pair is rarely observed mating more than once or twice a day . A clutch of anywhere from 1 to 21 eggs are usually laid in June or July depending on the size and age of the female , in nests excavated in pockets of earth exposed to the sun . Several exploratory nests are begun before one is completed . These burrows can range from 16 inches ( 0 @.@ 41 m ) to over 60 inches ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in length , with an enlarged chamber at its terminal portion to allow the female to turn around . The temperature within nests that have been monitored by researchers remained a constant 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) throughout the incubation period which ranges from 65 – 90 days . The blue iguana 's eggs are among the largest laid by any lizard . 
 Individuals are aggressively territorial from the age of about three months onward . Females occupy overlapping areas of the order of 0 @.@ 6 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 m2 ) seemingly regardless of age , while males occupy progressively larger and more extensively overlapping territories as they age and grow . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 = = = Endangered status = = = 
 The blue iguana is listed as endangered on the IUCN Red List . The population is restricted to the eastern interior of Grand Cayman , where it had been reduced to a critically low level , only three animals having been observed before the survey in 1988 . The range of the blue iguana has contracted significantly over the past 25 years , with many sites once populated now showing no signs of iguanas . Surveys in 2003 indicated a total population in the range of 5 – 15 individuals . By 2005 the unmanaged wild population was considered to be functionally extinct . The species is one of the most endangered animals on Earth . A further blow to the dwindling population came in May 2008 when six individuals were found butchered in a nature preserve . 
 As the blue iguana consumes a variety of plant material , favoring fruits and flowers over leaves and stems when available , it is valuable on Grand Cayman as a seed disperser throughout its range . A study in 2000 by Dr Allison Alberts revealed that seeds passing through the digestive tracts of <unk> germinate more rapidly than those that do not . These seeds in the fruits consumed by the blue iguana have an adaptive advantage by sprouting before the end of very short rainy seasons . The blue iguana is an important means of distributing seeds to new areas and , as the largest native herbivore of Grand Cayman 's ecosystems , it is essential for maintaining the delicate balance between climate and vegetation necessary to survive under harsh conditions . 
 Restored free @-@ roaming subpopulations in the Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park and the Salina Reserve numbered approximately 125 individuals in total after an initial release in December 2005 . The restored subpopulation in the Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park has been breeding since 2001 , and the subpopulation in the Salina Reserve was deemed to be breeding in 2006 after a nest of three hatched eggs was discovered in the wild . As of April 2007 , after another large @-@ scale release , there were 299 blue iguanas living in the wild , with hundreds more being raised in captivity on Grand Cayman . In late 2012 , the blue iguana Recovery Program estimated that the wild population had risen to approximately 750 individuals , and the IUCN subsequently <unk> the species from critically endangered to endangered . 
 = = = Causes of decline = = = 
 Habitat destruction is the main factor threatening imminent extinction for this iguana . Land clearance within remnant habitat is occurring for agriculture , road construction , and real estate development and speculation . The conversion of traditional crop lands to cattle pasture is eliminating secondary blue iguana habitat . 
 Predation and injury to hatchlings by rats , to hatchlings and sub @-@ adults by feral cats , and killing of adults by roaming dogs are all placing severe pressure on the remaining wild population . Automobiles and <unk> are an increasing cause of mortality as the iguanas rarely survive the collisions . Trapping and shooting is a comparatively minor concern , but occasional trapping continues despite legal protection and sustained efforts to increase public awareness . 
 The common Green Iguana , ( Iguana iguana ) , has been introduced from Honduras and is well @-@ established on Grand Cayman as an invasive species . It far outnumbers the endemic blue iguana . No direct negative consequences of this introduction on the blue iguana are known , but the mere presence of the Green Iguana confuses public attitudes and understanding . For example , the people of the island are told that blue iguanas are endangered and rare , and when they subsequently see large numbers of the introduced Green Iguana , they do not understand the difference . 
 Blue iguanas used to regularly be sold to tourists as pets , as their rarity made them appealing to exotic @-@ animal collectors , despite this being illegal under the CITES treaty . In 1999 a World Wildlife Fund international conservation officer , Stuart Chapman , said , " The British government has turned a blind eye for over 20 years to these overseas territories which are home to many rare and endangered species . Many of these face extinction if Britain fails to honour its treaty obligations . The British Caribbean islands are extremely rich in biodiversity with many critically endangered species that are unique to the islands — yet there is virtually zero enforcement or implementation of CITES " . 
 In May 2008 , six blue iguanas were found dead in the preserve within Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park on Grand Cayman . The iguanas were apparently killed by human vandals armed with knives and two of the slaughtered animals were gravid females about to lay eggs . 
 The wild population of blue iguanas had been reduced from a near island @-@ wide distribution to a non @-@ viable , fragmented remnant . By 2001 , no young hatched in the unmanaged wild population were surviving to breeding age , meaning the population was functionally extinct , with only five animals remaining in the wild . 
 = = = Recovery efforts = = = 
 In 1990 , the American Zoo and Aquarium Association ( AZA ) designated the genus Cyclura as their highest priority for conservation . Their first project was an in situ captive breeding program for the blue iguana , which at the time was the most critically endangered of all the species of Cyclura . 
 One of the early difficulties encountered was that the captive stock of the early 1990s was found not to be pure . It was discovered through DNA analysis that the captive population contained a number of animals that were hybrids with C. nubila caymanensis . The program contains only pure specimens , as these hybrids were sterilized by means of <unk> and hence excluded . This program was created to determine the exact genealogies of the limited gene pool of the remaining animals and DNA analysis revealed that the entire North American captive population was descended from a single pair of animals . After five years of research two captive breeding populations were established and are managed as a single unit , with cross @-@ breeding between the populations to promote genetic diversity . 
 As a hedge against disaster striking the blue iguana population on Grand Cayman , an off @-@ island captive population was established in 25 zoos in the USA . A minimum of 20 founder lines represented by at least 225 individuals is being maintained by captive breeding and recorded in a studbook for the species by <unk> Grant of the San Diego Zoo 's Center for Conservation and Research for Endangered Species ( <unk> ) . The Indianapolis Zoo has had success with breeding the blue iguana in captivity twice since the year 2000 . 
 In October 2006 , hatchlings were released into the wild for the first time to boost the species and help bring them back from the brink of extinction . Each released blue iguana wears a string of colored beads through its nuchal crest for visual identification at a distance , backed up by an implanted microchip and a high @-@ resolution photograph of its head scales . ( Head scale patterns are as unique among blue iguanas as fingerprints are among humans . ) 
 The blue iguana is established in captivity , both in public and private collections . As there are very few pure @-@ bred animals in private collections , private individuals have established these animals in captive breeding programs as hybrids with the Lesser Caymans Iguana ( <unk> caymanensis ) and occasional hybrids with the Cuban Iguana ( <unk> ) minimizing the demand for wild @-@ caught specimens for the pet trade . 
 = = = = Blue Iguana Recovery Programme = = = = 
 The Blue Iguana Recovery Programme grew from a small project started in 1990 within the National Trust for the Cayman Islands . It is now a partnership , linking the Trust with the Cayman Islands Department of Environment , National Trust Cayman Islands , Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park , Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust , International Reptile Conservation Foundation , <unk> , and the European Commission . This program operates under a special exemption from provisions in the Animals Law of the Cayman Islands , which normally would make it illegal for anyone to kill , capture , or keep iguanas . <unk> 's conservation strategy involves generating large numbers of genetically diverse hatchlings , head @-@ starting them for two years so that their chance of survival in the wild is high , and using these animals to rebuild a series of wild sub @-@ populations in protected , managed natural areas . This is accompanied by field research , nest site protection , and monitoring of the released animals . A rapid numerical increase from a maximum possible number of founding stock is sought to minimize loss of genetic diversity caused by the " population bottleneck " . 
 Restored sub @-@ populations are already present in two non @-@ contiguous areas — the Salina Reserve and the Queen Elizabeth II Botanic Park . Habitat protection is still vital , as the Salina Reserve has only 88 acres ( 360 @,@ 000 m2 ) of dry shrubland , which is not enough to sustain the 1 @,@ 000 blue iguanas that must be restored to the wild to remove this species from the Critically Endangered List . Additional separate sub @-@ populations will be restored in one or more other areas . The overall captive population is likely to remain genetically fragmented in the long term . Individuals will be translocated between sub @-@ populations to maintain gene flow so that the entire population remains a single genetic management unit . When the wild sub @-@ populations have reached the carrying capacity of their respective protected areas , release of head @-@ started animals will be phased out , and they will be left to reproduce naturally . In addition , guided by research and monitoring , control or eradication of non @-@ native predators will be implemented to the degree necessary to allow young blue iguanas to survive to maturity in sufficient numbers to maintain these sub @-@ populations . 
 Maintenance of blue iguanas in the wild requires active management into the indefinite future . To sustain this activity , a range of commercial activities generates the funding required , while an ongoing education and awareness effort ensures continued involvement and support by the local community . 
 = Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor = 
 Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor is an open world action @-@ adventure video game set within Tolkien 's legendarium , developed by Monolith Productions and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment . Officially announced in November 2013 , it was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One in September 2014 and released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November 2014 . 
 The story of the game takes place between the events of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings . The players control Talion , a ranger who was killed by the Black Hand of Sauron . Talion 's spirit merged with the wraith of the Elf Lord Celebrimbor , and together they try to avenge the death of their loved ones . Players can engage in melee combat , and utilize some of the wraith abilities to fight against enemies . The game uses the Nemesis System , which allows the artificial intelligence of non @-@ playable characters to remember the death of the game 's protagonist and react accordingly . 
 The game 's development began in 2011 . In order to create an accurate environment and be consistent with the books written by Tolkien , the developer consulted several people from Warner Bros. , and Peter Jackson , the director of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit film series . In addition , the team received assistance from Weta Workshop , who gave advice to the team in creating special effects . Monolith focused on the development of the PC , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions , while the development of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions was outsourced to Behaviour Interactive . The port to Linux and OS X was done by Feral Interactive . 
 Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor received critical acclaim upon release . Most praise directed at its combat , open @-@ world design , the game 's lore , and the Nemesis System , which most critics agreed was the best part of the game . Some criticism was aimed at the game 's story and boss battles . The game marked the biggest launch for a game based upon The Lord of the Rings universe , and would go on to win several awards from video gaming publications . Two post @-@ release downloadable content , Lord of the Hunt and The Bright Lord , were released in December 2014 and February 2015 respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor is a third @-@ person open world video game , where the player controls a ranger by the name of Talion who seeks revenge on the forces of Sauron after his family , including his wife , are killed . Players can travel across locations in the game through parkour , riding monsters , or accessing Forge Towers , which serve as fast travel points . Though Talion is mortally felled in the game 's introduction , the wraith of the Elven Lord Celebrimbor is able to use his power to keep Talion alive , along with gifting him wraith @-@ like abilities to exact his revenge . Missions in the game feature main story missions that follow Talion 's quest for revenge , side missions that involve following Gollum as to find artifacts that are tied to Celebrimbor 's past , missions to free the human slaves that have been captured by the Uruk armies and forced to work for Sauron , and additional quests to help forge new abilities for Talion 's sword , bow , and dagger . The player also has the freedom to pursue side quests and roam around Mordor , with special activities to collect specific flora or to hunt certain creatures , or to find old artifacts or Elvish seals . Completing quests earns the player a number of rewards : experience points that are used to unlock new abilities for the player from both Talion 's ranger and Celebrimbor 's wraith skills , a Power value that allows the player to access more powerful abilities to unlock , and an in @-@ game currency called " Mirian " that the player can use to improve Talion 's health , wraith skill capacity , or forge new slots on his weapons to add additional runes ( as described in the Nemesis System below ) . 
 In completing missions , the player can have Talion engage in melee , ranged combat , and stealth approaches , with some missions rewarding the player more for completing the mission in a specific manner . Talion 's ranger abilities are enhanced through Celebrimbor , allowing the player to mix combat with special focus @-@ based attacks ; these latter attacks can be used to slow time down while aiming with the bow , drain focus out of an enemy foe , or , later in the game , brand the foe to become an ally of Talion . The combat system uses an attack @-@ chain system that enables the player to perform special moves after building the chain to a large enough value , such as instantly draining a foe of focus or performing an area focus attack . With the combat system , they can also counter and dodge attacks . Stealth is a critical element in some missions ; several areas are considered <unk> and should Talion 's presence be discovered , an alarm will sound and more Uruks will arrive to try to kill him . 
 = = = Nemesis system = = = 
 A core feature of Shadow of Mordor is the Nemesis system . The game tracks a number of specially tagged Uruks as part of Sauron 's armies , who will lead the other Uruks in battle . Defeating these leaders will help to weaken Sauron 's army , and these leaders will drop a rune which the player can install on Talion 's weapons to provide additional buffs in battle . Alternatively , being killed by a leader will cause the current mission to be cancelled and the player returned to a safe point to continue exploring , and the leader will gain additional power , making him more difficult to defeat in the next encounter . If the procedurally generated Orcs survive an encounter with Talion , they will also be promoted . Further , such deaths are tracked through online servers , and the player 's friends on the various network services will be notified of this death and be offered the chance to accept the Vendetta mission , and carry out exact revenge on the Uruk . If the mission is successful the game will give rewards to both the original player and the victorious friend . 
 The leader Uruk will have a range of strengths and weaknesses , the latter that can be exploited in combat to quickly weaken and defeat the leader . The player can gain knowledge of these through finding intelligence mostly by draining and interrogating marked Uruks for this . Being able to exploit such weaknesses in defeating the leader will gain a better quality rune and more experience points in this manner . Once the player gains the ability to brand Uruks , they can brand these leaders and convert portions of Sauron 's army to their side . At this point , the player can use the Nemesis system to trigger infighting within the Uruk forces which they can then directly participate in , helping to weaken the army further . Uruks that survive their encounter with Talion will remember this when Talion combats them again ; for example , an Uruk who was thrown into a fire by Talion might want revenge on him for being disfigured . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game takes place in the 60 @-@ year gap between the events of J.R.R. Tolkien 's The Hobbit and The Lord of The Rings . The family of Talion ( voiced and motion captured by Troy Baker ) , a ranger of Gondor responsible for guarding the Black Gate of Mordor , is killed by the armies of Sauron , but Talion is revived with " wraith @-@ like abilities " and heads into Mordor to exact his revenge . Mordor is not yet a barren wasteland in this story . The player will encounter Gollum ( voiced by Liam O 'Brien ) . Talion discovers that the wraith who revived him is Celebrimbor ( voiced by Alastair Duncan ) , the greatest Elven smith master of the Second Age , who also seeks revenge against Sauron . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Talion , a captain , serves within a garrison stationed at the Black Gate of Mordor . The garrison is attacked by Sauron 's Orc forces led by three Black <unk> captains ; the Hammer of Sauron ( John DiMaggio ) , the Tower of Sauron ( J. B. Blanc ) , and their leader , the Black Hand of Sauron ( Nolan North ) . Talion , his wife <unk> ( Laura Bailey ) , and his adult son , <unk> , are captured and ritually sacrificed by the Black Hand in an attempt to summon the wraith of the Elf Lord Celebrimbor . However , Celebrimbor ( who suffers from amnesia due to his centuries as a wraith ) instead merges with Talion , preventing him from dying alongside his family . Talion and Celebrimbor then depart to both uncover Celebrimbor 's identity — increasing his / their power — and avenge the death of Talion 's family . 
 Over the course of their travels , Talion and Celebrimbor encounter Gollum multiple times , who is wandering Mordor in search of his " Precious " ( The one ring ) . Gollum possesses the ability to see and speak with Celebrimbor due to his prior contact with the One Ring , and pledges to serve the " Bright Master " . Hoping that Celebrimbor might lead him to the One Ring , Gollum leads Celebrimbor to relics of his past , each of which restore parts of his lost memories . Celebrimbor gradually recalls how Sauron , disguised as <unk> , the Lord of Gifts , deceived him into forging the Rings of Power . Celebrimbor ultimately assisted Sauron in forging the One Ring , but was able to steal it from him . Celebrimbor proclaimed himself the Bright Lord of Mordor and raised an army of Orcs against Sauron . However , the Ring ultimately betrayed Celebrimbor and returned to Sauron . A victorious Sauron then punished Celebrimbor by executing his wife and daughter before finally killing him with his own smithing hammer . 
 In his search for the Black Hand , Talion allies himself with <unk> , a ranger deserter who leads a community of <unk> outcasts choosing to settle in Mordor , and Ratbag the Coward ( Phil LaMarr ) , an Orc who offers to bring Talion closer to the Black Hand in exchange for his assistance in climbing Mordor 's military hierarchy . Talion helps Ratbag ascend the ranks to the level of <unk> by killing each of his immediate superiors , finally becoming <unk> himself . Talion then goes after the other <unk> in <unk> , weakening Sauron 's forces in that area . Soon enough , <unk> has a plan to draw out the Black Captains . Using acquired grog and blasting powder , Talion helps the Outcasts destroy a statue dedicated to Sauron . Instead of the Black Hand answering the " message " , the Hammer of Sauron is sent , promptly executing Ratbag for not answering his duties to kill the ranger . Talion and The Hammer then face off , with packs of Uruk joining the fight . Eventually , Talion manages to kill The Hammer . 
 Talion is then sought out by the warrior <unk> , the daughter of Queen Marwen ( Claudia Black ) , who claims to be able to assist Celebrimbor with his mission . Marwen is the ruler of <unk> , a kingdom of sea raiders located in the south of Mordor . She uses prophetic powers to guide Talion and Celebrimbor to another of Celebrimbor 's relics . Talion also gets help from a Dwarf hunter named Torvin , teaching Talion the ways of the hunt to dominate <unk> and <unk> ( beasts native to Mordor ) , eventually fighting a massive <unk> from Torvin 's past who killed Torvin 's hunting partner , later revealed to be his brother . Later , Marwen advises them to use Celebrimbor 's powers to take control of an army of orcs and other beasts , using them to lead an assault against Sauron . Talion eventually realizes that the wizard Saruman is possessing Marwen , and assists <unk> in freeing her from his control . Talion , however , still carries out Saruman 's plan , leading an army of mind @-@ controlled orcs in an assault against the Black Hand 's stronghold at <unk> <unk> . However , rather than the Black Hand , Talion finds the Tower of Sauron waiting for him . The Tower mockingly taunts Talion that Celebrimbor chose him as a host and can free him at any time and offers the elf a place at Sauron 's side . Refusing the offer , the two battle and Talion emerges victorious after viciously stabbing the Tower to death with his son 's sword . Afterwards , Celebrimbor confesses that the Tower told the truth and promises to let Talion join his family in death if he wishes , once the Black Hand is slain . 
 Talion then travels to the Black Gate for a final confrontation with the Black Hand . The Black Hand quickly incapacitates him with a spell that also restores the last of Celebrimbor 's memories . He then kills himself as part of a ritual that forces Celebrimbor to depart from Talion and merge with himself . This allows Sauron to possess the Black Hand 's body and incarnate in physical form . However , Celebrimbor is able to briefly paralyze Sauron from within , allowing Talion to destroy Sauron 's physical form . With the Black Hand dead , Celebrimbor wishes to depart for Valinor . Talion instead convinces him to stay and attempt to overthrow Sauron . Gazing at Mount Doom , Talion declares his intention to forge a new Ring of Power . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor , which took about three years , began in late 2011 . The game 's lead developer was Monolith Productions , who had experience on a Middle @-@ earth game with Guardians of Middle @-@ earth ( a multiplayer online battle arena game released in 2012 ) . According to design director Michael de Plater , Shadow of Mordor was developed in parallel with Guardians of Middle @-@ earth but handled by a separate team . It was published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment , who had published the Batman : Arkham game series . The game was designed by de Plater , who had worked with Creative Assembly on Rome : Total War and Ubisoft on Tom Clancy 's <unk> and Tom Clancy 's Ghost Recon : Future Soldier . 
 Shadow of Mordor was Monolith 's first third @-@ person open world video game for the eighth generation consoles PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and de Plater considered its development an educational experience for the studio . In Monolith 's introduction to the genre , many core mechanics were built from scratch and the studio were inspired by successful video games such as the Batman : Arkham series created by Rocksteady Studios ; those games inspired Shadow of Mordor 's stealth and free @-@ flow combat mechanics . The studio considered Rocksteady 's games good examples of how to handle a licensed title . 
 The game 's signature feature is its Nemesis system . The Monolith team considered themselves experts in artificial intelligence , and wanted to push its boundaries . Allowing players to choose their story ( a sandbox @-@ game pillar ) and " leverage the new generation hardware through innovation " , the team wanted to create a system allowing non @-@ playable characters to respond to player actions ; this later became the Nemesis system . The system 's idea was <unk> three months after development began , and to best present it everyone in the studio was involved . The developers hoped that with the system , orcs could be memorable for players . It was made more complex during the game 's early development , incorporating personal relationships among orcs , but was later pared down when the studio considered it too complicated . The Nemesis system was also inspired by pen @-@ and @-@ paper role @-@ playing games . Although most orcs are similar , some were designed with distinctive behavior patterns . These orcs have dialogue written by Dan Abnett , and the team hoped the special orcs would surprise players . The team also hoped that the system would provide tension and competition , similar to a multiplayer game . The studio was inspired by sports games , where the narrative continues when players lose a match . This can prevent immersion and narrative from breaking when players die in the game . According to Rob Roberts , the system is designed so players can emotionally attach to the protagonist through gameplay drama . They also hoped that through the system , players can create their own villain , leading to an organic story . 
 Shadow of Mordor bridges the gap between The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings , with the team wanting to show iconic elements of the universe in an original way . The team had to draw notes on Tolkien 's notes and appendices to ensure that their vision for the game would not change the franchise 's timeline . Although the game 's environment is inspired by the books and films , several places ( such as <unk> and the Sea of <unk> ) were re @-@ imagined . Art director Phil Straub considered consistency with the lore and presenting " something visually new " and realistic the most important elements of creating the game , and the team did not incorporate many fantasy elements in its world . To depict volcanic activity , the studio sent a team to Eastern Washington and the Columbia River plateau to photograph a volcano ; to create other parts of the game environment , they studied photos of Iceland and New Zealand and yellow stone found worldwide . Since Shadow of Mordor is set before The Lord of the Rings , its landscape is less post @-@ apocalyptic ; environments also vary by weather , lighting and atmosphere . 
 The game has a standalone plot . Early in development the team consulted Peter Jackson , director of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit trilogies , who advised them against a film tie @-@ in . According to de Plater , the story is character @-@ driven to be " authentic " relative to Tolkien 's themes . The game was written by Christian Cantamessa , who was lead writer and lead designer for Rockstar San Diego 's Red Dead Redemption . According to Roberts , the story is designed for accessibility by all players ( regardless of their familiarity with the franchise ) by creating natural interactions and believable relationships among the characters . Its protagonist is Talion , a half @-@ human , half @-@ wraith inspired by Boromir . Although Torvin was originally proposed as the game 's playable character , the idea was scrapped , as the team wanted to follow the philosophy of featuring standalone characters . The wraith is later revealed as Celebrimbor , creator of the Rings of Power . The development team picked Celebrimbor because they considered his backstory sufficiently interesting to expand the canon 's authenticity , allowing the team to write a story around power ( a major theme of the game ) . Another important component was Mordor 's tone . The team created a dark atmosphere with humor , reflected in dialogue and voice acting . This was handled by Dan Abnett , who previously worked on books related to Warhammer 's " dark and gritty " universe . The team hired David Salo , a linguist who worked on the Tolkien 's languages for the Lord of the Rings film trilogy , to develop the Orcs ' Black Speech . The game 's narrative was also inspired by BioShock , which according to de Plater , has successfully incorporated systemic stories with players ' choices . 
 To prevent inaccuracies , Monolith consulted several Tolkien scholars from Warner Bros. and collaborated with Weta Workshop ( Jackson 's design company ) on the game 's special effects and scenery . To depict well @-@ known characters the company partnered with Middle @-@ earth Enterprises , the franchise @-@ rights holder , to prevent misuse and contradiction between the game 's story and Tolkien 's . 
 Monolith focused on developing the game 's PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions , with development of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions outsourced to Behaviour Interactive . Although the game 's core gameplay mechanics , story and narrative are unchanged in the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports , some features ( such as the Nemesis system ) are less complex than the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions . According to the game 's developer , the Nemesis system was too large for older consoles . 
 The music for Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor was composed by Garry Schyman and Nathan Grigg , and a soundtrack album was released digitally by WaterTower Music on September 30 , 2014 . In designing the game 's music , the team used a number of sonic tools which synchronize with other aspects of the game ( such as player actions and enemy movements ) ; combat music included <unk> and spring drums . 
 In August 2013 an artist mentioned that Monolith Productions was working on a AAA title separate from Guardians of Middle @-@ earth , and on November 12 its title was announced . Although the game was originally scheduled for release on October 7 , 2014 , according to Warner Bros. its release was moved up to September 30 in North America and October 3 in the United Kingdom due to " fans ' excitement " . The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions were released on November 18 in North America and November 21 in Europe . 
 On December 16 , 2014 , the downloadable content ( DLC ) Lord of the Hunt was released . Its storyline revolved around Torvin , and it included new runes , skins and bosses . Lord of the Hunt received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The final DLC for Shadow of Mordor ( The Bright Lord ) is set 3 @,@ 000 years before the main campaign and allows players to control Talion 's companion , Celebrimbor . It adds a chapter to Shadow of Mordor in which players can complete ten more missions and fight Sauron . The content was released on February 24 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . 
 A Game of the Year edition with DLC was announced on April 29 , 2015 and released on May 5 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . A special edition , with in @-@ game items and a steelbook , was introduced on August 1 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor was critically acclaimed . The review aggregator websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version scores of 86 @.@ 67 percent ( based on nine reviews ) and 84 out of 100 ( based on 17 reviews ) ; the PlayStation 4 version scored 86 @.@ 55 percent ( based on 57 reviews ) and 84 out of 100 ( based on 85 reviews ) , and the Xbox One version scored 85 @.@ 82 percent ( based on 11 reviews ) and 87 out of 100 ( based on 12 reviews ) . 
 The game 's core feature , its Nemesis system , was praised . According to Lucas Sullivan of GamesRadar , the system elevated Shadow of Mordor to excellence by making its villains memorable and adding personality to its protagonist . Brad Shoemaker of Giant Bomb agreed , writing that the system created many distinctive characters and its side content extended the game 's longevity . Joystiq 's Alexander Sliwinski said that the system made each playthrough unique and made the game stand out from other action games . Chris Carter of Destructoid found the system gimmicky , since it failed to create unique villains ; it added different appearances and weaknesses to villains without adding personality . 
 Shadow of Mordor 's combat was considered excellent by most critics . Shoemaker and Sliwinski compared it to the rhythm @-@ based combat system of the Batman : Arkham game series ; both found it engaging and fluid . Shoemaker praised the game 's combat variety ; the combination of the combat and nemesis systems created " a specific kind of chaotic , emergent nonsense " desirable in an open world game . According to Sliwinski and Shoemaker , even without the Nemesis system the combat system would make the game compelling . Although Matt Miller of Game Informer found the game 's focus on killing made it repetitive , failing to capture the charm of its inspirations Assassin 's Creed and Batman : Arkham , Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot called Shadow of Mordor 's combat an improvement of the Assassin 's Creed formula . 
 Reception of the game 's storyline was mixed . Although Shoemaker and Sliwinski praised its " dark " tone , Shoemaker found some story elements ( such as Gollum 's introduction ) forced and designed to appeal to a particular audience . According to Game Informer 's Matt Miller , Shadow of Mordor fails to successfully tie together all of its various plot threads in the game 's conclusion . Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot also found the storyline erratic , dragged down by anti @-@ climactic fights and scenes . Dan Stapleton of IGN wrote that the story introduced memorable characters but would not make sense to fans of the series , and his interest in the game waned towards its end . Destructoid 's Chris Carter was disappointed in a plot he considered generic ( " Go here , kill this , draw out this big bad , then kill him for your family " ) ; the game failed to add anything new to the universe , and its side missions were more interesting than the main campaign . 
 Other aspects of Shadow of Mordor were praised . Sullivan enjoyed its Lord of the Rings ' lore , and found the number of collectibles in the game " staggering " . Miller also admired Monolith 's extensive use of lore in the game , and praised its soundtrack and voice @-@ acting ; Stapleton agreed , particularly about the voice acting . 
 Elements of the game were criticized . Sullivan found some side missions repetitive , and Sliwinski was disappointed with some of the boss battles . Miller wrote that some Shadow of Mordor features are too complex and inaccessible for new players or those unwilling to use strategy . Critics disagreed about the Nemesis system . Miller wrote that the system fell flat in the game 's final hours ; according to VanOrd , the system was unappealing until the game 's second half . Carter found the unskippable cutscenes after a player died annoying . 
 Unlike Shadow of Mordor 's current @-@ generation versions , the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions received mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews and many technical problems were noted . According to Thomas Morgan of Eurogamer its frame rate was substandard , and Yannick LeJacq of Kotaku cited " many technical hiccups and glitches " . Morgan believed that the game developers spent little effort on the port , and LeJacq questioned the need to release the game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 at all . Shadow of Mordor was well received by BioShock series creator Ken Levine , who called it the first open world game with a non @-@ linear story and narrative and said he would bring some of its elements to his upcoming science @-@ fiction project . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Shadow of Mordor 's release was the most successful for a Lord of the Rings @-@ based game . The game debuted at number two in the UK retail software sales chart in its first week ( behind FIFA 15 ) , and was the ninth @-@ bestselling game in the United States in October 2014 . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 When Shadow of Mordor was introduced , Monolith was accused by former Ubisoft employee Charles Randall of using assets ( such as the protagonist @-@ animation code ) from Assassin 's Creed II . Monolith responded that all their project 's assets were developed from scratch ; they had confidence in their originality , and the game was based upon the Nemesis system . 
 In October 2014 , after the usual video @-@ game review outlets were unable to obtain early access to Shadow of Mordor , John Bain ( known as <unk> ) said that YouTube video creators had been offered early access in exchange for agreeing to a contract requiring them to describe it positively . Jim Sterling of The Escapist obtained a copy of one of the contracts and analyzed it in detail . The Federal Trade Commission began an investigation and announced that Warner Brothers Home Entertainment had violated the Federal Trade Commission Act , and that the company must declare sponsored advertising in the future in July 2016 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Brownhills = 
 Brownhills is a town in the West Midlands , England . Located on the edge of Cannock Chase near the large artificial lake Chasewater , it is 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) north @-@ east of Walsall and a similar distance south @-@ west of Lichfield . It is part of the Metropolitan Borough of Walsall and the Aldridge @-@ Brownhills parliamentary constituency and neighbours the ancient villages of Pelsall and <unk> . Before boundary changes in 1974 , it was in the county of Staffordshire . 
 The town lies on the ancient Watling Street , but is not recorded before the 17th century , although Ogley Hay , which in modern times is a district of the town , is recorded as a settlement in the Domesday Book . Brownhills quickly grew around the coal mining industry , especially after it became linked to the canal and railway networks in the mid @-@ 19th century , and by the end of the century had grown from a hamlet of only 300 inhabitants to a town with a population of over 13 @,@ 000 , of whom the vast majority were employed in the coal industry . Mining remained the town 's principal industry until the 1950s , but the subsequent closure of the area 's pits led to a severe economic decline which has continued until the present day . The local authority has instituted a regeneration programme which it is hoped will revive the town 's fortunes , providing better transport and leisure facilities . 
 = = History = = 
 Brownhills is situated on the ancient Watling Street and there is evidence of early settlement in the area , including an ancient burial mound and a guard post believed to date from Roman times and later dubbed <unk> Castle . The name Brownhills , however , is not recorded before the 17th century . The most popular suggestion for the origin of the name is that it refers to the early mining spoil heaps which dotted the area . 
 The settlement is first recorded ( as " Brownhill " ) on Robert Plot 's 1680 map of Staffordshire , at which time it was a hamlet within the manor of Ogley Hay , which in turn was part of the parish of Norton Canes . Ogley Hay itself had existed since at least the 11th century and is mentioned in the Domesday Book , although the 1801 census lists it as having a population of only 8 people . Beyond Ogley Hay lay Catshill , another hamlet which pre @-@ dated Brownhills and which lay within the parish of Shenstone . 
 During the 17th century , shallow mine workings began to develop in the area and in 1759 a turnpike was erected in the Catshill area . A local legend claims that Dick Turpin once vaulted the barricade on his horse to avoid paying the toll , although this is demonstrably false as Turpin was executed in 1739 , twenty years before the turnpike 's construction . In 1794 Brownhills ( now in the plural ) was included in a list of local settlements mentioned in an Act of Parliament concerning canals in Staffordshire , and three years later the Wyrley & Essington Canal , nicknamed the " Curly Wyrley " by the locals due to its winding course , was opened . In 1799 Norton Pool , later to be renamed Chasewater , was created to serve as a reservoir for the canals . 
 Early in the 19th century , a horse @-@ drawn tram system connected the mines to the wharves on the canal . In response to the growing population of the area open land in Ogley Hay , up until then merely heathland , was enclosed and converted to farmland in 1838 , the same year in which the area was first declared a parish , although no church was built for another 13 years . Charles Foster Cotterill , a former mayor of Walsall who had purchased the manor of Ogley Hay in 1836 upon the death of former lord Phineas Hussey , saw the potential of the area and sold off large tracts of his land for private farming and the construction of a flour mill and a foundry . The remaining land of the former manor was progressively sold off through a series of indentures of questionable legality until 1846 when Cotterill sold the last 135 acres ( 0 @.@ 55 km2 ) and moved to London . 
 The South Staffordshire Railway reached Brownhills in 1850 and led to a huge expansion of the local mining operation and with it a population explosion in the area , with the population increasing from 305 in 1801 to over 13 @,@ 000 in 1891 . In 1858 a branch line was constructed through the heart of what was then the hamlet of Brownhills , which led to a migration of the population eastwards , leading to the formation of mining slums in the Ogley Hay area . Eventually a new town centre developed , complete with library and theatre . This led to the gradual amalgamation of Brownhills , Ogley Hay and Catshill into one town . 
 Mining was to remain the principal industry of Brownhills until the last pit closed in the 1950s . During the 18th and 19th centuries the area known as Coppice Side was the hub of the mining industry , and the census of 1841 showed that over 80 % of the population of the area which makes up modern Brownhills lived and worked there , with up to ten pits active in the area at any one time . As in other mining areas , several men lost their lives in the Brownhills pits . Seven miners , including a boy aged 11 , died in an accident in 1861 , and in October 1930 an explosion at the Grove Colliery killed fourteen miners , ten of them from Brownhills . 
 In 1877 the town of Brownhills was officially recognised for the first time after a new Act authorised the amalgamation of rural districts into larger local government areas . An order was issued on 29 September stating : 
 After the First World War , the Urban District Council , which had replaced the District Board in 1894 , began a programme of urban improvement . Large areas of open farmland were purchased for the building of council houses , and a notorious slum area , Ogley Square , which had been declared unfit for human habitation , was demolished after a long legal dispute and the tenants rehoused . The final farmland within the boundaries of Brownhills was sold for redevelopment in 1952 . 
 By the time of the Second World War the mines of Brownhills , being amongst the oldest in the area , were largely exhausted , and following the nationalisation of the mining industry the final pit on the Common was closed in the 1950s . Following the demise of the coalfield the town experienced a severe economic slump , with many high street shops closing down . A wave of new development in the 1960s and 1970s saw a new shopping precinct planned , which it was claimed would incorporate a cinema , bowling alley , hotel and bus station and would completely revitalise the town . Despite the developers ' grandiose claims , the project was not a success and ultimately consisted solely of shopping units , many of which stood empty for up to five years . There was little further development in the 1980s and 1990s , and the feeling of the local council is that the town centre is in need of improvement . To this end the council has created a " Townscape Masterplan " for the redevelopment of the town . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Brownhills is represented by three tiers of government , Walsall Borough Council ( " local " ) , UK Parliament ( " national " ) , and European Parliament ( " Europe " ) . 
 The Brownhills District established in 1877 remained in existence until 1894 when it was superseded by Brownhills Urban District . In 1966 the Urban District merged with that of Aldridge to form the Aldridge @-@ Brownhills Urban District , in accordance with a recommendation of the Local Government Commission for England . This in turn was amalgamated in 1974 , under the Local Government Act 1972 , into the newly formed Metropolitan Borough of Walsall , under whose jurisdiction the area remains to this day . As a result of this amalgamation Brownhills also became part of the West Midlands county , having previously been part of Staffordshire . Today Brownhills constitutes a ward within the Borough of Walsall and has three seats on the Borough Council . As at the 2008 local elections two of these seats were held by the Conservative Party and one by Labour . 
 Wendy Morton , representing the Conservative Party , has been the Member of Parliament for the constituency of Aldridge @-@ Brownhills since 2015 . Before the creation of the Aldridge @-@ Brownhills seat in 1974 , the town had been part of the Walsall North constituency since 1955 , when it had been transferred from the now @-@ defunct Cannock constituency . 
 Brownhills is part of the Walsall council counting area of the West Midlands European Parliament constituency , which elects six MEPs . In the 2009 election the Conservatives gained 26 @.@ 8 % of the vote in this counting area , ahead of UKIP 24 @.@ 5 % and Labour with 18 @.@ 9 % . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Brownhills is located at 52 ° 38 ′ 49 @.@ 20 ″ N 1 ° 55 ′ 58 @.@ 80 ″ W on the edge of Cannock Chase and lies mostly at a height of approximately 150 metres ( 492 ft ) above sea level , although there is a sharp incline to nearly 180 metres ( 590 ft ) at the eastern end of the town . The highest point of Cannock Chase , standing at 244 metres ( 801 ft ) above sea level , lies approximately 4 miles ( 6 km ) from the town . Although a small river called Crane Brook flows slightly to the east of Brownhills , the only significant bodies of water in the area are human @-@ made , namely the canal and the 3 km2 ( 1 @.@ 2 sq mi ) reservoir Chasewater , which lies to the north , between Brownhills and Cannock Chase . The reservoir was constructed in the 18th century and reshaped by reclamation schemes as recently as the 1970s . 
 Immediately to the west of the town is Brownhills Common , a 100 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) heathland which once formed part of Cannock Forest ( also known as " <unk> Wood " ) . Although the forest was felled in the 15th and 16th centuries , the spread of heather and the grazing of sheep led to the creation of a huge area of heathland . The area was affected by mine workings but has now returned to a more natural state and lizards and dragonflies may be observed . The area now supports various habitat types , with the heathland mixing with marshy grassland , with scattered scrub and pools . In 1926 , when ownership of the Common was transferred to the local Council , a large area of barren land at the eastern end , closest to the town , was landscaped , with new trees planted . Lying south of the Common , Birch Coppice is a large area of predominantly oak and birch woodland , which , although crossed by a now @-@ dismantled railway line , mostly escaped the destruction caused to other wooded areas by mining and other industry . 
 To the south , Brownhills is separated from the nearby village of Clayhanger by Clayhanger Common , which is designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest and considered " one of the best wetland sites in the county " . In 2007 , a new £ 445 @,@ 000 bridge was erected across the canal at Brownhills , providing pedestrian , disabled and cycling access to the Common and to the village of Clayhanger beyond . To the east lies the village of <unk> and a large area of green belt land . 
 The geology of Brownhills comprises mainly red clay marl overlying Triassic sandstone and deposits of coal . The town is on several fault lines , the main one being the Vigo Fault , a branch of the larger Eastern Boundary Fault , which runs from Birmingham to <unk> . On the western side of the fault , in the area of Brownhills Common , the marl is over 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) thinner than on the eastern side , bringing the coal seams significantly closer to the surface . The presence of the faults and the effects of mining mean that subsidence has been a major problem in the area for many years . 
 The land within the town is made up of approximately 62 % greenspace , 18 % domestic gardens , 7 % roads , 4 % domestic buildings , 3 % non @-@ domestic buildings and 6 % other uses . Since the 19th century , trade in Brownhills has been centred on the High Street . As the canal and Clayhanger Common lie immediately to the south of the High Street , the town 's housing areas are mainly to the north and at the eastern and western ends of the town . Brownhills has 5 @,@ 152 residential dwellings , of which 47 % are semi @-@ detached houses . Selling prices for all types of property within the town have risen significantly since 2000 ; in August 2007 the average selling price was £ 137 @,@ 600 , compared to £ 59 @,@ 596 in 2000 , a rise of 131 % . The Aldridge and Brownhills Housing Trust owns and manages those properties formerly owned as council houses by Walsall Council . 
 In the West Midlands , the warmest time of the year is July and August , when maximum temperatures average around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) ; the coolest months are January and February , when minimum temperatures average around 1 ° C ( 39 ° F ) . The area 's average maximum and minimum temperatures are almost exactly in line with the national average . The average annual rainfall is about 676 millimetres ( 27 in ) , the wettest months being September to January . This is lower than the national average annual rainfall of 838 mm ( 33 inches ) . 
 See Penkridge weather station for details of average temperature and rainfall figures taken between 1971 and 2000 at the Met Office weather station in Penkridge ( around 11 miles ( 18 km ) from Brownhills ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , Brownhills ward had a population of 12 @,@ 637 , and a population density of 17 @.@ 45 persons per hectare . 
 Of the town 's 5 @,@ 151 households , 40 @.@ 7 % were married couples living together , 10 @.@ 4 % were cohabiting couples and 10 @.@ 2 % were lone parents . 25 @.@ 9 % of all households were made up of individuals and 12 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone at pensionable age . 31 @.@ 8 % of households included children aged under 16 or a person aged 16 to 18 who was in full @-@ time education . The average household size was 2 @.@ 5 . 
 The ethnicity of the town was 97 @.@ 4 % white , 0 @.@ 6 % mixed race , 1 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 5 % black and 0 @.@ 3 % Chinese or other . The country of birth of residents was 97 @.@ 8 % United Kingdom , 0 @.@ 4 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 2 % Germany , 0 @.@ 2 % other Western European countries , 0 @.@ 2 % Eastern Europe , 0 @.@ 2 % Africa , 0 @.@ 3 % Far East , 0 @.@ 4 % South Asia , < 0 @.@ 1 % Middle East , 0 @.@ 2 % North America and < 0 @.@ 1 % Oceania . Religion was recorded as 79 @.@ 6 % Christian , 0 @.@ 6 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 1 % Buddhist , 0 @.@ 1 % Jewish and 0 @.@ 3 % Sikh . 12 @.@ 5 % were recorded as having no religion , 0 @.@ 1 % had an alternative religion and 6 @.@ 5 % did not state their religion . 
 For every 100 females , there were 98 @.@ 04 males . The age distribution was 6 @.@ 6 % aged 0 – 4 years , 15 @.@ 0 % aged 5 – 15 years , 4 @.@ 2 % aged 16 – 19 years , 36 @.@ 3 % aged 20 – 44 years , 23 @.@ 6 % aged 45 – 64 years and 14 @.@ 1 % aged 65 years and over . The mean population age was 37 @.@ 5 , lower than the national average of 38 @.@ 6 . 
 The economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 43 @.@ 2 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 @.@ 3 % in part @-@ time employment , 6 @.@ 1 % self @-@ employed , 3 @.@ 8 % unemployed , 1 @.@ 3 % students with jobs , 2 @.@ 3 % students without jobs , 13 @.@ 5 % retired , 7 @.@ 3 % looking after home or family , 6 @.@ 9 % permanently sick or disabled and 3 @.@ 3 % economically inactive for other reasons . The percentage of people in full @-@ time employment was significantly higher than the 39 @.@ 1 % average for the whole of the Walsall district . Of the town 's residents aged 16 – 74 , 8 @.@ 5 % had a higher education qualification or the equivalent , compared with 19 @.@ 9 % nationwide . According to Office for National Statistics estimates , during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in the Brownhills area was £ 460 ( £ 23 @,@ 920 per year ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The decline of the mining industry in the 1950s caused a severe economic slump in Brownhills , which continues to this day . The local authority has created a " Townscape Masterplan " for the regeneration of Brownhills , which involves increased leisure provision , the improvement of the town centre 's shopping facilities , a new transport interchange incorporating Park and Ride facilities and cycle links to the town centre and the National Cycle Route , and the refurbishment of run @-@ down properties . The plan also involves the potential construction of a bypass to relieve the heavily congested High Street . In addition to these developments , a grant of over £ 350 @,@ 000 was obtained to fund the creation of a new " mini town square " , and the demolition of blocks of high @-@ rise flats in the town has begun . 
 At the 2001 census , Brownhills had 5 @,@ 768 people in employment , of which the largest percentage ( 28 @.@ 85 % ) worked in manufacturing , followed by retail ( 19 @.@ 35 % ) and construction ( 8 @.@ 93 % ) . Compared to the national average , the town had a relatively high percentage of workers in the construction industry and a relatively low number in real estate and financial intermediation . The average distance travelled to work by Brownhills residents was 10 @.@ 36 km ; the vast majority ( 62 % ) travelled to work by car . 
 One of the town 's largest employers is T & S Stores , a subsidiary of Tesco plc , whose depot in the town employs approximately 1 @,@ 000 people . Brownhills was also formerly home to the wirings manufacturer <unk> 's last UK @-@ based factory , but this has closed , with manufacturing shifted overseas and commercial staff moved to a new site in Cannock . In 2006 , the site was converted into a mixed @-@ use facility dubbed Toll Point , with Walsall Council among those moving to the site . Many people are also employed at the town 's large branch of Tesco which is open 24 hours a day on weekdays and is large enough to have its own petrol station . Before being taken over by Tesco , the store was a branch of <unk> , and an earlier Tesco store in the town had been forced to close as it could not compete with <unk> . 
 The High Street retains various independent shops , including a cobbler and a butcher , but is seen as in need of improvement . Walsall Council 's regeneration programme includes extensive redevelopment of the High Street ; the council 's view is that retail investment should be focussed on the existing shopping area rather than encouraging new developments outside this area as , based on consultants ' studies , the council believes that the town could not support large @-@ scale retail development . Specific development opportunities within the vicinity of the High Street have been identified , with particular focus on land on Silver Street , adjacent to the canal . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Road network = = = 
 Brownhills is served by the A5 and lies close to a junction of the M6 Toll motorway . National Express West Midlands bus services connect the town with Walsall , Arriva links to both Cannock and Walsall , and Diamond Bus to Aldridge and Birmingham . Choice Travel and <unk> Travel did link services to Brownhills before being taken over by the present Diamond Bus . The nearest National Express coach stops are in Walsall , <unk> and Cannock . See also Bus Routes 10 & 10A and Diamond Bus . 
 = = = Canal network = = = 
 The Birmingham Canal Navigations ' Wyrley and Essington Canal passes through Brownhills and meets the Daw End Branch Canal at Catshill Junction . The Lichfield and <unk> Canals Restoration Trust is in the process of restoring the Lichfield Canal from Ogley Junction , Brownhills , to Lichfield . 
 = = = Rail network = = = 
 Brownhills formerly had two railway stations . The first , on the South Staffordshire Line ( later part of the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ) , opened in 1849 but was closed as part of the Beeching Axe in 1965 . The line remained open for freight until 1983 , but the track was lifted in 1985 . The other , on the Midland Railway , was open for passengers between 1884 and 1930 and for freight until 1960 , when the track was lifted . The local authority ultimately aims to create a new station and re @-@ open passenger rail links to Brownhills as part of its " Townscape Masterplan " . Within a 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) radius of Brownhills there are six Network Rail stations , at Walsall , Lichfield , Cannock , <unk> , Great Wyrley , and Shenstone ; of which Shenstone ( about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) away ) is the closest . 
 = = Education = = 
 The town 's main secondary school is Brownhills School ( formerly Brownhills Sports College , Brownhills Community Technology College , Brownhills Community School and Brownhills Comprehensive ) , a mixed @-@ gender school with approximately 1 @,@ 000 pupils . In 2002 the school was designated a technology college and since 2005 has been affiliated to the Specialist Schools and Academies Trust . In 2006 , only 28 % of the school 's pupils gained at least five GCSEs at grades A * – C including English and maths , ranking it 12th out of Walsall 's 19 secondary schools . 
 Although officially located slightly outside the town 's boundaries in Walsall Wood , Shire Oak School ( the former Shire Oak Grammar School ) takes many pupils from Brownhills . Approximately 6 % of children from the town attend selective schools elsewhere in the borough of Walsall . 
 Watling Street Primary School , situated on the A5 at the western end of town , has approximately 200 students between the ages of 3 and 11 . In 2006 Watling Street 's Key Stage 2 results were the best in the Walsall LEA . There are four other primary schools in the town , St James ' Primary School , St Bernadette 's Catholic Primary School , Brownhills West Primary School , Millfield Primary School and one in Clayhanger , Holy Trinity Church of England Primary School . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Brownhills has a Church of England church ( St James ) , a Roman Catholic church ( St Bernadette ) , three Methodist churches ( including one in Clayhanger ) , two Spiritualist Churches , and a Pentecostal church . 
 Brownhills has had strong links with the Methodist faith since the 19th century . The current Silver Street Methodist church was built in the 1960s when two other churches were compulsorily purchased and demolished due to their sites being identified as prime locations for additional town centre car parking under a council redevelopment scheme . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Attractions and landmarks = = = 
 One of Brownhills ' most prominent landmarks is a 46 feet ( 14 m ) stainless steel sculpture of a coal miner , erected in May 2006 on a roundabout at one end of the High Street , where the <unk> Pelsall Road and High Street <unk> cross . The colossal sculpture , by John McKenna <unk> , commemorates the town 's mining tradition . A competition was organised to choose an official nickname for the statue . The winning name was Jigger after Jack " Jigger " Taylor who died when the roof of Walsall Wood pit collapsed in 1951 . 
 Chasewater in Staffordshire lies on the edge of Brownhills , with the area surrounding it , which is designated as a country park , officially falling within the Brownhills postal area . The reservoir supports a variety of activities including water @-@ skiing , sailing , angling and bird watching . The Chasewater Railway , operates a heritage rail service on the line of the former mineral railway around Chasewater between Brownhills and Chasetown , north of the former Brownhills Watling Street station . The railway 's main station is designated Brownhills West . 
 On the opposite side of the A5 , Brownhills Common , where a wide variety of birds can be observed , is a designated nature reserve , as is Shire Oak Park , approximately 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) from the town centre . Holland Park , on the edge of the Common , has a skate park and multi @-@ sports area , which were created as part of a £ 95 @,@ 000 environmental regeneration project and opened in 2002 . The final stage of the project will see the building of a new " youth shelter " . 
 The town is home to what is reputed to be the oldest <unk> in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Cultural events and venues = = = 
 One of the major concerns of the local council is that the town is " particularly lacking in leisure provision " . At one time the town had two cinemas , but the last of these closed in the 1960s and a plan to build a new one never came to fruition . Although the town 's theatre also closed down many years ago , the Brownhills Community School 's theatre stages productions by local groups such as the Aldridge Musical Comedy Society and the Walsall Gilbert and Sullivan Society . 
 Brownhills holds an annual canal festival in June with stalls , entertainment and boat trips , and there is an active Community Association which organises a range of events , including a weekend @-@ long military display event in 2006 . The town has a weekly market which is popular but suffers from a reputation for the sale of counterfeit goods . In 2005 Trading Standards officers seized over £ 40 @,@ 000 worth of fake goods in a raid on the market . 
 Brownhills has several public houses . Although some older ones , such as the Victorian @-@ era Jolly Collier in Coppice Side , were demolished in the 1980s , several dating from the 19th century still stand comparatively unchanged , including the Shoulder of Mutton , which still bears windows etched with the emblem of the brewery which owned it in the 1850s . The Station Hotel in the High Street hosted concerts , including an appearance by Black Sabbath in 1968 . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Brownhills does not currently have a Saturday men 's football ( soccer ) team , the nearest being Pelsall Villa F.C. , Heath Hayes F.C. and Walsall Wood F.C. of the Midland Football Combination . In the 1990s Brownhills Town F.C. competed in the Combination but folded during the 2003 – 04 season . During the 1950s Ogley Hay F.C. were a strong local team , reaching the final of the Walsall Senior Cup on three occasions . Currently , the main football club in the town is Brownhills Community Colts , a youth club which has existed since the 1970s and fields teams in various age groups , as well as teams for children with disabilities . 
 The Brownhills Canoe and Outdoor Centre opened in 2006 , funded by British Waterways with the assistance of partners such as Sport England , the European Regional Development Fund and Walsall Council , and offers canoeing and kayaking lessons on the canal , close to the centre of town . Nearby Chasewater is a prominent watersports site , with the Watersports Centre offering a variety of water skiing facilities , including the largest children 's coaching scheme in the UK , and the sailing club providing year @-@ round windsurfing and dinghy sailing . 
 The local community association organises a range of sporting activities for members of the public , including activities as diverse as yoga , badminton and kickboxing . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Brownhills has no dedicated local newspaper of its own , but is covered by newspapers published in Wolverhampton and Walsall . The most popular paid @-@ for local newspaper is the Express & Star . Free newspapers with significant circulation in the town include the Walsall Chronicle , Walsall Advertiser , and Walsall Observer . Similarly , the town has no dedicated local radio station but receives the stations broadcast from the Sutton Coldfield transmitting station , including BRMB and Kerrang ! 105 @.@ 2 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Three members of the Dorsett family from Brownhills played professional football . George Dorsett ( 1881 – 1942 ) and his brother Joe ( 1888 – 1951 ) both played for West Bromwich Albion and Manchester City in the early years of the 20th century . Their nephew Dicky Dorsett ( born 3 December 1919 , died 1999 ) played over 250 times for Aston Villa between 1946 and 1952 and also played for Wolverhampton Wanderers in the 1939 FA Cup Final . 
 Supermodel Erin O 'Connor ( born 9 February 1978 ) grew up in Brownhills . 
 = 21st Century Breakdown = 
 21st Century Breakdown is the eighth studio album by the American punk rock band Green Day . It is the band 's second rock opera , following American Idiot ( 2004 ) , and their first album to be produced by Butch Vig . Green Day commenced work on the record in January 2006 and forty @-@ five songs were written by vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong by October 2007 , but the band members did not enter studio work until January 2008 . 
 The album was released May 15 , 2009 through Reprise Records . Armstrong has described the album as a " snapshot of the era in which we live as we question and try to make sense of the selfish manipulation going on around us , whether it be the government , religion , media or frankly any form of authority " . The singles " Know Your Enemy " and " 21 Guns " exemplify the themes of alienation and politically motivated anger present in the record . 
 Critical response to 21st Century Breakdown was generally positive . The record achieved Green Day 's best chart performance to date , reaching number one on the album charts of various countries , including the United States Billboard 200 , the European Top 100 Albums , and the United Kingdom Albums Chart . It was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album at the 52nd Grammy Awards held on January 31 , 2010 . As of December 2010 , 21st Century Breakdown has sold 1 @,@ 005 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and more than 4 million worldwide . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Green Day began to write new songs for what would become 21st Century Breakdown in January 2006 after touring extensively in 2005 in support of their seventh studio album American Idiot . At the time , frontman Billie Joe Armstrong stated : " We 'll start with silence , and that 's how we 'll be able to find the inspiration to find another record . " The band did not release any details of the writing and recording process until October 2007 , when Armstrong said in an interview with Rolling Stone that he had written " something like 45 songs " . The band members worked on the primitive conceptual stages of the album at their rehearsal studio in Oakland , California . Little was revealed on the themes or musical style of the album , but Armstrong stated : " I want to dig into who I am and what I 'm feeling at this moment – which is middle @-@ aged . " He added that many of the 45 songs were written on piano rather than guitar . 
 Green Day began the recording process for 21st Century Breakdown in January 2008 . Later that year , it was confirmed that the band worked with producer Butch Vig . The album was recorded with Vig throughout 2008 and into early 2009 at four locations in California : Ocean Way Recording in Hollywood , Studio 880 in Oakland , <unk> Studios in Newport Beach , and Costa Mesa Studios in Costa Mesa . While recording in Hollywood , the band members bought cheap turntables from Amoeba Music and listened to many vinyl records for inspiration , including albums by The Beat and The <unk> . Armstrong cited as inspiration the music of The Kinks ' Ray Davies , The Pretty Things ' S.F. Sorrow , The Doors ' The Doors and Strange Days , and Meat Loaf 's Bat Out of Hell . Drummer Tré Cool noted the influence of Eddie Cochran and The Creation on Armstrong 's writing . 
 While writing at his home studio , Armstrong worked on a cover of The Who 's 1966 mini @-@ opera " A Quick One , While He 's Away " ; Green Day recorded a full @-@ band version of the song during the album sessions . Vig noted that frustrations would sometimes cause delays in the recording process for 21st Century Breakdown . Armstrong kept his lyrics closely guarded and intentionally mixed his demos so that the vocals were low in the mix and thus unintelligible to the other band members . It was not until late 2008 that he chose to share his words with Cool , Vig , and bassist Mike Dirnt by sitting down with them and reading the entire album 's lyrics aloud in order . The band members made the finishing touches on the album in early April 2009 and claimed that its release would lead to a " kind of ... post @-@ partum depression " . 
 = = Themes and composition = = 
 21st Century Breakdown continues the rock opera style of its predecessor , American Idiot . The album is set in Detroit , Michigan and is divided into three acts : " Heroes and Cons " , " Charlatans and Saints " , and " Horseshoes and <unk> " . Its loose narrative follows a young couple named Christian and Gloria through the challenges present in the U.S. following the presidency of George W. Bush . Bassist Mike Dirnt has compared the relationships between the songs to those in Bruce Springsteen 's Born to Run , saying that the themes are not as tightly interwoven as in a concept album , but that they are still connected . Many of the record 's themes and lyrics are drawn from Armstrong 's personal life and he sings in the first @-@ person narrative style about abandonment and vengeance in " Before the Lobotomy " , " Christian 's Inferno " , and " Peacemaker " . Rolling Stone noted that the album is " the most personal , emotionally convulsive record Armstrong has ever written " . 
 The title track 's opening lyric " Born into Nixon , I was raised in hell " references Armstrong 's birth year of 1972 , while " We are the class of ' 13 " references the fact that his eldest son , Joseph , will graduate from high school in 2013 . Dirnt has expressed his belief that " Last of the American Girls " was written about Armstrong 's wife Adrienne , who he claimed is steadfast in her beliefs and assertively defends them . Armstrong has cited his " disconnected " childhood — he was raised by his five older siblings after their father 's death , while their mother worked graveyard shifts as a waitress — as the roots of the discontent expressed on 21st Century Breakdown . " East Jesus Nowhere " rebukes fundamentalist religion and was written after Armstrong attended a church service where a friend 's baby was baptized . 
 Musically , 21st Century Breakdown is similar to the punk rock style of American Idiot , but many critics have claimed that Green Day 's traditional sound has evolved in the five years since their last release to incorporate new influences such as heavier , louder pop rock and stadium rock on an epic scale . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone indicated that the album sports ballads that are Green Day 's most polished ; he claimed that the band " combine punk thrash with their newfound love of classic @-@ rock grandiosity " . MTV compared the material to that of classic rockers like The Who , while Spin called the title track " Green Day 's most epic song yet " . Cool has remarked : " It 's important to us that we 're still looked at as a punk band . It was our religion , our higher education " . However , he also noted that Armstrong had delved into the past in writing 21st Century Breakdown , gleaning inspiration from the artists who shaped rock music . Armstrong himself has stated : " Ground zero for me is still punk rock . I like painting an ugly picture . I get something uplifting out of singing some of the most horrifying shit you can sing about . It 's just my DNA . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Green Day commenced work on the record in January 2006 . The writing and recording process spanned three years and four California recording studios , and it was finished in April 2009 . On February 9 , 2009 , Green Day announced the album title and that the record would be split into three acts : " Heroes and Cons " , " Charlatans and Saints " , and " Horseshoes and <unk> " . On March 17 , a teaser trailer for 21st Century Breakdown was posted on the band 's website . The international release date of May 15 was announced on March 25 . In early April 2009 , Green Day premiered " Know Your Enemy " on television ; a portion of the song was used as introductory music to the 2009 NCAA Men 's Basketball Tournament Championship game . The band first performed 21st Century Breakdown in full during a string of California club shows in April 2009 . At each show , concertgoers were given programs containing all of the album 's lyrics . The first single , " Know Your Enemy " , was released on April 16 , 2009 , and soon after the world premiere of the song 's music video occurred on April 24 on the MTV UK website . 
 21st Century Breakdown was released internationally on May 15 , 2009 , through Reprise Records . The special edition vinyl version was limited to 3 @,@ 000 copies and consisted of three 10 " records , one for each of the album 's " acts " , a CD copy of the album , a 60 @-@ page art booklet , and a code for the digital download of the full album . The album artwork process was led by Chris Bilheimer and is based on a work from artist Sixten , who confirmed that the couple on the cover were " just friends of a friend at a party in <unk> , Sweden " and explained that a mutual friend snapped a picture of the pair kissing . He added : " I love their passion , and just had to make a stencil out of it to spread the love . " The cover art was noted for a marked similarity with that of Blur 's 2003 album Think Tank , itself a stencil by artist Banksy . Green Day showcased a collection of similarly themed art , called " The Art of Rock " , at an art exhibition in London between October 23 and November 1 , 2009 . 
 The record reached number one on the Billboard 200 in the U.S. , where it sold 215 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , which was a shortened three days . The album remained at number one on the Billboard Top Rock Albums chart for three weeks . In Canada , the album debuted at # 1 on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 30 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album debuted at the top of sales charts in twenty four total countries , including a peak of number one on the European Top 100 Albums . 21st Century Breakdown was only released in a Parental Advisory version containing explicit lyrics and content ; Wal @-@ Mart refuses to sell albums with a Parental Advisory sticker and requested that Green Day release a censored edition . The band members responded by stating : " There 's nothing dirty about our record ... They want artists to censor their records in order to be carried in there . We just said no . We 've never done it before . You feel like you 're in 1953 or something . " The second single , " 21 Guns " , was released to radio stations on May 25 . The band embarked on a world tour in July 2009 ; the North American leg lasted through September and the European leg ended in November . " East Jesus Nowhere " was released as the album 's third single on October 19 , 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reception to 21st Century Breakdown has been generally favorable , according to aggregating website Metacritic , which reported a rating of 70 / 100 based on 30 critical reviews . Dan Silver of The Observer awarded the record four stars out of five and likened it to both Bruce Springsteen 's music and the avant @-@ garde writing of Chuck Palahniuk . Rolling Stone 's David Fricke called 21st Century Breakdown " a compound bomb of classic @-@ rock ecstasy , no @-@ mercy punk assault and pop @-@ song wiles ; it 's like The Clash 's London Calling , The Who 's Quadrophenia and Hüsker Dü 's Zen Arcade all compressed into 18 songs " . Dan Cairns of The Times concluded : " Lyrically , it may succeed in capturing the contradictions , vulnerabilities and longing for harmony that thrum through Armstrong , Dirnt and Cool , their country , and humanity as a whole . But its real triumph , in an age of trimming , of market testing , of self @-@ censorship and lowest common denominators , is not simply to aim insanely high , but to make it to the summit . " 
 Criticism centered on the concept of the record ; BBC 's Chris Jones said that it is " griping vaguely against ' authority ' " and that " too many buzz words obscure incisive meaning " . Steve Kandell of Spin wrote that the humor of American Idiot was " sorely missed " and that the energy of the album seemed " directionless " . The Guardian 's Alexis Petridis indicated that " the storyline becomes impossible to follow " . Adam Downer of Sputnikmusic was the most critical professional reviewer of the album ; he questioned the clarity of the lyrics by calling 21st Century Breakdown " more conceptually vague / ridiculous than American Idiot " , and he went on to say that it " spirals out of control in its own heroic glory and never regains focus , thus ending with a product that Green Day couldn 't afford to produce : an average record " . Slant Magazine claims that " ... an uncanny sense of familiarity hangs over too much of the album . The melodies of several tracks suggest ghosts of older Green Day songs . " Kyle Ryan at The A.V. Club gave the album a B + , noting it as " going [ even ] bolder " than American Idiot . Ryan also declared " 21st Century Breakdown reinforces what American Idiot first revealed : Green Day should never be underestimated . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Album awards = = = 
