 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Billie Joe Armstrong , all music composed by Green Day . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 All lyrics written by Billie Joe Armstrong , all music composed by Green Day , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 2009 Samsung 500 = 
 The 2009 Samsung 500 was the seventh stock car race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series . It was held on April 5 , 2009 at Texas Motor Speedway in Fort Worth , Texas before a crowd of 176 @,@ 300 people . The 334 @-@ lap race was won by Jeff Gordon of the Hendrick Motorsports team after starting from second position . His teammate Jimmie Johnson finished second and Greg Biffle came in third . 
 David Reutimann won the pole position , and maintained his lead going into the first corner to begin the race , but Gordon took over the lead before the first lap was over . Afterward , Reutimann took back the lead , holding it until Matt Kenseth passed him on lap 47 . Gordon led after the final pit stops . In the final laps , Johnson was gaining on Gordon , but Gordon maintained his position to win . There were six cautions and twenty @-@ eight lead changes among thirteen different drivers during the race . 
 The race was Gordon 's first win of the 2009 season , and the eighty @-@ second of his career . The result kept Gordon in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , one @-@ hundred and sixty @-@ two ahead of Johnson , and one @-@ hundred and eighty ahead of Kurt Busch . Chevrolet increased its lead in the Manufacturers ' Championship , ten points ahead of Ford , who bumped Toyota to third place , with twenty @-@ nine races remaining in the season remaining . The race attracted 7 @.@ 4 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Texas Motor Speedway is one of ten intermediate to hold NASCAR races , the others being Atlanta Motor Speedway , Kansas Speedway , Chicagoland Speedway , Darlington Raceway , Homestead Miami Speedway , New Hampshire Motor Speedway , Kentucky Speedway , Las Vegas Motor Speedway , and Charlotte Motor Speedway . The standard track at Texas Motor Speedway is a four @-@ turn quad @-@ oval track that is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at twenty @-@ four degrees , and both the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) and the back stretch have a five degree banking . 
 Before the race , Jeff Gordon led the Drivers ' Championship with 959 points , followed by Clint Bowyer with 870 . Kurt Busch was third with 827 points , Jimmie Johnson was fourth with 817 and Denny Hamlin was fifth with 811 points . Kurt 's younger brother Kyle Busch , along with Tony Stewart , Carl Edwards , Kasey Kahne and Kevin Harvick rounded out the top ten . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet was leading with 39 points , five points ahead of their rival Toyota . Ford , with 32 points , was five points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third place . Edwards was the race 's defending champion . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were before the Sunday race — one on Friday , and two on Saturday . The first session lasted 90 minutes , while the second session lasted 45 minutes . The third and final practice session lasted 60 minutes . During the first practice session , Mark Martin was fastest , placing ahead of David Reutimann in second and Kurt Busch in third . Greg Biffle was scored fourth , and Johnson placed fifth . Jeff Gordon , Edwards , Dale Earnhardt , Jr . , David Stremme and David Ragan rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session . 
 Although forty @-@ eight drivers were entered in the qualifier ; according to NASCAR 's qualifying procedure , only forty @-@ three could race . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitor 's fastest times . Reutimann clinched his second pole position in the Sprint Cup Series , with a time of 28 @.@ 344 . He was joined on the grid 's front row by Jeff Gordon . Matt Kenseth qualified third , Ragan took fourth , and Paul Menard started fifth . Kahne , Tony Stewart , Kyle Busch , Johnson and Joey Logano rounded out the top ten qualifiers . The five drivers who failed to qualify were Joe Nemechek , Scott Speed , Jeremy Mayfield , Todd Bodine and Scott Riggs . After the qualifier Reutimann said , " We had a great car all day , right off the truck . This pole reminds me of how much things have changed for me in the past few years . I didn 't make the field here two years ago , during a bad time in my racing career . " 
 On Saturday morning , Reuitmann was fastest in the second practice session , ahead of Johnson in second , and Hamlin in third . Edwards was fourth quickest , and Jeff Gordon took fifth . Stewart , Kurt Busch , Kenseth , Bobby Labonte and Jeff Burton rounded out the top ten . Later that day , Johnson paced the final practice session , with Hamlin and Kyle Busch followed in second and third respectively . Jamie McMurray was fourth fastest , ahead of David Gilliland and Burton . Martin placed seventh , Edwards eighth , Juan Pablo Montoya ninth , and Martin Truex , Jr. tenth . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Television coverage for the race , the seventh of a total of thirty @-@ six in the 2009 season , began at 1 : 30 p.m. EDT live in the United States on Fox . Roger Marsh of Texas Alliance Raceway Ministries began pre @-@ race ceremonies with the invocation . Pianist Lewis Warren , Jr. performed the national anthem , and Contest Winner Mark <unk> commanded the drivers to start their engines . No driver had to move to the rear of the grid at the start of the race . 
 The race began at 2 : 17 p.m. Jeff Gordon passed Reuitmann almost immediately by the end of the first lap . Three laps later , Kurt Busch collided with Robby Gordon , with the latter sustaining minor damage and both drivers managed to continue . On lap 8 , Reutimann took back the lead from Jeff Gordon . One lap later , Jeff Gordon dropped a further position when he was passed by Kenseth . By lap 20 , Reuitmann had a lead of about 1 @.@ 6 seconds over Kenseth . Kurt Busch , who began the race in twenty @-@ sixth , had moved up seven positions to nineteenth by lap 24 . On lap 29 , Stewart claimed fifth from Menard . 
 By lap 30 , Earnhardt had moved up eight positions to twelfth . Ten laps later , Reutimann had maintained a lead of 1 @.@ 7 seconds over Kenseth . On lap 42 , Marcos Ambrose moved into seventh . Five laps later , Kenseth claimed the lead off Reutimann who was blocked by Casey Mears . On lap 51 , green flag pit stops began , as Kenseth made a pit stop handling the lead to Stewart . On lap 54 , Kyle Busch became the new race leader after Stewart came into pit road . Kyle Busch made a pit stop one lap later , handing the lead back to Kenseth . By lap 60 , Kenseth had built up his lead over Reutimann by over two seconds . Eight laps later , Stewart passed Reutimann for second . 
 On lap 79 , Biffle passed Reutimann for third . Seven laps later , Stewart claimed the lead from Kenseth . During the 97th lap , debris was spotted on the track , prompting the first caution of the race . During the caution , all of the drivers on the lead lap made pit stops . Kenseth reclaimed the lead and maintained it at the restart . On the 109th lap , Kyle Busch 's car suffered a cut left front tire from contact with John Andretti , forcing Kyle Busch to come to pit road . Seven laps later , Biffle passed Kenseth for the lead , while Jeff Gordon passed Reuitmann for fourth thirteen laps later . By the 135th lap , Biffle had built a lead over Kenseth to three seconds . 
 Green flag pit stops began on the 152nd lap ; Kenseth made his pit stop on the same lap . Johnson and Biffle made a pit stop the next lap , handing the lead to Jeff Gordon . After pit stops , Biffle reclaimed the first position . On lap 157 , Elliott Sadler spun out , causing the second caution . None of the leaders elected to pit under the caution . The race restarted on lap 162 with Biffle in the lead , ahead of Kenseth and Jeff Gordon . By the 190th lap , Biffle 's lead was three seconds . 
 Another round of green flag pit stops began on lap 203 when Truex made a pit stop ; Kenseth was the first of the leaders to pit the following lap . On lap 208 , Jeff Gordon became the new race leader after Biffle came into pit road . After pit stops , Biffle reclaimed the top position . On lap 220 , the third caution was given as Ambrose 's car suffered an engine failure . Jeff Gordon and Martin stayed out , while some of the leaders came to pit road . 
 Jeff Gordon led the field back up to speed on the restart . On lap 226 , Sam Hornish , Jr. spun and Labonte collided with the <unk> prompting the fourth caution ; During the caution , Johnson , Earnhardt and Hamlin made pit stops . Jeff Gordon stayed out of pit road and the led the field to restart on lap 237 . Four laps later , Logano collided with the wall , but escaped with minor damage . On lap 247 , Edwards moved into sixth . Four laps later , a fifth caution came out when Robby Gordon 's car suffered an engine failure . All of the leaders elected to pit under caution , giving the lead to Earnhardt The race restarted on lap 259 . On lap 260 , Jeff Gordon moved back into the lead , while Earnhardt fell back to the seventh position . Three laps later , Edwards passed Brian Vickers to move into ninth . 
 On lap 290 , Earnhardt Jr was forced onto pit road after colliding with the wall at turn two . One lap later , Ragan drove to pit road because of overheating issues . On the 294th lap , Edwards reclaimed the lead off Gordon , while Ragan drove to the garage , three laps later . On lap 298 , Stewart moved into second after passing Jeff Gordon . Four laps later , a sixth and final caution came out , after Stremme collided with the wall and spun going into turn 3 . Jeff Gordon led on the restart . On lap 309 , Johnson passed Stewart for the second position , while Jeff Gordon built up a 1 @.@ 4 second lead four laps later . On the 314th lap , Biffle moved into the fourth position after passing Johnson . By lap 323 , Jeff Gordon had increased his lead to 1 @.@ 7 seconds over Johnson . Jeff Gordon maintained the lead to win his first race of the 2009 season . Johnson finished second , ahead of Biffle in third , Stewart in fourth , and Kenseth in fifth . Martin , Montoya , Kurt Busch , Burton and Edwards rounded out the top ten finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Jeff Gordon appeared in victory lane to celebrate his first win of the 2009 season in front of 176 @,@ 300 who attended the race . He also earned $ 541 @,@ 874 in race winnings . Gordon was delighted with his victory : " Incredible team effort . This whole year has been amazing . What a great car . I 've never had a car like this at Texas . We finally had one and put it in position . " Johnson was happy with his second @-@ place result , saying , " It was nice to get our car up front and get some clean air on it . We had to work really hard all day long to keep the car right . I 'm very proud of the team . " Third @-@ place finisher Biffle was candid with his performance : " We worked our way all the way back to fourth , third -- 15 more laps , would 've passed [ runner @-@ up Jimmie Johnson ] and then a little while longer we could 've gotten [ Gordon ] . But , I just ran out of time , lost track position and weren 't able to capitalize on it . " 
 The race results kept Jeff Gordon in the lead of the Drivers ' Championship with 1154 points . Johnson , who finished behind Gordon , moved to second on 992 , eighteen points ahead of Kurt Busch and twenty @-@ five ahead of Bowyer . In the Manufacturers ' Championship , Chevrolet increased their points total to 48 , while Ford advanced to second with 38 and Toyota was bumped to third with 37 . 7 @.@ 4 million people watched the race on television . The race took three hours , twenty @-@ five minutes and twenty @-@ two seconds to complete , and the margin of victory was 0 @.@ 378 seconds . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 = Dodo = 
 The dodo ( Raphus cucullatus ) is an extinct flightless bird that was endemic to the island of Mauritius , east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean . The species died out before 1700 , less than a hundred years after encountering men . The dodo 's closest genetic relative was the also extinct Rodrigues solitaire , the two forming the subfamily Raphinae of the family of pigeons and doves . The closest living relative of the dodo is the Nicobar pigeon . A white dodo was once thought to have existed on the nearby island of Réunion , but this is now thought to have been confusion based on the Réunion ibis and paintings of white dodos . 
 Subfossil remains show the dodo was about 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) tall and may have weighed 10 @.@ 6 – 21 @.@ 1 kg ( 23 – 47 lb ) in the wild . The dodo 's appearance in life is evidenced only by drawings , paintings , and written accounts from the 17th century . Because these vary considerably , and because only some illustrations are known to have been drawn from live specimens , its exact appearance in life remains unresolved . Similarly , little is known with certainty about its habitat and behaviour . It has been depicted with brownish @-@ grey plumage , yellow feet , a tuft of tail feathers , a grey , naked head , and a black , yellow , and green beak . It used gizzard stones to help digest its food , which is thought to have included fruits , and its main habitat is believed to have been the woods in the drier coastal areas of Mauritius . One account states its clutch consisted of a single egg . It is presumed that the dodo became flightless because of the ready availability of abundant food sources and a relative absence of predators on Mauritius . 
 The first recorded mention of the dodo was by Dutch sailors in 1598 . In the following years , the bird was hunted by sailors and invasive species , while its habitat was being destroyed . The last widely accepted sighting of a dodo was in 1662 . Its extinction was not immediately noticed , and some considered it to be a mythical creature . In the 19th century , research was conducted on a small quantity of remains of four specimens that had been brought to Europe in the early 17th century . Among these is a dried head , the only soft tissue of the dodo that remains today . Since then , a large amount of subfossil material has been collected on Mauritius , mostly from the Mare aux Songes swamp . The extinction of the dodo within less than a century of its discovery called attention to the previously unrecognised problem of human involvement in the disappearance of entire species . The dodo achieved widespread recognition from its role in the story of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , and it has since become a fixture in popular culture , often as a symbol of extinction and obsolescence . It is frequently used as a mascot on Mauritius . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The dodo was variously declared a small ostrich , a rail , an albatross , or a vulture , by early scientists . In 1842 , Danish zoologist Johannes Theodor Reinhardt proposed that dodos were ground pigeons , based on studies of a dodo skull he had discovered in the collection of the Natural History Museum of Denmark . This view was met with ridicule , but was later supported by English naturalists Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville in their 1848 monograph The Dodo and Its Kindred , which attempted to separate myth from reality . After dissecting the preserved head and foot of the specimen at the Oxford University Museum and comparing it with the few remains then available of the extinct Rodrigues solitaire ( Pezophaps solitaria ) they concluded that the two were closely related . Strickland stated that although not identical , these birds shared many distinguishing features of the leg bones , otherwise known only in pigeons . 
 Strickland and Melville established that the dodo was anatomically similar to pigeons in many features . They pointed to the very short keratinous portion of the beak , with its long , slender , naked basal part . Other pigeons also have bare skin around their eyes , almost reaching their beak , as in dodos . The forehead was high in relation to the beak , and the nostril was located low on the middle of the beak and surrounded by skin , a combination of features shared only with pigeons . The legs of the dodo were generally more similar to those of terrestrial pigeons than of other birds , both in their scales and in their skeletal features . Depictions of the large crop hinted at a relationship with pigeons , in which this feature is more developed than in other birds . Pigeons generally have very small clutches , and the dodo is said to have laid a single egg . Like pigeons , the dodo lacked the vomer and septum of the nostrils , and it shared details in the mandible , the zygomatic bone , the palate , and the hallux . The dodo differed from other pigeons mainly in the small size of the wings and the large size of the beak in proportion to the rest of the cranium . 
 Throughout the 19th century , several species were classified as congeneric with the dodo , including the Rodrigues solitaire and the Réunion solitaire , as Didus solitarius and Raphus solitarius , respectively ( Didus and Raphus being names for the dodo genus used by different authors of the time ) . An atypical 17th @-@ century description of a dodo and bones found on Rodrigues , now known to have belonged to the Rodrigues solitaire , led Abraham Dee Bartlett to name a new species , Didus nazarenus , in 1852 . Based on solitaire remains , it is now a synonym of that species . Crude drawings of the red rail of Mauritius were also misinterpreted as dodo species ; Didus <unk> and Didus herberti . 
 For many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own , the Raphidae ( formerly Dididae ) , because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved . Each was also placed in its own monotypic family ( Raphidae and Pezophapidae , respectively ) , as it was thought that they had evolved their similarities independently . Osteological and DNA analysis has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae , and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in their own subfamily , Raphinae , within the family Columbidae . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 One of the original names for the dodo was the Dutch " <unk> " , first used in the journal of Vice Admiral <unk> van <unk> , who visited Mauritius during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia in 1598 . <unk> means " tasteless " , " insipid " , or " sickly " , and <unk> means " bird " . The name was translated into German as <unk> or <unk> , by Jakob <unk> . The original Dutch report titled <unk> <unk> was lost , but the English translation survived : 
 On their left hand was a little island which they named <unk> Island , and the bay it <unk> they called Warwick Bay ... Here they <unk> 12 @.@ <unk> to refresh <unk> , finding in this place great quantity of <unk> twice as bigge as swans , which they call <unk> or <unk> being very good meat . But finding an abundance of pigeons & <unk> [ parrots ] , they disdained any more to eat those great <unk> calling them <unk> , that is to say <unk> or fulsome <unk> . 
 Another account from that voyage , perhaps the first to mention the dodo , states that the Portuguese referred to them as penguins . The meaning may not have been derived from penguin ( the Portuguese referred to them as " <unk> " at the time ) , but from pinion , a reference to the small wings . The crew of the Dutch ship Gelderland referred to the bird as " <unk> " ( meaning " swollen " ) in 1602 , a name that is still used in some languages . This crew also called them " <unk> @-@ <unk> " and " <unk> " , in reference to fowl fattened for the <unk> festival in Amsterdam , which was held the day after they anchored on Mauritius . 
 The etymology of the word dodo is unclear . Some ascribe it to the Dutch word <unk> for " <unk> " , but it is more probably related to <unk> , which means either " fat @-@ arse " or " knot @-@ arse " , referring to the knot of feathers on the hind end . The first record of the word <unk> is in Captain Willem Van West @-@ Zanen 's journal in 1602 . The English writer Sir Thomas Herbert was the first to use the word dodo in print in his 1634 travelogue , claiming it was referred to as such by the Portuguese , who had visited Mauritius in 1507 . Another Englishman , Emmanuel Altham , had used the word in a 1628 letter , in which he also claimed the origin was Portuguese . The name " <unk> " was introduced into English at the same time as dodo , but was only used until the 18th century . As far as is known , the Portuguese never mentioned the bird . Nevertheless , some sources still state that the word dodo derives from the Portuguese word <unk> ( currently <unk> ) , meaning " fool " or " crazy " . It has also been suggested that dodo was an onomatopoeic approximation of the bird 's call , a two @-@ note pigeon @-@ like sound resembling " doo @-@ doo " . 
 The Latin name cucullatus ( " hooded " ) was first used by Juan Eusebio <unk> in 1635 as Cygnus cucullatus , in reference to Carolus Clusius 's 1605 depiction of a dodo . In his 18th @-@ century classic work Systema Naturae , Carl Linnaeus used cucullatus as the specific name , but combined it with the genus name <unk> ( ostrich ) . Mathurin Jacques Brisson coined the genus name Raphus ( referring to the <unk> ) in 1760 , resulting in the current name Raphus cucullatus . In 1766 , Linnaeus coined the new binomial Didus ineptus ( meaning " inept dodo " ) . This has become a synonym of the earlier name because of nomenclatural priority . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 In 2002 , American geneticist Beth Shapiro and colleagues analysed the DNA of the dodo for the first time . Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome b and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from a tarsal of the Oxford specimen and a femur of a Rodrigues solitaire confirmed their close relationship and their placement within the Columbidae . The genetic evidence was interpreted as showing the Southeast Asian Nicobar pigeon ( Caloenas nicobarica ) to be their closest living relative , followed by the crowned pigeons ( Goura ) of New Guinea , and the superficially dodo @-@ like tooth @-@ billed pigeon ( Didunculus <unk> ) from Samoa ( its scientific name refers to its dodo @-@ like beak ) . This clade consists of generally ground @-@ dwelling island endemic pigeons . The following cladogram shows the dodo 's closest relationships within the Columbidae , based on Shapiro et al . , 2002 : 
 A similar cladogram was published in 2007 , inverting the placement of Goura and <unk> and including the pheasant pigeon ( <unk> nobilis ) and the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon ( Trugon terrestris ) at the base of the clade . The DNA used in these studies was obtained from the Oxford specimen , and since this material is degraded , and no usable DNA has been extracted from subfossil remains , these findings still need to be independently verified . Based on behavioural and morphological evidence , Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the Groura pigeons and others , in agreement with the genetic evidence . In 2014 , DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon ( Caloenas maculata ) was analysed , and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon , and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire . 
 The 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the dodo and the solitaire diverged around the Paleogene @-@ Neogene boundary . The Mascarene Islands ( Mauritius , Réunion , and Rodrigues ) , are of volcanic origin and are less than 10 million years old . Therefore , the ancestors of both birds probably remained capable of flight for a considerable time after the separation of their lineage . The Nicobar and spotted green pigeon were placed at the base of a lineage leading to the Raphinae , which indicates the flightless raphines had ancestors that were able to fly , were semi @-@ terrestrial , and inhabited islands . This in turn supports the hypothesis that the ancestors of those birds reached the Mascarene islands by island hopping from South Asia . The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes and flightlessness . Despite its divergent skull morphology and adaptations for larger size , many features of its skeleton remained similar to those of smaller , flying pigeons . Another large , flightless pigeon , the Viti Levu giant pigeon ( Natunaornis gigoura ) , was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji . It was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the solitaire , and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons . 
 = = Description = = 
 As no complete dodo specimens exist , its external appearance , such as plumage and colouration , is hard to determine . Illustrations and written accounts of encounters with the dodo between its discovery and its extinction ( 1598 – 1662 ) are the primary evidence for its external appearance . According to most representations , the dodo had greyish or brownish plumage , with lighter primary feathers and a tuft of curly light feathers high on its rear end . The head was grey and naked , the beak green , black and yellow , and the legs were stout and yellowish , with black claws . A study of the few remaining feathers on the Oxford specimen head showed that they were pennaceous rather than <unk> ( downy ) and most similar to those of other pigeons . 
 The bird was sexually dimorphic : males were larger and had proportionally longer beaks . The beak was up to 23 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) in length and had a hooked point . The upper bill was nearly twice as long as the cranium , which was short compared to those of its closest pigeon relatives . The openings of the bony nostrils were elongated along the length of the beak , and they contained no bony septum . The cranium ( excluding the beak ) was wider than it was long , and the frontal bone formed a dome , with the highest point above the hind part of the eye sockets . The skull sloped downwards at the back . The eye sockets occupied much of the hind part of the skull . The sclerotic rings inside the eye were formed by eleven ossicles ( small bones ) , similar to the amount in other pigeons . The mandible was slightly curved , and the hind part was expanded to the side . 
 Subfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to Europe in the 17th century show that they were very large birds , up to 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) tall , and possibly weighing up to 23 kilograms ( 51 lb ) . The higher weights have been attributed to birds in captivity ; weights in the wild were estimated to have been in the range 10 @.@ 6 – 21 @.@ 1 kg ( 23 – 47 lb ) . A later estimate gives an average weight as low as 10 @.@ 2 kg ( 22 lb ) . This has been questioned , and there is still some controversy . A 2016 study estimated the weight at 10 @.@ 6 to 14 @.@ 3 kg ( 23 to 32 lb ) , based on CT scans of composite skeletons . It has been suggested that the weight depended on the season , and that individuals were fat during cool seasons , but less so during hot . 
 Many of the skeletal features that distinguish the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire , its closest relative , from pigeons have been attributed to their flightlessness . The pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted pigeons to support the higher weight , and the pectoral region and the small wings were paedomorphic , meaning that they were underdeveloped and retained juvenile features . The skull , trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic , meaning that they changed considerably with age . The dodo shared several other traits with the Rodrigues solitaire , such as features of the skull , pelvis , and sternum , as well as their large size . It differed in other aspects , such as being more robust and shorter than the solitaire , having a larger skull and beak , a rounded skull roof , and smaller orbits . The dodo 's neck and legs were proportionally shorter , and it did not possess an equivalent to the knob present on the solitaire 's wrists . 
 = = = Contemporary descriptions = = = 
 Most contemporary descriptions of the dodo are found in ship 's logs and journals of the Dutch East India Company vessels that docked in Mauritius when the Dutch Empire ruled the island . These records were used as guides for future voyages . Few contemporary accounts are reliable , as many seem to be based on earlier accounts , and none were written by scientists . One of the earliest accounts , from van <unk> 's 1598 journal , describes the bird as follows : 
 Blue parrots are very numerous there , as well as other birds ; among which are a kind , conspicuous for their size , larger than our swans , with huge heads only half covered with skin as if clothed with a hood . These birds lack wings , in the place of which 3 or 4 blackish feathers protrude . The tail consists of a few soft incurved feathers , which are ash coloured . These we used to call ' <unk> ' , for the reason that the longer and oftener they were cooked , the less soft and more insipid eating they became . Nevertheless their belly and breast were of a pleasant flavour and easily <unk> . 
 One of the most detailed descriptions is by Sir Thomas Herbert in A Relation of Some <unk> <unk> into Afrique and the Greater Asia from 1634 : 
 First here only and in <unk> [ Rodrigues , likely referring to the solitaire ] is generated the Dodo , which for shape and rareness may antagonize the Phoenix of Arabia : her body is round and fat , few weigh less than fifty pound . It is reputed more for wonder than for food , <unk> <unk> may <unk> after them , but to the delicate they are offensive and of no nourishment . Her visage darts forth melancholy , as sensible of Nature 's <unk> in framing so great a body to be guided with <unk> wings , so small and impotent , that they serve only to prove her bird . The halfe of her head is naked seeming <unk> with a fine <unk> , her bill is crooked downwards , in midst is the trill [ nostril ] , from which part to the end tis a light green , mixed with pale yellow tincture ; her eyes are small and like to Diamonds , round and <unk> ; her clothing downy feathers , her train three small plumes , short and <unk> , her legs suiting her body , her pounces sharpe , her appetite strong and greedy . Stones and iron are digested , which description will better be conceived in her representation . 
 = = = Contemporary depictions = = = 
 The travel journal of the Dutch ship Gelderland ( 1601 – 1603 ) , rediscovered in the 1860s , contains the only known sketches of living or recently killed specimens drawn on Mauritius . They have been attributed to the professional artist Joris Joostensz Laerle , who also drew other now @-@ extinct Mauritian birds , and to a second , less refined artist . Apart from these sketches , it is unknown how many of the twenty or so 17th @-@ century illustrations of the dodos were drawn from life or from stuffed specimens , which affects their reliability . 
 All post @-@ 1638 depictions appear to be based on earlier images , around the time reports mentioning dodos became rarer . Differences in the depictions led authors such as Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans and Masauji Hachisuka to speculate about sexual dimorphism , <unk> traits , seasonal variation , and even the existence of different species , but these theories are not accepted today . Because details such as markings of the beak , the form of the tail feathers , and colouration vary from account to account , it is impossible to determine the exact morphology of these features , whether they signal age or sex , or if they even reflect reality . Dodo specialist Julian Hume argued that the nostrils of the living dodo would have been slits , as seen in the Gelderland , Cornelis <unk> , Crocker Art Gallery , and Ustad Mansur images . According to this claim , the gaping nostrils often seen in paintings indicate that taxidermy specimens were used as models . 
 The traditional image of the dodo is of a very fat and clumsy bird , but this view may be exaggerated . The general opinion of scientists today is that many old European depictions were based on overfed captive birds or crudely stuffed specimens . It has also been suggested that the images might show dodos with puffed feathers , as part of display behaviour . The Dutch painter Roelant Savery was the most prolific and influential illustrator of the dodo , having made at least ten depictions , often showing it in the lower corners . A famous painting of his from 1626 , now called Edwards 's Dodo as it was once owned by the ornithologist George Edwards , has since become the standard image of a dodo . It is housed in the Natural History Museum , London . The image shows a particularly fat bird and is the source for many other dodo illustrations . 
 An Indian Mughal painting rediscovered in St. Petersburg in the 1950s shows a dodo along with native Indian birds . It depicts a slimmer , brownish bird , and its discoverer A. <unk> and dodo specialist Julian Hume regard it as one of the most accurate depictions of the living dodo ; the surrounding birds are clearly identifiable and depicted with appropriate colouring . It is believed to be from the 17th century and has been attributed to artist Ustad Mansur . The bird depicted probably lived in the menagerie of Mughal Emperor Jahangir , located in Surat , where English traveller Peter Mundy also claimed to have seen dodos . In 2014 , another Indian illustration of a dodo was reported , but it was found to be derivative of an 1836 German illustration . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Little is known of the behaviour of the dodo , as most contemporary descriptions are very brief . Based on weight estimates , it has been suggested the male could reach the age of 21 , and the female 17 . Studies of the cantilever strength of its leg bones indicate that it could run quite fast . The legs were robust and strong to support the bulk of the bird , and also made it agile and manoeuvrable in the dense , pre @-@ human landscape . Though the wings were small , muscle insertions show that they may have been used for display behaviour and balance , and were therefore not completely vestigial . Unlike the Rodrigues solitaire , there is no evidence that the dodo used its wings in intraspecific combat . Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures , it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison . The dodo may instead have used its large , hooked beak in territorial disputes . Since Mauritius receives more rainfall and has less seasonal variation than Rodrigues , which would have affected the availability of resources on the island , the dodo would have less reason to evolve aggressive territorial behaviour . The Rodrigues solitaire was therefore probably the more aggressive of the two . 
 The preferred habitat of the dodo is unknown , but old descriptions suggest that it inhabited the woods on the drier coastal areas of south and west Mauritius . This view is supported by the fact that the Mare aux Songes swamp is close to the sea in south @-@ eastern Mauritius . Such a limited distribution across the island could well have contributed to its extinction . A 1601 map from the Gelderland journal shows a small island off the coast of Mauritius where dodos were caught . Julian Hume has suggested this island was in <unk> Bay , on the west coast of Mauritius . Subfossil bones have also been found inside caves in highland areas , indicating that it once occurred on mountains . Work at the Mare aux Songes swamp has shown that its habitat was dominated by tambalacoque and Pandanus trees and endemic palms . The near @-@ coastal placement and wetness of the Mare aux Songes led to a high diversity of plant species , whereas the surrounding areas were drier . 
 Many endemic species of Mauritius became extinct after the arrival of humans , so the ecosystem of the island is badly damaged and hard to reconstruct . Before humans arrived , Mauritius was entirely covered in forests , but very little remains of them today , because of deforestation . The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened . The dodo lived alongside other recently extinct Mauritian birds such as the flightless red rail , the broad @-@ billed parrot , the Mascarene grey parakeet , the Mauritius blue pigeon , the Mauritius owl , the Mascarene coot , the Mauritian shelduck , the Mauritian duck , and the Mauritius night heron . Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle @-@ backed Mauritius giant tortoise , the domed Mauritius giant tortoise , the Mauritian giant skink , and the Round Island burrowing boa . The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail Tropidophora carinata lived on Mauritius and Réunion , but vanished from both islands . Some plants , such as Casearia tinifolia and the palm orchid , have also become extinct . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 A 1631 Dutch document , rediscovered in 1887 but now lost , is the only account of the dodo 's diet and also mentions that it used its beak for defence : 
 These mayors are superb and proud . They displayed themselves to us with stiff and stern faces , and wide @-@ open mouths . Jaunty and audacious of gait , they would scarcely move a foot before us . Their war weapon was their mouth , with which they could bite fiercely ; their food was fruit ; they were not well feathered but abundantly covered with fat . Many of them were brought onboard to the delight of us all . 
 In addition to fallen fruits , the dodo probably subsisted on nuts , seeds , bulbs , and roots . It has also been suggested that the dodo might have eaten crabs and shellfish , like their relatives the crowned pigeons . Its feeding habits must have been versatile , since captive specimens were probably given a wide range of food on the long sea journeys . Anthonie Oudemans suggested that as Mauritius has marked dry and wet seasons , the dodo probably fattened itself on ripe fruits at the end of the wet season to survive the dry season , when food was scarce ; contemporary reports describe the bird 's " greedy " appetite . France Staub suggested that they mainly fed on palm fruits , and he attempted to correlate the fat @-@ cycle of the dodo with the fruiting regime of the palms . Skeletal elements of the upper jaw appear to have been <unk> ( movable in relation to each other ) , which must have affected its feeding behaviour . In extant birds , such as frugivorous ( fruit @-@ eating ) pigeons , kinetic premaxillae help with consuming large food items . In 2016 , the first 3D endocast was made from the brain of the dodo ; examination found that though the brain was similar to that of other pigeons in most respects , the dodo had a comparatively large olfactory bulb . This gave the dodo a good sense of smell , which may have aided in locating fruit and small prey . 
 Several contemporary sources state that the dodo used <unk> ( gizzard stones ) to aid digestion . The English writer Sir Hamon L 'Estrange witnessed a live bird in London and described it as follows : 
 About 1638 , as I walked London streets , I saw the picture of a strange looking fowle hung out upon a clothe and myselfe with one or two more in company went in to see it . It was kept in a chamber , and was a great fowle somewhat bigger than the largest Turkey cock , and so legged and footed , but stouter and thicker and of more erect shape , coloured before like the breast of a young cock <unk> , and on the back of a <unk> or <unk> colour . The keeper called it a Dodo , and in the ende of a <unk> in the chamber there lay a <unk> of large pebble stones , whereof hee gave it many in our sight , some as big as nutmegs , and the keeper told us that she eats them ( <unk> to digestion ) , and though I remember not how far the keeper was questioned therein , yet I am confident that afterwards she cast them all again . 
 It is not known how the young were fed , but related pigeons provide crop milk . Contemporary depictions show a large crop , which was probably used to add space for food storage and to produce crop milk . It has been suggested that the maximum size attained by the dodo and the solitaire was limited by the amount of crop milk they could produce for their young during early growth . 
 In 1973 , the tambalacoque , also known as the dodo tree , was thought to be dying out on <unk> , to which it is endemic . There were supposedly only 13 specimens left , all estimated to be about 300 years old . Stanley Temple hypothesised that it depended on the dodo for its propagation , and that its seeds would germinate only after passing through the bird 's digestive tract . He claimed that the tambalacoque was now nearly <unk> because of the disappearance of the dodo . Temple overlooked reports from the 1940s that found that tambalacoque seeds germinated , albeit very rarely , without being abraded during digestion . Others have contested his hypothesis and suggested that the decline of the tree was exaggerated , or seeds were also distributed by other extinct animals such as Cylindraspis tortoises , fruit bats or the broad @-@ billed parrot . According to Wendy Strahm and Anthony Cheke , two experts in the ecology of the Mascarene Islands , the tree , while rare , has germinated since the demise of the dodo and numbers several hundred , not 13 as claimed by Temple , hence discrediting Temple 's view as to the dodo and the tree 's sole survival relationship . 
 It has been suggested that the broad @-@ billed parrot may have depended on dodos and Cylindraspis tortoises to eat palm fruits and excrete their seeds , which became food for the parrots . Anodorhynchus macaws depended on now @-@ extinct South American megafauna in the same way , but now rely on domesticated cattle for this service . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 As it was flightless and terrestrial and there were no mammalian predators or other kinds of natural enemy on Mauritius , the dodo probably nested on the ground . The account by François Cauche from 1651 is the only description of the egg and the call : 
 I have seen in Mauritius birds bigger than a Swan , without feathers on the body , which is covered with a black down ; the hinder part is round , the rump adorned with curled feathers as many in number as the bird is years old . In place of wings they have feathers like these last , black and curved , without webs . They have no tongues , the beak is large , curving a little downwards ; their legs are long , scaly , with only three toes on each foot . It has a cry like a <unk> , and is by no means so savoury to eat as the Flamingos and Ducks of which we have just spoken . They only lay one egg which is white , the size of a halfpenny roll , by the side of which they place a white stone the size of a hen 's egg . They lay on grass which they collect , and make their nests in the forests ; if one kills the young one , a grey stone is found in the gizzard . We call them Oiseaux de <unk> . The fat is excellent to give ease to the muscles and nerves . 
 Cauche 's account is problematic , since it also mentions that the bird he was describing had three toes and no tongue , unlike dodos . This led some to believe that Cauche was describing a new species of dodo ( " Didus nazarenus " ) . The description was most probably mingled with that of a cassowary , and Cauche 's writings have other inconsistencies . A mention of a " young ostrich " taken on board a ship in 1617 is the only other reference to a possible juvenile dodo . An egg claimed to be that of a dodo is stored in the museum of East London , South Africa . It was donated by Marjorie Courtenay @-@ Latimer , whose great aunt had received it from a captain who claimed to have found it in a swamp on Mauritius . In 2010 , the curator of the museum proposed using genetic studies to determine its authenticity . It may instead be an aberrant ostrich egg . 
 Because of the possible single @-@ egg clutch and the bird 's large size , it has been proposed that the dodo was K @-@ selected , meaning that it produced a low number of altricial offspring , which required parental care until they matured . Some evidence , including the large size and the fact that tropical and frugivorous birds have slower growth rates , indicates that the bird may have had a protracted development period . The fact that no juvenile dodos have been found in the Mare aux Songes swamp , where most dodo remains have been excavated , may indicate that they produced little offspring , that they matured rapidly , that the breeding grounds were far away from the swamp , or that the risk of miring was seasonal . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Mauritius had previously been visited by Arab vessels in the Middle Ages and Portuguese ships between 1507 and 1513 , but was settled by neither . No records of dodos by these are known , although the Portuguese name for Mauritius , " Cerne ( swan ) Island " , may have been a reference to dodos . The Dutch Empire acquired Mauritius in 1598 , renaming it after Maurice of Nassau , and it was used for the provisioning of trade vessels of the Dutch East India Company henceforward . The earliest known accounts of the dodo were provided by Dutch travelers during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia , led by admiral Jacob van Neck in 1598 . They appear in reports published in 1601 , which also contain the first published illustration of the bird . Since the first sailors to visit Mauritius had been at sea for a long time , their interest in these large birds was mainly culinary . The 1602 journal by Willem Van West @-@ Zanen of the ship Bruin @-@ Vis mentions that 24 – 25 dodos were hunted for food , which were so large that two could scarcely be consumed at mealtime , their remains being preserved by salting . An illustration made for the 1648 published version of this journal , showing the killing of dodos , a dugong , and possibly Mascarene grey parakeets , was captioned with a Dutch poem , here in Hugh Strickland 's 1848 translation : 
 Some early travellers found dodo meat unsavoury , and preferred to eat parrots and pigeons ; others described it as tough but good . Some hunted dodos only for their gizzards , as this was considered the most delicious part of the bird . Dodos were easy to catch , but hunters had to be careful not to be bitten by their powerful beaks . 
 The appearance of the dodo and the red rail led Peter Mundy to speculate , 230 years before Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution : 
 Of these 2 sorts off fowl afforementionede , For oughtt wee yett know , Not any to bee Found out of this Iland , which lyeth aboutt 100 leagues From St. Lawrence . A question may bee demaunded how they should bee here and Not elcewhere , beeing soe Farer From other land and can Neither fly or swymme ; whither by Mixture off kindes producing straunge and Monstrous formes , or the Nature of the Climate , ayer and earth in alltring the First shapes in long tyme , or how . 
 = = = Dodos transported abroad = = = 
 The dodo was found interesting enough that living specimens were sent to Europe and the East . The number of transported dodos that reached their destinations alive is uncertain , and it is unknown how they relate to contemporary depictions and the few non @-@ fossil remains in European museums . Based on a combination of contemporary accounts , paintings , and specimens , Julian Hume has inferred that at least eleven transported dodos reached their destinations alive . 
 Hamon L 'Estrange 's description of a dodo that he saw in London in 1638 is the only account that specifically mentions a live specimen in Europe . In 1626 Adriaen van de <unk> drew a dodo that he claimed to have seen in Amsterdam , but he did not mention if it was alive , and his depiction is reminiscent of Savery 's Edwards 's Dodo . Two live specimens were seen by Peter Mundy in Surat , India , between 1628 and 1634 , one of which may have been the individual painted by Ustad Mansur around 1625 . In 1628 , Emmanuel Altham visited Mauritius and sent a letter to his brother in England : 
 Right wo and <unk> brother , we were ordered by ye said <unk> to go to an island called Mauritius , lying in <unk> of south <unk> . , where we arrived ye 28th of May ; this island having many <unk> , hogs and <unk> upon it , and very strange <unk> , called by ye <unk> Dodo , which for the rareness of the same , the like being not in ye world but here , I have sent you one by Mr. Perce , who did arrive with the ship William at this island ye 10th of June . [ In the margin of the letter ] Of Mr. Perce you shall receive a <unk> of ginger for my sister , some <unk> for my cousins your daughters , and a bird called a Dodo , if it live . 
 Whether the dodo survived the journey is unknown , and the letter was destroyed by fire in the 19th century . The earliest known picture of a dodo specimen in Europe is from a c . 1610 collection of paintings depicting animals in the royal menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II in Prague . This collection includes paintings of other Mauritian animals as well , including a red rail . The dodo , which may be a juvenile , seems to have been dried or embalmed , and had probably lived in the emperor 's zoo for a while together with the other animals . That whole stuffed dodos were present in Europe indicates they had been brought alive and died there ; it is unlikely that taxidermists were on board the visiting ships , and spirits were not yet used to preserve biological specimens . Most tropical specimens were preserved as dried heads and feet . 
 One dodo was reportedly sent as far as Nagasaki , Japan in 1647 , but it was long unknown whether it arrived . Contemporary documents first published in 2014 proved the story , and showed that it had arrived alive . It was meant as a gift , and , despite its rarity , was considered of equal value to a white deer and a bezoar stone . It is the last recorded live dodo in captivity . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 Like many animals that evolved in isolation from significant predators , the dodo was entirely fearless of humans . This fearlessness and its inability to fly made the dodo easy prey for sailors . Although some scattered reports describe mass killings of dodos for ships ' provisions , archaeological investigations have found scant evidence of human predation . Bones of at least two dodos were found in caves at Baie du Cap that sheltered fugitive slaves and convicts in the 17th century , which would not have been easily accessible to dodos because of the high , broken terrain . The human population on Mauritius ( an area of 1 @,@ 860 km2 or 720 sq mi ) never exceeded 50 people in the 17th century , but they introduced other animals , including dogs , pigs , cats , rats , and crab @-@ eating macaques , which plundered dodo nests and competed for the limited food resources . At the same time , humans destroyed the forest habitat of the dodos . The impact of the introduced animals on the dodo population , especially the pigs and macaques , is today considered more severe than that of hunting . Rats were perhaps not much of a threat to the nests , since dodos would have been used to dealing with local land crabs . 
 It has been suggested that the dodo may already have been rare or localised before the arrival of humans on Mauritius , since it would have been unlikely to become extinct so rapidly if it had occupied all the remote areas of the island . A 2005 expedition found subfossil remains of dodos and other animals killed by a flash flood . Such mass mortalities would have further jeopardised a species already in danger of becoming extinct . Yet the fact that the dodo survived hundreds of years of volcanic activity and climactic changes shows the bird was resilient within its ecosystem . 
 Some controversy surrounds the date of their extinction . The last widely accepted record of a dodo sighting is the 1662 report by shipwrecked mariner Volkert <unk> of the Dutch ship Arnhem , who described birds caught on a small islet off Mauritius , now suggested to be Amber Island : 
 These animals on our coming up to them stared at us and remained quiet where they stand , not knowing whether they had wings to fly away or legs to run off , and suffering us to approach them as close as we pleased . Amongst these birds were those which in India they call Dod @-@ <unk> ( being a kind of very big goose ) ; these birds are unable to fly , and instead of wings , they merely have a few small pins , yet they can run very swiftly . We drove them together into one place in such a manner that we could catch them with our hands , and when we held one of them by its leg , and that upon this it made a great noise , the others all on a sudden came running as fast as they could to its assistance , and by which they were caught and made prisoners also . 
 The dodos on this islet may not necessarily have been the last members of the species . The last claimed sighting of a dodo was reported in the hunting records of Isaac Johannes <unk> in 1688 . Statistical analysis of these records by Roberts and Solow gives a new estimated extinction date of 1693 , with a 95 % confidence interval of 1688 – 1715 . The authors also pointed out that because the last sighting before 1662 was in 1638 , the dodo was probably already quite rare by the 1660s , and thus a disputed report from 1674 by an escaped slave cannot be dismissed out of hand . 
 Anthony Cheke pointed out that some descriptions after 1662 use the names " Dodo " and " <unk> " when referring to the red rail , indicating that they had been transferred to it after the disappearance of the dodo itself . Cheke therefore points to the 1662 description as the last credible observation . A 1668 account by English traveller John Marshall , who used the names " Dodo " and " Red Hen " interchangeably for the red rail , mentioned that the meat was " hard " , which echoes the description of the meat in the 1681 account . Even the 1662 account has been questioned by Errol Fuller , as the reaction to distress cries matches what was described for the red rail . Until this explanation was proposed , a description of " dodos " from 1681 was thought to be the last account , and that date still has proponents . Recently accessible Dutch manuscripts indicate that no dodos were seen by settlers in 1664 – 1674 . It is unlikely the issue will ever be resolved , unless late reports mentioning the name alongside a physical description are rediscovered . The IUCN Red List accepts Cheke 's rationale for choosing the 1662 date , taking all subsequent reports to refer to red rails . In any case , the dodo was probably extinct by 1700 , about a century after its discovery in 1598 . The Dutch left Mauritius in 1710 , but by then the dodo and most of the large terrestrial vertebrates there had become extinct . 
 Even though the rareness of the dodo was reported already in the 17th century , its extinction was not recognised until the 19th century . This was partly because , for religious reasons , extinction was not believed possible until later proved so by Georges Cuvier , and partly because many scientists doubted that the dodo had ever existed . It seemed altogether too strange a creature , and many believed it a myth . The bird was first used as an example of human @-@ induced extinction in Penny Magazine in 1833 . 
 = = Physical remains = = 
 = = = 17th @-@ century specimens = = = 
 The only extant remains of dodos taken to Europe in the 17th century are a dried head and foot in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History , a foot once housed in the British Museum but now lost , a skull in the University of Copenhagen Zoological Museum , and an upper jaw and leg bones in the National Museum , Prague . The last two were rediscovered and identified as dodo remains in the mid @-@ 19th century . Several stuffed dodos were also mentioned in old museum inventories , but none are known to have survived . Apart from these remains , a dried foot , which belonged to the Dutch professor Pieter Pauw , was mentioned by Carolus Clusius in 1605 . Its provenance is unknown , and it is now lost , but it may have been collected during the Van Neck voyage . 
 The only known soft tissue remains , the Oxford head ( specimen OUM <unk> ) and foot , belonged to the last known stuffed dodo , which was first mentioned as part of the Tradescant collection in 1656 and was moved to the Ashmolean Museum in 1659 . It has been suggested that this might be the remains of the bird that Hamon L 'Estrange saw in London , the bird sent by Emanuel Altham , or a donation by Thomas Herbert . Since the remains do not show signs of having been mounted , the specimen might instead have been preserved as a study skin . Many sources state that the museum burned the stuffed dodo around 1755 because of severe decay , saving only the head and leg . Statute 8 of the museum states " That as any particular grows old and perishing the keeper may remove it into one of the closets or other repository ; and some other to be substituted . " The deliberate destruction of the specimen is now believed to be a myth ; it was removed from exhibition to preserve what remained of it . This remaining soft tissue has since degraded further ; the head was dissected by Strickland and Melville , separating the skin from the skull in two halves . The foot is in a skeletal state , with only scraps of skin and tendons . Very few feathers remain on the head . It is probably a female , as the foot is 11 % smaller and more gracile than the London foot , yet appears to be fully grown . The specimen was exhibited at the Oxford museum from at least the 1860s and until 1998 , where @-@ after it was mainly kept in storage to prevent damage . Casts of the head can today be found in many museums worldwide . 
 The dried London foot , first mentioned in 1665 , and transferred to the British Museum in the 18th century , was displayed next to Savery 's Edwards 's Dodo painting until the 1840s , and it too was dissected by Strickland and Melville . It was not posed in a standing posture , which suggests that it was severed from a fresh specimen , not a mounted one . By 1896 it was mentioned as being without its integuments , and only the bones are believed to remain today , though its present whereabouts are unknown . 
 The Copenhagen skull ( specimen <unk> 90 @-@ 806 ) is known to have been part of the collection of <unk> <unk> in <unk> until 1651 , when it was moved to the museum in <unk> Castle , Schleswig . After the castle was occupied by Danish forces in 1702 , the museum collection was assimilated into the Royal Danish collection . The skull was rediscovered by J. T. Reinhardt in 1840 . Based on its history , it may be the oldest known surviving remains of a dodo brought to Europe in the 17th century . It is 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) shorter than the Oxford skull , and may have belonged to a female . It was mummified , but the skin has perished . 
 The front part of a skull ( specimen NMP <unk> @-@ <unk> , a syntype of this species ) in the National Museum of Prague was found in 1850 among the remains of the <unk> Museum . Other elements supposedly belonging to this specimen have been listed in the literature , but it appears only the partial skull was ever present . It may be what remains of one of the stuffed dodos known to have been at the menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II , possibly the specimen painted by Hoefnagel or Savery there . 
 = = = Subfossil specimens = = = 
 Until 1860 , the only known dodo remains were the four incomplete 17th @-@ century specimens . Philip <unk> Ayres found the first subfossil bones in 1860 , which were sent to Richard Owen at the British Museum , who did not publish the findings . In 1863 , Owen requested the Mauritian Bishop Vincent Ryan to spread word that he should be informed if any dodo bones were found . In 1865 , George Clark , the government schoolmaster at <unk> , finally found an abundance of subfossil dodo bones in the swamp of Mare aux Songes in Southern Mauritius , after a 30 @-@ year search inspired by Strickland and Melville 's monograph . In 1866 , Clark explained his procedure to The Ibis , an ornithology journal : he had sent his coolies to wade through the centre of the swamp , feeling for bones with their feet . At first they found few bones , until they cut away herbage that covered the deepest part of the swamp , where they found many fossils . The swamp yielded the remains of over 300 dodos , but very few skull and wing bones , possibly because the upper bodies were washed away or scavenged while the lower body was trapped . The situation is similar to many finds of moa remains in New Zealand marshes . Most dodo remains from the Mare aux Songes have a medium to dark brown colouration . 
 Clark 's reports about the finds rekindled interest in the bird . Sir Richard Owen and Alfred Newton both wanted to be first to describe the post @-@ cranial anatomy of the dodo , and Owen bought a shipment of dodo bones originally meant for Newton , which led to rivalry between the two . Owen described the bones in Memoir on the Dodo in October 1866 , but erroneously based his reconstruction on the Edwards 's Dodo painting by Savery , making it too squat and obese . In 1869 he received more bones and corrected its stance , making it more upright . Newton moved his focus to the Réunion solitaire instead . The remaining bones not sold to Owen or Newton were auctioned off or donated to museums . In 1889 , <unk> Sauzier was commissioned to explore the " historical souvenirs " of Mauritius and find more dodo remains in the Mare aux Songes . He was successful , and also found remains of other extinct species . 
 In 2005 , after a hundred years of neglect , a part of the Mare aux Songes swamp was excavated by an international team of researchers ( International Dodo Research Project ) . To prevent malaria , the British had covered the swamp with hard core during their rule over Mauritius , which had to be removed . Many remains were found , including bones of at least 17 dodos in various stages of maturity ( though no juveniles ) , and several bones obviously from the skeleton of one individual bird , which have been preserved in their natural position . These findings were made public in December 2005 in the Naturalis museum in Leiden . 63 % of the fossils found in the swamp belonged to turtles of the extinct Cylindraspis genus , and 7 @.@ 1 % belonged to dodos , which had been deposited within several centuries , 4 @,@ 000 years ago . Subsequent excavations suggested that dodos and other animals became mired in the Mare aux Songes while trying to reach water during a long period of severe drought about 4 @,@ 200 years ago . Furthermore , cyanobacteria thrived in the conditions created by the excrements of animals gathered around the swamp , which died of intoxication , dehydration , trampling , and miring . Though many small skeletal elements were found during the recent excavations of the swamp , few were found during the 19th century , probably owing to the employment of less refined methods when collecting . 
 Louis Etienne Thirioux , an amateur naturalist at Port Louis , also found many dodo remains around 1900 from several locations . They included the first articulated specimen , which is the first subfossil dodo skeleton found outside the Mare aux Songes , and the only remains of a juvenile specimen , a now lost tarsometatarsus . The former specimen was found in 1904 in a cave near Le Pouce mountain , and is the only known complete skeleton of an individual dodo . Thirioux donated the specimen to the Museum Desjardins ( now Natural History Museum at Mauritius Institute ) . <unk> 's heirs sold a second mounted composite skeleton ( composed of at least two skeletons , with a mainly reconstructed skull ) to the Durban Museum of Natural Science in South Africa in 1918 . Together , these two skeletons represent the most completely known dodo remains , including bone elements previously unrecorded ( such as knee @-@ caps and various wing bones ) . Though some contemporary writers noted the importance of <unk> 's specimens , they were not scientifically studied , and were largely forgotten until 2011 , when sought out by a group of researchers . The mounted skeletons were laser scanned , from which 3 @-@ D models were reconstructed , which became the basis of a 2016 monograph about the osteology of the dodo . In 2006 , explorers discovered a complete skeleton of a dodo in a lava cave in Mauritius . This was only the second associated skeleton of an individual specimen <unk> , and the only one in recent times . 
 Worldwide , 26 museums have significant holdings of dodo material , almost all found in the Mare aux Songes . The Natural History Museum , American Museum of Natural History , Cambridge University Museum of Zoology , the Senckenberg Museum , and others have almost complete skeletons , assembled from the dissociated subfossil remains of several individuals . In 2011 , a wooden box containing dodo bones from the Edwardian era was rediscovered at the Grant Museum at University College London during preparations for a move . They had been stored with crocodile bones until then . 
 = = The white dodo = = 
 The supposed " white dodo " ( or " solitaire " ) of Réunion is now considered an erroneous conjecture based on contemporary reports of the Réunion ibis and 17th @-@ century paintings of white , dodo @-@ like birds by Pieter Withoos and Pieter Holsteyn that surfaced in the 19th century . The confusion began when Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe , who visited Réunion around 1619 , mentioned fat , flightless birds that he referred to as " Dod @-@ <unk> " in his journal , though without mentioning their colouration . When the journal was published in 1646 , it was accompanied by an engraving of a dodo from Savery 's " Crocker Art Gallery sketch " . A white , stocky , and flightless bird was first mentioned as part of the Réunion fauna by Chief Officer J. Tatton in 1625 . Sporadic mentions were subsequently made by Sieur Dubois and other contemporary writers . 
 Baron Edmond de Sélys Longchamps coined the name Raphus solitarius for these birds in 1848 , as he believed the accounts referred to a species of dodo . When 17th @-@ century paintings of white dodos were discovered by 19th @-@ century naturalists , it was assumed they depicted these birds . Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans suggested that the discrepancy between the paintings and the old descriptions was that the paintings showed females , and that the species was therefore sexually dimorphic . Some authors also believed the birds described were of a species similar to the Rodrigues solitaire , as it was referred to by the same name , or even that there were white species of both dodo and solitaire on the island . 
 The Pieter Withoos painting , which was discovered first , appears to be based on an earlier painting by Pieter Holsteyn , three versions of which are known to have existed . According to Hume , Cheke , and Valledor de Lozoya , it appears that all depictions of white dodos were based on Roelant Savery 's 1611 painting Landscape with Orpheus and the animals , or on copies of it . The painting shows a whitish specimen and was apparently based on a stuffed specimen then in Prague ; a <unk> described as having a " dirty off @-@ white colouring " was mentioned in an inventory of specimens in the Prague collection of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II , to whom Savery was contracted at the time ( 1607 – 1611 ) . Savery 's several later images all show greyish birds , possibly because he had by then seen another specimen . Cheke and Hume believe the painted specimen was white , owing to albinism . Valledor de Lozoya has instead suggested that the light plumage was a juvenile trait , a result of bleaching of old taxidermy specimens , or simply artistic license . 
 In 1987 , scientists described fossils of a recently extinct species of ibis from Réunion with a relatively short beak , Borbonibis <unk> , before a connection to the solitaire reports had been made . Cheke suggested to one of the authors , Francois <unk> , that the fossils may have been of the Réunion solitaire , and this suggestion was published in 1995 . The ibis was reassigned to the genus Threskiornis , now combined with the specific epithet solitarius from the binomial R. solitarius . Birds of this genus are also white and black with slender beaks , fitting the old descriptions of the Réunion solitaire . No fossil remains of dodo @-@ like birds have ever been found on the island . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The dodo 's significance as one of the best @-@ known extinct animals and its singular appearance led to its use in literature and popular culture as a symbol of an outdated concept or object , as in the expression " dead as a dodo , " which has come to mean unquestionably dead or obsolete . Similarly , the phrase " to go the way of the dodo " means to become extinct or obsolete , to fall out of common usage or practice , or to become a thing of the past . " Dodo " is also a slang term for a stupid , dull @-@ witted person , as it was supposedly stupid and easily caught . 
 The dodo appears frequently in works of popular fiction , and even before its extinction , it was featured in European literature , as symbol for exotic lands , and of gluttony , due to its apparent fatness . In 1865 , the same year that George Clark started to publish reports about excavated dodo fossils , the newly vindicated bird was featured as a character in Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . It is thought that he included the dodo because he identified with it and had adopted the name as a nickname for himself because of his stammer , which made him accidentally introduce himself as " Do @-@ do @-@ <unk> " , his legal surname . The book 's popularity made the dodo a well @-@ known icon of extinction . 
 The dodo is used as a mascot for many kinds of products , especially in Mauritius . The dodo appears as a supporter on the coat of arms of Mauritius . It is also used as a watermark on all Mauritian rupee banknotes . A smiling dodo is the symbol of the <unk> de Bourbon , a popular brewer on Réunion , whose emblem displays the white species once thought to have lived there . 
 The dodo is used to promote the protection of endangered species by environmental organisations , such as the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and the Durrell Wildlife Park . The Center for Biological Diversity gives an annual ' Rubber Dodo Award ' , to " those who have done the most to destroy wild places , species and biological diversity " . In 2011 , the <unk> spider <unk> dodo , which inhabits the same woods as the dodo once did , was named after the bird to raise awareness of the urgent need for protection of the Mauritius biota . Two species of ant from Mauritius have been named after the dodo : <unk> dodo in 1946 and <unk> dodo in 2013 . A species of isopod from a coral reef off Réunion was named <unk> dodo in 1991 . The name dodo has been used by scientists naming genetic elements , honoring the dodo 's flightless nature . A fruitfly gene within a region of a chromosome required for flying ability was named " dodo " . In addition , a defective <unk> element family from Phytophthora <unk> was named <unk> as it contained mutations that eliminated the element 's ability to jump to new locations in a chromosome . 
 In 2009 , a previously unpublished 17th @-@ century Dutch illustration of a dodo went for sale at Christie 's and was expected to sell for £ 6 @,@ 000 . It is unknown whether the illustration was based on a specimen or on a previous image . It sold for £ 44 @,@ 450 . 
 The poet Thomas Lovell Beddoes included a lyric in his play Death 's Jest @-@ Book in which the spirit of an aborted fetus considers reincarnating as various animals , concluding : 
 The poet Hilaire Belloc included the following poem about the dodo in his Bad Child 's Book of Beasts from 1896 : 
 = Aetosaur = 
 Aetosaurs ( aetosaur / <unk> / ; order name Aetosauria / <unk> / ; from Greek , <unk> ( aetos , " eagle " ) and σαυρος ( sauros , " lizard " ) ) are an extinct order of heavily armoured , medium- to large @-@ sized Late Triassic herbivorous archosaurs . They have small heads , upturned snouts , erect limbs , and a body covered by plate @-@ like scutes . All aetosaurs belong to the family Stagonolepididae . Two distinct subdivisions of <unk> are currently recognized , Desmatosuchinae and Aetosaurinae , based primarily on differences in the morphology of the bony scutes of the two groups . Over 20 genera of aetosaurs have been described , and recently there has been controversy regarding the description of some of these genera . 
 Aetosaur fossil remains are known from Europe , North and South America , parts of Africa and India . Since their armoured plates are often preserved and are abundant in certain localities , aetosaurs serve as important Late Triassic tetrapod index fossils . Many aetosaurs had wide geographic ranges , but their stratigraphic ranges were relatively short . Therefore , the presence of particular aetosaurs can accurately date a site that they are found in . 
 Aetosaur remains have been found since the early 19th century , although the very first remains that were described were mistaken for fish scales . Aetosaurs were later recognized as crocodile relatives , with early paleontologists considering them to be semiaquatic scavengers . They are now considered to have been entirely terrestrial animals . Some forms have characteristics that may have been adaptations to digging for food . There is also evidence that some if not all aetosaurs made nests . 
 = = Description = = 
 The head is small relative to the large body , and quite distinctive in shape , being flat and blunt at the front , like the snout of a pig . Some teeth are chisel @-@ shaped , small and leaf @-@ like , indicating a probable herbivorous diet , although peg @-@ like teeth and a keratinous snout have been considered possible adaptations in some species for feeding on colonial insects . A study of the braincase of Stagonolepis robertsoni has shown that there are similarities between it and those of crocodylomorphs , which may indicate a close relationship . 
 Aetosaurs had a " pillar @-@ erect " erect limb posture similar to that seen in Rauisuchia , a related group of Triassic archosaurs . A pillar @-@ erect limb posture is one where the femur articulates vertically with the acetabulum of the hip , which is angled downward , so that the leg is positioned beneath the body and acts as a pillar bearing weight . While the limb posture is similar to rauisuchians , the feet resemble those of phytosaurs ( crocodile @-@ like semiaquatic crurotarsans ) in the retention of primitive characteristics . Although the forelimbs are much smaller than the hind limbs , all aetosaurs were quadrupeds . 
 Aetosaurs were very heavily armored ( most certainly as a defense against predators ) , with large quadrangular , interlocking bony plates , or osteoderms , protecting the back and sides , belly , and tail . Most osteoderms are heavily pitted on their upper surfaces and smooth on their undersides . Their centers are made of cancellous or spongy bone ( also called <unk> ) and their outer portions are made up of compact bone . In life , these plates were probably covered in horn . Dorsal osteoderms , which are found on the backs of aetosaurs , are often ornamented with radial grooves . Dorsal paramedians , those found along the midline of the animal , are often wide and quadrangular with a small boss called a dorsal eminence on the dorsal surface of each plate . In aetosaurs , paramedian plates often have raised or depressed anterior edges where the plates articulate with the ones in front of them . If the anterior edge is raised , the area is called an anterior bar , while if it is depressed , the area is called an anterior lamina . In lateral plates , which are positioned on either side of the paramedian plates , the dorsal eminence is often enlarged into a prominent spike . This spike is especially noticeable in <unk> such as Longosuchus and Desmatosuchus . Osteoderms are useful in diagnosing aetosaur taxa , and aetosaur species can often be identified from individual scutes based on their ornamentation pattern . 
 Primitive genera , like the widespread Norian genus Aetosaurus and the Carnian Coahomasuchus , tended to be small , about a metre ( 3 @.@ 2 ft ) in length . However , more advanced forms were larger - about 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in length - with some taxa , such as Typothorax and Paratypothorax , possessing broad turtle @-@ like bodies , and others , like Desmatosuchus , a narrow @-@ bodied genus at least 4 metres ( 13 ft ) long , equipped with large spines over the shoulders , which added to the animal 's defensive armament . 
 = = History = = 
 Aetosaur material was first described by Swiss paleontologist Louis Agassiz in 1844 . He named the genus Stagonolepis from the Lossiemouth Sandstone in Elgin , Scotland , but considered it to be a Devonian fish rather than a Triassic reptile . This may be because he considered the strata to be part of the Old Red Sandstone , and thus Paleozoic in age . Agassiz mistook the osteoderms for large rhomboidal scales , which he thought were arranged in a similar pattern to those of gars . He also thought that these supposed scales were very similar to those of the lobe @-@ finned fish <unk> due to their large size . 
 English biologist Thomas Henry Huxley reconsidered the fish scales described by Agassiz and considered them to belong to a crocodilian . He first proposed this to the Geological Society of London in 1858 , and went into more detail in an 1875 paper in the society 's quarterly journal . By this time , new material had been uncovered from Elgin that indicated that Stagonolepis was not a fish , but a reptile . However , Stagonolepis was still known primarily by scutes and imprints of scutes , many of which were not well preserved . 
 More complete aetosaur remains were found from the Lower <unk> of Germany in the 1870s . Among them were complete articulated skeletons of 22 aetosaurs . These specimens were found in a large sandstone outcrop near Stuttgart and were preserved together in an area less than 2 square metres in size . The animals were probably buried under lake sediment soon after they died , with the flow of water repositioning their bodies on the lake bed and putting them in close proximity to one another . In 1877 , German paleontologist Oskar Fraas assigned these specimens to the newly erected genus Aetosaurus . Fraas named the genus after the skull 's resemblance to the head of an eagle , with a narrow , elongate skull and a pointed snout . 
 The first aetosaurs from North America were also being described at this time . American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope named Typothorax in 1875 and <unk> in 1877 , both of which were from New Mexico . However , Cope considered these genera to be phytosaurs , crocodile @-@ like aquatic archosaurs that were also common in the Late Triassic . While new material referable to Typothorax has been found in recent years throughout the American southwest , <unk> is no longer considered valid . Cope , along with later paleontologists such as Friedrich von Huene , recognized that remains of the type species E. horridus actually belonged to Typothorax . Another species , E. <unk> , was reassigned to Desmatosuchus in 1953 . 
 A third North American genus called Stegomus was named by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1896 . Marsh had a long @-@ time rivalry with Cope that was made famous in the Bone Wars of the late 19th century , in which the two tried to out @-@ compete one another in the field and in scientific literature . Unlike Cope 's aetosaurs , Stegomus was found from the eastern United States in Connecticut . Marsh also recognized Stegomus as an aetosaur rather than a phytosaur in his initial description of the genus . Like Cope , many paleontologists tended to consider aetosaur scutes to belong to phytosaurs during this time period . 
 Aetosauria was first named in 1889 by English naturalist Richard Lydekker and zoologist Henry Alleyne Nicholson . They considered Aetosauria to be one of three suborders of the order Crocodilia , the other two being Parasuchia ( a Triassic group ) and <unk> ( a group including all post @-@ Triassic crocodiles ) . At the time , Cope considered Aetosauria to belong to Rhynchocephalia , an order of reptiles that includes the living tuatara . He also thought that the tightly fitting osteoderms , which were thought to be fused to the ribs , indicated that aetosaurs were transitional between rhynchocephalians and turtles . Nicholson and Lydekker placed a single family within the suborder , <unk> . They considered aetosaurs to be similar to living crocodilians apart from their elongated metatarsals , which were compared to those of dinosaurs . In fact , Marsh considered aetosaurs to be closely related to dinosaurs because both had similar metatarsals . 
 Aetosaur material continued to be described into the early 20th century , with notable paleontologists such as Barnum Brown and Charles Camp collecting specimens . However , aetosaur remains were still being confused with those of phytosaurs . During this time , aetosaurs were usually considered to be members of Pseudosuchia , a now obsolete group consisting of various Triassic archosaurs including phytosaurs . However , similarities were often observed between aetosaurs and Crocodilia , the group to which aetosaurs were initially referred in the 19th century . While the skull had many features in common with pseudosuchians , parts of the postcranial skeleton , in particular the scutes , seemed to be similar to those of crocodilians . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Aetosaur fossils have been found on all continents except Australia and Antarctica , giving them a nearly worldwide distribution during the Late Triassic . Many aetosaur remains have been found from the Chinle Group in the southwestern United States . Most fossils have been found from Arizona , New Mexico , and Texas . Some remains have also been found from Utah , particularly in Canyonlands National Park and Zion National Park . Aetosaurs are also known from the Newark Supergroup along the East Coast of the United States in states such as Connecticut and North Carolina . Two genera are known from Greenland : Aetosaurus and Paratypothorax . They have been found from the Fleming Fjord Formation in Jameson Land . Longosuchus is the only aetosaur known from Africa , with scutes having been found from the late Carnian <unk> Formation in Morocco . During the Late Triassic , Morocco would have been in close proximity with the Newark Supergroup of North America in the supercontinent of Pangaea . It is also possible that Desmatosuchus was present in Africa , as fossils have been found from the <unk> Series in Algeria that were referred to the genus . 
 South American aetosaurs have been found from Argentina , Brazil , and Chile . In Argentina , they are known from the Carnian Ischigualasto Formation . Common genera from Ischigualasto include Aetosauroides and Stagonolepis . In Brazil , fossils have been found in the Santa Maria and <unk> Formations in Rio Grande do Sul ( <unk> ) . Chilean aetosaurs are represented by one genus , <unk> , from the Antofagasta Region . Aetosaurs have also been found from India , which , along with South America , was part of Gondwana during the Late Triassic . Early descriptions of aetosaurs included material from the Maleri Formation in south @-@ central India , although it was too inadequate to assign specimens to any particular genus . Based on such descriptions , the Indian aetosaurs most closely resemble Longosuchus and Paratypothorax . Reports of aetosaurs from Madagascar are based on probable <unk> scutes . 
 Footprints belonging to the ichnogenus <unk> are often associated with aetosaurs . <unk> has been found from Rio Grande do Sul in <unk> , Brazil as well as Italy , Germany , and the eastern United States . They are also common in the southwestern United States , having been found from Canyonlands National Park and Dinosaur National Monument . Many of these tracks have a narrow gauge ( meaning left and right prints are placed closely together ) and nearly overstep each other . A 2011 functional analysis of the skeleton of Typothorax coccinarum indicated that it had the range of movement necessary to produce the tracks . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 Aetosaurs belong to Pseudosuchia , a clade of archosaurs that includes living crocodilians and is characterized by the distinctive structure of the ankle bones . Aetosaurs were traditionally referred to a ( now obsolete ) group called the <unk> , which included all " primitive " crocodilian relatives that lived in the Triassic . With the rise of phylogenetics , aetosaurs were later placed in a group called <unk> , which included many Triassic crurotarsans as well as later crurotarsans , including crocodilians . 
 Originally , all aetosaurs were considered members of the family Stagonolepididae . Early phylogenetic analyses split aetosaurs into two subfamilies , Aetosaurinae and Desmatosuchinae . <unk> are characterized by projections called eminences on the dorsal paramedian osteoderms that are close to the midline of the back . <unk> have a few more distinguishing characteristics , including grooves on the dorsal paramedians that help them lock to the lateral plates in a tight articulation . Many <unk> have long spikes projecting from the lateral plates . These spikes are especially prominent in Desmatosuchus . <unk> , on the other hand , tend to have less spikes . Many <unk> , such as Aetosaurus and Neoaetosauroides , have smooth carapaces and lack spikes altogether . More recent studies ( see below have favored a third group , <unk> , which like Desmatosuchinae has long spikes , but differs in having more sharply angled joints between osteoderms . Moreover , the genus Aetosauroides is now often classified outside Stagonolepididae as a non @-@ stagonolepidid aetosaur , making the names Aetosauria and Stagonolepididae no longer synonymous . 
 = = = = Genera = = = = 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 Aetosaur phylogeny was first investigated in 1994 by paleontologist J. Michael Parrish . Aetosauroides , Aetosaurus , Desmatosuchus , Longosuchus , Neoaetosauroides , Stagonolepis , and Typothorax were included in the phylogenetic analysis . Aetosaurs were found to form a clade with rauisuchians , which Parrish termed <unk> . <unk> also included the superorder Crocodylomorpha , to which living crocodilians belong . Parrish found Aetosauria to be a monophyletic group and thus a true clade consisting of a common aetosaur ancestor and all of its descendants . To phylogenetically define Aetosauria , Parrish identified five synapomorphies , or shared characteristics . The first synapomorphy concerned the jaw , with the premaxilla at its tip being edentulous ( toothless ) , upturned , and wide to form a " shovel " . Moreover , the dentary bone in the lower jaw is also toothless , upturned , and broad . The reduced size and simple conical shape of the teeth was considered another synapomorphy . Two more synapomorphies of aetosaurs are shared with crocodylomorphs , but were not considered to be an indication of a close phylogenetic relationship ; the body is covered in dorsal and ventral armor to form a complete carapace , and the paramedian osteoderms are much wider than they are long , with distinctive pitting . A final synapomorphy was found in the structure of the limb bones . In all aetosaurs , the limbs are very robust , with large muscle attachments such as the deltopectoral crest of the humerus , the fourth trochanter of the femur , the <unk> ridge of the tibia , and the <unk> trochanter of the fibula . 
 In Parrish 's phylogenetic analysis , Aetosaurus was found to be the most basal member of the clade , the earliest to diverge after the most recent common ancestor . After Aetosaurus , there is a polytomy of three smaller clades in which it is unknown which clade diverged first from the group . Within this polytomy there was Neoaetosauroides , a clade containing Aetosauroides and Stagonolepis , and another polytomy that included Longosuchus , Desmatosuchus , and a clade containing Paratypothorax and Typothorax . 
 A later study by paleontologists Andrew B. Heckert and Spencer G. Lucas in 1999 expanded the number of synapomorphies that diagnose Aetosauria to 18 . New synapomorphies included temporal fenestrae , or holes , that opened on the side of the skull rather than the top , lateral osteoderms articulating with the paramedians , and osteoderms covering the limbs . Aetosaurus was still found to be the most basal member , but the phylogeny of more derived aetosaurs differed in that Typothorax and Paratypothorax were split into two different clades with their sister taxa being Desmatosuchus and Longosuchus , respectively . More importantly , a new aetosaur called Coahomasuchus was included in the analysis . Coahomasuchus was found to be a basal aetosaur closely related to Stagonolepis , and also appeared early in the fossil record of aetosaurs . Previously , basal members were only known from later times , occurring after more advanced aetosaurs . 
 In 2003 , paleontologists Simon R. Harris , David J. Gower , and Mark Wilkinson examined previous phylogenetic studies of aetosaurs and criticized the way in which they used certain characters to produce cladograms . They concluded that only three hypotheses of aetosaur relationships from previous studies were still true : that Aetosaurus is the most basal aetosaur , that Aetosauroides is the sister taxon of Stagonolepis robertsoni , and that Longosuchus and Desmatosuchus are more closely related to each other than either is to Neoaetosauroides . They also went on to correct the trees from all previous analyses . 
 More recently , a 2007 analysis by paleontologist William G. Parker resulted in a larger tree of aetosaur phylogenetics with the inclusion of Heliocanthus . Based on the tree , Parker defined the clades <unk> and <unk> , both within Aetosaurinae . Parker also gave a revised phylogenetic definition of Aetosauria , mentioning that the previous definition , made by Heckert and Lucas in 2000 , was somewhat ambiguous . Heckert & Lucas ( 2000 ) defined Aetosauria as a stem @-@ based taxon , claiming that Aetosauria included all crurotarsans that were more closely related to Desmatosuchus than to the immediate sister group of Aetosauria . Because the immediate sister group of Aetosauria was uncertain , Parker offered a new definition with several non @-@ aetosaur <unk> genera rather than one sister group . According to Parker , Aetosauria included all taxa more closely related to Aetosaurus and Desmatosuchus than to <unk> , Postosuchus , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Alligator , <unk> , and Revueltosaurus . 
 In 2008 , Parker , along with Michelle R. Stocker and Randall B. <unk> , conducted a new phylogenetic analysis which included the newly described <unk> . Below is the cladogram from Parker et al . ( 2008 ) : 
 A new genus of aetosaur , <unk> , was named in 2012 . The phylogenetic analysis in that study found Aetosaurinae to be a paraphyletic grouping . As a paraphyletic group , <unk> would share a most recent common ancestor that is also the ancestor of other non @-@ <unk> aetosaurs , and thus could not form their own clade . Parker 's 2007 analysis accepted this definition . In 2002 , Heckert and Lucas defined Aetosaurinae as " a stem @-@ based taxon containing all taxa more closely related to Aetosaurus than to the last common ancestor of Aetosaurus and Desmatosuchus " . The 2012 study placed Aetosaurus at the base of the stagonolepidid clade , with traditional <unk> taxa placed in successively more derived positions . In the analysis , these taxa are actually more closely related to Desmatosuchus than to Aetosaurus . Thus , under Heckert and Lucas 's definition Aetosaurinae might be restricted to only Aetosaurus itself . 
 Another finding of this study was that Aetosauroides lies outside Stagonolepididae . If this phylogeny is correct , Stagonolepididae and Aetosauria would not be equivalent groupings , and Aetosauroides would be the first non @-@ stagonolepidid aetosaur . The following cladogram simplified after an analysis presented by Julia B. <unk> , Martin D. Ezcurra and <unk> E. <unk> ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Although aetosaurs are known exclusively from the Late Triassic , their currently accepted position in archosaur phylogeny indicates that they originated from more basal pseudosuchian archosaurs in the Early or Middle Triassic . Given that aetosaurs are highly specialized with many anatomical features not seen in other pseudosuchians , the group 's evolutionary origins are poorly understood . The recent discovery of complete specimens of the Late Triassic pseudosuchian Revueltosaurus <unk> indicate that it may have been close to the ancestry of aetosaurs . Several phylogenetic analyses place it as the sister taxon or closest relative of Aetosauria . Like aetosaurs , Revueltosaurus has two rows of paramedian osteoderms along its back and , in the cheek region of the skull , a maxilla that fits into a groove of the jugal bone . One phylogenetic analysis places <unk> <unk> , a Middle Triassic pseudosuchian , as the sister taxon of Revueltosaurus and Aetosauria , potentially making it the earliest known " stem aetosaur " ( " stem " meaning that it lies on the branch that includes aetosaurs , but is not itself an aetosaur ) . 
 In 2012 a third " stem aetosaur " was described from the Middle Triassic Manda Beds of Tanzania . It differs from other Middle Triassic pseudosuchians in having a long skull , a small antorbital fenestra that fits into a large antorbital fossa in front of the eye socket , sharp and curved teeth , and osteoderms covering much of its body . Like aetosaurs and Revueltosaurus , it has a maxilla that fits into the jugal . Revueltosaurus , <unk> , and the unnamed Tanzanian pseudosuchian are all good fits for the hypothesized ancestor of aetosaurs because they both have double rows of leaf @-@ shaped osteoderms along their backs that could potentially have evolved into the tightly fitting paramedian osteoderms of aetosaurs . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Early interpretations = = = 
 In 1904 , American paleontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn described aetosaurs as carnivorous aquatic animals of the order Parasuchia , mentioning that " [ Parasuchia ] constitutes an independent order , probably freshwater , littoral , carnivorous , short snouted ( <unk> ) or long snouted ( <unk> , <unk> ) forms , analogous in their habits to the modern Crocodilia " . Early aetosaur remains were often found in clays beside skeletons of aquatic animals such as phytosaurs and terrestrial animals such as dinosaurs and <unk> . This may have led some paleontologists to believe that the animals had died in swampy environments . Because there were a large number of skeletons of animals that would not normally have inhabited swamps in these clays , some paleontologists even suggested that aetosaurs scavenged off the carcasses of animals that became trapped in the swamps and died . Doubts were later raised over this lifestyle , since aetosaur teeth show little indication of carnivory and the weight of the armor suggests that aetosaurs had " a passive mode of life . " However , aetosaurs were still regarded as partly aquatic into the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Aetosaurs were herbivores , likely feeding on ferns and seed ferns that were common in the Triassic . The upturned shape of their snout suggests that aetosaurs may have dug up roots and tubers . Aetosaurs have several anatomical features that may have been adaptations to digging , including a short radius relative to the humerus ( seen in many other digging tetrapods ) and a large deltopectoral crest on the humerus that served as an attachment for muscles . Aetosaurs also have large hind feet , or pes , with large claws that were likely used for <unk> @-@ digging . One aetosaur , Typothorax , has an <unk> on the humerus , which is the origin of forearm pronator and manual flexor muscles often used in digging . Moreover , it has a large olecranon process on the ulna which projects backward past the elbow , giving a large area for the insertion of the triceps muscle . While many studies have suggested that aetosaurs had a fossorial or burrowing lifestyle , aetosaurs have few of the characteristics that fossorial animals have as adaptations to digging . Therefore , it is likely that aetosaurs were able to dig to some extent , possibly rooting for food , but were unable to burrow . 
 While features of the limbs indicate that aetosaurs probably dug for food , features of the skull and teeth can indicate what kind of food they were eating . Aetosaurs have many derived features not seen in other crurotarsans , which indicate that they are adapted to a different diet . Unlike the sharp , recurved teeth of other <unk> archosaurs , aetosaurs had simple , conical teeth . The tips of the jaws were edentulous , or toothless , and probably supported a beak . The teeth have very little wear , suggesting that aetosaurs did not consume stiff and tough plant material . It is more likely that they consumed non @-@ abrasive vegetation such as soft leaves . 
 Alternative theories have been proposed for the diet of aetosaurs . In 1947 , H J <unk> proposed that the aetosaur Longosuchus was a scavenger based on the close proximity of some specimens to a large number of skeletons that were likely carcasses . A 2009 study of the jaw biomechanics of the South American genus Neoaetosauroides suggested that the animal may have fed on larvae and insects without hard exoskeletons . This is because Neoaetosauroides lacks serrations or wear facets on the teeth and has a jaw leverage that is not designed for strong forces such as crushing and chopping . The study recognized that northern aetosaurs such as Desmatosuchus and Stagonolepis did have jaws that would have supported a strong musculature , and were likely better suited to eating plant material . 
 = = = Nests = = = 
 At least some aetosaurs built nests and protected their eggs . In 1996 , geologist Stephen <unk> discovered 220 ‑ million @-@ year @-@ old , fossilized , bowl @-@ like nests in Arizona 's Petrified Forest , in part of the Chinle Formation . The oldest such nests that have been found belonged to phytosaurs and aetosaurs . The nests are compacted and appear very similar to the nests of the modern day crocodiles who guard their nests . The nests were holes dug in the sand in the bank of an ancient river . 
 A second possible aetosaur nest site is known from northeastern Italy . The nests are preserved as depressions in carbonate rock that are circular or horseshoe @-@ shaped , with high ridges around the sides . They appear to be unusually complex for nests created by Triassic reptiles . <unk> footprints were found nearby that resembled aetosaurs , although they were not present in the same layer . Because the tracks were found so close to the nests , it is likely that aetosaurs built them . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 The ages of individual aetosaurs can be determined by examining their osteoderms . Some isolated osteoderms have been claimed to belong to juvenile aetosaurs based on their size and shape but these hypotheses have often been questioned . For example , juvenile osteoderms of <unk> were later identified as those of the small @-@ bodied pseudosuchian Revueltosaurus ( which is not an aetosaur ) , and juvenile osteoderms of Desmatosuchus have been reinterpreted as those of aetosaur <unk> , which had a relatively small body size at maturity . Studies of the bone structure of paramedian osteoderms indicate that new bone was deposited along the edges of each plate over the course of an aetosaur 's lifetime . This means that lines of arrested growth on the undersides of paramedian osteoderms can be used to determine an individual 's age . Comparing the ages of individual specimens with their total body lengths indicates that aetosaurs increased in length at relatively constant rates , but increased in body mass at different rates depending on whether they had wide bodies like Typothorax or narrow bodies like <unk> . Aetosaurs also seem to have grown more slowly than modern crocodilians . Analysis of the limb bones of aetosaurs indicates that they grew quickly when young and more slowly when adults . This pattern of growth is seen in most other pseudosuchians . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Because species of aetosaurs typically have restricted fossil ranges and are abundant in the strata they are found in , they are useful in <unk> . Osteoderms are the most common remains associated with aetosaurs , so a single identifiable scute can accurately date the layer it is found in . 
 One aetosaur , Typothorax coccinarum , has been used to define the Revueltian land vertebrate <unk> . A land vertebrate <unk> ( LVF ) is a time interval that is defined by the first appearance datum ( FAD ) , or first occurrence , of a tetrapod index fossil and is commonly used to date Late Triassic and Early Jurassic terrestrial strata . Since the FAD of T. coccinarum is at the beginning of the Norian stage , the Revueltian LVF starts at the beginning of the Norian around 216 million years ago . The Revueltian ends with the next FAD , which happens to be that of the phytosaur <unk> and the start of the <unk> LVF . 
 <unk> for aetosaur genera have been developed for dating strata in the Chinle Group of the southwestern United States . Up to 13 genera of aetosaurs are known from the Chinle Group , with most occurring in multiple localities and over short time spans . In 1996 , paleontologists Spencer G. Lucas and Andrew B. Heckert recognized five biochrons based on the presence of aetosaurs throughout the Chinle Group . The number of biochrons grew to 11 in a 2007 study by Heckert and Lucas along with Adrian P. Hunt and Justin A. Spielmann . These biochrons occurred from the <unk> LVF to the <unk> LVF and included genera such as Longosuchus , <unk> , and Typothorax . 
 = = Naming controversy = = 
 In 2007 , paleontologists at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science in Albuquerque , New Mexico were accused of plagiarism in some of their published articles dealing with aetosaurs . In late 2006 , the genus <unk> was erected as a replacement name for " Desmatosuchus " <unk> in the museum 's bulletin . However , four years earlier paleontologist William Parker reassigned " D. " <unk> to the newly named genus Heliocanthus in an unpublished thesis . Because the name was not published , it was considered a nomen nudum until 2007 when it was described in the Journal of Systematic Palaeontology . The authors of the 2006 paper , Spencer G. Lucas , Adrian P. Hunt , and Justin A. Spielmann , were accused of " intellectual theft " by paleontologists Jeff Martz , Mike Taylor , Matt Wedel , and Darren Naish , who claimed that they knew that Parker was eventually going to <unk> the species and formally erect a new genus . According to Martz , Taylor , Wedel , and Naish , the authors rushed to publish their own name before Parker could publish his . 
 Another controversy occurred after Spielmann , Hunt , and Lucas published a 2006 paper mentioning that the holotype of <unk> was not a left paramedian but a right one . In 2002 , Martz came to the same conclusion in an unpublished thesis . He , along with Taylor , Wedel , and Naish , claimed that this was another form of plagiarism . 
 These allegations were brought to the attention of the Ethics Education Committee of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology ( SVP ) in 2007 , and a response was given in 2008 . In regard to <unk> , the SVP found no plagiarism involved , while in the case of Heliocanthus and <unk> , the SVP did not try to resolve the issue . 
 The entire controversy came to be known as " <unk> " , in reference to the famous Watergate scandal of the 1970s . It received wide attention from local Albuquerque newspapers and science blogs . It was also the focus of a news article in a 2008 issue of the journal Nature . 
 = Portia schultzi = 
 Portia schultzi is a jumping spider which ranges from South Africa in the south to Kenya in the north , and also is found in West Africa and Madagascar . In this species , which is slightly smaller than some other species of the genus Portia , the bodies of females are 5 to 7 mm long , while those of males are 4 to 6 mm long . The carapaces of both sexes are orange @-@ brown with dark brown mottling , and covered with dark brown and whitish hairs lying over the surface . Males have white tufts on their <unk> and a broad white band above the bases of the legs , and these features are less conspicuous in females . Both sexes have tufts of orange to dark orange above the eyes , which are fringed with pale orange hairs . Males ' abdomens are yellow @-@ orange to orange @-@ brown with blackish mottling , and on the upper sides are black and light orange hairs , and nine white tufts . Those of females are pale yellow and have black markings with scattered white and orange @-@ brown hairs on the upper side . P. schultzi has relativity longer legs than other Portia , and a " lolloping " gait . 
 While most jumping spiders focus accurately up to about 75 cm away , P. schultzi responds to a maximum of about 10 cm in good light , and ignores everything in very subdued light . For prey , P. schultzi prefers web @-@ based spiders , then jumping spiders , and finally insects . The females of P. schultzi and other Portia species build " capture webs " to catch prey , and often join their own webs on to web @-@ based spiders to catch the other spiders or their prey . 
 If a P. schultzi female is mature , a male P. schultzi will try to copulate with her , or cohabit with a subadult female and copulate while she is moulting . They usually mate on a web or on a dragline made by the female , and P. schultzi typically copulates for about 100 seconds , while others in the genus can take several minutes or even several hours . Females try to kill and eat their mates during or after copulation , and subadult females mimic adult females to attract males as prey . Contests between Portia females are violent , and embraces in P. schultzi typically take 20 to 60 seconds . Sometimes , one female knocks the other on her back and the other may be killed and eaten if she does not right herself quickly and run way . When hunting , P. schultzi mature females emit olfactory signals that reduce the risk that any other females , males , or juveniles of the same species may contend for the same prey . 
 = = Body structure and appearance = = 
 The bodies of female P. <unk> are 5 to 7 mm long ( smaller than other Portia species ) , while those of males are 4 to 6 mm long . : 433 The carapaces of both sexes are orange @-@ brown with dark brown mottling , and covered with dark brown and whitish hairs lying over the surface . Males have white tufts on their <unk> and broad white band above the bases of the legs , and these features are less conspicuous in females . Both sexes have tufts of orange to dark orange above the eyes , which are fringed with pale orange hairs . Females ' chelicerae are pale yellow with black markings at the ends , while males ' orange @-@ brown with darker markings , and those of both sexes have pale orange and white hairs . The abdomens of females are pale yellow with black markings and the upper sides have scattered white and orange @-@ brown hairs . Males ' abdomens yellow @-@ orange to orange @-@ brown with blackish mottling , and on the upper sides are black and light orange hairs , and nine white tufts . Those of females ' are pale yellow and have black markings with scattered white and orange @-@ brown hairs on the upper side , but no tufts . : 88 @-@ 89 The legs of both sexes are unusually long and slender , : 34 and those of male 's are orange @-@ brown with darker markings while those of females are light yellow with blackish markings . : 88 @-@ 89 In both sexes the final two segment of each leg has no other decorations , : 34 but the other segments in both sexes have brownish hairs and many robust spines , and those of males also scattered white tufts . The palps of both sexes have pale yellow hairs and white fringes . : 88 @-@ 89 All species of the genus Portia have elastic abdomens , so that those of both sexes can become almost spherical when well fed , and females ' can stretch as much when producing eggs . : 495 
 = = Movement = = 
 When not hunting for prey or a mate , Portia species , including P. schultzi , : 31 adopt a special posture , called the " cryptic rest posture " , pulling their legs in close to the body and their palps back beside the chelicerae ( " jaws " ) , which obscures the outlines of these appendages . When walking , most Portia species have a slow , " choppy " gait that preserves their concealment : pausing often and at irregular intervals , waving their legs continuously and their palps jerkily up and down , moving each appendage out of time with the others , : 6 and continuously varying the speed and timing . : 418 P. schultzi uses what Forster and Murphy ( 1986 ) call a " lolloping " gait , : 34 @-@ 35 flexing and stretching the legs . They suggest that the long legs are advantageous for moving through webs , and that lolloping enables P. schultzi to use the long legs while keeping the body near the surface . : 34 
 Like many species of spider , a P. schultzi lays a continuous dragline of silk as it moves , and from time to time anchors the dragline to a surface with a spot of sticky silk . This allows the spider to return to the surface if the animal is dislodged . A spider about to jump first lays a sticky silk anchor , and then lays out a dragline as it flies . : 574 Unlike those of most jumping spiders , P. schultzi ′ s draglines stick to each other and , when a P. schultzi has laid a few lines across a gap , it uses these as walkways and reinforces them with additional silk as it moves . : 34 
 When disturbed , most leap upwards about 100 to 150 mm , often from the cryptic rest pose , and often over a wide trajectory . Usually Portia then either freezes or runs about 100 mm and then freezes . : 434 
 = = Senses = = 
 Although other spiders can also jump , salticids including P. schultzi have significantly better vision than other spiders , : 521 and their main eyes are more acute in daylight than a cat 's and 10 times more acute than a dragonfly 's . Jumping spiders have eight eyes , the two large ones in the center @-@ and @-@ front position ( the <unk> eyes , also called " principal eyes " : 51 ) housed in tubes in the head and providing acute vision . The other six are secondary eyes , positioned along the sides of the carapace and acting mainly as movement detectors . : 16 In most jumping spiders , the middle pair of secondary eyes is very small and has no known function , but those of Portia are relatively large , and function as well as those of the other secondary eyes . : 424 : 232 Jumping spiders ' main eyes can see from red to ultraviolet . 
 In most jumping spiders , the main eyes focus accurately on an object up to about 75 cm away . : 51 , 53 However , P. schultzi does not react at all to objectives when the light is under 100 lux . Between 100 and 500 lux , it detects and approaches the objective from distances up to 6 cm , from 500 lux to 1500 lux , its response distance increases gradually to a maximum of about 10 cm , and stronger light causes no increase in the response distance . For comparison , <unk> auricoma swivels towards a movement up to 75 cm away and approaches targets from about 20 cm . Perhaps P. schultzi gains little from being alerted to objectives at distances because this spider moves so slowly that it is very unlikely to reach a more distant target in time to catch it . : 37 
 Like all jumping spiders , P. schultzi can take in only a small visual field at one time , as the most acute part of a main eye can see all of a circle up to 12 millimeters wide at 20 centimeters away , or up to 18 millimeters wide at 30 centimeters away . A Portia spider takes a relatively long time to see objects , possibly because getting a good image out of such tiny eyes is a complex process and needs a lot of scanning . This makes a Portia vulnerable to much larger predators such as birds , frogs , and mantises , which it often cannot identify because of the other predator 's size . 
 Spiders , like other arthropods , have sensors , often modified setae ( bristles ) , for smell , taste , touch and vibration protruding through their cuticle ( " skin " ) . : 532 @-@ 533 Unlike insects , spiders and other chelicerates do not have antennae . A Portia can sense vibrations from surfaces , and use these for mating and for hunting other spiders in total darkness . It can use air- and surface " smells " to detect prey which it often meets , to identify members of the same species , to recognise familiar members , and to determine the sex of other member of the same species . : 13 
 = = Hunting tactics = = 
 = = = Tactics used by most jumping spiders and by most of genus Portia = = = 
 Members of the genus Portia have hunting tactics as versatile and adaptable as a lion 's . All members of Portia have instinctive tactics for their most common prey , but can improvise by trial and error against unfamiliar prey or in unfamiliar situations , and then remember the new approach . They can also make detours to find the best attack angle against dangerous prey , even when the best detour takes it out of visual contact with the prey , and sometimes the planned route leads to abseiling down a silk thread and biting the prey from behind . Such detours may take up to an hour , and it usually picks the best route even if it needs to walk past an incorrect route . : 422 If a Portia spider makes a mistake while hunting another spider , it may itself be killed . 
 While most jumping spiders prey mainly on insects and by active hunting , : 340 females of Portia also build webs to catch prey directly . These " capture webs " are funnel @-@ shaped and widest at the top : 513 and are about 4 @,@ 000 cm3 in volume . : 429 @-@ 431 The web is initially built in about 2 hours , and then gradually made stronger . : 239 A Portia spider often joins her own web on to one of a web @-@ based <unk> spider . When not joined to another spiders ' , a P. schultzi female 's capture web may be suspended from rigid foundations such as boughs and rocks , or from pliant bases such as stems of shrubs . : 432 Males of Portia do not build capture webs . : 429 
 Portias hunt in all types of webs , : 491 while other cursorial spiders generally have difficulty moving on webs , and web @-@ building spiders find it difficult to move in webs unlike those they build . : 424 Where the web is sparse , a Portia will use " rotary probing " , in which it moves a free leg around until it meets a thread . : 433 @-@ 434 When hunting in another spider 's web , a Portia ′ s slow , choppy movements and the flaps on its legs make it resemble leaf detritus caught in the web and blown in a breeze . : 514 P. schultzi and some other Portias use breezes and other disturbances as " smokescreens " in which these predators can approach web spiders more quickly , and revert to a more cautious approach when the disturbance disappears . : 313 A few web spiders run far away when they sense the un @-@ rhythmical gait of a Portia entering the web - a reaction Wilcox and Jackson call " Portia panic " . : 418 
 If a large insect is struggling in a web , Portia usually does not usually take the insect , but waits for up to a day until the insect stops struggling , even if the prey is thoroughly stuck . : 448 When an insect stuck in a web owned by P. schultzi , P. labiata or any regional variant of P. fimbriata , and next to a web spider 's web , the web spider sometimes enters the Portia ′ s web , and the Portia pursues and catches the web spider . : 440 @-@ 441 , 444 
 The webs of spiders on which Portias prey sometimes contain dead insects and other arthropods which are uneaten or partly eaten . P. schultzi and some other Portias such as P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) and P. labiata sometimes scavenge these corpses if the corpses are not obviously decayed . : 448 
 A Portia typically takes 3 to 5 minutes to pursuit prey , but some pursuits can take much longer , and in extreme cases close to 10 hours when pursuing a web @-@ based spider . : 439 
 All Portias eat eggs of other spiders , including eggs of their own species and of other cursorial spiders , and can extract eggs from cases ranging from the flimsy ones of Pholcus to the tough papery ones of Philoponella . While only P. fimbriata ( in Queensland ) captures cursorial spiders in their nests , all Portias steal eggs from empty nests of cursorial spiders . : 448 
 Portias ' venom is unusually powerful against spiders . : 491 When a Portia stabs a small to medium spider ( up to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , including another Portia , the prey usually runs away for about 100 to 200 millimetres , enters convulsions , becomes paralysed after 10 to 30 seconds , and continues convulsing for 10 seconds to 4 minutes . Portia slowly approaches the prey and takes it . : 441 @-@ 443 Portia usually needs to inflict up to 15 stabbings to completely immobilise a larger spider ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 times to the Portia ′ s weight : 428 ) , and then Portia may wait about 20 to 200 millimetres away for 15 to 30 minutes from seizing the prey . : 441 @-@ 443 Insects are usually not immobilised so quickly but continue to struggle , sometimes for several minutes . If Portia cannot make further contact , all types of prey usually recover , making sluggish movements several minutes after the stabbing but often starting normal movement only after an hour . : 441 @-@ 443 
 Occasionally a Portia is killed or injured while pursuing prey up to twice Portia ′ s size . In tests , P. schultzi is killed in 1 @.@ 7 % of pursuits and injured but not killed in 5 @.@ 3 % , P. labiata is killed in 2 @.@ 1 % and injured but not killed in 3 @.@ 9 % , and P. fimbriata in Queensland is killed in 0 @.@ 06 % of its pursuits and injured but not killed in another 0 @.@ 06 % . A Portia ′ s especially tough skin often prevents injury , even when its body is caught in the other spider 's fangs . When injured , Portia bleeds and may sometimes loses one or more legs . Spiders ' palps and legs break off easily when attacked , Portia ′ s palps and legs break off exceptionally easily , which may be a defence mechanism , and Portias are often seen with missing legs or palps , while other salticids in the same habitat are not seen with missing legs or palps . : 440 @-@ 450 
 = = = Tactics used by Portia schultzi = = = 
 All performance statistics summarise result of tests in a laboratory , using captive specimens . : 429 @-@ 430 The following table shows the hunting performance of adult females . In addition to P. schultzi , the table shows for comparison the hunting performances of P. africana , P. labiata and three regional variants of P. fimbriata . : 424 , 432 , 434 
 For resting , all Portias spin a horizontal web whose diameter is about twice the spider 's body length and is suspended only 1 to 4 millimetres below a leaf . : 496 , 513 P. schultzi returns to its resting platform at night . While eating prey at dusk and with no platform nearby , one P. schultzi built a silk platform while holding the prey , and then continued eating . : 34 
 P. schultzi does not respond to prey if the light is under 100 lux ( like a restaurant with only subdued artificial lighting ) , but responds to prey at distances from 6 to 10 centimetres as the light level increases . A test suggested that P. schultzi ′ s hunting is stimulated only by vision , as prey close but hidden caused no response . : 37 A preliminary check showed that lures got the same responses from P. schultzi as live prey , and then more detailed testing with the lures showed that : if the target moved erratically , P. schultzi did not pursue it ; if the target was totally stationary , the spider approached very slow ( between 5 and 100 millimetres per minute ) , with very long pauses in the final stages , and the sequence was not completed in 43 % of cases ; if the lure <unk> on the same spot , P. schultzi approached much faster and the sequence was almost always completed ; if a lure was pulled directly away from P. schultzi , the spider followed , and faster if the lure was pulled , up to a limit ( P. schultzi generally moves very slowly : 34 @-@ 35 ) . : 37 @-@ 38 
 A female P. schultzi more often pursues small jumping spiders and web spiders than larger prey . While it more often catches small jumping spiders than larger ones , it is about equally effective with all sizes of web spiders up to twice P. schultzi ′ s size . : 437 @-@ 439 A female P. schultzi is effective against insects up to twice P. schultzi ′ s size when the insect is stuck in a non @-@ salticid 's web , and against insects not in webs and up to P. schultzi ′ s size , while P. schultzi seldom pursues or catches a larger insect in the open . A female P. schultzi very seldom pursues or catches a larger insect in her own web , and is slightly less effective against smaller insects in P. schultzi ′ s web than in other situations . : 439 Males are less efficient in all cases . : 436 
 A test in 1997 showed that P. schultzi ′ s preferences for different types of prey are in the order : web spiders ; jumping spiders ; and insects . : 337 @-@ 339 These preferences apply to both live prey and motionless lures , and to P. schultzi specimens without prey for 7 days ( " well @-@ fed " : 335 ) and without prey for 14 days ( " starved " : 335 ) . P. schultzi specimens without prey for 21 days ( " extra @-@ starved " ) showed no preference for different types of prey . : 339 The test included as prey several species of web spiders and jumping spiders , and the selection of the prey species showed no evidence of affecting the results . : 337 @-@ 339 Insects were represented by the house fly Musca domestica . : 335 
 In a test , P. schultzi spiderlings took Drosophila ( " fruit flies " ) almost as often as spiders . P. schultzi retreats from the sudden flights of houseflies found in the open , but sometimes takes flies entangled in a web . : 38 @-@ 39 Out of its web , P. schultzi rarely capture <unk> ( non @-@ web sit @-@ and @-@ wait predators , usually under 13 millimetres long ) in the open , as <unk> often wave their front legs when threatened . : 38 @-@ 39 
 If a spider walks under a P. schultzi female 's capture web and the vertical distance is less than 8 centimetres , the P. schultzi often drops on to the prey too fast for a human eye to follow . If the P. schultzi misses , it quickly returns up its safety line to its vantage point and looks for another chance - and seldom misses the second time . Most drops cover two to four centimetres , as longer drops are often obstructed by the web . : 36 
 When hunting a web spider in the prey 's web , a P. schultzi walks very slowly towards the prey and then , when two to three centimetres away , pauses for some minutes . During this time the P. schultzi quivers very quickly with its whole body at regular intervals . In almost all cases the prey stays motionless . P. schultzi never plucks the web as Portia fimbriata does . : 37 
 Unlike the Queensland variant of P. <unk> , P. schultzi has no special tactics when hunting other jumping spiders . : 343 
 When hunting , mature females of P. fimbriata , P. africana , P. fimbriata , P. labiata , and P. schultzi emit olfactory signals that reduce the risk that any other females , males or juveniles of the same species may contend for the same prey . The effect inhibits aggressive mimicry against a prey spider even if the prey spider is visible , and also if the prey is inhabiting any part of a web . If a female of one of these Portias smells a male of the same species , the female stimulates the males to court . These Portia species do not show this behaviour when they receive olfactory signals from members of other Portia species . 
 = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = 
 Before courtship , a male Portia spins a small web between boughs or twigs , and he hangs under that and ejaculates on to it . : 467 He then soaks the semen into reservoirs on his pedipalps , : 581 @-@ 583 which are larger than those of females . : 572 @-@ 573 Females of many spider species , including P. schultzi , emit volatile pheromones into the air , and these generally attract males from a distance . : 517 : 36 
 Among P. schultzi and some other Portias , when adults of the same species but opposite sexes recognise each other , they display at 10 to 30 centimetres . Males usually wait for 2 to 15 minutes before starting a display , but sometimes a female starts a display first . : 461 Portias sometimes use " propulsive displays " , with which a member threatens a rival of the same species and sex , and unreceptive females also threaten males in this way . : 343 A propulsive display is a series of sudden , quick movements including striking , charging , ramming and leaps . : 455 In P. schultzi and in some other species , contests between males usually last only 5 to 10 seconds , and only their legs make contact . : 466 Contests between Portia females are violent : 518 and embraces in P. schultzi typically take 20 to 60 seconds . These occasionally include grappling that sometimes breaks a leg , but more usually the final move is a lunge . Sometimes one knocks the other on her back and the other may be killed and eaten if she does not right herself quickly and run way . If the loser has a nest , the winner takes over and eats any eggs there . : 466 @-@ 467 
 A female P. schultzi that sees a male may approach slowly or wait . The male then walks erect and displaying by waving his legs and palps . If the female does not run away , she gives a propulsive display first . If the male stands his ground and she does not run away or repeat the propulsive display , he approaches and , if she is mature , they copulate . : 461 @-@ 464 If the female is sub @-@ adult ( one moult from maturity ) , a male may cohabit in the female 's capture web . : 467 Portias usually mate on a web or on a dragline made by the female . : 518 P. schultzi typically copulates for about 100 seconds , : 465 while other genera can take several minutes or even several hours . : 518 : 465 
 Females of P. schultzi , like those of P. labiata , try to kill and eat their mates during or after copulation , by twisting and lunging . The males wait until the females have hunched their legs , making this attack less likely . Males also try to abseil from a silk thread to approach from above , but females may manoeuvre to get the higher position . If the female moves at all , the male leaps and runs away . : 343 
 Before being mature enough to mate , females of P. <unk> and also P. labiata mimic adult females to attract males as prey . 
 P. schultzi usually lays eggs on dead , brown leaves about 20 millimetres long , suspended near the top of its capture web , and then cover the eggs with a sheet of silk . If there is no dead leaf available , the female will make a small horizontal silk platform in the capture web , lay the eggs on it , and then cover the eggs . : 434 @-@ 435 P. schultzi has been seen laying eggs in a rolled @-@ up leaf in a web of <unk> karschi . : 33 
 For moulting , all Portias spin a horizontal web whose diameter is about twice the spider 's body length and is suspended only 1 to 4 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 039 to 0 @.@ 157 in ) below a leaf . The spider lies head down , and often slides down 20 to 30 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) during moulting . : 496 Portias spin a similar temporary web for resting . : 513 Like all arthropods , spiders moult and , after hatching , the life stage before each moult is called an " instar " . The distinctive tufts of P. schultzi juveniles appear in the third instar . : 33 
 P. schultzi exuviae ( discarded " skins " ) have been found both in their own webs and in those of I. karschi , which has suggested that P. schultzi moults in the open . In one case , while its new skin was still pale and soft , its spinnerets were still stuck in the discarded skin , and the spider slowly twirled for about 90 seconds until it was free . The spider 's body then darkened quickly to the normal colouration , and some time later the spider hung in its usual upside @-@ down posture in the web . : 35 
 = = Ecology = = 
 P. schultzi ′ s range runs from Durban ( in South Africa ) in the south to Malindi ( in Kenya ) in the north , and westwards to the East African Rift , and also in West Africa and Madagascar . : 30 
 P. schultzi , along with a large variety of spiders and insects , is often found in the dense , large webs of the <unk> <unk> karschi ( about 15 millimetres long : 31 ) , which are especially abundant in partly cleared secondary bush where rain forests have been cut down , and usually about one metre above the ground . A survey of one area suggested that there is about one P. schultzi per three I. karschi webs . P. schultzi is also found in its own web and those of other spiders , on tree trunks and the walls of buildings , and in leaf litter . : 30 @-@ 32 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 P. schultzi is one of 17 species in the genus Portia as of June 2011 . This species has been named Portia <unk> ( Karsch , 1878 ) , <unk> martini ( Simon , 1900 ) , Linus <unk> ( Lawrence , 1937 ) , Linus <unk> ( Lawrence , 1938 ) , Portia <unk> ( Wanless , 1978 ) , Portia <unk> ( Wanless , 1978 ) , Portia schultzi ( Simon , 1901 ; Jackson & <unk> , 1986 ; <unk> , 1989 ) , and the last name has been used since then . : 424 : 88 
 Wanless divided the genus Portia into two species groups : the schultzi group , in which males ' palps have a fixed tibial apophysis ; and the <unk> group , in which the apophysis of each palp in the males has a joint separated by a membrane . : 87 – 88 The schultzi group includes P. schultzi , P. africana , P. fimbriata , and P. labiata . : 93 – 94 , 99 – 100 , 102 – 105 
 Portia is in the subfamily Spartaeinae , which is thought to be primitive . : 491 Molecular phylogeny , a technique that compares the DNA of organisms to reconstruct the tree of life , indicates that Portia is a member of the clade Spartaeinae , that Spartaeinae is basal ( quite similar to the ancestors of all jumping spiders ) , that Portia ′ s closest relative is the genus Spartaeus , and that the next closest are Phaeacius and Holcolaetis . : 53 
 = Say Hello to My Little Friend = 
 " Say Hello to My Little Friend " is the eleventh episode of the American television police procedural fantasy drama Awake , which originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) on May 10 , 2012 . Written by Leonard Chang and series creator Kyle Killen , " Say Hello to My Little Friend " earned a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 9 , being watched by 2 @.@ 51 million viewers upon its initial broadcast in the United States . Directed by recurring guest actress Laura Innes , the episode generally received positive reviews , with many critics claiming that it was the best episode of the series since " Pilot " and that Jason Isaacs ' performance deserved an Emmy Award . 
 Awake centers on Michael Britten ( Isaacs ) , a detective living in two separate realities after a car crash . In one reality , in which he wears a red wristband , his wife Hannah Britten ( Laura Allen ) survived the collision , and in another reality , in which he wears a green wristband , his son Rex Britten ( Dylan Minnette ) survived . In this episode , Michael passes out during a bungee jump while he is at a carnival with Rex and Emma ( Daniela Bobadilla ) . He is unable to switch realities , consistently hallucinates and realizes that Ed Hawkins ( Kevin Weisman ) , a detective who is working with Michael 's former partner Bird ( Steve Harris ) , was attempting to kill him in the crash . Meanwhile , Hannah deals with Emma 's new baby by trying to convince her parents to let her keep the baby . 
 Shortly after this episode was broadcast , NBC announced their decision to cancel Awake , due to declining ratings , although NBC still decided to air the remaining two episodes in the show 's original time slot . Isaacs found " Say Hello to My Little Friend " the most difficult to shoot , and had to imagine an awful thing happening to his family . It was filmed in Los Angeles , California , and continued and introduced key thematic elements to the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Brittens are involved in a fatal car crash . As a result , Michael Britten , a Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) detective , begins to live in two separate realities . In one reality , in which he wears a red wristband , his wife Hannah Britten ( Laura Allen ) survives the crash , and in the other reality , in which he wears a green wristband , his son Rex Britten ( Dylan Minnette ) survives . Michael does not know which reality is real , and uses the wristbands to differentiate the two . 
 Michael sees two separate therapists : Dr. Jonathan Lee ( BD Wong ) in the " red reality " , and Dr. Judith Evans ( Cherry Jones ) in the " green reality " . Meanwhile , in the " red reality " , Michael and Hannah continue with their plan to move to Oregon . Michael works with Detective Isaiah " Bird " Freeman ( Steve Harris ) in the " green reality " and with Detective Efrem Vega ( Wilmer Valderrama ) in the " red reality " after the collision . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Dr. Lee asks Michael about his latest experience with the " green reality " . At a police carnival at an amusement park , Emma ( Daniela Bobadilla ) , Rex 's girlfriend , asks if she and Rex can bungee jump . As they are walking to the ride , Michael bumps into someone who claims that it was his fault . At the ride , Michael goes first , but the person in charge of the ride seems concerned about something ; Michael passes out and wakes up in the " red reality " ( where Hannah is alive , but Rex is dead ) , as if the " green reality " were a dream . In the " red reality " , Dr. Lee says it is progress , that Michael is trying to tell himself that his son is dead and that he is on the verge of a breakthrough . Shortly after getting into his car , Michael suddenly sees the man who he bumped into at the amusement park . Michael sees the mystery man several more times throughout the episode and it becomes more clear the man is only a hallucination . 
 Michael passes out and remembers events shortly before and after the crash ; Hannah and Rex are singing the Queen song , " Bohemian Rhapsody " . Later , Michael meets with Emma 's father Joaquin ( Carlos <unk> ) at a coffee shop to discuss the new baby , the mystery man appears to let Michael know that he sees the real mystery man through the window and Michael chases after him . When a police artist ( Chad <unk> ) draws an image of the man , his real name is revealed to be Ed Hawkins ( Kevin Weisman ) , another detective who took over Michael 's spot at the police department after the crash , now working with Bird ( Steve Harris ) , Michael 's former partner in the " red reality " and his current one in the " green reality " . Michael meets with Bird and Hawkins and the latter says that he was one of the first on the scene of the crash and that he is sorry about Rex 's death . Michael starts to believe that his son is really dead ; he remembers the crash , yet again , with additional information . Michael realizes that Hawkins was trying to kill him in the crash . As soon as he figures out the situation , Michael wakes up with Rex and Emma ; he is relieved to see Rex . After the carnival , Michael phones Dr. Evans to tell her what he now knows about the crash . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Leonard Chang and series creator Kyle Killen . It was Killen 's sixth credit and Chang 's second writing acknowledgment for the show . The entry was directed by Laura Innes , who guest stars in the recurring role of Captain Tricia Harper in the series . It was Innes ' first and only directing credit for Awake . The installment was rated TV @-@ 14 in the United States during its original broadcast . Killen noted that , during the filming of the episode , he became " hungry " and wanted to " bend the rules " with the installment . He stated that the installment was a model episode that he wanted to " pursue with the show going forward " . Killen also thought the last " three or four episodes " of Awake , including this episode , represent what the show 's writers were able to accomplish throughout Awake 's original run . 
 " Say Hello to My Little Friend " marked the first appearance of Hawkins , a detective who was described as a titular " little guy " , from the series ' second episode , " The Little Guy " . Weisman obtained a recurring role in January 2012 and later garnered the role of the character . He was later revealed as the man who caused the Britten family 's collision . This entry 's production code was " <unk> " . It was filmed in Los Angeles , California . 
 Isaacs found " Say Hello to My Little Friend " the " most difficult [ episode ] to shoot " as one of the character 's realities was fabricated and had to disappear by the end . To prepare himself for the episode , he imagined that he had suddenly lost his own child or that something awful happened to his family . While Isaacs had " played cheesy disco music " through filming the majority of the episodes , he played nothing during the filming of " Say Hello to My Little Friend " . During a scene where Michael sits on the floor and starts crying , Isaacs had " no idea what came out of [ his mouth ] " . That scene was shot three or four times with a different performance by Isaacs each time ; the actor did not know which take Innes would use . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Say Hello to My Little Friend " continued and introduced key thematic elements to the series that were originally introduced in " The Little Guy " . Key themes in this installment included when Michael was unable to see Rex and realized that Hawkins was trying to kill him in the car crash . It was described as a " show about grief " when it first started airing and that the " cause of the car crash didn 't really matter " at that time . Now , however , The A.V. Club noted that Awake is " dabbling in crooked cops and God only knows what else " . He observed that Michael could be having another defense to keep the fantasy world alive because of his thoughts with Hawkins . 
 The A.V. Club also thought that Hawkins was the reasoning for the second episode 's name . Writing for HitFix , Alan Sepinwall observed that the episode came from Michael 's perspective . According to Sepinwall , " Say Hello to My Little Friend " showed Hannah and Rex together for the first time in the flashback shortly before the crash . He opined that the only people who currently watch the series are " the ones who can quickly identify the red filter from the green filter and figure things out accordingly " . Maggie Furlong from The Huffington Post thought that " Say Hello to My Little Friend " " surfaces some serious issues for Britten " that has only been " cryptically referenced " previously . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Say Hello to My Little Friend " originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) on May 10 , 2012 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky Atlantic on July 13 , 2012 . The episode 's initial broadcast in the United States was viewed by approximately 2 @.@ 51 million viewers . " Say Hello to My Little Friend " earned a Nielsen rating of 0 @.@ 9 , with a 2 share , meaning that roughly 0 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households and 2 percent of households watching television were tuned in to the episode . 
 A sneak peek was released online shortly before the episode 's original broadcast . In the United Kingdom , the episode obtained 275 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the third most @-@ viewed program for the channel behind Alan <unk> : Mid Morning Matters and The Newsroom . Shortly after this episode was broadcast , NBC announced their decision to cancel Awake , due to declining ratings . Despite the series ' cancellation , NBC still decided to air the remaining two episodes . 
 Before its original airing , " Say Hello to My Little Friend " was highly anticipated by commentators . In a review for " Slack Water " , The A.V. Club claimed that " Say Hello to My Little Friend " would be " very cool " because Michael will " face a crisis when he stops waking up in [ the green reality ] " . In a review for the same episode , Sepinwall called " Say Hello to My Little Friend " and the following episode " quite good " . 
 This episode generally received positive reviews from critics . Commentators from IGN , Paste and TV Fanatic were pleased with Isaacs ' performance ; they felt that his performance deserved an Emmy Award . IGN 's Matt Fowler described Isaacs ' performance as " suspense " <unk> , while Paste writer Ross Bonaime thought that his acting deserved an Emmy nomination " at the very least " . Although he did not note that his performance was Emmy @-@ worthy , in his " A- " review , Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club claimed that Isaacs ' is usually the " bad guy " , but he seems like a " dad " . Fowler gave the episode itself a " 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 " , classifying it as " amazing " ; the entry 's story was called " powerful " . However , Bonaime gave the entry a " 8 @.@ 9 " rating . 
 Fowler and Nick McHatton , a TV Fanatic critic , stated that this was the best episode of the program since " Pilot " ; Handlen said that the episode , for the most part , was " a great hour of television , and a fine uptick from the last couple weeks of Awake " , while Bonaime called it " one of Awake 's most compelling episodes to date " . McHatton called the emotional problems of the episode " heart wrenching " to watch " , as they had him in tears ; he gave a " 4 @.@ 9 out of 5 " rating for the episode . Handlen complimented the " powerful scene , as [ Michael ] tries to convince her father that he should do anything possible to avoid losing touch with his daughter " , and also noted that the episode " raises the stakes for [ Michael ] , changing what he 's come to accept as his routine for the first time since the start of the series : while bungee jumping at a fair with Rex and Emma in [ the green reality ] , [ Michael ] has a fainting spell , and comes to in [ the red reality ] " . Handlen claimed the episode " doesn 't seem to fit everything else " . 
 Sepinwall complained that viewers went into " the episode already knowing that the Britten family 's car crash was anything but " . Sepinwall noted that " as it played not only with the structure of the show , but the emotions of our hero by showing us what happens if he stops going to sleep in one reality and waking up in the other " . According to Sepinwall , " Say Hello to My Little Friend " was " effective " as it " forced [ Michael ] to finally confront a truth about his situation " , and that he finally needs to grieve , by recognizing that one of his two loved ones is dead . Sepinwall praised how the episode " kept mirroring moments in the pilot " , while Screen Rant writer Kevin Yeoman called the installment itself " powerful " and " compelling " . Yeoman compared Awake to Mission : Impossible , writing that " with just two episodes left " , Awake has to go into Mission : Impossible mode to " provide answers " . 
 = Fragile Allegiance = 
 Fragile Allegiance is an open @-@ ended 4X real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) game from Gremlin Interactive , released in 1996 for MS @-@ DOS and Windows 95 . The game begins on May 25 , <unk> as the player begins their employment with TetraCorp ( a large interstellar megacorporation ) who have set up a new asteroid mining franchise operation in the Fragmented Sectors . There are six alien races competing with <unk> for these resources . Beginning with one building and one million credits , the player is tasked with building up a successful mining operation to sell as much ore as possible to the Federation . Diplomacy is crucial to the success or failure of this franchise operation as the players colonies begin to encroach on one another . 
 The game features complex diplomacy between players and includes real @-@ time lip @-@ synced animations for in @-@ game actors . Described as a combination of SimCity 2000 , Civilization and Risk , Fragile Allegiance uses an icon based GUI for all menus and game commands . Unlike other RTS games , there is no defined tech tree , with technology being unlocked by the purchase of 36 blueprints at any time during the course of the game . Fragile Allegiance is the spiritual successor to K240 and there are many similarities between the two . 
 Fragile Allegiance generally scored well with reviewers , with PC Gamer UK giving the game the Game of Distinction award and it was praised for its graphics , interface and sound . The game has problems running on Windows XP and later Windows versions , as it was designed for MS @-@ DOS and ported to Windows 95 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay takes place in the Fragmented Sectors , an area of outer space filled with asteroids that are rich in mineral resources . The aim of the game is to colonise and mine the asteroids for the various ores found on them and then sell the ore to the Federation . The player can use the proceeds for empire expansion , purchasing new technologies , construction of buildings , ships and missiles , spying , trading and also to pay fines should the Federation impose any . Construction of the various missiles and ships requires quantities of different ores , so the decision to sell to the Federation is not straightforward . The game has a stock market where commodities can be bought and sold . There is also a black market offering unauthorised information regarding individual spies and colony supervisors , and illicit trade in rare ores and missiles . The manual states that any TetraCorp employee caught selling ore on the black market will be terminated . 
 Fragile Allegiance has a simplistic combat system with the player having no direct control over units when a fleet enters combat . Enemy asteroids can be attacked using ships , missiles and agents . During a battle , laser beams criss @-@ cross the screen and buildings catch fire before being destroyed . Ground turrets fire back at attacking ships and anti @-@ missile turrets shoot out incoming missiles . 
 Small ships are built in a ship yard while the larger ships require a space dock for construction . Ships range from the small <unk> ( used to discover new asteroids ) , to the gigantic Command Cruiser ( which is used for transporting combat fleets over vast distances that they would otherwise be unable to travel without refueling ) . Each ship has a limited number of hardpoints to which weapons and other devices can be attached , and ships can be grouped together into fleets . 
 There are a total of seven races in the game , but only TetraCorp ( representing the human race ) is playable . Upon discovering an alien race , diplomacy can be initiated in order to arrange actions such as non @-@ aggression pacts and joint @-@ combat treaties , as well as accuse them of spying or trading with the Mauna ( Trading with the Mauna is illegal under Federation law ) . If a faction is found to be trading with the Mauna , Jane Fong ( Federal minister for trade relations in addition to her role as Terran ambassador for the Fragmented Sectors ) can be informed , who will in turn tell the Federation , which could result in increased hostility towards the offending faction from all others or , they can be threatened with blackmail and forced to pay a tribute in return for the players silence . Each race has a unique look and diplomatic strategies and everything happens in real time with highly detailed characters that are well animated and lip @-@ synced . One of the factions — The Mauna , are not members of the Federation and are unable to be negotiated or traded with . As the players empire expands , agents and supervisors will make themselves available for employment . Agents are used for gathering intelligence on alien asteroids and can also be deployed on the players own asteroids for counter @-@ intelligence . Other uses for agents include deploying APV 's and destroying various buildings such as defense installations , life support , production , and other various installations . The chances of an agent successfully completing their mission and escaping detection are increased if there is a spy satellite orbiting the asteroid they are assigned to . Colony Supervisors are able to be employed to help manage the building and maintenance of asteroid colonies . There is no research in the game , as this popular mechanic is replaced with the Sci @-@ Tek blueprint system which allows players to buy new technologies as needed . Multiplayer is available over an IPX network with TetraCorp being the only playable race . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The player begins the game as the latest recruit to <unk> mining franchise operation and is tasked with selling as much ore as possible to the Federation , which is a coalition of six of the seven known alien cultures : the Terrans , the Artemia , the <unk> , the Achean Gatherings , the <unk> and the Rigellians . The Federation was inaugurated in <unk> following a coup deposing the last Terran Emperor <unk> <unk> in <unk> and was established to encourage commercial competition rather than full @-@ scale wars between its constituent parties . The authority of the Federation is constantly challenged — in part by those who helped to create it , and the further away from the Federal center a person is , the less the Federation can influence their day @-@ to @-@ day lives . The seventh alien culture — the Mauna are not members of the Federation and it is revealed in the game that they are an untrustworthy and cruel species . It is not known if the Mauna were consulted with prior to the creation of the Federation , and trading with the Mauna is frowned upon by the Federation . 
 Numerous megacorporations exist within the Federation and TetraCorp is one of the largest and oldest . Their sister company is Sci @-@ Tek , which manufactures and supplies most of the technology that the player has access to . Sci @-@ Tek also has blueprints for advanced technologies that the player can purchase . The opening cinematic plays like a corporate recruitment video and at one point is jammed by a Terran male who tells the viewer that TetraCorp has a history of exploiting workers of all races and cultures with low pay and wretched working conditions . The movie is jammed a second time by an <unk> who tells the player that Terran progression was responsible for 68 % of all alien mortalities during the past three centuries and that the reason for this high percentage is due to megacorporations such as TetraCorp . 
 = = Development = = 
 Fragile Allegiance is essentially a remake of Gremlin Interactive 's 1994 Amiga game K240 , with the graphics and user interface revamped for the improved PC hardware available at the time . The core gameplay elements of K240 are retained ; the game is set in an asteroid belt , the Sci @-@ Tek blueprint system replaces research and the player is tasked with building up a successful mining operation . Many of the buildings , ships and missiles have the same names and functions as those in K240 and in both games there are six alien races competing against the player . The soundtrack for the game was composed by Patrick Phelan who also composed the soundtrack for K240 . The game was released in 1996 and competed against other empire building titles such as Ascendancy and Master of Orion 2 . 
 Fragile Allegiance was marketed as an intense deep space real @-@ time strategy game complete with complex face @-@ to @-@ face diplomacy . It was the first game to use Gremlin Interactive 's facial motion capture technology which allowed for highly detailed and realistic looking alien ambassadors , giving depth and adding atmosphere to the games diplomacy . Two versions of the game were released — a European version and a North American version , with each region having different box art . There were two different demo versions , one with audio and one without audio . A cheat code is available for the game and is entered slightly differently between the two versions . For the European version the code is " <unk> / <unk> " , while " <unk> / <unk> " must be entered for the North American version . These codes reward the player with decreased construction time , extra money , the ability to see all asteroids in play , the ability to change the game speed in @-@ game and gives the player access to all of the information in the game . 
 Historically , people <unk> that Fragile Allegiance did not work properly on Windows XP and later Windows platforms , as the game was designed for MS @-@ DOS and ported to Windows 95 . The most common issues being reported are no audio , the game failing to start , and the game crashing when trying to rename anything , including saved games . As no patch was ever released for the game , people have had to use emulators such as <unk> or <unk> in order to get the game to function properly but it may still crash when trying to rename a saved game . The game is now however available for purchase from Steam and is packaged with a <unk> build , making it compatible <unk> Windows 7 and later versions of Windows . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fragile Allegiance was generally well received , achieving average to good scores from reviewers . It was praised for its graphics and icon driven interface which was considered slick and well integrated but a little confusing at first . Reviewers noted that after figuring out what all the icons did the game was immensely engrossing , with the player always having something to do . The game was criticised for its difficulty , its simplistic combat model , the time spent transporting ore between asteroids , and the large amount of micromanagement involved when the player 's empire got large — although reviewers noted that the latter two could be countered by the " Ore <unk> blueprint " and Colony Supervisors respectively . There were mixed feelings regarding the replacing of research with the Sci @-@ Tek blueprint system , which meant that any blueprint could be bought in any order provided the player had the money to do so . 
 The game was also criticised for only having one playable race ( TetraCorp ) . Despite these criticisms PC Gamer UK gave it the Game of Distinction award for Christmas of 1996 stating , " Takes ages to work out what 's going on , and immense concentration . But this is completely engrossing . " and awarded it a score of 91 % . Users of internet gaming site GameSpot rated Fragile Allegiance significantly higher than the site reviewer , rating it 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . <unk> 's review rated it at 75 % while GameRankings gave the game a score of 65 % . 
 = Love dart = 
 A love dart ( also known as a <unk> ) is a sharp , calcareous or chitinous dart which some hermaphroditic land snails and slugs create . Love darts are made in sexually mature animals only , and are used as part of the sequence of events during courtship , before actual mating takes place . Darts are quite large compared to the size of the animal : in the case of the semi @-@ slug genus <unk> , the length of a dart can be up to one fifth that of the semi @-@ slug 's foot . 
 The process of using love darts in snails is a form of sexual selection . Prior to copulation , each of the two snails ( or slugs ) attempts to " shoot " one ( or more ) darts into the other snail ( or slug ) . There is no organ to receive the dart ; this action is more analogous to a stabbing , or to being shot with an arrow or flechette . The dart does not fly through the air to reach its target however ; instead it is fired as a contact shot . 
 The love dart is not a penial stylet ( in other words this is not an accessory organ for sperm transfer ) . The exchange of sperm between both of the two land snails is a completely separate part of the mating progression . Nevertheless , recent research shows that use of the dart can strongly favor the reproductive outcome for the snail that is able to lodge a dart in its partner . This is because mucus on the dart introduces a hormone @-@ like substance that allows far more of its sperm to survive . 
 Love darts , also known as shooting darts , or just as darts , are shaped in many distinctive ways which vary considerably between species . What all the shapes of love darts have in common is their harpoon @-@ like or needle @-@ like ability to pierce . 
 = = The mating dance = = 
 Mating begins with a courting ritual . For example , in land snails of the genus Helix , including the <unk> Helix <unk> , and the common garden snail Helix <unk> ( also known as Cornu aspersum and <unk> <unk> ) , copulation is preceded by an elaborate tactile courtship . 
 The two snails circle around each other for up to six hours , touching with their tentacles , and biting lips and the area of the genital pore , which shows some preliminary signs of the eversion of the penis . As the snails approach mating , hydraulic pressure builds up in the blood sinus surrounding the organ housing the dart . Each snail manoeuvres to get its genital pore in the best position , close to the other snail 's body . Then , when the body of one snail touches the other snail 's genital pore , it triggers the firing of the dart . 
 The darting can sometimes be so forceful that the dart ends up buried in the internal organs . It can also happen that a dart will pierce the body or head entirely , and protrude on the other side . 
 After both snails have fired their darts , the snails copulate and exchange sperm . 
 A snail does not have a dart to fire the very first time it mates , because the first mating is necessary to trigger the process of dart formation . Once a snail has mated , it fires a dart before some , but not all , subsequent matings . A snail often mates without having a dart to use , because it takes time to create a replacement dart . In the case of the garden snail Cornu aspersum , it takes a week for a new dart to form . 
 The dart is shot with some variation in force , and with considerable inaccuracy , such that one @-@ third of the darts that are fired in Cornu aspersum either fail to penetrate the skin , or miss the target altogether . Snails have only very simple visual systems and cannot see well enough to use vision to help aim the darts . 
 = = Function = = 
 Although the existence and use of love darts in snails has been known for at least several centuries , until recently the actual function of love darts was not properly understood . 
 It was long assumed that the darts had some sort of " stimulating " function , and served to make copulation more likely . It was also suggested that darts might be a " gift " of calcium . These theories have proved to be incorrect ; recent research has led to a new understanding of the function of love darts in which the love dart is used by the male component to manipulate the female component ’ s sperm collection , increasing paternity . 
 A closer look into the behavior of Cornu aspersum , shows that it is not the mechanical action of the dart that increases paternity in sperm donors but instead the mucus that coats the dart . The mucus carries an <unk> that is transferred into the recipient snail ’ s hemolymph when the dart is stabbed . This <unk> <unk> the female component of the reproductive system in the receiving individual : the bursa <unk> ( sperm digestion organ ) is closed off , and the copulatory canal ( leading to the sperm storage ) is opened . This reconfiguration allows more sperm to access the sperm storage area and fertilize eggs , rather than being digested . Ultimately this increases the shooter ’ s paternity . 
 = = Morphology of darts = = 
 The love dart , also known as a " <unk> " , is often made of calcium carbonate which is secreted by a specialized organ within the reproductive system of several families of air @-@ breathing snails and slugs , mainly in terrestrial pulmonate gastropod mollusks within the clade Stylommatophora . 
 Darts can range in size from about 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long in the larger snail species , down to about 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) in the smallest snails that have darts . Typically most darts are less than 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 20 in ) long , but they are substantial compared with the size of the animal . 
 There is considerable variety in both the overall shape and the cross section of the love dart . The morphology ( shape and form ) of the dart is species @-@ specific . For example , individual snails of the two rather similar <unk> species Cepaea hortensis and Cepaea nemoralis can sometimes only be distinguished by examining the shape of the love dart and the vaginal mucus glands ( which in the anatomical diagram are marked " MG " and are positioned off the structure marked " V " . ) 
 = = Anatomical context = = 
 Note : The taxonomic placement of all the families mentioned in this article follows the taxonomy of the <unk> by Bouchet & <unk> ( 2005 ) . 
 There is a complex hermaphroditic reproductive system in pulmonate snails ( those snails that have a lung rather than a gill or gills . ) Their reproductive system is completely internal , except for the active protrusion ( eversion ) of the penis for copulation . The outer opening of the reproductive system is called the " genital pore " ; it is positioned on the right hand side , very close to the head of the animal . This opening is virtually invisible however , unless it is actively in use . 
 The love dart is created and stored before use in a highly muscular internal anatomical structure known as the stylophore or dart sac ( also known as the bursa <unk> ) . The exact positioning of the stylophore varies , but it is in the vicinity of the eversible penis and the vagina , where these two structures open into the " atrium " , a common area right inside the genital pore . 
 The opening of the stylophore leads directly into the atrium in certain species in the families Vitrinidae , Parmacellidae , Helminthoglyptidae , Bradybaenidae , Urocyclidae , Ariophantidae , and Dyakiidae . The opening of the stylophore can instead lead to the penis , as is the case in some species of <unk> ( a subfamily of <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , Gastrodontidae and <unk> . Alternatively , it can lead to the vagina , as in the case in some species of <unk> ( a subfamily of <unk> ) , <unk> ( a subfamily of <unk> ) , Philomycidae , other species within the Bradybaenidae , and also in the Hygromiidae , Helicidae and Dyakiidae . 
 Only two families have darts present in every species : the Bradybaenidae and in the Dyakiidae . In all the other families there is reduction or loss of dart @-@ making ability in some of the species ( cf . ) . 
 Many species have only one dart sac , however other species have several . Snails in the family Bradybaenidae have more than one dart sac , and some species of Hygromiidae and <unk> have four dart sacs . Some Urocyclidae have up to 70 darts . 
 = = Occurrence within the pulmonate snails and slugs = = 
 All pulmonate land snails are hermaphrodites , and have a complete and rather elaborate set of both male and female reproductive organs ( see the simplified anatomical diagram above ) , but the majority of pulmonate land snails have no love darts and no dart sac . 
 = = = Calcareous darts = = = 
 Calcareous ( composed of calcium carbonate ) darts are found in a limited number of pulmonate families within the Stylommatophora . 
 Most of these families are within the land snail superfamily <unk> : Helicidae , Bradybaenidae , Helminthoglyptidae , Hygromiidae , <unk> ( previously considered to be a part of the Hygromiidae ) . 
 Calcium carbonate darts are also found in the family <unk> within the superfamily <unk> , and in one family of slugs , the Philomycidae , which are within the <unk> <unk> . 
 Lightly calcified darts occur in the snail and semi @-@ slug family Urocyclidae , within the superfamily Helicarionoidea . 
 = = = <unk> darts = = = 
 <unk> ( composed of chitin ) love darts occur in the pulmonate land snail families Ariophantidae ( superfamily Helicarionoidea ) , in the family <unk> ( superfamily Helicarionoidea ) , in the Vitrinidae ( superfamily <unk> ) , and in the slug family Parmacellidae ( superfamily <unk> ) . 
 Within the more ancient clade <unk> , chitin darts are found in the pulmonate sea slugs of the family <unk> , in the superfamily <unk> . 
 = = = Cartilaginous darts = = = 
 Love darts made of cartilage occur in the family Gastrodontidae . 
 = = Evolution of love darts = = 
 Because of the presence of darts in many superfamilies of the Stylommatophora , it seems likely that love darts appeared during the early evolution of the <unk> , and that the ancestors of the Stylommatophora possessed darts already . 
 During evolution , darts appear to have been lost secondarily , i.e. , after they had evolved and been functional . <unk> darts ( ones that exist only in a rudimentary condition ) occur in the family <unk> . , and in many <unk> , the surrounding organs have also degenerated ( become non @-@ functional ) . The <unk> is a fleshy or cuticle @-@ coated papilla which is considered to be a degenerated , previously dart @-@ bearing , organ . 
 = = Species variability = = 
 Love darts are shaped in many distinctive ways , and vary considerably between species . The morphology of the dart is almost always species @-@ specific . 
 Some darts have a round cross section , others are bladed or vaned . In some cases the blades on the sides of the dart are bifurcated or divided into two parts . Some darts are shaped like a needle or a thorn , others have a tip like an arrowhead , or look like a dagger . What all the shapes have in common is their ability to pierce . 
 = = = Images = = = 
 Note : both the scanning electron micrographs ( <unk> ) and the drawings below are taken from , or modified from , <unk> & Schulenburg , 2005 . 
 SEM images of love darts from eight different species of pulmonate land snails . The upper images show a lateral view , where the scale bar is 500 μm ( = 0 @.@ 5 mm ) . The lower images show a cross @-@ section , where the scale bar is 50 μm ( = 0 @.@ 05 mm ) . 
 The following tables or charts show numerous examples of love dart morphology , on a family by family and species by species basis . Not all families and species are included . The drawings show first the cross section , and then the lateral view , of the dart in that particular species . Darts vary in size according to the size of the snail or slug species , but here they are all shown at the same size , for purposes of comparison . 
 = = = = Helicidae = = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 = = = = Bradybaenidae = = = = 
 = = = = Helminthoglyptidae = = = = 
 = = = = Hygromiidae = = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 = = = = Ariophantidae = = = = 
 = = = = Ariophantidae = = = = 
 = = = = Philomycidae = = = = 
 A slug family 
 = = = = Urocyclidae = = = = 
 Some species in this family have spiral darts , and some darts have " minute barbs pointing toward the tip " . 
 = = = = Vitrinidae = = = = 
 = = = = Parmacellidae = = = = 
 Species of slugs within this family have spiral darts . 
 = = = = Gastrodontidae = = = = 
 = = The Cupid connection = = 
 Some writers have commented on the parallel between the love darts of snails and the love darts fired by the mythological being Cupid , known as Eros in Greek mythology . It is even possible that there is a connection between the behavior of the snails and the myth . <unk> ( mollusk expert ) Ronald Chase of McGill University said about the garden snail Cornu aspersum , " I believe the myth of Cupid and his arrows has its basis in this snail species , which is native to Greece " . He added , " The Greeks probably knew about this behavior because they were pretty good naturalists and observers . " 
 In some languages , the dart that these snails use before mating is known as an " arrow " . For example , in the German language it is called a <unk> or " love arrow " , and in the Czech language it is <unk> <unk> ( which means " arrow of love " ) . 
 = = Dart @-@ like structures in other gastropod groups = = 
 = = = The toxoglossans = = = 
 Marine gastropods in the predatory superfamily <unk> , ( known as the toxoglossans , meaning " poison tongue " ) use a poison dart or harpoon , which is a single modified radula tooth which is created inside the mouth of the snail , and which is primarily made of chitin . These snails are carnivorous hunters : the harpoon is used in predation . When the snail is close to its prey , it extends its proboscis a considerable distance ; then it fires its harpoon and injects a toxin into the prey . For most species of toxoglossans the prey is marine worms , but in the case of some larger cone snails , the prey is small fish . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> gastropods are hermaphrodites , as are the <unk> , however <unk> do not have love darts . Nonetheless , some of them do stab one another during mating , using hardened anatomical structures . For example , in the <unk> genus <unk> , both <unk> attempt to stab their partner with a two @-@ part , spined penis . 
 = Boletus abruptibulbus = 
 Boletus abruptibulbus is a species of bolete mushroom in the family Boletaceae . Described as new to science in 2009 , it is found only in the Gulf Coast of the Florida Panhandle , where it grows on the ground in coastal sand dunes , one of only three North American boletes known to favor this habitat . The fruit bodies have convex brownish caps up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter , supported by solid yellowish to reddish stems measuring 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long by 10 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The pores on the underside of the cap measure about 1 – 2 mm in diameter and are initially pale yellow before developing a greenish tinge in age . The mushroom 's spores , about 20 micrometers long , are unusually long for a member of the Boletaceae . The stem base is bulbous , a diagnostic feature for which the species is named . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described as new to science in 2009 by Beatriz Ortiz @-@ Santana , William Roody , and Ernst Both in the journal Mycotaxon . The holotype material was collected at St. Joseph Peninsula State Park in Florida in January 2005 . In 2007 , Roody and Both published a short description and color photograph of the species in their field guide Mushrooms of the Southeastern United States , but this was not a valid name as it lacked a Latin description . The specific epithet abruptibulbus refers to the abruptly ( <unk> ) swollen ( <unk> ) shape of the bulb at the base of the stem . 
 = = Description = = 
 The convex cap measures 30 – 80 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter . Slightly sticky when wet , the cap surface is shiny and smooth . Sometimes , the surface has flattened filaments ( formed from aggregated hyphae ) , and may develop cracks . The thin and easily detached cap cuticle is initially reddish brown to dark brown , later becoming cinnamon brown . The cap margin is curved inward when young , but becomes bent downward when mature . The white to very pale yellow cap flesh does not change color when exposed to air , and has a pleasant odor and mild taste . The tubes comprising the hymenophore on the underside of the cap measure 3 – 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) long and are pale yellow initially before developing a greenish tinge in age . The pore surface does not stain when it is bruised . The pores are roughly spherical or polyhedral at first , becoming angular to pentagonal in age , and almost gill @-@ like near the attachment to the stem . Pores are about 1 – 2 mm in diameter . The stem is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long , 10 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick in the upper part , expanding to 2 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) at the bulbous base . It has pseudorrhiza ( cord @-@ like structures resembling a plant root ) that are 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long . The stem surface is dry and smooth except for a powdery region near the apex . The top of the stem is yellow , but it gradually becomes reddish approaching the bulbous base . The stem tissue is pale yellow , although tunnels dug by insect larvae are reddish brown . 
 A drop of dilute ammonia ( as a 12 % NH4OH solution ) placed on the cap surface immediately turns dark red . If placed on the bulbous part of the stem base of a dried specimen , it will turn dark for roughly 15 seconds before starting to fade . 
 The spores are smooth , spindle @-@ shaped , and measure 13 @.@ 5 – 19 @.@ 8 by 5 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 2 µm — rather large for a member of the Boletaceae . <unk> @-@ yellow or greenish yellow when mounted in a dilute potassium hydroxide , they are dextrinoid ( yellowish- or reddish @-@ brown ) when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are club @-@ shaped , hyaline ( translucent ) , four @-@ spored , and measure 28 @.@ 8 – 42 @.@ 3 by 7 @.@ 2 – 11 @.@ 7 µm . The hymenium contains basidioles ( immature or aborted basidia ) , which are club @-@ shaped and measure 20 @.@ 7 – 35 @.@ 1 by 7 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 0 µm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the surface of the tubes ) range in shape from somewhat spindle @-@ shaped to cylindrical , and are hyaline , smooth , and thin @-@ walled , with dimensions of 41 @.@ 4 – 61 @.@ 2 by 7 @.@ 2 – 10 @.@ 8 µm . Cystidia on the edges of the pores ( cheilocystidia ) are 31 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 5 by 7 @.@ 2 – 13 @.@ 5 µm , spindle @-@ shaped to centrally swollen , hyaline , smooth , and thin @-@ walled . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 The bulbous base , large spores , and distinctive habitat are characteristic features that make this species readily distinguishable from other boletes . It has a coloration and cap texture similar to Boletus <unk> and B. <unk> , but the spores of these species are shorter ( 11 – 15 µm and 11 – 16 µm , respectively ) . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Boletus abruptibulbus grow singly or in groups in sand . The species is known only from the Gulf Coast of the Florida Panhandle , where fruiting occurs on older sand dunes , particularly in areas where the habit changes from coastal scrub to oak @-@ pine woods . This latter habitat is characterized by the presence of the tree species Sand Live Oak ( Quercus <unk> ) , Myrtle Oak ( Q. <unk> ) , and Sand Pine ( Pinus clausa ) . Fruiting occurs from December to March . Boletus abruptibulbus is one of only three North American Boletaceae species that occur in coastal sand dunes ; the others are Leccinum arenicola , found in New Brunswick , Canada , and <unk> arenicola , described from Oregon . 
 = Industrial metal = 
 Industrial metal is a musical genre that draws from industrial dance music , thrash metal and hardcore punk , using repeating metal guitar riffs , sampling , synthesizer or sequencer lines , and distorted vocals . Founding industrial metal acts include Ministry , Godflesh , and KMFDM . 
 Industrial metal developed in the late 1980s , as industrial and heavy metal began to fuse into a common genre . In the early years of the 21st century , groups from the black metal scene began to incorporate elements of industrial music . Industrial metal did well in the early 1990s , particularly in North America , with the success of groups such as Nine Inch Nails . The industrial metal movement began to fade in the latter half of the 1990s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early innovators = = = 
 Though electric guitars had been used by industrial artists since the early days of the genre , archetypal industrial groups such as Throbbing Gristle displayed a strong anti @-@ rock stance . British post @-@ punk band Killing Joke pioneered the crossing over between styles , and was an influence on major industrial metal bands such as Ministry , Godflesh , and Nine Inch Nails . Another pioneer industrial rock group , Big Black , also impacted some later groups . 
 By the late 1980s industrial and heavy metal began to fuse into a common genre , with Godflesh 's self @-@ titled EP and Ministry 's The Land of Rape and Honey at the forefront . Godflesh was founded by former Napalm Death guitarist Justin Broadrick . Drawing from a wide array of influences — power electronics forefathers Whitehouse , noise rock band Swans , ambient music creator Brian Eno and fellow Birmingham hard rockers Black Sabbath — the Godflesh sound was once described as " Pornography @-@ era Cure on Quaaludes " . Though not a top @-@ seller , Godflesh nonetheless became an influential act , their name mentioned by Korn , Metallica , Danzig , Faith No More , and Fear Factory . 
 Ministry emerged from the scene surrounding Wax Trax ! Records , a Chicago label dedicated to industrial music . Ministry 's initial foray into guitar rock happened during a recording session of The Land of Rape and Honey on Southern Studios , in London . The band 's frontman , the Cuban @-@ born Al Jourgensen , explained this transition : 
 Jourgensen seemed particularly fond of thrash metal . After the release of Land , he recruited guitarist Mike <unk> from Texas thrashers <unk> Mortis . On one occasion , Jourgensen told the press that Sepultura was his favorite band . He also expressed the desire to produce a Metallica album . Jourgensen 's interest in dance @-@ oriented electronic music did not entirely fade , however ; he also formed the side @-@ project Revolting Cocks , a more electronic body music @-@ inflected collaboration with Richard 23 of Front 242 . 
 German band KMFDM was another seminal industrial metal group . Although not a metal fan , KMFDM leader Sascha Konietzko 's " infatuation with ripping off metal licks " stemmed from his experiments with E @-@ mu 's Emax sampler in late 1986 . He told Guitar World that , 
 A Swiss trio , The Young Gods , brushed with the style on their second album , L <unk> Rouge ( 1989 ) . Prior to its release , singer Franz <unk> declared : 
 Pigface , formed by Martin Atkins and including Ministry drummer Bill Rieflin , emerged as an industrial metal collective of sorts , participating with many figures from the noise rock and industrial worlds . Nine Inch Nails , the " one @-@ man @-@ band " formed by Trent Reznor , brought the genre to mainstream audiences with albums such as the Grammy @-@ winning Broken and the best @-@ selling The Downward Spiral , accompanied by their groundbreaking performance at Woodstock ' 94 . The <unk> subculture also developed at this time , along with the so @-@ called " <unk> " subgenre , which encompassed <unk> , 16 Volt , and Acumen Nation . Some electro @-@ industrial groups adopted industrial metal techniques in this period , including Skinny Puppy ( on the Jourgensen @-@ produced Rabies ) , and Front Line Assembly . 
 British band <unk> , formed in 1989 by brothers Jon and Mark Clayden , also started as an industrial metal band . The band later included elements of drum and bass . Frontman JS mentions 
 = = = Industrial thrash and death metal = = = 
 Industrial metal 's popularity led a number of successful thrash metal groups , including Megadeth , Sepultura , and Anthrax , to request remixes by " industrial " artists . Some musicians emerging from the death metal scene , such as Fear Factory , <unk> , and Meathook Seed , also began to experiment with industrial . Fear Factory , from Los Angeles , were initially influenced by the Earache roster ( namely Godflesh , Napalm Death and Bolt Thrower ) . The German band <unk> ! after their debut album Sperm started to play Industrial metal combined with elements of death metal and groove metal until the album <unk> . Sepultura singer Max Cavalera 's <unk> , a collaboration with Alex Newport , also practiced a combination of extreme metal and industrial production techniques . A lesser @-@ known example of industrial death metal is Meathook Seed , made up of members of Napalm Death and the Florida death metal group Obituary . An industrial music fan , Obituary guitarist Trevor Peres suggested drum machines for The End Complete , Obituary 's most successful album . The other band members ' refusal led him to form Meathook Seed . 
 = = = Industrial black metal = = = 
 In the early years of the 21st century , groups from the black metal scene began to incorporate elements of industrial music . <unk> , formed in 1991 , was the first of these groups . <unk> ( <unk> ) , Thorns from Norway and Blut Aus Nord , a French black metal group , have been acclaimed for their incorporation of industrial elements . Other industrial black metal musicians include Samael , The Axis of Perdition , <unk> , and ... And Oceans . In addition , The <unk> , Mortiis and <unk> emerged from the Norwegian black metal scene , but later chose to experiment with industrial music . 
 = = = Commercial rise = = = 
 Industrial metal blossomed in the early 1990s , particularly in North America , where it would eventually sell close to 35 million units . It first became a commercial force in 1992 when Nine Inch Nails ' Broken and Ministry 's Psalm 69 went platinum in America , though the latter took three years to reach that status . Both groups were nominated for the Best Metal Performance in the 1992 Grammy Awards , with Nine Inch Nails winning . Two years later , Nine Inch Nails released The Downward Spiral , which debuted at No. 2 , and would eventually go quadruple @-@ platinum . This record is considered by Allmusic as " one of the bleakest multi @-@ platinum albums ever . " 
 Overall , popular heavy rock music has changed to become more " industrialized " . This robbed the industrial hardcore movement of any hopes of establishing a new identity of its own . The style is dead ( or at least dying ) ; the elements of the style continue on in new musical settings . 
 – David A. Locher , Professor of Sociology , Missouri State University , 1998 
 Following Nine Inch Nails ' success , Marilyn Manson , led by a protégé of Reznor 's , came to prominence . The group 's live performance and its transgressive appeal was often more commented on than their music . 
 Industrial metal reached its commercial zenith in the latter half of the 1990s – according to the RIAA databases , its top @-@ selling artists sold around 17 @.@ 5 million units combined . Records by major industrial metal artists routinely debuted on the top spots of the Billboard 200 chart : Fear Factory 's Obsolete ( No. 1 ) , Rob Zombie 's <unk> Deluxe ( No. 5 ) , Marilyn Manson 's Antichrist Superstar ( No. 3 ) , and Nine Inch Nails ' The Fragile ( No. 1 ) . A number of industrial metal albums performed well on Billboard 's Heatseekers chart : Filter 's Short Bus ( No. 3 ) , <unk> Westward 's Wither Blister Burn + Peel ( No. 1 ) , Rammstein 's <unk> ( No. 2 ) , Orgy 's <unk> ( No. 1 ) , and Static @-@ X 's Wisconsin Death Trip ( No. 1 ) . 
 During this era , Trent Reznor was chosen by Time as one of the most influential Americans of 1997 . Its popularity was such that established glam metal groups , including Guns N ' Roses and Mötley Crüe , began to dabble in the style . Figures from the hip hop scene also began to seek out collaborations with and remixes from industrial metal musicians . 
 When industrial metal climbed the charts of the late 1990s , its sudden popularity was met with negative reactions from the early innovators of industrial music . Peter Christopherson told The Wire that he no longer felt any kinship with the industrial scene : " this is not me , this is not what I 'm about " . Lustmord , a prominent early industrial musician , declared that " Ministry just doesn 't interest [ him ] " and " [ he has ] no time for all this rock and roll shit they 're doing now . " Skinny Puppy frontman Nivek Ogre dismissed Nine Inch Nails as " cock rock " , but have since patched things up and have even performed on stage together . 
 Industrial metal suffered a critical backlash at the turn of the millennium . In an April 2000 review for the Chicago Sun Times , Jim DeRogatis dismissed Nine Inch Nails ' new music as a " generic brand of industrial thrash " and accused Ministry of repeating an act that " was old by 1992 " . Although The Fragile reached the top spot of the Billboard 200 and went on to earn double platinum status , DeRogatis considered it a " flop " nonetheless . Around this time , veteran industrial metal artists ( Ministry , Godflesh , and White Zombie ) began to repudiate the industrial label . Sales remained high throughout 2000 – 2005 ; at least 10 million records were sold during that time frame . Many groups began to take influence from hip hop and electronic music , in addition to industrial metal . As a result , acts like Powerman 5000 are often described as industrial metal as well as nu metal . 
 = = Film and video = = 
 Several industrial metal groups have produced eye @-@ catching videos . These include Godflesh 's collaboration with Andres Serrano , Aidan Hughes 's graphics for KMFDM , Nine Inch Nails ' work with Mark Romanek , Rob Zombie 's visual work for White Zombie ( for which he received the MTV Video Music Award for Best Hard Rock Video ) , and Marilyn Manson 's output with Richard Kern and Floria Sigismondi . NIN later collaborated with Bill Viola for live accompaniment . Trent Reznor also produced the soundtracks for the films Natural Born Killers and Lost Highway , and served as " musical consultant " for Man on Fire . Rob Zombie has directed three films . As of 2009 , Marilyn Manson is in the process of directing Phantasmagoria : The Visions of Lewis Carroll . Other films that have included prominent contributions from industrial metal artists include The Crow , Johnny Mnemonic , Spawn , The Matrix , and A.I. Artificial Intelligence . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Its emphasis on transgressive themes has made a few industrial metal groups vulnerable to attack from American social conservatives . For example , Sen. Bob Dole , then head of the Republican Party , sharply criticized Time Warner after a meeting between Michael J. Fuchs ( head of the Warner Music Group ) , William Bennett , and C. Delores Tucker , at which Tucker and Bennett demanded that Fuchs read lyrics from NIN 's " Big Man with a Gun " . A year later , Bennett , Tucker , and Joseph Lieberman launched a similar campaign against MCA Records for their distribution of Marilyn Manson 's music . Many of his concerts were cancelled by authorities after this uproar . In addition , Dennis Cooper cited Ministry 's video for " Just One Fix " , which featured footage of William S. Burroughs , as an early example of heroin chic . Some initial reports claimed that Columbine High School shooters Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold were Marilyn Manson fans . In fact , they preferred KMFDM and Rammstein . Asa Coon , another school shooter , was a Manson fan . Manson , a former journalist , published a detailed response to the controversy following the Columbine shootings in an article published in Rolling Stone . It concluded : 
 Sascha Konietzko reported that KMFDM was " sick and appalled " by the shootings , issuing a statement the following day saying : 
 Rammstein stated that they " have no lyrical content or political beliefs that could have possibly influenced such behavior . " Rammstein have also been controversial for their use of Nazi imagery , including footage shot by Leni Riefenstahl for Olympia in their video for " Stripped " . Alec Empire , a German digital hardcore musician , declared that " [ Rammstein is ] successful for all the wrong reasons . I think they 're not a fascist band at all , but I think in Germany there 's a lot of misunderstanding and that 's why they sell records and I think that 's dangerous . " In response to the controversy , Rammstein stated that " We are not Nazis , Neo @-@ Nazis , or any other kind of Nazi . We are against racism , bigotry or any other type of discrimination . " 
 = Anna Bågenholm = 
 Anna Elisabeth Johansson Bågenholm ( born 1970 ) is a Swedish radiologist from <unk> , who survived after a skiing accident in 1999 left her trapped under a layer of ice for 80 minutes in freezing water . During this time she became a victim of extreme hypothermia and her body temperature decreased to 13 @.@ 7 ° C ( 56 @.@ 7 ° F ) , one of the lowest survived body temperatures ever recorded in a human with accidental hypothermia . Bågenholm was able to find an air pocket under the ice , but suffered circulatory arrest after 40 minutes in the water . 
 After rescue , Bågenholm was transported by helicopter to the Tromsø University Hospital , where a team of more than a hundred doctors and nurses worked in shifts for nine hours to save her life . Bågenholm woke up ten days after the accident , paralyzed from the neck down and subsequently spent two months recovering in an intensive care unit . Although she has made an almost full recovery from the incident , late in 2009 she was still suffering from minor symptoms in hands and feet related to nerve injury . Bågenholm 's case has been discussed in the leading British medical journal The Lancet , and in medical textbooks . 
 = = Background and incident = = 
 Anna Bågenholm was born in 1970 in <unk> , Sweden . At the time of the incident , she was 29 years old and studying to become an orthopedic surgeon . Bågenholm decided to do her residency in Narvik , Norway , and , in May 1998 , she became a surgeon assistant at the Narvik Hospital . Bågenholm 's mentor during this period was Yngve Jones , a doctor at the Narvik Hospital who was about to celebrate his retirement with a party on 20 May 1999 . 
 On that day , Bågenholm was skiing in the mountains outside of Narvik with two of her colleagues , Marie Falkenberg and <unk> Næsheim . An expert skier , Bågenholm often skied after work . On this day , as she was heading down a steep mountainside — a route she had taken several times before — she lost control of her skis . She fell headfirst onto a layer of ice on a frozen stream near a waterfall , landing on her back . A hole opened up in the ice and Bågenholm 's head and torso were pulled in as meltwater filled her clothes . Her body became trapped under the ice , which was 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick . When Falkenberg and Næsheim found Bågenholm , only her feet and skis were above the ice . 
 = = Rescue attempts = = 
 Bågenholm 's colleagues made an attempt to free her but failed . At 18 : 27 local time ( CET ) , seven minutes after she had fallen into the water , they called for help on a mobile phone . Police lieutenant Bård Mikalsen received the call and put together two rescue teams ; one at the top of the mountain and one at the bottom . Mikalsen also contacted the Bodø rescue team , which was equipped with a Sea King helicopter , but they told him that the helicopter had left to transport a sick child . Mikalsen was persistent and convinced the dispatcher to turn the helicopter around . 
 Falkenberg and Næsheim held onto Bågenholm 's skis as they waited for the rescue teams to arrive . As Bågenholm first struggled in the cold water , she found an air pocket and was able to remain conscious for 40 minutes before becoming a victim of circulatory arrest . Ketil <unk> led the rescue team from the top of the mountain . He skied as fast as he could to Bågenholm 's location , where he and his rescue team tried unsuccessfully to pull her out with a rope . They then tried to dig her out , but their snow shovel could not break through the ice . Rescuers from the bottom of the mountain then arrived , bringing with them a pointed gardening shovel . They were able to cut a hole in the ice , and pulled her through at 19 : 40 . Bågenholm had been in the water for 80 minutes when she was rescued . 
 = = Resuscitation and recovery = = 
 When Bågenholm was pulled out of the water , her pupils were dilated , her blood was not circulating , and she was not breathing . Falkenberg and Næsheim , both doctors , began giving her cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) . The rescue helicopter soon arrived and Bågenholm was brought to the Tromsø University Hospital in an hour . The helicopter emergency team continued to give her CPR during the flight , and she was ventilated with oxygen . She was also treated with a defibrillator , but to no effect . 
 Bågenholm arrived at the hospital at 21 : 10 . Her body temperature at the time was 13 @.@ 7 ° C ( 56 @.@ 7 ° F ) , the lowest survived body temperature ever recorded in a human with accidental hypothermia , until fellow Swede Stella , 7 years old , survived 13 @.@ 0 ° C ( 55 @.@ 4 ° F ) at Christmas 2010 . Dr. Mads Gilbert , an anesthesiologist and the chief of the hospital 's emergency room , proceeded with the resuscitation attempt . He commented on Bågenholm 's state : " She has completely dilated pupils . She is ashen , flaxen white . She 's wet . She 's ice cold when I touch her skin , and she looks absolutely dead . " Gilbert had treated many cases of hypothermia before because of the cold climate in Norway , and knew how to treat Bågenholm . The electrocardiogram connected to her showed no signs of life , but Gilbert knew patients should be " warmed up before you declare them dead " . He and his team hoped Bågenholm 's brain had received enough oxygen from the CPR she was given after her rescue . 
 Bågenholm was brought to the operating theatre , where a team of more than a hundred doctors and nurses worked in shifts for nine hours to save her life . At 21 : 40 , she was connected to a cardiopulmonary bypass machine that warmed up her blood outside of her body before it was reinserted into her veins . Bågenholm 's first heart beat was recorded at 22 : 15 , and her body temperature had risen to 36 @.@ 4 ° C ( 97 @.@ 5 ° F ) at 0 : 49 . Bågenholm 's lung function deteriorated at 02 : 20 , and she spent the following 35 days connected to a ventilator . 
 Bågenholm soon began to show signs of vitality , and woke up paralyzed from the neck down on 30 May . She feared she would spend the rest of her life on her back , and was angry with her colleagues for saving her . Bågenholm soon recovered from the paralysis , however , and later apologized to her friends ; " I was very irritated when I realized they had saved me . I feared a meaningless life , without any dignity . Now I am very happy to be alive and want to apologize . " Bågenholm 's kidneys and digestive system were not working properly , so she had to recover in an intensive care unit for two more months . After spending 28 days in the Tromsø intensive care unit , she was flown to Sweden in an ambulance helicopter for the remainder of her recovery . 
 Dr Petter Andreas Steen , professor at the National Hospital in Oslo , said it was " an extraordinary medical achievement " that Bågenholm 's life could be saved . He believed the reason she was able to recover was that her metabolism slowed down during the incident and the tissues inside her body required less oxygen at the low temperatures . According to the journal Proto ( published by the Massachusetts General Hospital ) , Bågenholm 's metabolism slowed down to ten percent of its baseline rate and thus she barely needed any oxygen at all . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite the severe damage to Bågenholm 's body , no permanent brain damage was diagnosed . Gilbert commented on this : " Her body had time to cool down completely before the heart stopped . Her brain was so cold when the heart stopped that the brain cells needed very little oxygen , so the brain could survive for quite a prolonged time . " Gilbert also noted that therapeutic hypothermia , a method used to save victims of circulatory arrest by lowering their body temperature , has become more frequent at Norwegian hospitals after Bågenholm 's case gained fame . 
 Bågenholm returned to work in October 1999 . On 7 October 1999 – 140 days after the accident — she returned to the hospital in Tromsø and met the doctors and nurses that helped save her life . Bågenholm commented : " When you are a patient , you 're not thinking you are going to die . You think , I 'm going to make it . But as a medical person , I think it 's amazing that I 'm alive . " As of October 2009 , Bågenholm has made an almost full recovery , although minor symptoms in hands and feet related to nerve injury remain . In late 2009 , she was working as a radiologist at the hospital where her life was saved . 
 According to BBC News , most patients who suffer from extreme hypothermia die , even if doctors are able to restart their hearts . The survival rate for adults whose body temperature has decreased to below 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) is 10 % – 33 % . Prior to Bågenholm 's accident , the lowest survived body temperature was 14 @.@ 4 ° C ( 57 @.@ 9 ° F ) , which had been recorded in a child . Gilbert said " victims of very deep accidental hypothermia with circulatory arrest should be seen as potentially <unk> with a prospect of full recovery . The key success factors of such marginal resuscitation efforts are early bystander actions with vigorous CPR and early warning of the emergency system , early dispatch of adequate rescue units ( ground and air @-@ ambulances ) and good co @-@ ordination between the resources outside and inside the hospital , aggressive <unk> and a spirit not to give up . " General practitioner <unk> Coward from Tywyn , Wales , said persons who are victims of extreme hypothermia are often mistakenly thought dead because it can be difficult to detect a pulse on them . He said this case " really does bring it home to us how cautious one has to be before diagnosing death in people who are cold . " 
 After the incident , Bågenholm became a subject of fiction and medical textbooks , and her case has been discussed in the leading British medical journal The Lancet . On 25 October 2009 her story was featured on CNN 's television program Another Day : Cheating Death . Hosted by Sanjay Gupta , the program features stories from people who have survived severe conditions against all odds . Bågenholm hoped the program would give the people watching it more knowledge of hypothermia . The story is also included in Gupta 's companion book , Cheating Death : The Doctors and Medical Miracles that Are Saving Lives Against All Odds . On 30 October 2009 , Bågenholm and Gilbert appeared together on the popular Swedish SVT talk show Skavlan , hosted by Fredrik Skavlan . 
 = Treehouse of Horror = 
 " Treehouse of Horror " ( originally known as " The Simpsons Halloween Special " ) is the third episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 25 , 1990 . The episode was inspired by 1950s horror comics , and begins with a disclaimer that it may be too scary for children . It is the first Treehouse of Horror episode . These episodes do not obey the show 's rule of realism and are not treated as canon . The opening disclaimer and a panning shot through a cemetery with humorous tombstones were features that were used sporadically in the Treehouse of Horror series and eventually dropped . This is also the first episode to have the music composed by Alf Clausen , taking over for Danny Elfman who also wrote the show 's theme . 
 The plot revolves around three scary stories told by the Simpson children in the family 's treehouse . The first segment involves a haunted house that is based on various theatrical haunted houses , primarily The Amityville Horror and Poltergeist . In the second segment , Kang and Kodos are introduced when the Simpsons are abducted by aliens . In the third , Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Raven " is adapted . James Earl Jones guest starred in all three segments . The episode was received positively , being included on several critics ' " best of " lists . Critics singled out The Raven for praise , although Simpsons creator Matt Groening was concerned that it would be seen as pretentious . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On Halloween , Bart , Lisa and Maggie sit in the treehouse and tell scary stories , while Homer eavesdrops on them . 
 = = = Bad Dream House = = = 
 The Simpsons move into an old house , wondering at its low cost . Their questions are answered when the walls begin to bleed and objects begin to fly through the air , and Lisa senses an evil presence in the house . There is also a portal to another dimension in the kitchen . Marge expresses the desire to leave , but Homer asks her to sleep on it , due to the cost of buying the house . That night , the house possesses Homer and the children , manipulating their minds and making them chase each other with axes and knives . Marge unlike the others however , is instead using her knife to spread mayonnaise on a sandwich and intervenes , breaking the trance . Afterwards , Lisa discovers the source of the haunting - a Native American burial ground hidden in the basement . After the Spirit of The House threatens them again , Marge loses her patience and confronts the house , demanding that it treat them with respect during their stay . The house thinks it over , and eventually opts to destroy itself rather than live with the Simpsons . 
 = = = Hungry are the Damned = = = 
 The Simpsons are in their backyard having a barbecue when they are abducted by extraterrestrial life forms ( specifically Kang and Kodos ) . The aliens explain that they are taking the Simpsons to their home planet on Rigel IV , " a world of infinite delights , " for a ' feast ' . En route they present the family with enormous amounts of food and watch eagerly as they gorge themselves , then check their weights , being particularly delighted at Homer 's mass . Suspicious of the alien 's intentions , Lisa sneaks into the kitchen and finds a book titled How To Cook Humans . She takes the book and shows it to the aliens , who explain to her that part of the title was obscured by space dust , which they then blow away to reveal the title How To Cook For Humans . Lisa , skeptical at this , blows off more space dust , revealing the title to be How To Cook Forty Humans . The aliens blow off the last of the space dust , finally revealing the real title How To Cook For Forty Humans . Enraged at Lisa 's mistrust , they return the Simpsons to Earth , explaining that Lisa ruined the family 's chance at paradise on the aliens ' home planet . Homer and Bart agree with the aliens , but Marge tries to explain to them that Lisa was just concerned for their family and didn 't know better . Even she agrees that Lisa sometimes needs to tone down her attitude and just ask . 
 = = = The Raven = = = 
 Lisa reads " The Raven " by Edgar Allan Poe . In this adaptation , Bart is depicted as the raven , Homer finds himself in the role of the poem 's lead character , while Lisa and Maggie are seraphim . Marge appears briefly as a painting of Lenore . James Earl Jones narrates . 
 The episode then returns to the treehouse and Bart , Lisa and Maggie , who are not frightened by any of the stories . They climb down from the treehouse and sleep peacefully the whole night . Homer , on the other hand , lies in his bed terrified . As he notices a raven outside the window similar to the one from the poem , Homer hides under the sheets and exclaims that he " hates Halloween " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Unlike a typical Simpsons episode , " Treehouse of Horror " is divided into three segments . It is the first in the Treehouse of Horror series of Halloween themed Simpsons episodes . It is considered to be non @-@ canon and takes place outside the normal continuity of the show . A Treehouse of Horror episode has since aired around Halloween every season . Part of the series ' attraction for the writers is that they are able to break the rules and include violence that would not make it into a regular episode . The episode was inspired by EC Comics horror comics , such as Tales from the Crypt . In the first segment , several haunted house films are parodied , including The Shining and The Amityville Horror . The haunted house being built on a burial ground is inspired by the 1982 film Poltergeist . The house was also designed to look like the Addams family house . The second segment 's cookbook is a reference to the 1962 The Twilight Zone episode " To Serve Man " . The third segment reimagines Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Raven " . 
 In 2011 , staff writer Al Jean commented on the episode : " The idea of it to parody EC Comics was really original and kind of shocking for a cartoon on network television . [ Executive producer ] Jim Brooks said , ' We better have a disclaimer at the beginning of this Halloween show , ' so Marge came out and warned people that they were going to see something scary . And the funny thing is it 's now very tame by our Halloween standards and by network animation standards . " According to M. Keith Booker , author of Drawn to Television , the warning only made the episode more attractive to children . The entire segment was a parody of the opening of the 1931 film Frankenstein . While similar " warnings " were used to open the second and third " Treehouse " episodes , these quickly became a burden to write and there was no warning for the fourth episode . Instead , it had Marge ask Bart to warn people how frightening the show was during his introduction paying homage to Night Gallery . The tradition was revived for " Treehouse of Horror V " ; after that , they were permanently dropped and the writers did not make any attempts at reviving them . In the opening segment of the episode , and the four subsequent episodes , the camera zooms through a cemetery where tombstones with humorous epitaphs can be seen . These messages include the names of canceled shows from the previous television season and celebrities such as Walt Disney and Jim Morrison . They were last used in " Treehouse of Horror V " , which included a solitary tombstone with the words " Amusing Tombstones " to signal this . The tombstone gags were easy for the writers in the first episode , but like Marge 's warnings , they eventually got more difficult to write , so they were abandoned . Of the series , " Treehouse of Horror " was the only one that included a treehouse as a setting . " Treehouse of Horror " was the first time that an alternate version of the theme that airs over the end credits was used . Originally it was supposed to use a theremin ( an early electronic musical instrument ) , but one could not be found that could hit all the necessary notes . 
 Alf Clausen , who has scored most of the Simpsons music , began his work on the show with this episode . The first segment , " Bad Dream House " , was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Wes Archer . The voice of the house was provided by cast member Harry Shearer . Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky wrote the second segment , " Hungry are the Damned " , and Rich Moore directed it . Sam Simon wrote the third segment , " The Raven " , and David Silverman directed it . The segment was based on Edgar Allan Poe 's 1845 narrative poem " The Raven " . During production , Simpsons creator Matt Groening was nervous about " The Raven " because it did not have many gags , and felt it would be " the worst , most pretentious thing [ they had ] ever done " on the show . American actor James Earl Jones guest starred in the episode as a moving man , Serak the Preparer ( one of the aliens ) and the narrator of " The Raven " . He recorded his lines at the Village Recorder in West Los Angeles . To get the right drooling sound for the aliens , Jones chewed on a cookie close to his microphone . 
 The sibling aliens Kang and Kodos first appeared on the show on this episode . Every Treehouse of Horror episode since this one must have Kang and Kodos as characters , states an unofficial Simpsons rule . Despite this rule , the writers say the duo will often be forgotten and then added at the last second , leading to brief appearances . The idea of Kang and Kodos came from Kogen and Wolodarsky . In the script , Kang and Kodos were shown as " an octopus in a space helmet with a trail of goo " . The finished design was based on the cover of an EC Comics issue . Although originally designed to constantly drool , Groening suggested that they not drool all the time to make the animation process easier . However , the animators did not mind the work , leading to the drooling staying in the script . Kang and Kodos 's names are derived from two Star Trek characters . Kang was a Klingon captain portrayed by actor Michael Ansara in the episode " Day of the Dove " , whereas Kodos the Executioner was a human villain from " The Conscience of the King " . Harry Shearer voices Kang , and Dan Castellaneta voices Kodos . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Treehouse of Horror " finished 25th in ratings for the week of October 22 – 28 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 14 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said the first two segments worked better than the third , " but this is a marvelous episode , and set a high standard for the Halloween specials to come . " In 2008 , Canwest News Service chose " Treehouse of Horror " as one of the top five scariest episodes from the television 's past . They singled out Marge saying " This family has had its differences and we 've squabbled , but we 've never had knife fights before , and I blame this house " as a memorable line from the episode . Two of the episode 's segments were singled out by critics as exemplary parts of the Treehouse of Horror series . " The Raven " was selected as the second best Treehouse of Horror segment by Ryan J. Budke of TV Squad in 2005 . Budke described the segment as " one of the most refined Simpsons pop references ever " and knows " people that consider this the point that they realized The Simpsons could be both highly hilarious and highly intelligent . " " Hungry are the Damned " was selected as the fifth best Treehouse of Horror segment by Eric Goldman , Dan Iverson and Brian Zoromski of IGN in 2008 . The IGN reviewers singled out the How to Cook for Forty Humans section of the segment as its funniest moment . 
 Critics also praised the episode 's relationship to various television shows and Poe 's " The Raven " . Michael <unk> of DVD Verdict described the three Treehouse of Horror segments as " brilliantly crafted tales capturing the best elements of The Twilight Zone , Outer Limits , and Alfred Hitchcock Presents , injecting them into the Simpsons ' universe . " DVD reviewer Doug Pratt described " The Raven " as a " perfect adaptation " . Kurt M. Koenigsberger said in his book Leaving Springfield that The Simpsons , while " not strictly a literary form " , " is certainly the literate of all situation comedies . " Koenigsberger uses " The Raven " as one example in support of the statement " The Simpsons is steeped in the American literary context into which Arnold Bennett made such a splash on his tour in 1911 . " 
 = Alyssa Miller = 
 Alyssa Elaine Miller ( born July 4 , 1989 ) is an American fashion model . She has done print and runway work for numerous leading companies . Among her highlights are cover appearances on for Vogue ( Germany ) and Elle ( Italy ) , work as a featured model / spokesperson for both Guess and Victoria 's Secret as well as appearances in the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue . 
 = = Early life and description = = 
 Miller was born in Los Angeles , California . Her ancestry includes German , Austrian , English , Irish , Scottish and Welsh . She grew up in Palmdale , Los Angeles County . 
 Miller is known for her dark brown hair , full eyebrows and bone structure . She is considered to have a very European look . Guess founder Paul Marciano said , " Alyssa is the most European @-@ looking American girl I 've ever seen ! " When she had her breakthrough with Guess , she drew comparisons to Sophia Loren and Brooke Shields and was regarded as something of a throwback . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 2003 , her father sent test photos to a Los Angeles office of IMG Models . By 2005 she was an up @-@ and @-@ coming model with the Marilyn NY agency . She did a 2005 fall campaign for Stella McCartney . By February 2006 , she had been featured in each of the major editions of Vogue , including the cover of a Vogue Italia supplement . Following cover appearances for the October 2006 German Vogue and the July 2010 Italian Elle ( she also later appeared on the October 2012 cover ) , she became one of the new faces of Guess clothing in late 2010 . Miller has also done work for Victoria 's Secret . Other ad work has included Bebe , Billabong , Chopard , Diesel , Elie <unk> , <unk> , Juicy Couture , La Perla and Laura <unk> . 
 She signed with Elite Model Management in 2011 . She made her Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue debut in 2011 when she was one of five rookies ( along with Shannan Click , <unk> <unk> , Izabel Goulart , and fellow Guess model Kate Upton ) in the issue . According to a story in The Wall Street Journal she had previously thought that if she ever appeared in Sports Illustrated it would be for soccer , since given her athletic background she had envisioned herself as a professional soccer player . She also appeared in the body painting feature in the 2011 Swimsuit Issue where Joanne Gair painted her and Stewart Shining photographed her in New York City . 2013 was her third Swimsuit Issue . In both 2011 and 2013 , Miller participated in the annual Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition of David Letterman 's Top 10 on the Late Show with David Letterman on the night that the Swimsuit Issue cover model was announced . 
 In 2012 she became the muse of <unk> <unk> fragrance . She played the mermaid in the 2013 music video for " Mermaid " by Train . Miller is a former victim of bullying , and she became an advocate against bullying and cyberbullying on May 1 , 2013 , along with Super Bowl XLVII champion Jameel McClain , by becoming a global ambassador for <unk> Out Bullying . In 2013 , Miller signed with IMG soon after a first public appearance with Jake Gyllenhaal . She was featured in the 80th anniversary issue of Esquire as one of the 80 things that define our time . In December 2013 , she appeared on the cover and in the 2014 Calendar Girl Issue of the fashion magazine Galore . Her images were augmented by the artwork of Claw Money who affixed his graphic cartoon paws to both black @-@ and @-@ white and color photographs of her as if they were gripping her while she was modelling . 
 In July 2014 Miller , together with fashion publicist Robyn Berkley , launched a meditation @-@ wear collection for Berkley ’ s line , Live the Process , with a percentage of sales to the David Lynch Foundation . Miller made a cameo appearance in the 2015 film Entourage . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Miller began dating actor Jake Gyllenhaal in mid @-@ June 2013 and they became a public couple in July . Their first public appearance as a couple was at Barry 's Bootcamp , a gym in Tribeca , on July 12 and she met Gyllenhaal 's mother three days later . She credits Gyllenhaal with teaching her how to cook as they hosted dinner parties . According to reports , Miller and Gyllenhaal broke up in late 2013 . A source told <unk> : " They fizzled out . It happened a while ago – before the holidays . He 's back on the scene . " However , by February , the couple had reconciled . In May 2014 , they were spotted together walking her dog , a Boston Terrier named Charlie . 
 Miller 's fitness regimen includes ballet and running ; she practices Transcendental Meditation . She has taken both acting and improvisation classes . Her father 's name is Craig Miller ; she has several siblings . 
 = Ruggiero di Lauria @-@ class ironclad = 
 The Ruggiero di Lauria class was a class of ironclad battleships built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) during the late 19th century . The three ships — Ruggiero di Lauria , Francesco Morosini , and Andrea Doria — were improved versions of the earlier Caio Duilio @-@ class battleships . The primary improvements were new breech @-@ loading guns , better armor protection , and more powerful machinery . The ships , designed by Giuseppe Micheli , marked a temporary diversion from the ideas of Benedetto Brin , who had designed the two preceding classes along with the following class . 
 Construction of the ships was very lengthy , and by the time they were completed , the first pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were being built . Rendered obsolescent by these new ships , the Ruggiero di Laurias had limited careers . The spent their time in service alternating between the Active and Reserve Squadrons , and they were primarily occupied with conducting training exercises . The ships were removed from service in 1909 – 11 ; Francesco Morosini was expended as a target ship , while Ruggiero di Lauria became a floating oil tank and Andrea Doria was converted into a depot ship . During World War I , Andrea Doria returned to service as a guard ship before being repurposed for oil storage after the war , eventually being broken up in 1929 . Ruggiero di Lauria survived until 1943 , when she was sunk by bombers during World War II . Her wreck was salvaged in 1945 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Starting in the 1870s , following the Italian fleet 's defeat at the Battle of Lissa , the Italians began a large naval expansion program , initially aimed at countering the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The program included the Caio Duilio and Italia classes , which were both designed by Benedetto Brin . The Ruggiero di Laurias were authorized in the naval program for 1880 , and the task of designing them was assigned to Engineering Inspector Giuseppe Micheli . Vice Admiral Ferdinando Acton opposed the very large ironclads designed by Brin , and so he charged Micheli with creating a ship that would not exceed 10 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 800 long tons ; 11 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Micheli chose to base his new design on a cut @-@ down version of Caio Duilio , though he incorporated several improvements , including more modern , breech @-@ loading guns , a more powerful propulsion system , and new , more effective compound armor . Micheli 's tenure as the designer for Italian capital ships was short @-@ lived , with Brin returning to create the follow @-@ on Re Umberto class , the final members of the second generation of Italian ironclads . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Ruggiero di Lauria class were 100 meters ( 330 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 105 @.@ 9 meters ( 347 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 19 @.@ 84 m ( 65 @.@ 1 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 29 to 8 @.@ 37 m ( 27 @.@ 2 to 27 @.@ 5 ft ) . They displaced 9 @,@ 886 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 730 long tons ) normally and up to 11 @,@ 145 t ( 10 @,@ 969 long tons ) at full load . The ships were built with a high forecastle to improve sea @-@ keeping over the Caio Duilio class . A single military mast with fighting tops was located amidships ; a hurricane deck connected the forward and aft superstructure . Both sections of superstructure was used to store several smaller boats ; each section also had a large crane to handle the boats . The ships had a crew of 507 – 509 officers and men . 
 Their propulsion system consisted of a pair of compound steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . The boilers were trunked into two funnels , one in the forward superstructure and the other in the aft superstructure . Ruggiero di Lauria was the fastest member of the class , reaching a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) at 10 @,@ 591 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 898 kW ) . Francesco Morosini and Andrea <unk> had a top speed of around 16 kn ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . The ships could steam for 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The Ruggiero di Laurias were armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) 27 @-@ caliber rifled <unk> guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . These guns were the A 1882 model , and they fired a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of around 1 @,@ 837 feet per second ( 560 m / s ) . Their rate of fire was very slow , taking eight minutes to reload after each shot . They carried a secondary battery of two 6 in ( 152 mm ) 32 @-@ caliber guns , one at the bow and the other at the stern , and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) 32 @-@ caliber guns . The 6 in gun fired a variety of shells , including 102 lb ( 46 kg ) armor @-@ piercing shells , while the 4 @.@ 7 in guns fired 36 lb ( 16 kg ) shells . From 1900 , the ships had their secondary battery significantly expanded with two 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , ten 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , five 37 mm revolver cannon , and two machine guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , they carried five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . The torpedoes carried a 125 kg ( 276 lb ) warhead and had a range of 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 The ships ' protection scheme consisted of compound armor . The Ruggiero di Laurias had an armored belt that was 17 @.@ 75 in ( 451 mm ) thick ; the citadel received the same thickness of steel . They had an armored deck that was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick , and their conning tower was armored with 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) of steel plate . The barbette had 14 @.@ 2 in ( 361 mm ) of steel armor . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The ships ' construction times were very lengthy ; by the time they were completed , the United Kingdom had begun building the Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships , the first pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , which rendered older ironclad battleships obsolescent . In addition , technological progress , particularly in armor production techniques — first Harvey armor and then Krupp armor — contributed to the ships ' rapid obsolescence . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The three Ruggiero di Laurias served in the Active Squadron for the first several years of their careers , into the mid @-@ 1890s . By 1895 , Ruggiero di Lauria had been transferred to the Reserve Squadron , though Andrea Doria and Francesco Morosini remained in the Active Squadron . That year , Ruggiero di Lauria and Andrea Doria joined the Active Squadron for a major cruise to Britain and Germany . All three ships were assigned to the Active Squadron in 1899 . That year , Ruggiero di Lauria and Andrea Doria took part in a naval review in Cagliari for the Italian King Umberto I , which included a French and British squadron as well . 
 All three ships had been transferred to the Reserve Squadron by 1905 , and they were quickly discarded . In 1908 , the Italian Navy decided to discard Ruggiero di Lauria and Francesco Morosini , while Andrea Doria remained in service until 1911 . Francesco Morosini was expended as a target ship for torpedo experiments in September 1909 . Ruggiero di Lauria was converted into a floating oil tank in 1909 and was renamed GM 45 ; she was sunk in an air raid in 1943 during World War II . Andrea Doria served as a depot ship until Italy entered World War I in May 1915 , when she was employed as a guard ship in Brindisi . After the war , she too was converted into an oil tank , before being broken up for scrap in 1929 . 
 = Denny Bautista = 
 Denny M. Bautista Germán ( born August 23 , 1980 ) is a Dominican professional baseball pitcher who is currently a free agent . Bautista is 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) tall and weighs 190 pounds ( 86 kg ) . He played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Baltimore Orioles , Kansas City Royals , Colorado Rockies , Detroit Tigers , Pittsburgh Pirates , and San Francisco Giants from 2004 to 2010 . From 2011 through 2013 , he played for the Hanwha Eagles of the Korea Baseball Organization ( KBO ) . He bats and throws right @-@ handed . Bautista throws three pitches : a fastball , a curveball , and a changeup . He has struggled with control throughout his career . 
 Bautista grew up receiving instruction on pitching from his second cousin , Pedro Martínez . The Florida Marlins signed him in 2000 but traded him to the Baltimore Orioles before Bautista reached the major leagues . He debuted with the Orioles in 2004 , appearing in two games before getting traded to the Kansas City Royals . Bautista was ranked Kansas City 's number two prospect by Baseball America entering the 2005 season , but he made just seven starts before missing the rest of the season with an injury . He posted a 5 @.@ 66 earned run average ( ERA ) for the Royals in 2006 before getting traded to the Colorado Rockies . He appeared in nine games ( all in relief ) for the Rockies in 2007 , spending most of the year in the minor leagues . 
 After 2007 , Bautista never made another start in the major leagues . He began 2008 with the Detroit Tigers bullpen but had an injury and was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates during the year . He re @-@ signed with Pittsburgh in 2009 but only appeared in 14 games , spending most of the year in the minors . Bautista posted a 3 @.@ 74 ERA with the San Francisco Giants in 2010 but was never on their playoff roster and was released during the playoffs . In 2011 , he signed with the Seattle Mariners but was assigned to the minor leagues . Halfway through the season , he joined the Hanwha Eagles of the Korea Baseball Organization . On April 18 , 2015 , it was announced that he had signed a minor league deal with the Boston Red Sox . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bautista had an early connection to Major League Baseball ( MLB ) : as a teenager he pitched in a park built by professional baseball players Pedro Martínez , Ramón Martínez , and Juan Guzmán . Pedro , then one of baseball 's outstanding starting pitchers , mentored Bautista and trained with him during the offseason . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor league career = = = 
 = = = = Florida Marlins organization = = = = 
 The Florida Marlins signed Bautista on June 21 , 2000 , and assigned him to the Gulf Coast Marlins , their rookie @-@ level minor league affiliate . He started 11 games for the Marlins , posting a 6 – 2 win – loss record with an earned run average ( ERA ) of 2 @.@ 43 and 17 walks . He was tied for second in the league in wins ( along with six other pitchers behind Jeff Randazzo 's seven ) , second in the league in ERA ( behind Yoel Hernández 's 1 @.@ 35 ) , tied for second with 58 strikeouts ( along with Randazzo behind Manuel <unk> 's 77 ) , third in the league with 63 innings pitched ( behind Randazzo 's 68 2 ⁄ 3 and <unk> 's 64 2 ⁄ 3 ) , and tied for second in the league in complete games with two ( tied with Hernández behind Randazzo 's three ) . He also appeared in one game for the Single @-@ A short season Utica Blue Sox of the New York – Penn League that year . He split 2001 between Utica and the Single @-@ A Kane County Cougars of the Midwest League , going a combined 6 – 2 with an ERA of 3 @.@ 23 , 51 strikeouts , 20 walks , and 78 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 15 games ( 14 starts ) . In the playoffs , he pitched a shutout for the Cougars , allowing just one hit , striking out eight , and helping the Cougars win their first Midwest League title . 
 After the 2001 season , Baseball America ranked Bautista the third @-@ best prospect in the Marlins ' organization . The following April , a USA Today article said that Bautista had similar career potential to Pedro Martínez , noting that Bautista 's fastball had become about 10 mph faster during his time in the minor leagues . In 2002 , he pitched with the Single @-@ A Advanced Jupiter Hammerheads of the Florida State League , where he went 4 – 6 with an ERA of 4 @.@ 99 , 79 strikeouts , 40 walks , and 88 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 19 games ( 15 starts ) . He recovered in 2003 , making 25 starts between the Hammerheads and the Double @-@ A Carolina Mudcats of the Southern League . He finished the year with a 12 – 9 win @-@ loss record , an improved ERA of 3 @.@ 41 , 138 strikeouts , and 70 walks in 137 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = Major League career = = = 
 = = = = Baltimore Orioles = = = = 
 On August 31 , 2003 the Marlins traded Bautista and fellow minor leaguer Don <unk> to the Baltimore Orioles for veteran Jeff <unk> . Before the 2004 season , Baseball America ranked him the Orioles ' fifth @-@ best prospect . The Orioles assigned Bautista to the Double @-@ A Bowie Baysox of the Eastern League , where he went 3 – 5 with a 4 @.@ 74 ERA , 72 strikeouts , 33 walks , and 62 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 14 games ( 13 starts ) during the 2004 season . Bautista made his major league debut that year : the Orioles called him up as part of a roster reshuffle , and he made his first appearance , in relief , on May 25 , 2004 , against the New York Yankees . He recorded three outs in the first inning he pitched , but he got into difficulties and surrendered four runs on three hits before getting removed during his second inning . After a second relief appearance on May 27 ( in which he allowed four runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning ) amid a three @-@ game sweep of the Orioles by the Yankees , Bautista was sent back to Bowie . A month later the Orioles traded him to the Kansas City Royals for veteran relief pitcher Jason Grimsley . 
 = = = = Kansas City Royals = = = = 
 = = = = = 2004 = = = = = 
 The Royals assigned Bautista to the Double @-@ A Wichita Wranglers of the Texas League , where he went 4 – 3 with an ERA of 2 @.@ 53 , 73 strikeouts , 32 walks , and 81 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 12 starts . In September , he was called up and added to the Royals ' starting rotation when the team decided to go to a six @-@ man staff to limit their pitchers ' innings . He made his first major league start on September 6 , allowing four runs over six innings and taking the loss in a 7 – 3 defeat to the Detroit Tigers . In five starts for the Royals , Bautista had an 0 – 4 record , a 6 @.@ 51 ERA , 18 strikeouts , and 11 walks in 27 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = = = 2005 = = = = = 
 Bautista was ranked the second @-@ best prospect in the Royals ' organization before the 2005 season by Baseball America . After a productive spring training in 2005 , Bautista was named to the Royals ' starting rotation again ; he started seven games , going 2 – 2 with an ERA of 5 @.@ 80 , 23 strikeouts , and 17 walks in 35 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched before tendinitis in his shoulder put him on the disabled list for the remainder of the season . On April 8 , 2005 , Bautista won his first MLB game , holding the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim to one run in eight innings pitched . 
 = = = = = 2006 = = = = = 
 At the start of the 2006 season , Bautista was again in the Royals ' starting rotation , but after a poor start ( interrupted by a disabled list stint from April 14 to May 8 ) in which he went 0 – 2 with an ERA of 5 @.@ 66 , 22 strikeouts , and 17 walks in 35 innings pitched , the Royals sent him to the Triple @-@ A Omaha Royals of the Pacific Coast League . There he continued to struggle , posting a 2 – 5 record , a 7 @.@ 36 ERA , 28 strikeouts , 32 walks , and 44 innings pitched in 10 starts . On August 1 , the Royals traded him along with Jeremy Affeldt to the Colorado Rockies for Ryan Shealy and Scott <unk> . 
 = = = = Colorado Rockies = = = = 
 = = = = = 2006 = = = = = 
 The Rockies assigned Bautista to the Triple @-@ A Colorado Springs Sky Sox of the Pacific Coast League where he started six games , posting a 1 – 4 record , a 4 @.@ 50 ERA , 35 strikeouts , and 16 walks in 36 innings pitched before being called up to the Rockies in September . He appeared in four games , three of them in relief with Colorado . In 12 games ( eight starts ) with Kansas City and Colorado on the season , Bautista had an 0 – 3 record , a 5 @.@ 62 ERA , 27 strikeouts , and 21 walks in 41 2 ⁄ 3 innings . His Pacific Coast League totals for 2006 were a 3 – 9 record , a 6 @.@ 08 ERA , 63 strikeouts , and 40 walks in 80 innings pitched . 
 = = = = = 2007 = = = = = 
 Bautista was optioned to Colorado Springs halfway through spring training in 2007 . On April 29 , he was called up by the Rockies to replace Ryan Speier in the bullpen . He gave up one run over 4 2 ⁄ 3 innings and won two of the first four games he appeared in before he then allowed 11 runs in one inning pitched over his next three outings . After Bautista allowed six runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning on May 13 in a 15 – 2 loss to the San Francisco Giants , bringing his ERA to 19 @.@ 06 , he was sent back to Colorado Springs . In 51 games , all in relief , at Colorado Springs , he had a 3 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 92 ERA , 63 strikeouts , and 31 walks in 64 2 ⁄ 3 innings . He was recalled when rosters expanded in September . On September 12 , he made his final major league start in a bullpen game , throwing two scoreless innings in a 12 – 0 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies . In nine games , he had a 2 – 1 record , a 12 @.@ 46 ERA , eight strikeouts , and four walks in 8 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was left off the playoff roster as the Rockies went to the World Series . On December 4 , the Rockies traded Bautista to the Detroit Tigers for pitcher José <unk> . 
 = = = = Detroit Tigers = = = = 
 Bautista began 2008 with the Tigers in a relief role , often pitching in the eighth @-@ inning as the " setup man " for veteran closer Todd Jones . In his debut on Opening Day ( March 31 ) , he gave up a run in the 11th inning and took the loss in a 5 – 4 defeat to the Royals . After that game , he had nine consecutive scoreless outings . He then allowed five runs over three outings in a row before getting placed on the disabled list on May 3 with a sore shoulder . He came off the disabled list on June 5 and appeared in three more games with the Tigers . In 16 games with the Tigers , Bautista had an 0 – 1 record , a 3 @.@ 32 ERA , 10 strikeouts , and 14 walks in 19 innings . Due to the return of Joel Zumaya from the disabled list , Bautista was designated for assignment and was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates on June 25 for right @-@ handed pitcher Kyle Pearson . 
 = = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = = 
 = = = = = 2008 = = = = = 
 Bautista made thirty @-@ five appearances for the Pirates in 2008 , all in relief . On July 2 , he threw 3 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings of relief to pick up the win in a 9 – 5 victory over the Cincinnati Reds . With Pittsburgh , Bautista posted a 4 – 3 record , an ERA of 6 @.@ 10 , 34 strikeouts , and 28 walks in 41 1 ⁄ 3 innings . His combined totals for the season were a 4 – 4 record , a 5 @.@ 22 ERA , 44 strikeouts , 42 walks , and 60 1 ⁄ 3 innings in 51 games . Bautista was eligible for arbitration but the Pirates declined to tender an offer , although general manager Neal Huntington stated " We 'd like to get him back . " 
 = = = = = 2009 = = = = = 
 On December 22 , 2008 , Bautista signed a minor league contract with an invitation to spring training to return to the Pirates in 2009 . He failed to make the team and began 2009 with the Triple @-@ A Indianapolis Indians of the International League . In 36 games with Indianapolis , he had a 2 – 3 record , a 4 @.@ 88 ERA , 58 strikeouts , and 34 walks in 48 innings . On August 15 , he had his contract purchased from Indianapolis to replace the injured José Ascanio in the bullpen . He threw two scoreless innings to earn the win on August 27 in a 3 – 2 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies . In 14 games , he had a 1 – 1 record , a 5 @.@ 27 ERA , 15 strikeouts , and seven walks in 13 2 ⁄ 3 innings . On October 27 , he became a free agent . 
 = = = = San Francisco Giants = = = = 
 On January 21 , 2010 , Bautista signed a minor league contract with the San Francisco Giants with an invite to spring training . He competed with Guillermo Mota for the final spot in the Giants ' bullpen but was sent to the minors on April 4 as Mota won the job . Bautista served as the closer for the Fresno Grizzlies of the Pacific Coast League before he was recalled to the major league team on May 7 . Giants ' manager Bruce Bochy said , " He 's been the best pitcher down there . " With the Giants , Bautista often pitched in long relief . He posted a 2 @.@ 16 ERA in his first 19 games through June 30 , but in 12 games after that , his ERA was 8 @.@ 31 . In his most recent major league appearance , on August 4 , he allowed back @-@ to @-@ back home runs to Carlos González and Troy Tulowitzki in a 6 – 1 loss to Colorado . On August 5 , Bautista was designated for assignment by the Giants to make room for Todd Wellemeyer on the roster . Shortly thereafter , he was outrighted to Fresno . In 31 games with the Giants , he had a 2 – 0 record , a 3 @.@ 74 ERA , 44 strikeouts , and 27 walks in 33 2 ⁄ 3 innings . In 19 games with Fresno , he had a 3 – 2 record , a 3 @.@ 18 ERA , 28 strikeouts , 9 walks , and six saves in 22 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He did not pitch at all in the postseason for the Giants as they won the 2010 World Series ; in fact , he was granted free agency during the playoffs on October 12 . 
 = = = = Seattle Mariners organization = = = = 
 On December 14 , 2010 , Bautista signed a minor league contract with the Seattle Mariners including an invite to spring training . He stayed with the Mariners through most of spring training but was reassigned to the minor leagues on March 27 , 2011 . In 24 games with the Tacoma Rainiers of the Pacific Coast League , Bautista had a 1 – 2 record , a 4 @.@ 21 ERA , 49 strikeouts , and 22 walks in 36 1 ⁄ 3 innings . He was released on June 30 so that he could join the Korea Baseball Organization . 
 = = = = Hanwha Eagles = = = = 
 Bautista signed with the Hanwha Eagles in Korea on June 29 , 2011 . He served as Hanwha 's closer upon joining the team in 2011 , posting a 3 – 0 record , a 2 @.@ 02 ERA , 122 strikeouts , 41 walks , and 35 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 27 games . On April 11 , 2013 , he allowed a three @-@ run home run to Lee Seung @-@ <unk> in a 4 – 0 loss to the Samsung Lions . While pitching for Hanwha , he has become friends with Kim Tae @-@ <unk> . Used as a starter in 2013 after the departure of Hyun @-@ jin Ryu , Bautista had a 7 – 7 record , a 4 @.@ 24 ERA , and 153 strikeouts in 138 innings . After the 2013 season , the Eagles chose not to resign Bautista , opting to make Félix Pie and Caleb Clay the foreign players on their roster . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox = = = 
 Bautista signed a minor league deal with the Boston Red Sox in April 2015 . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Bautista throws three pitches : a fastball , a curveball , and a changeup . His fastball travels in the high 90 mph range . His curve can break down sharply , and he learned the changeup from Pedro Martínez . Wildness had been a problem for Bautista throughout his career . He has trouble controlling his fastball and walks a great deal of hitters , which has often contributed to his departure from teams . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bautista is married to Elizabeth ; the couple has one son and resides in Santo Domingo . The relationship between Bautista and Pedro Martínez has been reported variously as first cousin and second cousin , with Bautista at one point denying there was a connection at all . Bautista finally confirmed that he and Martínez are second cousins through Bautista 's mother . 
 = Code Age Commanders : Tsugu Mono Tsuga <unk> Mono = 
 Code Age Commanders : Tsugu Mono Tsuga <unk> Mono ( <unk> ・ <unk> <unk> ～ <unk> <unk> ～ ) is a Japan @-@ exclusive action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix on October 13 , 2005 for the PlayStation 2 . It is part of the Code Age series , a franchise created by video game artist Yusuke Naora and designed to span different interweaved titles in multiple platforms and media . The series consists of Commanders , the mobile phone game Code Age <unk> , and the manga Code Age Archives . 
 The story of the game depicts the struggles of people surviving in a fictional " <unk> world " menaced by an impending destruction , mysterious warped creatures , and different factions warring against each other . The game focuses successively on the viewpoints of four main protagonists . Reviews of the game were relatively positive , with high praises of its graphics and art direction but more mixed feelings for its complex and atypical gameplay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Code Age Commanders is an action role @-@ playing game divided in missions , in which the goal is to fight enemies called " Coded " to reach a certain area of the map , where a boss must sometimes be defeated . The player controls one character while other allies are computer @-@ controlled and must not die for the mission to be successful . Between two missions , the player can select in a menu numerous optional cut scenes to watch and which reveal the memories of the Coded defeated , while stages already completed can be re @-@ explored . The game features four successive main playable characters , and items and skills learned by one is each time passed to the next . 
 Weapons are equipped on both hands of the characters and are used with the circle and cross buttons . Pressing both buttons in succession is necessary to execute combos . The other buttons are used to lock focus onto an enemy , guard , dash , or manually change the camera angle . The number of attacks and blocks is limited by an energy meter for each arm , which decreases after each move but replenishes with time . 
 A third meter increases after each combo and allows when maxed out to perform a " Code Drive " attack . Executed with the triangle button , a Code Drive triggers a brief close @-@ up sequence in which a blue circle appears around the character . If the player presses a second button before the circle shifts to red , a powerful special attack will be unleashed . If the enemy blocks the Code Drive , a second , shorter close @-@ up sequence is triggered . Enemies can also perform Code Drives , in which case the player 's button press allows for protection rather than attack . Executing Code Drives frequently can cause the weapon used to upgrade , or the character to go into a " Code Crisis " ; a mode which reduces speed and renders immune to attack , but slowly drains hit points . 
 = = = Customization = = = 
 In addition to Coded , enemy creatures include " Otellos " , which can either be defeated normally or be absorbed , mutating one of the protagonist 's arm into a new form with new abilities . Depending on their types , absorbed Otellos can be used to fight , heal or be shot as a projectile weapon . Multiple Otellos can be absorbed into each arm and switched for usage , although gathering too many may result in an " Overload " mode in which attack power is boosted ; but one Otello must be dropped quickly or the character 's hit points will decrease steadily and continually . 
 Characters do not level up in a way similar to standard role @-@ playing games ; instead , stats evolve according to two <unk> systems . The " Self Evolution System " alters stats and skills depending on their usage during battle : for instance , a repeated use of left @-@ handed attacks increases the character 's left arm strength , while running around often increases their speed . The second system is the " Code Extension " mode , in which Code Points can be spent on either of the two arms or up to four body slots to increase their stats or acquire new skills . Code Points are earned after each mission in amounts that depend on the quantity of " Dropped Code " collected from defeated enemies , as well as mission clear time , and damage done and taken . When replaying completed stages , the amount of Code Points earned is the difference between the player 's highest past score for the mission and the new score obtained . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Code Age Commanders is set in an " <unk> world " ( <unk> , <unk> sekai ) , a fictional hollow world similar to a Dyson sphere , with people living on its internal surface . The center of the sphere is occupied by the " Central Code " , a spherical structure which goes through a transformation called " Reborn " about every ten thousand years , destroying all life on the globe and allowing for the birth of a new one . 
 The game begins near the end of a Central Code cycle , while mankind has learned about the impending disaster and built " Arks " , flying stations intended to float in the sky and house most of them in a deep sleep state for the duration of the Reborn . The operation works for one hundred years before objects falling from the Central Code hit the Arks and cause them to crash to the surface . Its passengers die or awake , now at the mercy of those who remained on the ground as well as the Otellos ; a new , warped species which arose from the dropped pieces of the Central Code . The Otellos seek humans to turn them into mindless puppets named " Coded " , although the mutation fails on people from the Arks and results in free and extremely evolved hybrids called " <unk> " . 
 Knowing this , several humans seek Otellos voluntarily to become <unk> and try to protect mankind with the powers gained from the mutation . Several armed factions form with differing points of view on the way to save the world , while the Reborn still has not been completed . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The events of the game unfolds successively from the viewpoints of four different Warhead protagonists . The first one is Gene , a young man who becomes amnesic after the Arks accident . He is the son of professor Alvin , one of the builders of the Arks , who disappeared some time after the accident . While searching for his sister <unk> kidnapped by a strange creature , Gene is mutated into a Warhead and watches his arm turning into a weapon during a battle against some Otellos . He is assisted by a small floating companion named Pake ; and is later joined by the Warhead Kilroy , who was an assistant to professor Alvin ; and Meme , a mysterious but determined , optimistic young female Warhead . 
 The second protagonist , Fiona , is a soldier of the White Army of Guinevere , who saved her life . Commander Guinevere , a Warhead , was a female scientist who worked in the Arks with professor Alvin . Fiona is initially very loyal to Guinevere , but becomes more reluctant following the death of a friend and the commander 's changing , more dominating behavior . 
 The third protagonist is Gerald , a member of the Black Army of Sullivan . Also very loyal , Gerald nevertheless wonders why people do not unite to face the common threat represented by the Otellos . Commander Sullivan was another companion of professor Alvin and Guinevere , and also became a Warhead . His divergence of opinions with the White Army forced him to gather his own distinct army . The fourth and final protagonist is Haze Healy , a member of the Keepers ; a faction opposed to both White and Black Armies . 
 = = Development = = 
 Conceptual work by Yusuke Naora , the producer of the Code Age franchise , began in 2002 ; and Code Age Commanders was officially announced in the April 2005 edition of the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu . The development team was nicknamed " Warhead " and specifically assembled for the game , with its lead developers Yusuke Naora and Toshiyuki Itahana belonging to the art field rather than project management . Several connections to the mobile phone game Code Age <unk> and the manga Code Age Archives were put throughout the game , so that information learnt from it could be used by players and readers of the other installments to understand the full picture . 
 The focus on customization features in the game was designed by Naora to appeal to the American market . A trailer of the game was featured at the Los Angeles E3 in 2005 , although Naora later commented that a North American release date was not yet set as there were concerns about competing with the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ released PlayStation 3 . While the gaming website RPGamer reported at one point a 2006 release in North America , the game was eventually released only in Japan . 
 = = Audio = = 
 The score for the game was composed primarily by Kumi Tanioka , with Yasuhiro Yamanaka penning three tracks and J @-@ Pop singer Kou Shibasaki writing and performing the theme song titled " Memory Pocket <unk> " . The non @-@ optional event scenes of the game are fully voiced . The Code Age Commanders Original Soundtrack , which does not contain " Memory Pocket " , was published by Square Enix on October 19 , 2005 in Japan . It spans two discs and 80 tracks , covering a duration of 2 hours and 28 minutes . " Memory Pocket " was released as the B @-@ side to Shibasaki 's single Sweet Mom by Universal Music Group on October 5 , 2005 in Japan , and was included in her second album Hitori Asobi published by Universal Music Group on 2006 @-@ 12 @-@ 14 in Japan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Code Age Commanders sold 37 @,@ 000 units in its first week of release in Japan , a strong start for a new franchise ; debuting at number two in the charts behind Dragon Ball Z : Budokai Tenkaichi . It sold over 61 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2005 . The game scored 32 out of 40 in the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu ; 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 in the American Play Magazine ; and 78 out of 100 on the gaming website <unk> Nevertheless , the gaming site Siliconera reported overall low sales in Japan and attributed the absence of a North American release to this lukewarm response . 
 GameBrink.Com highly praised the quality of the graphics and animation of the game , and compared them to those of the Kingdom Hearts titles . The site greatly lauded the music and sound effects , stating that they set the mood well and tie in with the visuals ; and comparing their style to that of " Final Fantasy and Phantasy Star mixed together " . Siliconera also considered the character design interesting and original , although they felt the textures were " blocky sort " and the environments consisted mostly of wide fields . 
 However , GameBrink.Com felt that the gameplay , user @-@ friendly even to non @-@ Japanese players , consists of too much repetitive button mashing despite featuring characters with different abilities . The Code Extension mode was considered imperfectly implemented , seeming as if it were " tacked on [ … ] late in development " , being totally optional yet difficult not to use to survive in the later missions . Calling the gameplay " shallow " , the site stated that " the soundtrack would probably be a better purchase than the actual game " . On its part , Siliconera noted that while the gameplay may seem complex for using every button on the controller , thirty minutes were enough to grasp how to play the game . The site felt the missions were designed with good pacing and replayability value , but added that hardcore role @-@ playing game fans could dislike the lack of exploration , puzzle , and standard role @-@ playing game principles . 
 The storyline was also criticized by GameBrink.Com for feeling secondary to the gameplay yet being told in long and numerous cut scenes ; their amount was compared to that of the Xenosaga series . On the contrary , Siliconera praised the story and did not report any issue concerning it , although it regretted that playing and reading the other installments of the franchise was necessary for a thorough understanding of all plot points . 
 = Cyclone Peter = 
 Cyclone Peter was the rainiest tropical cyclone on record in Australia . The third system and first severe tropical cyclone of the 1978 – 79 season , Peter developed on 29 December from a weak low pressure area over the Gulf of Carpentaria . Peter moved southeastward and deepened while brushing Arnhem Land . Initially a tropical low , it strengthened into a Category 1 cyclone by 12 : 00 UTC on 29 December . Peter intensified further on 30 December and became a Category 2 cyclone . On the following day , the cyclone peaked with maximum sustained winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Peter weakened to a Category 1 cyclone before making landfall near the mouth of the Edward River in Queensland . While crossing the Cape York Peninsula , the storm weakened slowly . After reaching Pacific Ocean near Cooktown , the storm decelerated and meandered offshore , but dissipated just offshore on 4 January . 
 While trekking slowly offshore the east coast of Queensland , the storm dropped very heavy rainfall , peaking at 1 @,@ 947 millimetres ( 76 @.@ 7 in ) at Mount Bellenden Ker , making it the wettest tropical cyclone on record in Australia . Severe flooding occurred , especially in the Cairns area . The most severe damage was dealt to sugar cane , which suffered 70 to 90 percent destruction . Some flights were canceled at the Cairns Airport due to standing water . Floodwaters forced at least 50 people to flee their homes in Cairns . A number of roads , including major highways , were flooded throughout coastal areas of Far North Queensland . Rainfall and winds also resulted in many power and telephone service outages through the region . There were two fatalities and damage reached approximately $ 10 million ( 1979 AUD ; $ 11 @.@ 4 million 1979 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During the final week of December 1978 , an area of atmospheric convection developed over northern Australia and surrounding areas . During 28 December , an area of low pressure developed over the eastern Arnhem Land within this area of atmospheric convection . Over the next day the system moved northwestward toward the Gulf of Carpentaria and developed further , with the first gale force wind associated with the system reported from an automatic weather station on 29 December . The system was subsequently named Peter by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) after it moved into the Gulf and developed into a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . After being named , Peter continued to intensify further as it tracked southeastward toward the Cape York Peninsula . 
 The system was subsequently considered to have peaked as a Category 2 tropical cyclone on 31 December , with 10 @-@ minute sustained winds estimated at 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) by the BoM . Several hours later , the system made landfall between <unk> and the Edward River mission , Queensland , at around 20 : 00 ( Australian Eastern Standard Time , 11 : 00 UTC ) . As Peter made landfall during 31 December winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , were reported from both Fitzroy Island and the Edward River mission weather stations . Over the next couple of days the system gradually weakened over land , before it emerged into the Coral Sea near Cooktown , Queensland , on 1 January . The system subsequently weakened below tropical cyclone intensity and became a tropical low during 2 January . The system was last noted on the following day as it degenerated into a complex low pressure system and moved back over the Cape York Peninsula . The complex low subsequently moved westwards over the Peninsula and into the Gulf , where it developed into Tropical Cyclone Greta . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Darwin Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre ( TCWC ) in Northern Territory issued a cyclone warning on 30 December for the coast of Arnhem Land from the Wessel Islands to Port Roper , located near the mouth of the Roper River . Although a cyclone warning indicates expectation of landfall , Peter would never strike Northern Territory . The strongest observed winds in the territory was 74 km / h ( 46 mph ) on Northeast Island , while the highest precipitation total was 140 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) in <unk> , 107 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) of which fell in 24 hours . Very rough seas were reported along the coast of some areas , beaching a 12 m ( 39 ft ) fishing vessel onto the rocks at Gove harbour . 
 In Queensland , the Brisbane TCWC issued cyclone watches and flood warnings as the storm passed over the Cape York Peninsula . Some areas experienced strong winds , with gusts up to 110 km / h ( 68 mph ) at Edward River Aboriginal Mission and Fitzroy Island . The storm dropped very heavy rainfall while drifting offshore Queensland , with Mount Bellenden Ker recording 1 @,@ 947 mm ( 76 @.@ 7 in ) over a period of approximately three days , making Peter the wettest tropical cyclone in Australia . About 1 @,@ 140 mm ( 45 in ) of that fell in a 24 @-@ hour period , which was the country 's highest daily rainfall total . Other significant precipitation amounts included 433 mm ( 17 @.@ 0 in ) in Millaa Millaa and 402 mm ( 15 @.@ 8 in ) in Cooktown . 
 Due to the heavy rainfall , severe flooding occurred , mostly between Tully and Cooktown , with the worst impact in the Cairns area . Many creeks and rivers , such as the Herbert , the north and south branches of the Johnstone , and McLeod rivers overflowed or reached dangerous levels . Much of the damage in North Queensland occurred to newly planted sugar cane , with approximately 70 to 90 percent of area 's crop destroyed . Twenty growers in <unk> each lost between $ 20 @,@ 000 to $ 30 @,@ 000 in sugar cane . Damage to this crop was comparable to the floods in 1977 . In total , the storm destroyed 270 @,@ 000 to 315 @,@ 000 tonnes of sugar cane . 
 Standing water at Cairns Airport led Ansett Australia to cancel some flights . Portions of many roads , including major highways such as the Bruce , Captain Cook , Gillies , and Kennedy highways were reported by the Royal Automobile Club as closed due to inundation and washouts . Many motorists were left stranded by floodwaters on Bruce Highway . Emergency personnel crews were put on standby in Innisfail as water up to 60 cm ( 24 in ) threatened dozens of homes in the eastern part of town . In Cairns , over 50 people fled their homes . On 5 January , the Coast Guard of Australia began evacuating some 160 stranded campers in areas about 140 km ( 85 mi ) north of Mossman . Foods shortages occurred in some areas of Far North Queensland , forcing several emergency food drops , including to about 250 people on 4 January and 70 people on 5 January . Additionally , a policeman was winched by helicopter to deliver food supplies to 10 isolated people on 7 January in Goldsborough , which is located in the Gillies Range to the west of Gordonvale . Overall , Peter left two fatalities and about $ 10 million ( 1979 AUD ) in damage , at least $ 4 @.@ 5 million of which was done to sugar cane in Babinda , Innisfail , and Tully . 
 After the storm , the Government of Queensland declared the Cairns area as a natural disaster area . About week later , the Cabinet supported a measure by Minister for Primary Industries , Vic Sullivan , to offer low @-@ interest loans to farmer who lost significant amounts of crops and livestock . Later , Queensland Premier Joh Bjelke @-@ Petersen requested aid from the national government . Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser approved low @-@ interest loans up to $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1979 AUD ) for small businesses and the implementation of other measures for recovery . 
 = John Calvin = 
 John Calvin ( / <unk> / ; French : Jean Calvin , pronounced : [ ʒɑ ̃ <unk> ̃ ] ; born Jehan Cauvin : 10 July 1509 – 27 May 1564 ) was an influential French theologian and pastor during the Protestant Reformation . He was a principal figure in the development of the system of Christian theology later called Calvinism , aspects of which include the doctrine of predestination and the absolute sovereignty of God in salvation of the human soul from death and eternal damnation . In these areas Calvin was influenced by the Augustinian tradition . Various Congregational , Reformed and Presbyterian churches , which look to Calvin as the chief expositor of their beliefs , have spread throughout the world . 
 Calvin was a tireless polemic and apologetic writer who generated much controversy . He also exchanged cordial and supportive letters with many reformers , including Philipp Melanchthon and Heinrich Bullinger . In addition to his seminal work Institutes of the Christian Religion , he wrote commentaries on most books of the Bible , as well as theological treatises and confessional documents . 
 Originally trained as a humanist lawyer , he broke from the Roman Catholic Church around 1530 . After religious tensions provoked a violent uprising against Protestantism in France , Calvin fled to Basel , Switzerland , where he published the first edition of the Institutes in 1536 . In that year , Calvin was recruited by another Frenchman William Farel to help reform the church in Geneva , where he regularly preached sermons throughout the week . The city council resisted the implementation of Calvin 's and Farel 's ideas , and both men were expelled . At the invitation of Martin Bucer , Calvin proceeded to Strasbourg , where he became the minister of a church of French refugees . He continued to support the reform movement in Geneva , and was eventually invited back to lead its church in 1541 . 
 Following his return , Calvin introduced new forms of church government and liturgy , despite opposition from several powerful families in the city who tried to curb his authority . During this period , Michael Servetus , a Spaniard regarded by both Catholics and Protestants as having a heretical view of the Trinity , arrived in Geneva . He was denounced by Calvin and burned at the stake for heresy by the city council . Following an influx of supportive refugees and new elections to the city council , Calvin 's opponents were forced out . Calvin spent his final years promoting the Reformation both in Geneva and throughout Europe . 
 = = Early life ( 1509 – 1535 ) = = 
 John Calvin was born as Jehan Cauvin on 10 July 1509 , in the town of Noyon in the Picardy region of France . He was the first of four sons who survived infancy . His mother , Jeanne le Franc , was the daughter of an innkeeper from Cambrai . She died in Calvin 's childhood , from an unknown cause , after bearing four more children . Calvin 's father , Gérard Cauvin , had a prosperous career as the cathedral notary and registrar to the ecclesiastical court . He died in 1531 , after suffering for two years with testicular cancer . Gérard intended his three sons — Charles , Jean , and Antoine — for the priesthood . 
 Young Calvin was particularly precocious . However , by age 12 , he was employed by the bishop as a clerk and received the tonsure , cutting his hair to symbolise his dedication to the Church . He also won the patronage of an influential family , the <unk> . Through their assistance , Calvin was able to attend the Collège de la Marche , Paris , where he learned Latin from one of its greatest teachers , Mathurin Cordier . Once he completed the course , he entered the Collège de Montaigu as a philosophy student . 
 In 1525 or 1526 , Gérard withdrew his son from the Collège de Montaigu and enrolled him in the University of Orléans to study law . According to contemporary biographers Theodore Beza and Nicolas <unk> , Gérard believed that Calvin would earn more money as a lawyer than as a priest . After a few years of quiet study , Calvin entered the University of Bourges in 1529 . He was intrigued by Andreas <unk> , a humanist lawyer . Humanism was a European intellectual movement which stressed classical studies . During his 18 @-@ month stay in Bourges , Calvin learned Koine Greek , a necessity for studying the New Testament . 
 During the autumn of 1533 Calvin experienced a religious conversion . In later life , he wrote two accounts of his conversion that differ in significant ways . In the first account he portrays his conversion as a sudden change of mind , brought about by God . This account can be found in his Commentary on the Book of Psalms : 
 " God by a sudden conversion subdued and brought my mind to a teachable frame , which was more hardened in such matters than might have been expected from one at my early period of life . Having thus received some taste and knowledge of true godliness , I was immediately inflamed with so intense a desire to make progress therein , that although I did not altogether leave off other studies , yet I pursued them with less ardour . " 
 In his second account he speaks of a long process of inner turmoil , followed by spiritual and psychological anguish . 
 " Being exceedingly alarmed at the misery into which I had fallen , and much more at that which threatened me in view of eternal death , I , duty bound , made it my first business to <unk> myself to your way , condemning my past life , not without groans and tears . And now , O Lord , what remains to a wretch like me , but instead of defence , earnestly to supplicate you not to judge that fearful abandonment of your Word according to its deserts , from which in your wondrous goodness you have at last delivered me . " 
 Scholars have argued about the precise interpretation of these accounts , but most agree that his conversion corresponded with his break from the Roman Catholic Church . The Calvin biographer Bruce Gordon has stressed that " the two accounts are not antithetical , revealing some inconsistency in Calvin 's memory , but rather [ are ] two different ways of expressing the same reality . " At the time of his conversion ( scholars have argued ) , Calvin also believed himself to have experienced a prophetic calling to reform the church , which is briefly reflected in the Psalms commentary account of his conversion and in many of his sermons and a number of his polemical tracts " 
 By 1532 , Calvin received his licentiate in law and published his first book , a commentary on Seneca 's De <unk> . After uneventful trips to Orléans and his hometown of Noyon , Calvin returned to Paris in October 1533 . During this time , tensions rose at the Collège Royal ( later to become the Collège de France ) between the humanists / reformers and the conservative senior faculty members . One of the reformers , Nicolas Cop , was rector of the university . On 1 November 1533 he devoted his inaugural address to the need for reform and renewal in the Catholic Church . 
 The address provoked a strong reaction from the faculty , who denounced it as heretical , forcing Cop to flee to Basel . Calvin , a close friend of Cop , was implicated in the offence , and for the next year he was forced into hiding . He remained on the move , sheltering with his friend Louis du Tillet in Angoulême and taking refuge in Noyon and Orléans . He was finally forced to flee France during the Affair of the <unk> in mid @-@ October 1534 . In that incident , unknown reformers had posted placards in various cities attacking the Catholic mass , which provoked a violent backlash against Protestants . In January 1535 , Calvin joined Cop in Basel , a city under the influence of the reformer Johannes Oecolampadius . 
 = = Reform work commences ( 1536 – 1538 ) = = 
 In March 1536 , Calvin published the first edition of his <unk> Christianae <unk> or Institutes of the Christian Religion . The work was an apologia or defense of his faith and a statement of the doctrinal position of the reformers . He also intended it to serve as an elementary instruction book for anyone interested in the Christian religion . The book was the first expression of his theology . Calvin updated the work and published new editions throughout his life . Shortly after its publication , he left Basel for Ferrara , Italy , where he briefly served as secretary to Princess Renée of France . By June he was back in Paris with his brother Antoine , who was resolving their father 's affairs . Following the Edict of Coucy , which gave a limited six @-@ month period for heretics to reconcile with the Catholic faith , Calvin decided that there was no future for him in France . In August he set off for Strasbourg , a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire and a refuge for reformers . Due to military manoeuvres of imperial and French forces , he was forced to make a detour to the south , bringing him to Geneva . 
 Calvin had only intended to stay a single night , but William Farel , a fellow French reformer residing in the city , implored him to stay and assist him in his work of reforming the church there , insisting that it was his pious duty . Calvin , who reluctantly agreed to remain , recounts : 
 Then Farel , who was working with incredible zeal to promote the gospel , bent all his efforts to keep me in the city . And when he realized that I was determined to study in privacy in some obscure place , and saw that he gained nothing by entreaty , he descended to cursing , and said that God would surely curse my peace if I held back from giving help at a time of such great need . Terrified by his words , and conscious of my own timidity and cowardice , I gave up my journey and attempted to apply whatever gift I had in defense of my faith . 
 Calvin accepted his new role without any preconditions on his tasks or duties . The office to which he was initially assigned is unknown . He was eventually given the title of " reader " , which most likely meant that he could give expository lectures on the Bible . Sometime in 1537 he was selected to be a " pastor " although he never received any pastoral consecration . For the first time , the lawyer @-@ theologian took up pastoral duties such as baptisms , weddings , and church services . 
 During the fall of 1536 , Farel drafted a confession of faith while Calvin wrote separate articles on reorganizing the church in Geneva . On 16 January 1537 , Farel and Calvin presented their Articles concernant l 'organisation de l 'église et du <unk> à Genève ( Articles on the Organization of the Church and its Worship at Geneva ) to the city council . The document described the manner and frequency of their celebrations of the Eucharist , the reason for , and the method of , excommunication , the requirement to subscribe to the confession of faith , the use of congregational singing in the liturgy , and the revision of marriage laws . The council accepted the document on the same day . 
 As the year progressed , however , Calvin and Farel 's reputation with the council began to suffer . The council was reluctant to enforce the subscription requirement , as only a few citizens had subscribed to their confession of faith . On 26 November , the two ministers hotly debated the council over the issue . Furthermore , France was taking an interest in forming an alliance with Geneva and as the two ministers were Frenchmen , councillors had begun to question their loyalty . Finally , a major ecclesiastical @-@ political quarrel developed when the city of Bern , Geneva 's ally in the reformation of the Swiss churches , proposed to introduce uniformity in the church ceremonies . One proposal required the use of unleavened bread for the Eucharist . The two ministers were unwilling to follow Bern 's lead and delayed the use of such bread until a synod in Zurich could be convened to make the final decision . The council ordered Calvin and Farel to use unleavened bread for the Easter Eucharist . In protest , they refused to administer communion during the Easter service . This caused a riot during the service and the next day , the council told Farel and Calvin to leave Geneva . 
 Farel and Calvin then went to Bern and Zurich to plead their case . The resulting synod in Zurich placed most of the blame on Calvin for not being sympathetic enough toward the people of Geneva . However , it asked Bern to mediate with the aim of restoring the two ministers . The Geneva council refused to readmit the two men , who then took refuge in Basel . Subsequently , Farel received an invitation to lead the church in Neuchâtel . Calvin was invited to lead a church of French refugees in Strasbourg by that city 's leading reformers , Martin Bucer and Wolfgang Capito . Initially , Calvin refused because Farel was not included in the invitation , but relented when Bucer appealed to him . By September 1538 Calvin had taken up his new position in Strasbourg , fully expecting that this time it would be permanent ; a few months later , he applied for and was granted citizenship of the city . 
 = = Minister in Strasbourg ( 1538 – 1541 ) = = 
 During his time in Strasbourg , Calvin was not attached to one particular church , but held his office successively in the Saint @-@ Nicolas Church , the Sainte @-@ Madeleine Church and the former Dominican Church , renamed the Temple Neuf . ( All of these churches still exist , but none are in the architectural state of Calvin 's days . ) Calvin ministered to 400 – 500 members in his church . He preached or lectured every day , with two sermons on Sunday . Communion was celebrated monthly and congregational singing of the psalms was encouraged . He also worked on the second edition of the Institutes . Calvin was dissatisfied with its original structure as a catechism , a primer for young Christians . 
 For the second edition , published in 1539 , Calvin dropped this format in favour of systematically presenting the main doctrines from the Bible . In the process , the book was enlarged from six chapters to seventeen . He concurrently worked on another book , the Commentary on Romans , which was published in March 1540 . The book was a model for his later commentaries : it included his own Latin translation from the Greek rather than the Latin Vulgate , an exegesis , and an exposition . In the dedicatory letter , Calvin praised the work of his predecessors Philipp Melanchthon , Heinrich Bullinger , and Martin Bucer , but he also took care to distinguish his own work from theirs and to criticise some of their shortcomings . 
 Calvin 's friends urged him to marry . Calvin took a prosaic view , writing to one correspondent : 
 " I , who have the air of being so hostile to celibacy , I am still not married and do not know whether I will ever be . If I take a wife it will be because , being better freed from numerous worries , I can devote myself to the Lord . " 
 Several candidates were presented to him including one young woman from a noble family . Reluctantly , Calvin agreed to the marriage , on the condition that she would learn French . Although a wedding date was planned for March 1540 , he remained reluctant and the wedding never took place . He later wrote that he would never think of marrying her , " unless the Lord had entirely bereft me of my wits " . Instead , in August of that year , he married Idelette de Bure , a widow who had two children from her first marriage . 
 Geneva reconsidered its expulsion of Calvin . Church attendance had dwindled and the political climate had changed ; as Bern and Geneva quarrelled over land , their alliance frayed . When Cardinal Jacopo <unk> wrote a letter to the city council inviting Geneva to return to the Catholic faith , the council searched for an ecclesiastical authority to respond to him . At first Pierre Viret was consulted , but when he refused , the council asked Calvin . He agreed and his <unk> ad <unk> ( Letter to <unk> ) strongly defended Geneva 's position concerning reforms in the church . On 21 September 1540 the council commissioned one of its members , Ami Perrin , to find a way to recall Calvin . An embassy reached Calvin while he was at a colloquy , a conference to settle religious disputes , in Worms . His reaction to the suggestion was one of horror in which he wrote , " Rather would I submit to death a hundred times than to that cross on which I had to perish daily a thousand times over . " 
 Calvin also wrote that he was prepared to follow the Lord 's calling . A plan was drawn up in which Viret would be appointed to take temporary charge in Geneva for six months while Bucer and Calvin would visit the city to determine the next steps . However , the city council pressed for the immediate appointment of Calvin in Geneva . By summer 1541 , Strasbourg decided to loan Calvin to Geneva for six months . Calvin returned on 13 September 1541 with an official escort and a wagon for his family . 
 = = Reform in Geneva ( 1541 – 1549 ) = = 
 In supporting Calvin 's proposals for reforms , the council of Geneva passed the Ordonnances <unk> ( Ecclesiastical Ordinances ) on 20 November 1541 . The ordinances defined four orders of ministerial function : pastors to preach and to administer the sacraments ; doctors to instruct believers in the faith ; elders to provide discipline ; and deacons to care for the poor and needy . They also called for the creation of the <unk> ( Consistory ) , an ecclesiastical court composed of the lay elders and the ministers . The city government retained the power to summon persons before the court , and the Consistory could judge only ecclesiastical matters having no civil jurisdiction . Originally , the court had the power to mete out sentences , with excommunication as its most severe penalty . However , the government contested this power and on 19 March 1543 the council decided that all sentencing would be carried out by the government . 
 In 1542 , Calvin adapted a service book used in Strasbourg , publishing La Forme des Prières et Chants <unk> ( The Form of Prayers and Church Hymns ) . Calvin recognised the power of music and he intended that it be used to support scripture readings . The original Strasbourg psalter contained twelve psalms by Clément Marot and Calvin added several more hymns of his own composition in the Geneva version . At the end of 1542 , Marot became a refugee in Geneva and contributed nineteen more psalms . Louis Bourgeois , also a refugee , lived and taught music in Geneva for sixteen years and Calvin took the opportunity to add his hymns , the most famous being the Old Hundredth . 
 In the same year of 1542 , Calvin published <unk> de l 'Eglise de Genève ( Catechism of the Church of Geneva ) , which was inspired by Bucer 's <unk> <unk> <unk> of 1534 . Calvin had written an earlier catechism during his first stay in Geneva which was largely based on Martin Luther 's Large Catechism . The first version was arranged <unk> , describing Law , Faith , and Prayer . The 1542 version was rearranged for theological reasons , covering Faith first , then Law and Prayer . 
 Historians debate the extent to which Geneva was a theocracy . On the one hand , Calvin 's theology clearly called for separation between church and state . Other historians have stressed the enormous political power wielded on a daily basis by the clerics . 
 During his ministry in Geneva , Calvin preached over two thousand sermons . Initially he preached twice on Sunday and three times during the week . This proved to be too heavy a burden and late in 1542 the council allowed him to preach only once on Sunday . However , in October 1549 , he was again required to preach twice on Sundays and , in addition , every weekday of alternate weeks . His sermons lasted more than an hour and he did not use notes . An occasional secretary tried to record his sermons , but very little of his preaching was preserved before 1549 . In that year , professional scribe Denis <unk> , who had learned or developed a system of shorthand , was assigned to record all of Calvin 's sermons . An analysis of his sermons by T. H. L. Parker suggests that Calvin was a consistent preacher and his style changed very little over the years . 
 Voltaire wrote about Calvin , Luther and Zwingli , " If they condemned celibacy in the priests , and opened the gates of the convents , it was only to turn all society into a convent . Shows and entertainments were expressly forbidden by their religion ; and for more than two hundred years there was not a single musical instrument allowed in the city of Geneva . They condemned auricular confession , but they enjoined a public one ; and in Switzerland , Scotland , and Geneva it was performed the same as penance . " 
 Very little is known about Calvin 's personal life in Geneva . His house and furniture were owned by the council . The house was big enough to accommodate his family as well as Antoine 's family and some servants . On 28 July 1542 , Idelette gave birth to a son , Jacques , but he was born prematurely and survived only briefly . Idelette fell ill in 1545 and died on 29 March 1549 . Calvin never married again . He expressed his sorrow in a letter to Viret : 
 I have been bereaved of the best friend of my life , of one who , if it has been so ordained , would willingly have shared not only my poverty but also my death . During her life she was the faithful helper of my ministry . From her I never experienced the slightest hindrance . 
 Throughout the rest of his life in Geneva , he maintained several friendships from his early years including Montmor , Cordier , Cop , Farel , Melanchthon and Bullinger . 
 = = Discipline and opposition ( 1546 – 1553 ) = = 
 Calvin encountered bitter opposition to his work in Geneva . Around 1546 , the uncoordinated forces coalesced into an identifiable group whom he referred to as the libertines , but who preferred to be called either <unk> or Patriots . According to Calvin , these were people who felt that after being liberated through grace , they were exempted from both ecclesiastical and civil law . The group consisted of wealthy , politically powerful , and interrelated families of Geneva . At the end of January 1546 , Pierre <unk> , a maker of playing cards who had already been in conflict with the Consistory , attacked Calvin by calling him a " Picard " , an epithet denoting anti @-@ French sentiment , and accused him of false doctrine . <unk> was punished by the council and forced to make expiation by parading through the city and begging God for forgiveness . A few months later Ami Perrin , the man who had brought Calvin to Geneva , moved into open opposition . Perrin had married Françoise Favre , daughter of François Favre , a well @-@ established Genevan merchant . Both Perrin 's wife and father @-@ in @-@ law had previous conflicts with the Consistory . The court noted that many of Geneva 's notables , including Perrin , had breached a law against dancing . Initially , Perrin ignored the court when he was summoned , but after receiving a letter from Calvin , he appeared before the Consistory . 
 By 1547 , opposition to Calvin and other French refugee ministers had grown to constitute the majority of the <unk> , the civil magistrates of Geneva . On 27 June an unsigned threatening letter in Genevan dialect was found at the pulpit of St. Pierre Cathedral where Calvin preached . Suspecting a plot against both the church and the state , the council appointed a commission to investigate . Jacques Gruet , a Genevan member of Favre 's group , was arrested and incriminating evidence was found when his house was searched . Under torture , he confessed to several crimes including writing the letter left in the pulpit which threatened the church leaders . A civil court condemned Gruet to death and he was beheaded on 26 July . Calvin was not opposed to the civil court 's decision . 
 The libertines continued organizing opposition , insulting the appointed ministers , and challenging the authority of the Consistory . The council straddled both sides of the conflict , alternately admonishing and upholding Calvin . When Perrin was elected first syndic in February 1552 , Calvin 's authority appeared to be at its lowest point . After some losses before the council , Calvin believed he was defeated ; on 24 July 1553 he asked the council to allow him to resign . Although the libertines controlled the council , his request was refused . The opposition realised that they could curb Calvin 's authority , but they did not have enough power to banish him . 
 = = Michael Servetus ( 1553 ) = = 
 The turning point in Calvin 's fortunes occurred when Michael Servetus , a fugitive from ecclesiastical authorities , appeared in Geneva on 13 August 1553 . Servetus was a Spanish physician and Protestant theologian who boldly criticised the doctrine of the Trinity and <unk> ( infant baptism ) . In July 1530 he disputed with Johannes Oecolampadius in Basel and was eventually expelled . He went to Strasbourg where he published a pamphlet against the Trinity . Bucer publicly refuted it and asked Servetus to leave . After returning to Basel , Servetus published Two Books of Dialogues on the Trinity ( Latin : <unk> de Trinitate libri duo ) which caused a sensation among Reformers and Catholics alike . The Inquisition in Spain ordered his arrest . 
 Calvin and Servetus were first brought into contact in 1546 through a common acquaintance , Jean <unk> of Lyon ; they exchanged letters debating doctrine ; Calvin used a pseudonym as Charles d ' <unk> , while Servetus left his unsigned . Eventually , Calvin lost patience and refused to respond ; by this time Servetus had written around thirty letters to Calvin . Calvin was particularly outraged when Servetus sent him a copy of the Institutes of the Christian Religion heavily annotated with arguments pointing to errors in the book . When Servetus mentioned that he would come to Geneva , " <unk> " ( Calvin ) wrote a letter to Farel on 13 February 1546 noting that if Servetus were to come , he would not assure him safe conduct : " for if he came , as far as my authority goes , I would not let him leave alive . " 
 In 1553 , Calvin 's front man , Guillaume de Trie , sent letters trying to address the French Inquisition to Servetus . Calling him a " Spanish @-@ Portuguese " , suspecting and accusing him of his recently proved Jewish converso origin . De Trie wrote down that " his proper name is Michael Servetus , but he currently calls himself Villeneuve , practising medicine . He stayed for some time in Lyon , and now he is living in Vienne . " When the inquisitor @-@ general of France learned that Servetus was hiding in Vienne , according to Calvin under an assumed name , he contacted Cardinal François de Tournon , the secretary of the archbishop of Lyon , to take up the matter . Servetus was arrested and taken in for questioning . His letters to Calvin were presented as evidence of heresy , but he denied having written them , and later said he was not sure it was his handwriting . He said , after swearing before the holy gospel , that " he was Michel De Villeneuve Doctor in Medicine about 42 years old , native of Tudela of the kingdom of Navarre , a city under the obedience to the Emperor " . The following day he said : " .. although he was not Servetus he assumed the person of <unk> for debating with Calvin " . He managed to escape from prison , and the Catholic authorities sentenced him in absentia to death by slow burning . 
 On his way to Italy , Servetus stopped in Geneva to visit " d <unk> " , where he was recognized and arrested . Calvin 's secretary Nicholas de la Fontaine composed a list of accusations that was submitted before the court . The prosecutor was Philibert Berthelier , a member of a libertine family and son of a famous Geneva patriot , and the sessions were led by Pierre Tissot , Perrin 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . The libertines allowed the trial to drag on in an attempt to harass Calvin . The difficulty in using Servetus as a weapon against Calvin was that the heretical reputation of Servetus was widespread and most of the cities in Europe were observing and awaiting the outcome of the trial . This posed a dilemma for the libertines , so on 21 August the council decided to write to other Swiss cities for their opinions , thus mitigating their own responsibility for the final decision . While waiting for the responses , the council also asked Servetus if he preferred to be judged in Vienne or in Geneva . He begged to stay in Geneva . On 20 October the replies from Zurich , Basel , Bern , and Schaffhausen were read and the council condemned Servetus as a heretic . The following day he was sentenced to burning at the stake , the same sentence as in Vienne . Some scholars claim that Calvin and other ministers asked that he be beheaded instead of burnt , knowing that burning at the stake was the only legal recourse . This plea was refused and on 27 October , Servetus was burnt alive at the Plateau of <unk> at the edge of Geneva . 
 = = Securing the Protestant Reformation ( 1553 – 1555 ) = = 
 After the death of Servetus , Calvin was acclaimed a defender of Christianity , but his ultimate triumph over the libertines was still two years away . He had always insisted that the Consistory retain the power of excommunication , despite the council 's past decision to take it away . During Servetus 's trial , Philibert Berthelier asked the council for permission to take communion , as he had been excommunicated the previous year for insulting a minister . Calvin protested that the council did not have the legal authority to overturn Berthelier 's excommunication . Unsure of how the council would rule , he hinted in a sermon on 3 September 1553 that he might be dismissed by the authorities . The council decided to re @-@ examine the Ordonnances and on 18 September it voted in support of Calvin — excommunication was within the jurisdiction of the Consistory . Berthelier applied for reinstatement to another Genevan administrative assembly , the Deux Cents ( Two Hundred ) , in November . This body reversed the council 's decision and stated that the final arbiter concerning excommunication should be the council . However , the ministers continued to protest , and as in the case of Servetus , the opinions of the Swiss churches were sought . The affair dragged on through 1554 . Finally , on 22 January 1555 , the council announced the decision of the Swiss churches : the original Ordonnances were to be kept and the Consistory was to regain its official powers . 
 The libertines ' downfall began with the February 1555 elections . By then , many of the French refugees had been granted citizenship and with their support , Calvin 's partisans elected the majority of the <unk> and the councillors . On 16 May the libertines took to the streets in a drunken protest and attempted to burn down a house that was supposedly full of Frenchmen . The syndic Henri <unk> tried to intervene , carrying with him the baton of office that symbolised his power . Perrin seized the baton and waved it over the crowd , which gave the appearance that he was taking power and initiating a coup d 'état . The insurrection was soon over when another syndic appeared and ordered Perrin to go with him to the town hall . Perrin and other leaders were forced to flee the city . With the approval of Calvin , the other plotters who remained in the city were found and executed . The opposition to Calvin 's church polity came to an end . 
 = = Final years ( 1555 – 1564 ) = = 
 Calvin 's authority was practically uncontested during his final years , and he enjoyed an international reputation as a reformer distinct from Martin Luther . Initially , Luther and Calvin had mutual respect for each other . However , a doctrinal conflict had developed between Luther and Zurich reformer Huldrych Zwingli on the interpretation of the eucharist . Calvin 's opinion on the issue forced Luther to place him in Zwingli 's camp . Calvin actively participated in the polemics that were exchanged between the Lutheran and Reformed branches of the Reformation movement . At the same time , Calvin was dismayed by the lack of unity among the reformers . He took steps toward rapprochement with Bullinger by signing the Consensus <unk> , a concordat between the Zurich and Geneva churches . He reached out to England when Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer called for an ecumenical synod of all the evangelical churches . Calvin praised the idea , but ultimately Cranmer was unable to bring it to fruition . 
 Calvin sheltered Marian exiles ( those who fled the reign of Catholic Mary Tudor in England ) in Geneva starting in 1555 . Under the city 's protection , they were able to form their own reformed church under John Knox and William Whittingham and eventually carried Calvin 's ideas on doctrine and polity back to England and Scotland . However , Calvin was most interested in reforming his homeland , France . He supported the building of churches by distributing literature and sending ministers . Between 1555 and 1562 , more than 100 ministers were sent to France . These efforts were funded by the church in Geneva , as the city council had refused to become involved in missionary activities at the time . Henry II severely persecuted Protestants under the Edict of Chateaubriand and when the French authorities complained about the missionary activities , Geneva was able to disclaim responsibility . 
 Within Geneva , Calvin 's main concern was the creation of a collège , an institute for the education of children . A site for the school was selected on 25 March 1558 and it opened the following year on 5 June 1559 . Although the school was a single institution , it was divided into two parts : a grammar school called the collège or <unk> <unk> and an advanced school called the académie or <unk> publica . Calvin tried to recruit two professors for the institute , Mathurin Cordier , his old friend and Latin scholar who was now based in Lausanne , and Emmanuel Tremellius , the Regius professor of Hebrew in Cambridge . Neither was available , but he succeeded in obtaining Theodore Beza as rector . Within five years there were 1 @,@ 200 students in the grammar school and 300 in the advanced school . The collège eventually became the Collège Calvin , one of the college preparatory schools of Geneva , while the académie became the University of Geneva . 
 In the autumn of 1558 , Calvin became ill with a fever . Since he was afraid that he might die before completing the final revision of the Institutes , he forced himself to work . The final edition was greatly expanded to the extent that Calvin referred to it as a new work . The expansion from the 21 chapters of the previous edition to 80 was due to the extended treatment of existing material rather than the addition of new topics . Shortly after he recovered , he strained his voice while preaching , which brought on a violent fit of coughing . He burst a blood @-@ vessel in his lungs , and his health steadily declined . He preached his final sermon in St. Pierre on 6 February 1564 . On 25 April , he made his will , in which he left small sums to his family and to the collège . A few days later , the ministers of the church came to visit him , and he bade his final farewell , which was recorded in Discours d <unk> aux <unk> . He recounted his life in Geneva , sometimes recalling bitterly some of the hardships he had suffered . Calvin died on 27 May 1564 aged 54 . At first his body was laid in state , but since so many people came to see it , the reformers were afraid that they would be accused of fostering a new saint 's cult . On the following day , he was buried in an unmarked grave in the Cimetière des Rois . While the exact location of the grave is unknown , a stone was added in the 19th century to mark a grave traditionally thought to be Calvin 's . 
 = = Theology = = 
 Calvin developed his theology in his biblical commentaries as well as his sermons and treatises , but the most concise expression of his views is found in his magnum opus , the Institutes of the Christian Religion . He intended that the book be used as a summary of his views on Christian theology and that it be read in conjunction with his commentaries . The various editions of that work span nearly his entire career as a reformer , and the successive revisions of the book show that his theology changed very little from his youth to his death . The first edition from 1536 consisted of only six chapters . The second edition , published in 1539 , was three times as long because he added chapters on subjects that appear in Melanchthon 's Loci Communes . In 1543 , he again added new material and expanded a chapter on the Apostles ' Creed . The final edition of the Institutes appeared in 1559 . By then , the work consisted of four books of eighty chapters , and each book was named after statements from the creed : Book 1 on God the Creator , Book 2 on the Redeemer in Christ , Book 3 on receiving the Grace of Christ through the Holy Spirit , and Book 4 on the Society of Christ or the Church . 
