 The first statement in the Institutes acknowledges its central theme . It states that the sum of human wisdom consists of two parts : the knowledge of God and of ourselves . Calvin argues that the knowledge of God is not inherent in humanity nor can it be discovered by observing this world . The only way to obtain it is to study scripture . Calvin writes , " For anyone to arrive at God the Creator he needs Scripture as his Guide and Teacher . " He does not try to prove the authority of scripture but rather describes it as <unk> or self @-@ authenticating . He defends the trinitarian view of God and , in a strong polemical stand against the Catholic Church , argues that images of God lead to idolatry . At the end of the first book , he offers his views on providence , writing , " By his Power God cherishes and guards the World which he made and by his Providence rules its individual Parts . " Humans are unable to fully comprehend why God performs any particular action , but whatever good or evil people may practise , their efforts always result in the execution of God 's will and judgments . 
 The second book includes several essays on the original sin and the fall of man , which directly refer to Augustine , who developed these doctrines . He often cited the Church Fathers in order to defend the reformed cause against the charge that the reformers were creating new theology . In Calvin 's view , sin began with the fall of Adam and propagated to all of humanity . The domination of sin is complete to the point that people are driven to evil . Thus fallen humanity is in need of the redemption that can be found in Christ . But before Calvin expounded on this doctrine , he described the special situation of the Jews who lived during the time of the Old Testament . God made a covenant with Abraham , promising the coming of Christ . Hence , the Old Covenant was not in opposition to Christ , but was rather a continuation of God 's promise . Calvin then describes the New Covenant using the passage from the Apostles ' Creed that describes Christ 's suffering under Pontius Pilate and his return to judge the living and the dead . For Calvin , the whole course of Christ 's obedience to the Father removed the discord between humanity and God . 
 In the third book , Calvin describes how the spiritual union of Christ and humanity is achieved . He first defines faith as the firm and certain knowledge of God in Christ . The immediate effects of faith are repentance and the remission of sin . This is followed by spiritual regeneration , which returns the believer to the state of holiness before Adam 's transgression . However , complete perfection is unattainable in this life , and the believer should expect a continual struggle against sin . Several chapters are then devoted to the subject of justification by faith alone . He defined justification as " the acceptance by which God regards us as righteous whom he has received into grace . " In this definition , it is clear that it is God who initiates and carries through the action and that people play no role ; God is completely sovereign in salvation . Near the end of the book , Calvin describes and defends the doctrine of predestination , a doctrine advanced by Augustine in opposition to the teachings of Pelagius . Fellow theologians who followed the Augustinian tradition on this point included Thomas Aquinas and Martin Luther , though Calvin 's formulation of the doctrine went further than the tradition that went before him . The principle , in Calvin 's words , is that " All are not created on equal terms , but some are preordained to eternal life , others to eternal damnation ; and , accordingly , as each has been created for one or other of these ends , we say that he has been <unk> to life or to death . " 
 The final book describes what he considers to be the true Church and its ministry , authority , and sacraments . He denied the papal claim to primacy and the accusation that the reformers were schismatic . For Calvin , the Church was defined as the body of believers who placed Christ at its head . By definition , there was only one " catholic " or " universal " Church . Hence , he argued that the reformers " had to leave them in order that we might come to Christ . " The ministers of the Church are described from a passage from Ephesians , and they consisted of apostles , prophets , evangelists , pastors , and doctors . Calvin regarded the first three offices as temporary , limited in their existence to the time of the New Testament . The latter two offices were established in the church in Geneva . Although Calvin respected the work of the ecumenical councils , he considered them to be subject to God 's Word found in scripture . He also believed that the civil and church authorities were separate and should not interfere with each other . 
 Calvin defined a sacrament as an earthly sign associated with a promise from God . He accepted only two sacraments as valid under the new covenant : baptism and the Lord 's Supper ( in opposition to the Catholic acceptance of seven sacraments ) . He completely rejected the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and the treatment of the Supper as a sacrifice . He also could not accept the Lutheran doctrine of sacramental union in which Christ was " in , with and under " the elements . His own view was close to Zwingli 's symbolic view , but it was not identical . Rather than holding a purely symbolic view , Calvin noted that with the participation of the Holy Spirit , faith was nourished and strengthened by the sacrament . In his words , the eucharistic rite was " a secret too sublime for my mind to understand or words to express . I experience it rather than understand it . " 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Calvin 's theology was not without controversy . Pierre Caroli , a Protestant minister in Lausanne accused Calvin as well as Viret and Farel of Arianism in 1536 . Calvin defended his beliefs on the Trinity in Confessio de Trinitate <unk> <unk> P. Caroli . In 1551 Jérôme @-@ Hermès <unk> , a physician in Geneva , attacked Calvin 's doctrine of predestination and accused him of making God the author of sin . <unk> was banished from the city , and after Calvin 's death , he wrote a biography which severely maligned Calvin 's character . In the following year , Joachim Westphal , a <unk> @-@ Lutheran pastor in Hamburg , condemned Calvin and Zwingli as heretics in denying the eucharistic doctrine of the union of Christ 's body with the elements . Calvin 's <unk> <unk> et <unk> <unk> de <unk> ( A Defence of the Sober and Orthodox Doctrine of the Sacrament ) was his response in 1555 . In 1556 Justus <unk> , a Dutch dissident , held a public disputation with Calvin during his visit to Frankfurt , in which <unk> defended free will against Calvin 's doctrine of predestination . Following the execution of Servetus , a close associate of Calvin , Sebastian <unk> , broke with him on the issue of the treatment of heretics . In <unk> 's Treatise on Heretics ( 1554 ) , he argued for a focus on Christ 's moral teachings in place of the vanity of theology , and he afterward developed a theory of tolerance based on biblical principles . 
 = = = Calvin and the Jews = = = 
 Scholars have debated Calvin 's view of the Jews and Judaism . Some have argued that Calvin was the least anti @-@ semitic among all the major reformers of his time , especially in comparison to Martin Luther . Others have argued that Calvin was firmly within the anti @-@ semitic camp . Scholars agree , however , that it is important to distinguish between Calvin 's views toward the biblical Jews and his attitude toward contemporary Jews . In his theology , Calvin does not differentiate between God 's covenant with Israel and the New Covenant . He stated , " all the children of the promise , reborn of God , who have obeyed the commands by faith working through love , have belonged to the New Covenant since the world began . " Still he was a covenant theologian and argued that the Jews are a rejected people who must embrace Jesus to re @-@ enter the covenant . 
 Most of Calvin 's statements on the Jewry of his era were polemical . For example , Calvin once wrote , " I have had much conversation with many Jews : I have never seen either a drop of piety or a grain of truth or ingenuousness – nay , I have never found common sense in any Jew . " In this respect , he differed little from other Protestant and Catholic theologians of his day . Among his extant writings , Calvin only dealt explicitly with issues of contemporary Jews and Judaism in one treatise , Response to Questions and Objections of a Certain Jew . In it , he argued that Jews misread their own scriptures because they miss the unity of the Old and New Testaments . 
 = = Political thought = = 
 The aim of Calvin 's political theory was to safeguard the rights and freedoms of ordinary people . Although he was convinced that the Bible contained no blueprint for a certain form of government , Calvin favored a combination of democracy and aristocracy ( mixed government ) . He appreciated the advantages of democracy . To further minimize the misuse of political power , Calvin proposed to divide it among several political institutions like the aristocracy , lower estates , or magistrates in a system of checks and balances ( separation of powers ) . Finally , Calvin taught that if rulers rise up against God they lose their divine right and must be put down . State and church are separate , though they have to cooperate to the benefit of the people . Christian magistrates have to make sure that the church can fulfill its duties in freedom . In extreme cases the magistrates have to expel or execute dangerous heretics . But nobody can be forced to become a Protestant . 
 Calvin thought that agriculture and the traditional crafts were normal human activities . With regard to trade and the financial world he was more liberal than Luther , but both were strictly opposed to usury . However , Calvin allowed the charging of modest interest rates on loans . Like the other Reformers Calvin understood work as a means through which the believers expressed their gratitude to God for their redemption in Christ and as a service to their neighbors . Everybody was obliged to work ; loafing and begging were rejected . The idea that economic success was a visible sign of God 's grace played only a minor role in Calvin 's thinking . It became more important in later , partly secularized forms of Calvinism and became the starting @-@ point of Max Weber 's theory about the rise of capitalism . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Calvin 's first published work was a commentary of Seneca the Younger 's De <unk> . Published at his own expense in 1532 , it showed that he was a humanist in the tradition of Erasmus with a thorough understanding of classical scholarship . His first theological work , the <unk> , attempted to refute the doctrine of soul sleep as promulgated by the Anabaptists . Calvin probably wrote it during the period following Cop 's speech , but it was not published until 1542 in Strasbourg . 
 Calvin produced commentaries on most of the books of the Bible . His first commentary on Romans was published in 1540 , and he planned to write commentaries on the entire New Testament . Six years passed before he wrote his second , a commentary on I Corinthians , but after that he devoted more attention to reaching his goal . Within four years he had published commentaries on all the Pauline epistles , and he also revised the commentary on Romans . He then turned his attention to the general epistles , dedicating them to Edward VI of England . By 1555 he had completed his work on the New Testament , finishing with the Acts and the Gospels ( he omitted only the brief second and third Epistles of John and the Book of Revelation ) . For the Old Testament , he wrote commentaries on Isaiah , the books of the Pentateuch , the Psalms , and Joshua . The material for the commentaries often originated from lectures to students and ministers that he reworked for publication . However , from 1557 onwards , he could not find the time to continue this method , and he gave permission for his lectures to be published from stenographers ' notes . These <unk> covered the minor prophets , Daniel , Jeremiah , Lamentations , and part of Ezekiel . 
 Calvin also wrote many letters and treatises . Following the <unk> ad <unk> , Calvin wrote an open letter at the request of Bucer to Charles V in 1543 , <unk> <unk> ad Caesarem , defending the reformed faith . This was followed by an open letter to the pope ( <unk> <unk> Pauli III ) in 1544 , in which Calvin admonished Paul III for depriving the reformers of any prospect of rapprochement . The pope proceeded to open the Council of Trent , which resulted in decrees against the reformers . Calvin refuted the decrees by producing the Acta <unk> <unk> cum <unk> in 1547 . When Charles tried to find a compromise solution with the Augsburg Interim , Bucer and Bullinger urged Calvin to respond . He wrote the treatise , Vera Christianae <unk> et Ecclesiae <unk> ratio in 1549 , in which he described the doctrines that should be upheld , including justification by faith . 
 Calvin provided many of the foundational documents for reformed churches , including documents on the catechism , the liturgy , and church governance . He also produced several confessions of faith in order to unite the churches . In 1559 , he drafted the French confession of faith , the Gallic Confession , and the synod in Paris accepted it with few changes . The Belgic Confession of 1561 , a Dutch confession of faith , was partly based on the Gallic Confession . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the deaths of Calvin and his successor , Beza , the Geneva city council gradually gained control over areas of life that were previously in the ecclesiastical domain . Increasing secularisation was accompanied by the decline of the church . Even the Geneva académie was eclipsed by universities in Leiden and Heidelberg , which became the new strongholds of Calvin 's ideas , first identified as " Calvinism " by Joachim Westphal in 1552 . By 1585 , Geneva , once the wellspring of the reform movement , had become merely its symbol . However , Calvin had always warned against describing him as an " idol " and Geneva as a new " Jerusalem " . He encouraged people to adapt to the environments in which they found themselves . Even during his polemical exchange with Westphal , he advised a group of French @-@ speaking refugees , who had settled in Wesel , Germany , to integrate with the local Lutheran churches . Despite his differences with the Lutherans , he did not deny that they were members of the true Church . Calvin 's recognition of the need to adapt to local conditions became an important characteristic of the reformation movement as it spread across Europe . 
 Due to Calvin 's missionary work in France , his programme of reform eventually reached the French @-@ speaking provinces of the Netherlands . Calvinism was adopted in the Electorate of the Palatinate under Frederick III , which led to the formulation of the Heidelberg Catechism in 1563 . This and the Belgic Confession were adopted as confessional standards in the first synod of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1571 . Several leading divines , either Calvinist or those sympathetic to Calvinism , settled in England ( Martin Bucer , Peter Martyr , and Jan Laski ) and Scotland ( John Knox ) . During the English Civil War , the Calvinistic Puritans produced the Westminster Confession , which became the confessional standard for Presbyterians in the English @-@ speaking world . As the Ottoman Empire did not force Muslim conversion on its conquered western territories , reformed ideas were quickly adopted in the two @-@ thirds of Hungary they occupied ( the Habsburg @-@ ruled third part of Hungary remained Catholic ) . A Reformed Constitutional Synod was held in 1567 in Debrecen , the main hub of Hungarian Calvinism , where the Second Helvetic Confession was adopted as the official confession of Hungarian Calvinists . Having established itself in Europe , the movement continued to spread to other parts of the world including North America , South Africa , and Korea . 
 Calvin did not live to see the foundation of his work grow into an international movement ; but his death allowed his ideas to break out of their city of origin , to succeed far beyond their borders , and to establish their own distinct character . 
 Calvin is recognized as a <unk> of the Church in Lutheran churches , and as a saint in the Church of England , commemorated on 26 May , and on 28 May by the Episcopal Church ( USA ) . 
 = Domenico Selvo = 
 Domenico Selvo ( died 1087 ) was the 31st Doge of Venice , serving from 1071 to 1084 . During his reign as Doge , his domestic policies , the alliances that he forged , and the battles that the Venetian military won and lost laid the foundations for much of the subsequent foreign and domestic policy of the Republic of Venice . He avoided confrontations with the Byzantine Empire , the Holy Roman Empire , and the Roman Catholic Church at a time in European history when conflict threatened to upset the balance of power . At the same time , he forged new agreements with the major nations that would set up a long period of prosperity for the Republic of Venice . Through his military alliance with the Byzantine Empire , Emperor Alexios I Komnenos awarded Venice economic favors with the declaration of a Golden Bull that would allow for the development of the republic 's international trade over the next few centuries . 
 Within the city itself , he supervised a longer period of the construction of the modern St Mark 's Basilica than any other Doge . The basilica 's complex architecture and expensive decorations stand as a testament to the prosperity of Venetian traders during this period . The essentially democratic way in which he not only was elected but also removed from power was part of an important transition of Venetian political philosophy . The overthrow of his rule in 1084 was one of many forced abdications in the early history of the republic that further blurred the lines between the powers of the Doge , the common electorate , and the nobility . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beginning with the reign of Pietro II Candiano in 932 , Venice saw a string of inept leaders such as Pietro III Candiano , Pietro IV Candiano , and <unk> <unk> . The reputed arrogance and ambition of these Doges caused the deterioration of the relationship with the Holy Roman Empire in the west , the stagnancy of the relationship with the Byzantine Empire in the east , and discord at home in the Republic . However , in 991 , Pietro II Orseolo became the Doge and spent his reign pushing the boundaries of the Republic further east down the western coast of the Balkan Peninsula with his conquests in Dalmatia in 1000 . This strengthened the commercial bonds with the empires of the east , Sicily , Northern Africa , and the Holy Roman Empire , and put an end to the infighting among the citizens of Venice . Pietro II 's negotiations with Byzantine Emperor Basil II to decrease tariffs on Venetian @-@ produced goods helped foster a new age of prosperity in the Republic as Venetian merchants could undercut the competition in the international markets of the Byzantine Empire . Similarly , Pietro II had success developing a new relationship with Holy Roman Emperor Otto III , who displayed his friendship to him by restoring previously seized lands to Venice , opening up routes of free trade between the two states , and exempting all Venetians from taxes in the Holy Roman Empire . 
 As the power and reputation of Pietro II grew , the Venetian people began to wonder if he was secretly planning to establish a hereditary monarchy . Their fears were confirmed when his son , Otto Orseolo ( named after Otto III ) , assumed the title of Doge upon Pietro II 's death in 1009 , thereby becoming the youngest Doge in Venetian history at the age of 16 . Scandal marked much of Otto 's reign as he showed a clear inclination toward nepotism by elevating several relatives to positions of power . In 1026 , he was deposed by his enemies and exiled to Constantinople , but his successor , Pietro <unk> , had such difficulty in attempting to unite the city that it seemed infighting would once again seize Venice . 
 In 1032 , <unk> himself was deposed by those who wished to restore power to Otto Orseolo , but the former Doge lay dying in Constantinople and was unable to return from exile . Domenico Orseolo , a younger brother of Otto and a rather unpopular figure in Venice , attempted to seize the throne without waiting for the formality of an election , but as soon as he tried this , his many enemies , including those who pushed for the reinstatement of Otto , grew outraged that an Orseolo would assume the throne simply because he was the son of Pietro II . The power of the Doge was severely checked , and Domenico Flabanico , a successful merchant , was called by the people to the position of Doge . During his 11 @-@ year reign Flabanico enacted several key reforms that would restrict the power of future Doges , including a law forbidding the election of a son of a Doge . 
 Doge Domenico Contarini ( 1043 – 1071 ) had a relatively uneventful reign , healing the rift between the Doge and his subjects and regaining territory that had been lost in the east to the Kingdom of Croatia in the years following the deposition of Otto Orseolo . However , one fact remained : based on their actions in the first half of the 11th century , the majority of the people of Venice were clearly not in favor of having a royal hereditary class . This reality , coupled with the fresh memories of power @-@ hungry Doges , set the stage for Domenico Selvo . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Life before <unk> = = = 
 What little is known of Selvo 's past is based mostly on accounts of his reputation when he entered his <unk> . Details of his family origins and even the year of his birth are unknown , but it can be assumed that he was a Venetian noble because , with the rare exception of Domenico Flabanico , only members of this class were elected to the position of Doge at this point in the Republic 's history . Selvo supposedly belonged to a family in the patrician class from the <unk> of <unk> who were allegedly of ancient Roman origin , possibly from one of the tribunes . He had also apparently been an ambassador to Holy Roman Emperor Henry III and he was certainly ducal counselor to Domenico Contarini prior to his election as Doge . Being connected to the relatively popular Doge might have been one of the causes for his own apparent initial popularity . 
 = = = Election as Doge = = = 
 Selvo is notable for being the first Doge in the history of Venice whose election was recorded by an eyewitness , a parish priest of the church of San Michele <unk> by the name of Domenico Tino . The account gives historians a valuable glimpse of the power of the popular will of the Venetian people . Over the previous two centuries , the rule of quasi @-@ tyrannies had plagued the popular belief that Venetians held democratic control over their leaders . The events of Selvo 's election occurred in the spring of 1071 , when the nearly thirty @-@ year reign of Doge Domenico Contarini came to an end upon his death . 
 According to Tino 's account , on the day of the election , Selvo was attending mass for the funeral of the late Doge at the new monastery church of San Nicolò built under Domenico Contarini on Lido , an island in the Venetian Lagoon . The location was ideal for the funeral of a Doge not only because St Mark 's Basilica was under construction at the time , but the new church was also spacious enough to hold a fairly large number of people . The location also proved ideal for the election of a new Doge for the very same reasons . 
 After the funeral , a large crowd assembled in their gondolas and armed galleys . Domenico Tino says " an innumerable multitude of people , virtually all Venice " was there to voice their opinion on the selection of a new Doge . After the bishop of Venice asked " who would be worthy of his nation , " the crowds chanted , " <unk> <unk> <unk> et laudamus " ( We want Domenico Selvo and we praise him ) . The people , according to the account , had clearly spoken , and with these cries , the election was over . A group of more distinguished citizens then lifted the Doge @-@ elect above the roaring crowd , and he was transported as such back to the city . Barefoot , in accordance with tradition , Selvo was led into St Mark 's Basilica where , amidst the construction materials and scaffolding , he prayed to God , received his staff of office , heard the oaths of fidelity from his subjects , and was legally sworn in as the 31st Doge of Venice . 
 = = = Peace and prosperity ( 1071 – 1080 ) = = = 
 During the first decade of his rule , Selvo 's policies were largely a continuation of those of Domenico Contarini . There were few armed conflicts at home or abroad , and the Doge enjoyed a period of popularity due to the prosperous economic conditions . The relations with the Holy Roman Empire were gradually strengthened to a level unknown since the reign of the last Orseolo through relatively free trade and the good relationship that Selvo maintained with Emperor Henry IV . The importance of the economic alliance between the two nations became increasingly crucial when the historically shared power of the Holy Roman Emperor and the Pope was challenged by the Investiture Controversy between Henry IV and Pope Gregory VII . Selvo had to walk an extremely tight line of competing priorities . On the one hand , he wanted to maintain the trade agreement Venice had with the lands occupied by Henry IV , but on the other hand , Venetians were religiously loyal to Roman Catholicism as opposed to the Eastern Orthodoxy . At the height of the controversy , Pope Gregory VII privately threatened to excommunicate Selvo and put an interdict on the Venetian Republic , but Selvo was able to narrowly escape this by diplomatically asserting Venice 's religious power as the reputed holders of the remains of St Mark . 
 In the east , Selvo not only maintained good trade relations with the Byzantine Empire , but also married into their royal family to consolidate the alliance that had existed for many years between the two nations . In 1075 , Selvo married Teodora Ducas , daughter of Constantine X and sister of the reigning emperor , Michael VII . Though Venetians , especially the nobles , were wary of the pageantry that accompanied the marriage and the royal bride , the strengthened alliance meant even greater mobility for Venetian merchants in the east . Though the popularity of the new <unk> was not great , Selvo was the hero of the merchant class that had had even greater political sway since the depositions of the <unk> . 
 = = = Victory ( 1081 – 1083 ) = = = 
 Despite the relative peace of the early years of Selvo 's reign , the forces that would eventually lead to his deposition had already swung into action . In southern Italy , the Duke of Apulia and Calabria , Robert Guiscard , had spent the majority of his reign consolidating Norman power along the heel and toe of lo <unk> by expelling the Byzantine armies . Guiscard was pushing north toward the Papal States ( to which the Duchy of Apulia and Calabria was allied ) , and was threatening Byzantine control of cities along the Ionian and Adriatic seas . In May 1081 , Guiscard led his army and navy across the sea to lay siege to the port city of Durazzo , as it was one end of the famous Via Egnatia , a direct route to the Byzantine capital of Constantinople . Alexios I Komnenos , the newly crowned Byzantine Emperor , dispatched an urgent message to Selvo asking for the mobilization of the Venetian fleet in defense of Durazzo in return for great rewards . The Doge wasted no time in setting sail for the besieged city in charge of his fleet of 14 warships and 45 other vessels . Selvo was motivated not only by his familial ties and the promise of reward , but also the realization that Norman control over the Strait of Otranto would be just as great of a threat to Venetian power in the region as it would be to their ally in the east . 
 When Selvo approached the city , Guiscard 's ships had already anchored in the harbor at Durazzo . Though the battle was fierce , superior tactics by the skilled Venetian fleet overpowered the inexperienced Normans who were mostly used to land battles . The battered fleet led by Guiscard retreated into the harbor after losing many ships . Victorious at sea , Selvo left the fleet under the command of his son and returned to Venice a hero . Because of the help given to the Byzantine Empire , the Republic of Venice was awarded a Golden Bull : a decree by Emperor Alexios I Komnenos granting Venice many privileges , including a tax exemption for Venetian merchants , that would be crucial for the future economic and political expansion of Venice in the eastern Mediterranean . 
 The defeat off the coast of Durazzo , though devastating to Guiscard 's fleet , had inflicted little damage to his army as the majority of it had disembarked before the battle in preparation of the siege of Durazzo . In the coming months , Guiscard would regroup his forces and defeat a large Byzantine army led by Alexios I himself . In 1082 , Guiscard took the city of Durazzo , and as the Venetian sailors were forced out of the city and their ships vacated the harbor of Durazzo , the first victory by Venice against the Norman fleet appeared just a temporary setback for the Normans . Due to the new trade privileges and the fact that virtually no damage was inflicted on the Venetians during this siege , Selvo remained very popular in Venice . Meanwhile , Guiscard advanced rapidly across the Balkan Peninsula , but his march was halted by an urgent dispatch and a call for help from his greatest ally , Pope Gregory VII . Guiscard responded by returning to Italy and marching on Rome to temporarily expel Henry IV , but in the process , he lost almost all the territories he had gained in the Balkans . Knowing that Guiscard was gone , in 1083 , Selvo sent the Venetian fleet to recapture both Durazzo and the island of Corfu to the south . 
 = = = Defeat and deposition ( 1084 ) = = = 
 In 1084 , Guiscard returned to the Balkans and planned a new offensive against Corfu , where a combined Greek @-@ Venetian fleet , commanded by Selvo , awaited his arrival . When the Normans approached the island , the combined fleets dealt Guiscard an even greater defeat than he had received in the naval battle at Durazzo . Guiscard ordered another attack three days later , but the results were still more disastrous for the Normans . Selvo was completely convinced of his fleet 's victory and sent all damaged ships north to Venice for repairs , to free them for other uses , and to report of their victory . The Doge then retired with the remaining ships to the Albanian coast to await the departure of the Normans . Acting on the Doge 's belief that a third attack would be unlikely and that the presence of a slightly depleted Venetian fleet meant greater odds for victory , Guiscard summoned every floating vessel he could find and led the Normans into a surprise attack . His strategy , though perhaps risky , was ultimately well @-@ calculated as it caused mass confusion among the Venetians , who were overwhelmed on all flanks , while the Greeks fled what they assumed to be a losing battle . Selvo barely managed to retreat with the remainder of his fleet , but not before 3 @,@ 000 Venetians died and another 2 @,@ 500 were taken prisoner . The Venetians also lost 9 great galleys , the largest and most heavily armed ships in their war fleet . 
 When the battered fleet returned to Venice , news of the defeat spread throughout the city to mixed reactions . Though some were willing to forgive the defeat considering the circumstances , many others needed someone to blame for the loss that was considerable not only in human and material terms , but also symbolically . The people of Venice had been humiliated by an upstart nation with practically no naval experience . Though Guiscard would die the next year and the Norman threat would quickly disappear , a scapegoat was needed at that moment . A faction of influential Venetians , possibly led by Vitale Faliero based on later writings , led a popular revolt to depose Selvo , and in December 1084 they succeeded . Selvo apparently did not make a great effort to defend himself and was sent off to a monastery . He died three years later in 1087 , and was buried in the <unk> of St. Mark 's Basilica . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Selvo was deposed , it took several years for Venice to recover from the defeat at Corfu and for the Venetians to fully realize the immediate impact of his actions as Doge . When Venice provided military aid to the Byzantine Empire , they were awarded a Golden Bull by Emperor Alexios I that would provide the Venetians a great economic and strategic advantage throughout the eastern empire for centuries . According to the terms of the decree , annual grants were awarded to all the churches in Venice ( including a special gift to the coffers of St Mark 's ) , the Republic was granted whole sections of the Golden Horn in Constantinople , and Venetian merchants were given a full exemption from all taxes and duties throughout the territories of the Byzantine Empire . Not only did this aid the rapid economic growth of Venice in the next few centuries by giving Venetian goods a significant price advantage over other foreign goods , but it initiated a long period of artistic , cultural , and military relationships between Venice and Byzantium . This combination of eastern and western cultural influences made Venice a symbolic gateway between the east and the west in Southern Europe . 
 At the beginning of Selvo 's rule , he took over responsibility for the third construction of St. Mark 's Basilica . This final and most famous version of the church , whose construction was begun by Domenico Contarini and finished by Vitale Faliero in 1094 , remains an important symbol of the long periods of medieval Venetian wealth and power . The church is also a monument to the great Byzantine influence on Venetian art and culture throughout its history , but particularly in the 11th century . Though Selvo did not oversee the beginning or completion of St Mark 's Basilica , his rule covered a longer period of its construction than the other two Doges who oversaw the project . The Doge decreed that all Venetian merchants returning from the east had to bring back marbles or fine carvings to decorate St Mark 's . The first mosaics were started in the basilica under the supervision of Selvo . 
 By gaining power through a vote of confidence from the people and then willingly surrendering power , Selvo , like many other Doges who underwent similar transitions , left a long @-@ term impact on the succession process that would eventually become a model for peaceful , anti @-@ nepotistic transitions of power in a classical republic . Although his deposition did not immediately change the system , it was one of many important changes of power in a society that was in the process of moving away from a monarchy and toward a government led by an elected official . Following the battles at Corfu , Selvo was seen by many as inept and incapable of handling the duties that a Doge must perform . His apparent squandering of nearly the entire fleet coupled with a decade @-@ long distrust for his royal wife caused Selvo to become unpopular in Venice . By responding to the will of the people , Selvo helped shape a society that would eventually create a complicated system to check the power of its most influential members , create cooperative governmental branches that checked each other 's power , and fuse the nation into a classical republic . 
 = Early life and career of Gene Roddenberry = 
 Eugene Wesley " Gene " Roddenberry ( August 19 , 1921 – October 24 , 1991 ) was an American television screenwriter , producer and futurist best remembered for creating the original Star Trek television series . He was born in El Paso , Texas , but grew up in Los Angeles , California where his father worked as a police officer . While at school , the young Roddenberry majored in police science and became interested in aeronautical engineering . 
 He obtained a pilot 's license through the Civilian Pilot Training Program . Following his graduation , he signed up for the United States Army Air Corps and he enlisted after the attack on Pearl Harbor . He was commissioned on August 5 , 1942 , and was posted to the Pacific Theater of Operations where he joined the 394th Bomb Squadron , 5th Bombardment Group , of the Thirteenth Air Force . He flew Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress in an estimated 89 combat missions . After being rotated back to the United States he was promoted to Captain and became an air crash investigator . During his military career , he was involved in two plane crashes and was awarded both the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 Once a civilian , he began to fly long @-@ haul routes for Pan American World Airways . He was involved in a further crash in June 1947 , where the Clipper Eclipse crashed in the Syrian desert . After pulling injured passengers out of the burning plane , he led the party which sought help . After a further incident , he resigned from Pan @-@ Am , seeking to write for television instead . However , he joined the Los Angeles Police Department , initially in the traffic division but transferred to the newspaper unit where he worked with Chief William H. Parker as a speech writer . He landed the role of technical adviser for a television version of Mr. District Attorney , which led to him writing scripts for the series under the pseudonym of " Robert Wesley " . This led to a series of collaborations with Ziv Television Programs , and he resigned from the police on June 7 , 1956 , in order to take up a writing position on the staff of The West Point Story . 
 = = Early life ( 1921 – 1941 ) = = 
 Gene Roddenberry was born on August 19 , 1921 in his parents ' rented home in El Paso , Texas , the first child of Eugene Edward Roddenberry and Caroline " Glen " ( née <unk> ) Roddenberry . He was named after his father and referred to as " Little " Gene . Roddenberry would later describe his father as " very intelligent " but a " very common man " . At the time of Gene 's birth , his father was working as a linesman , but shortly afterward he rode the rails to Los Angeles to seek better employment . He joined the Los Angeles Police Department as an emergency appointee on December 7 , 1922 . The following March he sent a message to his wife to tell her to come to Los Angeles with their son . Two months later , Gene Sr. passed the Civil Service test and was given a police commission . 
 The elder Roddenberry became a patrolman , and held that rank for the next twenty years . The family expanded with the birth of Robert Leon Roddenberry in 1924 , and Doris <unk> Roddenberry in 1925 . During this time , the <unk> bought their first home at <unk> Drew Street . During Gene 's early years , he was saved by a quick thinking milkman who noticed that the house was on fire . He pounded on the door until Glen awoke and rushed out of the house with the children in tow . Roddenberry 's father kept rabbits , and the children sold them outside the house . It was these animals that became the subject of Roddenberry 's first published work in his school 's twice @-@ yearly newspaper , The Ace . During his childhood , Roddenberry was interested in reading , especially pulp magazines , and was a fan of stories such as John Carter of Mars , Tarzan , and the Skylark series by E. E. Smith . 
 In 1933 , when Roddenberry was twelve years old , the family moved to <unk> Monte Vista in the shadow of Mount Washington , and he began attending Luther Burbank Junior High School . This was the house that Roddenberry would later describe as his childhood home . His father helped the boys obtain local jobs ; Gene worked as a newspaper delivery boy and as a gas station attendant on Saturdays , and after school . The young Roddenberry moved to Franklin High School during the middle years of the Great Depression . His father was relatively unaffected by the Great Depression because of his stable employment with the police department . The family distributed food to friends and family who were in need . Glen 's parents and her younger sister <unk> moved into the house for a time before finding other accommodation in Redondo Beach . During his time at Franklin , Roddenberry joined the Varsity Debate Team and was a member of the Authors Club under Mrs. Virginia Church . He graduated in 1939 . 
 He attended Los Angeles City College from 1939 onward . Although Roddenberry ranked in the ninetieth percentile on an intelligence test , and in the 99th percentile on a reading test administered as part of his college entrance examination , he elected to major in the police science curriculum ; as president of the school 's Police Club , he communicated with police liaison Stanley Sheldon . During his second year , he developed an interest in aeronautical engineering and obtained a pilot 's license through the United States Army Air Corps @-@ sponsored Civilian Pilot Training Program . He graduated from Los Angeles City College with an Associate of Arts degree in police science on June 26 , 1941 , becoming the first member of his family to earn a college degree . After graduating , he traveled to March Air Base and signed up for the Army Air Corps ; due to the lack of training spaces his entrance was delayed . For the remainder of the summer , he attended Peace Officer training at the University of California , Los Angeles as an Army cadet . 
 = = Military service and civil aviation ( 1941 – 1948 ) = = 
 In the days following the attack on Pearl Harbor , Roddenberry received a telegram with orders to attend Kelly Air Force Base , enlisting on December 18 , 1941 . Following the completion of boot camp , he was sent to Corsicana , Texas for pilot training by civilian instructors . He completed sixty hours of flight time there , including thirty @-@ two solo hours . In March 1942 , he moved to Goodfellow Field ( now Goodfellow Air Force Base ) in San Angelo , Texas for basic flight training where he flew a Vultee BT @-@ 13 Valiant . Roddenberry graduated on August 5 , and was commissioned as a second lieutenant . 
 His initial posting to the Pacific Theater was delayed by a month , during which he completed further training on the Cessna AT @-@ 17 Bobcat . By virtue of this additional training , and because Roddenberry 's height made it unlikely that he would be suitable for a combat fighter pilot , he was assigned to bombers . He received orders to report to Bellows Field , Oahu , to join the 394th Bomb Squadron , 5th Bombardment Group , of the Thirteenth Air Force . The squadron flew the Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress , which had previously been used by the 19th Bomb Group , and were en route to a maintenance overhaul when they had to flee due to the Japanese invasion of the Philippines . Roddenberry was assigned as Captain William Ripley 's co @-@ pilot for the flight that the squadron took to Christmas Island , and the following day to Canton Island . An additional flight on November 17 took the squadron to Nadi , Fiji , where they were expected to go on to the New Hebrides . Instead they were ordered to remain in Nadi to fly reconnaissance missions . 
 In January 1943 , the squadron was ordered to conduct bombing missions , alternating between bases in Espiritu Santo , Nadi , and Guadalcanal . These missions consisted of teams of four to eight planes , with no fighter support . It was during these flights that Roddenberry faced Japanese fighters for the first time . On August 2 , 1943 , while flying out of Espiritu Santo , Roddenberry was piloting a B @-@ 17 but realized the plane did not have enough speed to take off . He applied the brakes to stop the aircraft but they did not respond . The tail brake was applied but it also failed . The plane overshot the runway by 500 feet ( 150 m ) and impacted trees , crushing the nose , and starting a fire . Bombardier Sgt. John P. Kruger and navigator Lt. Talbert H. <unk> were both positioned in the nose and died on impact . While an official report absolved Roddenberry of any responsibility , there were those in the squadron who blamed him for the men 's deaths . Early in September 1943 , the squadron was rotated back to the United States . The crew was transported on an old Dutch freighter across the Pacific ; upon his arrival , and reunion with his wife , his picture was featured in the Los Angeles Times . 
 Roddenberry spent the remainder of his military career in the United States , and while he did not keep an ongoing record , he estimated that he had flown 89 combat missions . This number was disputed by the records of the Army Air Corps and other members of the 394th Bomber Squadron . For example , one pilot in the same bomb group as Roddenberry flew eighty missions , but took three times longer than Roddenberry had claimed to do so . In October , he was assigned to Fort Worth , Texas and then the 18th Replacement Wing at Salt Lake City . He was subsequently moved to the Office of Flight Safety based in Oakland , California . In February 1944 , he moved back to March Field and was promoted to Captain and subsequently flew all over the United States in his role as a plane crash investigator . During this time he was in another accident as a passenger on a military flight that crashed and caught fire . Roddenberry pulled three men to safety . During his military career , he was awarded the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 In March 1945 , he applied to the Civil Aeronautics Administration for a commercial pilot 's licence . He was subsequently certified to fly both single and multi @-@ engine aircraft between 225 and 1500 horsepower . Before being discharged from the Army Air Force in July 1945 , he began to fly for Pan American World Airways . He was based first in Miami , before moving to New York City for their long @-@ haul flights . He began to fly routes from New York to Johannesburg or Calcutta , the two longest Pan Am routes at the time . He and his wife Eileen lived in River Edge , New Jersey . He continued to pursue his dream of writing , and had a poem published in the Op @-@ Ed section of the New York Times on June 17 , 1943 . During his time with the airline , he took two extension courses at Columbia University in the spring of 1946 . 
 On June 18 , 1947 , he picked up the Clipper Eclipse in Karachi , India , for a flight to Istanbul with the designation Pan Am Flight 121 . Five hours into the flight , the number one engine developed a fault and was shut down . The plane was able to fly on three engines . However , they began to overheat , and the pilot descended to a lower altitude to allow the engines to cool . A second engine caught fire , and fire suppressant measures failed to extinguish it . While the pilot attempted to land the plane , Roddenberry went to the cabin to calm the passengers . He was certain at the time that he was going to die , as the engine fell from the wing , exposing fuel lines , causing the fire to spread . The plane descended rapidly . As he <unk> himself from a seat to calm a woman , it crashed in the Syrian Desert . Though he had two broken ribs , he began to evacuate passengers from the burning plane with the other crew . Roddenberry had to force the broken seatbelt of the Maharani of <unk> open so that she could leave the plane . He repeatedly re @-@ entered the plane to pull out more passengers ; some were burning and he used pillows to extinguish the flames . The wind turned , causing the fire to engulf the plane , and he was unable to make any further trips . Roddenberry took charge in the aftermath , and , after a group of local tribesmen proved to be of no help , he formed two teams to search for civilization . The team he led trekked four miles across the desert to the town of <unk> , where he telephoned the emergency landing strip at Deir ez @-@ Zor , some 38 miles ( 61 km ) away . In response , the Syrian Army dispatched planes with medical teams to the crash site . Roddenberry returned to the site to assist the survivors . Fourteen people died in the crash ; eleven passengers needed hospital treatment , eight were unharmed . 
 Two weeks later , the Syrian authorities allowed Roddenberry to return to the United States . This near @-@ death experience had increased his desire to have children , and Eileen became pregnant shortly after his return . While back in the U.S. , he testified at a Civil Aviation Authority inquiry in New York alongside two other surviving crew members . All three were commended for their work following the crash for : " devotion to duty , their calmness and efficiency in the difficult and hazardous experience . " The crash investigation questioned the maintenance of the plane 's engines , as issues with them had been identified on a previous flight . The <unk> ' first child , <unk> Anita , was born on April 4 , 1948 , and Eileen expressed concerns , following the crash , about raising the child alone . After the birth , Roddenberry continued to fly for Pan @-@ Am , but another incident , while flying out of La Guardia Airport , marked the end of his career as a pilot . On a particularly cold and snowy day , the controls froze during takeoff , almost causing the plane to stall . He resigned from Pan @-@ Am on May 15 , 1948 , and decided to pursue his dream of writing particularly for the new medium of television . 
 = = Police service and burgeoning writing career = = 
 On arriving back in Los Angeles , the Roddenberry family lived initially with Gene 's parents at 2710 Green Street , Temple City . He obtained employment as a sales manager with the Tri @-@ Vision Corporation in Alhambra , which sold stereo " 3 @-@ D " cameras . However , he realized that this would only be temporary and sought more permanent employment elsewhere . Roddenberry applied for a position with the Los Angeles Police Department on January 10 , 1949 , quitting Tri @-@ Vision the following day . He was enrolled in the department on February 1 and given badge number <unk> . His initial training was completed on March 16 , and he spent the following sixteen months in the traffic division . Roddenberry was subsequently transferred to the newspaper unit . His first job , in his new role as a writer , was to write press releases and teach traffic safety . Roddenberry 's father had worked with Deputy Chief William H. Parker , who was promoted to LAPD Chief on August 9 , 1950 , and Gene became friends with him . 
 As part of Parker 's modernization efforts , the newspaper unit became the " Public Information Division " with Captain Stanley Sheldon in charge . He and Gene had known each other since Roddenberry attended Los Angeles City College . Roddenberry became Parker 's speech writer , and wrote of the Chief 's professional philosophy in the in @-@ house magazine , The Beat , in September 1952 . He reputedly based the Star Trek character Spock on Parker 's rational and unemotional behavior . In this new office , he worked alongside Don <unk> , who would go on to create Fantasy Island , and write episodes for Star Trek such as " The Alternative Factor " . The Association for Professional Law Enforcement was founded on November 12 , 1952 , with Roddenberry as one of the founding members and spokesman . He said at the time that : " We are of the opinion that professional ethics and practical police work are completely compatible and we intend to meet together to promote this compatibility . " Following this , Roddenberry began a correspondence with Erle Stanley Gardner , creator of the Perry Mason novels . The duo would record audio letters and send them to each other . Gardner forwarded Roddenberry 's comments to Harry Steeger , who felt that he and Roddenberry had similar opinions on law enforcement . Gardner began to seek Roddenberry 's opinion of his work , including allowing him a preview of The Court of Last Resort . 
 Over time , Roddenberry sought to earn more money for his family . In 1951 , he requested permission to take a second job which he described as " of a dignified nature " ; it was as a freezer salesman for the Amana Corporation . He was turned down , but found another way to earn money . The Dragnet radio series and the 1951 television series sourced their stories from the LAPD . Roddenberry gathered stories from his colleagues on the force and wrote them up for submission to the show , splitting the $ 100 payment evenly if they sold . This extra income was substantial for the time , as he earned only $ 400 a month from the Department . The Roddenberry 's second child , Dawn Allison , was born on August 31 , 1953 . 
 Later that year , Captain Sheldon gave Roddenberry an additional position as technical adviser for a new television version of Mr. District Attorney . Having spent the intervening years dissecting any scripts he could get his hands on , and comparing them to the television output , Roddenberry advised the head of the studio 's story department that he could write scripts as good as the ones they were using . He submitted his first script on October 22 , 1953 , under his pseudonym " Robert Wesley " . It went into production as episode 9b , " Defense Plant Gambling " . On December 1 , he made a further request to the LAPD for a second job as a free @-@ lance writer and adviser . This time it was approved . He later said , during the production of the second season of Star Trek , that the pseudonym was used after a fortune cookie revealed a message saying : " A change of name will bring you fame . " 
 Roddenberry took his Sergeant 's exam in early 1954 passing on the first attempt . At the same time , he wrote a second script for Mr. District Attorney titled " Wife Killer " , for which he was paid $ 700 . During his six @-@ month probation as Sergeant , he became friends with Wilbur <unk> , who would later have the Klingon race named after him . He sold another script entitled " Police Academy " in July . The sales of the three scripts amounted to the equivalent of nearly fifty @-@ percent of his Sergeant 's yearly salary of $ 5 @,@ 000 . The following December , he began to write the script for his first work of science fiction , which was eventually called The Secret Defense of 117 . With Ricardo Montalbán as lead , it was aired two years later as part of an anthology package , with the screenplay again credited to Robert Wesley . This was his first collaboration with Ziv Television Programs . He submitted a science fiction script " The Transporter " on January 4 , 1955 which was not purchased , but sold several scripts through the rest of the year : " Court Escape " , " Patrol Boat " , and " Police Brutality " for Mr. District Attorney , and " Reformed Criminal " , " Human Bomb " , and " Mental Patient " for Ziv 's Highway Patrol . In early 1956 , he sold two @-@ story ideas for I Led Three Lives , and he found that it was becoming increasingly difficult to be a writer as well as a policeman . 
 Ziv offered Roddenberry a writing position for a series it was developing called The West Point Story . He informed Parker that he was intending to resign in order to join the writing staff . To his surprise , the Chief revealed that he had been intentionally connecting Roddenberry with television professionals for the past few years with the hope that one would offer him a permanent position so that he could pursue his dream of writing . On June 7 , 1956 , he resigned from the force to concentrate on his writing career . In his brief letter of resignation , Roddenberry wrote : " I find myself unable to support my family at present on anticipated police salary levels in a manner we consider necessary . Having spent slightly more than seven years on this job , during all of which fair treatment and enjoyable working conditions were received , this decision is made with considerable and genuine regret . " 
 = Milwaukee Airport Railroad Station = 
 The Milwaukee Airport Railroad Station is an Amtrak railway station which opened for service on January 18 , 2005 . It is located at 5601 South 6th Street , just south of Wisconsin Highway 119 , near the western edge of General Mitchell International Airport in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , United States . The facility accommodates travelers who use the Hiawatha Service between Chicago Union Station and the Milwaukee Intermodal Station , and sees fourteen daily arrivals , seven each from Milwaukee and Chicago . There is a shuttle from the station to the terminal of Mitchell Airport . 
 = = Service and facilities = = 
 The Milwaukee Airport Rail Station 's primary functions are to serve as an airport rail link for General Mitchell International Airport and to serve as an alternate to the downtown Milwaukee station for residents of the southern portions of the Milwaukee metropolitan area . The station is served only by the Amtrak Hiawatha Service , and sees fourteen daily arrivals , seven each from Milwaukee and Chicago Union Station . The station is the first stop en route to Chicago , with a travel time along the 8 @-@ mile ( 13 @-@ kilometer ) section taking 10 minutes . It is also the third stop en route to Milwaukee , with a travel time along the 78 @-@ mile ( 126 @-@ kilometer ) section taking one hour and 14 minutes . For 2008 , the station handled 149 @,@ 824 passengers . 
 The 1 @,@ 600 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 150 m2 ) station includes a Quik @-@ Trak ticket vending machine , restrooms , a seating area and covered walkways to both the drive @-@ up area and the boarding platform . As the station is unstaffed , all tickets from the station need to be pre @-@ paid , purchased from Quik @-@ Trak or on the train from a conductor . The station parking lot contains 300 spaces and costs $ 5 per day per vehicle . All revenue generated from parking fees is used to finance the station 's operating costs . Transport to and from the airport terminal is provided by the free parking shuttle buses operated by the airport . 
 = = History = = 
 The idea of opening an Amtrak station in the vicinity of Mitchell Airport is one that had been discussed since the mid @-@ 1970s . The justification for not building the station at the time was based on infrequent Amtrak service and relatively congestion @-@ free access to the airport from the south by road . By the late 1990s , a station at the airport was proposed as part of the Midwest Regional Rail Initiative . In June 2001 , the Wisconsin Department of Transportation authorized $ 100 @,@ 000 to start the preliminary design for the station , with an original opening slated for late @-@ 2003 . Although funding was authorized for preliminary work , funding for actual construction had not been secured . 
 How to fund construction of the station became an issue following objections from both airport and Milwaukee County officials . Although supported by both airport and local officials , they stated that financing a facility to transport persons primarily away from Milwaukee should not be done with local , but rather state and federal sources . As a result of this sentiment , Senator Herb Kohl requested $ 5 million for its construction as part of a federal transportation appropriations bill in July , only to see it reduced to $ 2 @.@ 5 million in the final bill in December . With an additional $ 4 million in funding secured by Kohl in February 2003 , combined with the $ 2 @.@ 5 million previously appropriated , construction of the $ 6 @.@ 5 million station could commence . 
 Groundbreaking for the facility occurred on June 28 , 2004 . Present at the ceremony was Governor Jim Doyle , Herb Kohl and state Transportation Secretary Frank <unk> . Included in its $ 6 @.@ 8 million budget was funds for both the construction of the station in addition to track improvements to reduce delays between Milwaukee and Chicago . State and local economic development officials saw its construction as an opportunity for travelers from Greater Chicago to use the station as a rail link to reach General Mitchell International Airport as an alternative for both Chicago 's Midway and O 'Hare airports . The station opened for service on January 18 , 2005 , as a regular stop along Amtrak 's Hiawatha Service . At the time of its opening , this became only the fourth Amtrak station to have direct service to an airport after Baltimore , Newark and Burbank . In January 2006 , the station was awarded an Urban Design Award from Milwaukee mayor Tom Barrett for its design as a " Prairie @-@ style transportation symbol . " 
 In 2009 , the Wisconsin Department of Transportation proposed adding 400 feet ( 120 m ) to the southern end of the existing 400 @-@ foot ( 120 m ) platform . The station was designed for trains carrying only four coach cars ; however , service has since been expanded to five cars with a sixth being proposed for the future . A six @-@ car train is nearly 700 feet ( 210 m ) long , thus the additional platform space is necessary to accommodate the increased train length for boarding and <unk> passengers . 
 = Jeremy Lin = 
 Jeremy Shu @-@ How Lin ( born August 23 , 1988 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Brooklyn Nets of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He unexpectedly led a winning turnaround with the New York Knicks in 2012 , which generated a global following known as " Linsanity " . 
 Lin grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area , and he earned Northern California player of the year honors as a senior in high school . After receiving no athletic scholarship offers , he attended Harvard University , where he was a three @-@ time all @-@ conference player in the Ivy League . Undrafted out of college , Lin reached a partially guaranteed contract deal in 2010 with his hometown Golden State Warriors . He seldom played in his rookie season and was assigned to the NBA Development League ( D @-@ League ) three times . He was waived by the Warriors and the Houston Rockets the following preseason before joining the New York Knicks early in the 2011 – 12 season . Lin continued to be played sparingly and again spent time in the D @-@ League . In February 2012 , he led a winning streak by New York while being promoted to the starting lineup . In the summer of 2012 , Lin signed a three @-@ year contract with the Rockets , for whom he played two seasons before the Los Angeles Lakers acquired him in a trade . He played one season with the Lakers before signing with the Charlotte Hornets . He signed with Brooklyn the following season . 
 Lin is one of the few Asian Americans in NBA history , and the first American of Chinese or Taiwanese descent to play in the league . He is also known for his public expression of his Christianity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lin was born in Los Angeles County in the city of Torrance . He was raised in a Christian family in the San Francisco Bay Area city of Palo Alto . 
 His parents , Lin Gie @-@ Ming and Shirley Lin , emigrated from Taiwan to the United States in the mid @-@ 1970s , settling first in Virginia before moving to Indiana , where they both attended universities . They are dual nationals of Taiwan and the U.S. Lin 's paternal family comes from <unk> , Changhua , Taiwan , while his maternal grandmother emigrated to Taiwan in the late 1940s from <unk> , Zhejiang , in mainland China . 
 Lin 's parents are both 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) tall . His maternal grandmother 's family was tall , and her father was over 6 feet 0 inches ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) . Lin has an older brother , Josh , and a younger brother , Joseph . Gie @-@ Ming taught his sons to play basketball at the local YMCA . Shirley helped form a National Junior Basketball program in Palo Alto where Lin played . She worked with coaches to ensure his playing did not affect academics . She was criticized by her friends for letting Lin play so much basketball , but let him play the game he enjoyed . 
 = = High school career = = 
 In his senior year in 2005 – 2006 , Lin captained Palo Alto High School to a 32 – 1 record and upset nationally ranked Mater Dei , 51 – 47 , for the California Interscholastic Federation ( CIF ) Division II state title . He was named first @-@ team All @-@ State and Northern California Division II Player of the Year , ending his senior year averaging 15 @.@ 1 points , 7 @.@ 1 assists , 6 @.@ 2 rebounds and 5 @.@ 0 steals . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Recruiting process = = = 
 Lin sent his résumé and a DVD of highlights of his high @-@ school basketball career to all the Ivy League schools , University of California , Berkeley , and his dream schools Stanford and University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) . The Pac @-@ 10 schools wanted him to walk @-@ on , rather than be actively recruited or offered a sports scholarship . Harvard and Brown were the only teams that guaranteed him a spot on their basketball teams , but Ivy League schools do not offer athletic scholarships . Rex Walters , University of San Francisco men 's basketball coach and a retired NBA player , said NCAA limits on coaches ' recruiting visits had an impact on Lin 's chances . " Most colleges start recruiting a guy in the first five minutes they see him because he runs really fast , jumps really high , does the quick , easy thing to evaluate , " Walters said . Lin added , " I just think in order for someone to understand my game , they have to watch me more than once , because I 'm not going to do anything that 's extra flashy or freakishly athletic . " 
 In July 2005 , then @-@ Harvard assistant coach Bill Holden saw that Lin was 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) , which fit the physical attributes he was seeking , and he had a 4 @.@ 2 grade point average in high school , which met Harvard 's academic standards . But Holden was initially unimpressed with Lin 's on @-@ court abilities , and told Lin 's high school basketball coach , Peter Diepenbrock , that Lin was a " Division III player " . Later that week , Holden saw Lin playing in a much more competitive game , driving to the basket at every opportunity with the " instincts of a killer " , and Lin became a top priority for him . Harvard coaches feared that Stanford , close to Lin 's home , would offer Lin a scholarship , but it did not , and Lin chose to attend Harvard . " I wasn 't sitting there saying all these Division I coaches were knuckleheads , " Diepenbrock said . " There were legitimate questions about Jeremy . " Joe Lacob , incoming Warriors ' owner and Stanford booster , said Stanford 's failure to recruit Lin " was really stupid . The kid was right across the street . [ If ] you can 't recognize that , you 've got a problem . " Kerry Keating , the UCLA assistant who offered Lin the opportunity to walk @-@ on , said in hindsight that Lin would probably have ended up starting at point guard for UCLA . 
 = = = Harvard = = = 
 A Harvard coach remembered Lin in his freshman season as " the [ physically ] weakest guy on the team " , but in his sophomore season ( 2007 – 08 ) , Lin averaged 12 @.@ 6 points and was named All @-@ Ivy League Second Team . By his junior year during the 2008 – 09 season , he was the only NCAA Division I men 's basketball player who ranked in the top ten in his conference for scoring ( 17 @.@ 8 ) , rebounding ( 5 @.@ 5 ) , assists ( 4 @.@ 3 ) , steals ( 2 @.@ 4 ) , blocked shots ( 0 @.@ 6 ) , field goal percentage ( 0 @.@ 502 ) , free throw percentage ( 0 @.@ 744 ) , and three @-@ point shot percentage ( 0 @.@ 400 ) , and was a consensus selection for All @-@ Ivy League First Team . He had 27 points , 8 assists , and 6 rebounds in an 82 – 70 win over the 17th @-@ ranked Boston College Eagles , three days after the Eagles defeated No. 1 North Carolina . 
 In his senior year ( 2009 – 10 ) , Lin averaged 16 @.@ 4 points , 4 @.@ 4 rebounds , 4 @.@ 5 assists , 2 @.@ 4 steals and 1 @.@ 1 blocks , and was again a unanimous selection for All @-@ Ivy League First Team . He was one of 30 midseason candidates for the John R. Wooden Award and one of 11 finalists for the Bob Cousy Award . He was also invited to the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament . Fran <unk> of ESPN picked Lin among the 12 most versatile players in college basketball . He gained national attention for his performance against the 12th @-@ ranked Connecticut Huskies , against whom he scored a career @-@ high tying 30 points and grabbed 9 rebounds on the road . After the game , Hall of Fame Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun said of Lin : " I 've seen a lot of teams come through here , and he could play for any of them . He 's got great , great composure on the court . He knows how to play . " 
 For the season , Harvard set numerous program records including wins ( 21 ) , non @-@ conference wins ( 11 ) , home wins ( 11 ) and road / neutral wins ( 10 ) . Lin finished his career as the first player in the history of the Ivy League to record at least 1 @,@ 450 points ( 1 @,@ 483 ) , 450 rebounds ( 487 ) , 400 assists ( 406 ) and 200 steals ( 225 ) . He graduated from Harvard in 2010 with a degree in economics and a 3 @.@ 1 grade @-@ point average . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2010 NBA Draft and Summer League = = = 
 At the Portsmouth Invitational , Lin first met sports agent Roger Montgomery and later gave him a commitment . To their disappointment , no team chose Lin in the 2010 NBA draft . The NBA had not drafted an Ivy League player since Jerome Allen of Penn in the second round in 1995 . The last Ivy League player to play in the NBA was Yale 's Chris Dudley in 2003 , while the last Harvard player was Ed Smith in 1954 . Eight teams had invited Lin to <unk> workouts . Diepenbrock said that NBA tryouts do not play five on five . Lin acknowledged that the workouts were " one on one or two on two or three on three , and that 's not where I excel . I 've never played basketball like that . " Scouts saw what The New York Times later described as " a smart passer with a flawed jump shot and a thin frame , who might not have the strength and athleticism to defend , create his own shot or finish at the rim in the N.B.A. " Lin joined the Dallas Mavericks for mini @-@ camp as well as their NBA Summer League team in Las Vegas . Donnie Nelson of the Mavericks was the only General Manager who offered him an invitation to play in the Summer League . " Donnie took care of me , " said Lin . " He has a different type of vision than most people do . " 
 In five Summer League games , while playing both guard positions , Lin averaged 9 @.@ 8 points , 3 @.@ 2 rebounds , 1 @.@ 8 assists , and 1 @.@ 2 steals in 18 @.@ 6 minutes per game and shot a team leading 54 @.@ 5 % from the floor . He outplayed first overall pick John Wall ; Lin scored 13 points to Wall 's 21 , but did so on 6 @-@ for @-@ 12 shooting in 28 minutes . Wall was 4 @-@ for @-@ 19 in 33 minutes . While Wall received the biggest cheer for any player during introductions , the crowd turned on Wall and was cheering for Lin by the end of the game . Lin was reluctant to play overseas without an NBA offer and only planned to do so for a year before finding a non basketball @-@ related job , but after the summer league received offers from the Mavericks , Los Angeles Lakers , Golden State Warriors , and an unnamed Eastern Conference team . 
 = = = Golden State Warriors ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = 
 On July 21 , 2010 , Lin signed a two @-@ year deal with his hometown Warriors , his favorite team growing up . Lin 's deal was partially guaranteed for 2010 – 11 , and the Warriors held a team option for the second season . The deal included a first @-@ year salary of close to $ 500 @,@ 000 with more than half of it guaranteed . Lin said the counteroffers from the three other teams were higher , but he wanted to play for the Warriors . Lin 's agent Roger Montgomery negotiated the deal . Lin also signed a three @-@ year guaranteed contract with Nike . His jersey was already on sale before his first NBA game . 
 The Warriors held a press conference for Lin after his signing , with national media in attendance . " It was surprising to see that ... for an undrafted rookie , " said then @-@ Warriors coach Keith Smart . The San Jose Mercury News wrote that Lin " had something of a cult following " after his signing . The San Francisco Bay Area , with its large Asian @-@ American population , celebrated his arrival . He became the first American of Chinese or Taiwanese descent to play in the NBA . Lin received the loudest ovation of the night in the Warriors ' home exhibition opener at Oracle Arena when he entered the game in the fourth quarter . The crowd had started chanting for him in the third quarter . " That really touched me . It 's something I 'll remember forever , " Lin said . During the first month of the season , Oracle Arena fans continued to root for Lin to play in the end of games and cheered every time he touched the ball . He drew cheers from the crowd on the road as well , with some writers attributing the attention to the unique story of a successful Asian @-@ American basketball player . Nevertheless , Lin played more relaxed on the road , where he felt less scrutiny and pressure to perform . 
 Lin acknowledged the expectations and warned , " I won 't be an All @-@ Star this year . " He was appreciative of the support , especially from the Asian @-@ American community , but he preferred to concentrate on his play without all the attention when he had not " proven anything to anybody " . Smart saw that Lin was skilled at getting to the paint , but needed to learn to pass because , he said , Lin " couldn 't shoot the ball at all " . The coach also noticed that the player always arrived early for practice and left late . Lin studied and rehearsed Steve Nash 's and other top point guards ' pick @-@ and @-@ roll plays . Frank Hughes of Sports Illustrated wrote that Lin spoke with the occasional " seeds of self @-@ doubt " , which he said was uncommon to hear in the NBA . Hughes also found it rare when Lin compared himself to the Phoenix Suns ' then @-@ backup point guard Goran Dragić . " Neither of us is a freak athlete , but we 're both effective and know how to play the game , " Lin said . Lin and Stephen Curry , the 2009 – 10 runner @-@ up Rookie of the Year , received more interview requests than any other Warrior . Team officials regularly denied requests for Lin to help him keep his focus . He was approached to be the subject of documentaries . Smart planned to take pressure off Lin since Lin had a tendency to be hard on himself and get frustrated , but the coach admitted that he once succumbed to the home crowd 's wishes and put Lin into a game in the wrong situation . 
 Lin received little playing time during the season with two dominant ball @-@ handling guards , Curry and Monta Ellis , starring for the Warriors . He initially competed with Charlie Bell and Reggie Williams , and later Acie Law , for playing time at backup point guard . Lin started the regular season on the Warriors ' inactive list , but made his NBA debut the next game during the Warriors ' Asian Heritage Night . He received a standing ovation when he entered the game in the final minutes . In the next game against the Los Angeles Lakers , Lin scored his first NBA basket , had three assists , and recorded four steals . He played 11 of his 16 minutes in the third quarter and committed five fouls but played a role in a 12 – 1 run by the Warriors in a 107 – 83 loss to the defending NBA champions . Lakers ' guard Derek Fisher praised Lin for his energy and aggressiveness . At Toronto on November 8 , the Raptors held Asian Heritage Night to coincide with Lin 's visit with the Warriors . Over 20 members of Toronto 's Chinese media covered the game . In an 89 – 117 road loss to the Lakers , Lin scored a ( then ) career @-@ high 13 points in 18 minutes after scoring only seven total points in his first six games . 
 Three times during the season , Lin was assigned to the Warriors ' D @-@ League affiliate , the Reno Bighorns . Each time , he was later recalled by the Warriors . He competed in the NBA D @-@ League Showcase and was named to the All @-@ NBA D @-@ League Showcase First Team on January 14 , 2011 . Lin helped lead the Bighorns to a 2 – 0 record at the Showcase with averages of 21 @.@ 5 points , 6 @.@ 0 rebounds , 5 @.@ 5 assists and 3 @.@ 5 steals . Lin posted a season @-@ high 27 points with the Bighorns on March 18 . In 20 games he averaged 18 points , 5 @.@ 8 rebounds and 4 @.@ 4 assists with Reno . Lin initially felt he was not good enough to play in the NBA , but he later realized he was learning and getting playing time in the D @-@ League that he would not have received with the Warriors . Lin credited Bighorns coach Eric Musselman with " helping him regain [ his ] swagger " . Musselman recalled that Lin was a good scorer but was not yet skilled at " using the whole floor " . He committed many offensive fouls , but Musselman believed Lin was as good as Gilbert Arenas in the dribble drive , an ability " you can 't teach " . The player continued to improve his pick @-@ and @-@ roll , how to handle double teams and traps , and improved his jump shot and , especially , his three pointer . Musselman also noticed that Lin , who as an NBA player received first @-@ class airplane tickets , gave them to his teammates . 
 The Warriors saw Lin as a potential backup for Curry . Lacob said the team received more than one trade offer for Lin while he was in the D @-@ League , but he was happy with Lin 's progress as an undrafted free agent . " He 's a minimum , inexpensive asset . You need to look at him as a developing asset . Is he going to be a superstar ? No . " He finished his rookie NBA season averaging 2 @.@ 6 points on 38 @.@ 9 percent shooting in 29 games . 
 = = = 2011 offseason = = = 
 Lin recovered from a patellar ligament injury to his knee during the 2011 NBA lockout . In September 2011 , Lin played a few games for the Chinese Basketball Association ( CBA ) club Dongguan Leopards at the ABA Club Championship in Guangzhou , China , where he was named the MVP of the tournament . Shanghai Sharks president and former NBA star Yao Ming also tried , unsuccessfully , to sign Lin for the upcoming CBA season ; Lin explained that as someone still under contract with the Golden State Warriors , he could not play in the CBA as the league would only admit NBA free agents . A few days before the lockout was lifted on November 26 , Lin had been close to signing with an undisclosed club in Italy . 
 Lin worked to improve his jump shot during the offseason by abandoning the shooting form he had used since the eighth grade . He also increased his strength , doubling the weight he could squat ( from 110 pounds ( 50 kg ) to 231 ( 105 ) ) and almost tripling the number of pull @-@ ups that he could do ( from 12 to 30 ) . He increased his body weight from 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) to 212 ( 96 ) — including 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 kg ) of muscle — added 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 cm ) to his standing vertical jump and 6 inches ( 15 cm ) to his running vertical jump , and improved his lateral quickness by 32 percent . Due to the lockout , he never got a chance to workout for new Warriors coach Mark Jackson . On the first day of training camp on December 9 , 2011 , the Warriors waived Lin . He was a favorite of Lacob , but the Warriors were freeing up salary cap space to make an offer to restricted free agent center DeAndre Jordan ; Lin was due to make almost $ 800 @,@ 000 that would have become fully guaranteed on February 10 , 2012 . The San Francisco Chronicle said Lin would have had trouble beating out rookie guard Charles Jenkins . 
 Lin was claimed off of waivers by the Houston Rockets on December 12 , 2011 , and played seven minutes , in two pre @-@ season games in Houston , but with Kyle Lowry , Goran Dragić and Jonny Flynn as point guards , all with guaranteed contracts , the Rockets waived Lin on December 24 , before the start of the season , to clear payroll to sign center Samuel <unk> . 
 = = = New York Knicks ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = 
 On December 27 , after an injury to guard Iman Shumpert , the New York Knicks claimed Lin off of waivers to be a backup behind Toney Douglas and Mike Bibby . Recently signed guard Baron Davis had also been injured , and was weeks away from being able to play . Because of the lockout , coaches had had little opportunity to see Lin 's play , and placed him fourth on the point guard depth chart . Lin stated that he was " competing for a backup spot " , and people saw him " as the 12th to 15th guy on the roster . It 's a numbers game , " yet he continued to arrive first at practice , and leave last , intensely studying game film , and working with coaches to improve his footwork and judgment . He made his season debut with the Knicks on the road against the Warriors , where he was warmly cheered in his return to Oracle Arena . In January , Lin was assigned to the Erie BayHawks of the D @-@ League , and on January 20 , he scored a triple @-@ double with 28 points , 11 rebounds , and 12 assists in the BayHawks ' 122 – 113 victory over the Maine Red Claws . Three days later , Lin was recalled by the Knicks , but was so fearful of being cut again that he asked a chaplain at a pregame prayer service to pray for him . If he were to be released again , Lin would consider playing in Europe , returning to the D @-@ League , or taking a non @-@ basketball job . 
 On January 28 , Davis postponed his Knicks debut due to an elbow infection and more back pain . Then New York considered releasing Lin before his contract became guaranteed on February 10 so they could sign a new player . However , after the Knicks squandered a fourth quarter lead in a February 3 loss to the Boston Celtics , coach Mike D 'Antoni decided to give Lin a chance to play , in " desperation " according to experts . " He got lucky because we were playing so bad , " said D 'Antoni . Lin had played only 55 minutes through the Knicks ' first 23 games , but he unexpectedly led a turnaround of an 8 – 15 team that had lost 11 of its last 13 games . 
 On February 4 , against the New Jersey Nets and All @-@ Star guard Deron Williams , Lin had 25 points , five rebounds , and seven assists — all career highs — in a 99 – 92 Knicks victory . Teammate Carmelo Anthony suggested to coach Mike D 'Antoni at halftime that Lin should play more in the second half . After the game , D 'Antoni said Lin had a point @-@ guard mentality and " a rhyme and a reason for what he is doing out there " . In the subsequent game against the Utah Jazz , Lin made his first career start playing without stars Anthony , who left the game due to injury , and Amar 'e Stoudemire , whose older brother had died . Lin had 28 points and eight assists in the Knicks ' 99 – 88 win . Stoudemire and Anthony missed the next three and seven games , respectively . D 'Antoni stated after the Jazz game that he intended to ride Lin " like freakin ' Secretariat " . Basketball trainer David Thorpe said in hindsight that such a statement of confidence so soon by a coach was " incredibly rare " , and likely gave Lin the confidence to continue to play aggressively despite making mistakes . 
 In a 107 – 93 win over the Washington Wizards , Lin played against John Wall and had 23 points and 10 assists , his first double @-@ double . On February 10 , Lin scored a new career @-@ high 38 points and had seven assists , leading the Knicks in their 92 – 85 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers . He outscored the Lakers ' Kobe Bryant , who had 34 points . On February 11 , Lin scored 20 points and had eight assists in a narrow 100 – 98 victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves . Lin was named the Eastern Conference Player of the Week after averaging 27 @.@ 3 points , 8 @.@ 3 assists and 2 @.@ 0 steals in those four starts with the Knicks going undefeated . 
 On February 14 , with less than a second remaining , Lin scored a game @-@ winning three @-@ pointer in a Knicks 90 – 87 win against the Toronto Raptors . The basket so amazed the Lakers , watching on TV , that veteran player Metta World Peace ran by reporters shouting " Linsanity ! Linsanity ! " and waving his hands above his head . Lin became the first NBA player to score at least 20 points and have seven assists in each of his first five starts . Lin scored 89 , 109 , and 136 points in his first three , four , and five career starts , respectively , all three of which are the most by any player since the merger between the American Basketball Association ( ABA ) and the NBA in 1976 – 77 . 
 In the following game against the Sacramento Kings , Lin recorded 13 assists and led the Knicks back to .500 . New York had a 7 – 0 record after Lin started receiving major playing time , 6 – 0 with him starting . The winning streak ended in an 89 – 85 loss to the New Orleans Hornets ; Lin scored 26 points but had nine turnovers . His 45 turnovers in his first seven career starts were the most since individual turnovers began being tracked in 1977 – 78 . 
 On February 19 in a 104 – 97 win against the Mavericks , Lin scored 28 points and tallied career highs with 14 assists and five steals . USA Today wrote , " No matter what Dallas threw at Lin – double @-@ teams , traps , blitzes , tall defenders ... smaller defenders ... stocky , thin – Lin found a way ... to a victory against the defending NBA champions . " By February 23 LeBron James and Dwyane Wade of the Miami Heat argued over who would guard Lin . He did not do as well against the Heat , going one for 11 from the field and committing eight turnovers . The eventual NBA champions focused their entire defense on Lin , an experience he described as " flattering — and terrifying ... I felt like they were all like hawks circling me and staring . " 
 In his 12 starts before the All @-@ Star break , Lin averaged 22 @.@ 5 points and 8 @.@ 7 assists , and New York had a 9 – 3 record . He played in the Rising Stars Challenge during NBA All @-@ Star Weekend . He was omitted from the original Rising Stars roster , but was added after his sudden rise to stardom . Some media outlets — including USA Today , Los Angeles Times , and CBSSports.com — stated that he deserved to play in the All @-@ Star Game . 
 The Knicks in March replaced D 'Antoni with Mike Woodson , who ran fewer pick @-@ and rolls and more isolation plays . Lin had excelled running pick @-@ and @-@ rolls under D 'Antoni . After the March 24 game against the Detroit Pistons he complained about a sore knee , and an MRI later revealed a small meniscus tear in the left knee . Lin opted to have knee surgery and missed the remainder of the regular season . He averaged 18 @.@ 5 points and 7 @.@ 6 assists during his 26 games as an everyday player . In the first 10 games , Lin averaged 24 @.@ 6 points and 9 @.@ 2 assists , shooting 49 @.@ 7 percent from the field but with 5 @.@ 6 turnovers . In the next seven games , he averaged 16 points and 7 @.@ 7 assists with 3 @.@ 9 turnovers . In the last nine games , Lin averaged 13 @.@ 6 points and 5 @.@ 9 assists and shot only 39 @.@ 1 percent while dealing with his then @-@ undisclosed knee injury . 
 Lin became a restricted free agent at the end of the season . The New York Times called Lin " [ the Knicks ' ] most popular player in a decade " , but his success over only 26 games left teams uncertain about his overall standing among the league 's point guards . Some still believed Lin was a bench player . 
 = = = Houston Rockets ( 2012 – 2014 ) = = = 
 During the 2012 offseason , the Knicks encouraged Lin to seek other offers , but he and the press expected that the team would re @-@ sign him given its need for a young guard , his good play , and worldwide popularity ; ESPN reported that the Knicks would match any other offer " up to $ 1 billion " . The Rockets offered a $ 28 @.@ 8 million contract over four years with the fourth year of that deal being at the team 's option , which put the true commitment at $ 19 @.@ 5 million . Woodson said the Knicks would match Houston 's offer and that Lin would be his starting point guard . The Rockets then offered a revised three @-@ year , $ 25 million deal , which Anthony called " ridiculous " . The Knicks did not match the deal , and Lin deduced the team 's decision when they signed Raymond Felton instead . The first two years of Houston 's offer paid $ 5 million and $ 5 @.@ 225 million , respectively , followed by $ 14 @.@ 8 million in the third year . The higher salary in the final year , known as a " poison pill " , was intended to discourage New York from matching the offer . Including luxury tax , the Knicks ' cost for Lin in 2014 – 15 was estimated at $ 43 million . Their failure to match the offer surprised observers , given the team 's history of high payrolls ; Lin would only have been the fourth @-@ highest @-@ paid <unk> . 
 Having already traded Kyle Lowry and lost Goran Dragić to free agency , the Rockets made Lin the center of both their preseason " A New Age " publicity campaign as well as their initial ads on Comcast SportsNet Houston . Coming off his " Linsanity " performance in New York , Houston coach Kevin McHale said the expectations of Lin were undue . McHale said the public believed Lin would " average 28 [ points ] and 11 [ assists ] " , but he had never played a whole 82 @-@ game season before . Shortly before their regular @-@ season opener in October , the Rockets acquired James Harden , who supplanted Lin as the face of the team . Throughout the season , though , Lin still placed pressure on himself to live up to the expectations from Linsanity . However , Harden was a ball @-@ dominant , pick @-@ and @-@ roll player like Lin , and McHale chose to have the offense run through the more @-@ proven Harden . The Rockets started the season with a 5 – 7 record and the youngest roster in the league . Lin was averaging 10 points and 6 @.@ 3 assists , but was struggling shooting 33 @.@ 3 percent and 22 @.@ 9 percent of his 3 @-@ pointers . He was handling the ball less than he did with the Knicks , with Harden often controlling the ball on pick @-@ and @-@ rolls with Lin on the wing . In the Rockets ' next game on November 23 , Lin faced the Knicks for the first time since leaving as a free agent . The Knicks entered at 8 – 2 with the best record in the league , but Houston won at home 131 – 103 as Lin contributed 13 points , seven rebounds and three assists . He shot 6 @-@ for @-@ 12 , making half of his shots for the first time in eight games , and breaking a personal five @-@ game drought without a 3 @-@ pointer . 
 Lin continued to struggle , and he began losing playing time to backup Toney Douglas . With Harden sitting out injured on December 10 , Lin scored 38 points in a 134 – 126 overtime loss to the San Antonio Spurs . The performance was reminiscent of his play during Linsanity . Lin shot 9 @-@ for @-@ 16 ( 56 @.@ 2 percent ) on his jump shots in the game ; entering the contest , he had shot just 26 @.@ 1 percent on jumpers , whereas he was 40 @.@ 2 percent a year earlier . Numbers through the season suggested that Harden and Lin were more productive individually with the other on the bench . " I 'll be my harshest critic but I 'll go ahead and say it : I 'm doing terrible , " Lin said before facing the Knicks in his first game back in New York . Houston won 109 – 96 , handing the Knicks their first home loss in 11 games . Lin had 22 points and nine assists . He was cheered in pregame introductions , but was booed after the game began . Three miles south in Chinatown , Lin fans packed restaurant and bars . 
 Lin did not play in the 2013 All @-@ Star Game , held in Houston , after finishing third in the voting behind Bryant and Chris Paul for the two starting guards of the Western Conference . He was selected instead to compete in the Skills Challenge during All @-@ Star Weekend . His scoring , shooting percentage , and 3 @-@ point percentage improved after the All @-@ Star break , and he finished with season averages of 13 @.@ 4 points and 6 @.@ 1 assists . Lin and center Ömer Aşık were the only Rockets to play in all 82 games . Houston qualified for the playoffs , but lost in the first round in six games to the No. 1 seed Oklahoma City Thunder . Lin suffered a bruised chest in Game 2 , which limited him in Game 3 and sidelined him for the two games after . He returned for the final game , coming off the bench for three points in 13 minutes . 
 In 2013 – 14 , Lin was replaced in the Rockets ' starting lineup by Patrick Beverley , and Lin became the second unit 's primary ball handler and scoring option as the team 's sixth man . Houston liked beginning games with Beverley 's defensive pressure , but also preferred increasing Lin 's playing time without Harden also on the court . Lin and Harden were both attacking players offensively , but each struggled defensively . In November , Lin established the highest two @-@ game scoring total of his career , 65 points , including season @-@ highs of 34 points and 11 assists along with a Rockets record @-@ tying nine three @-@ pointers in a start in place of an injured Harden . It was followed by a 21 @-@ point performance in a win at New York . He received a round of applause upon entering the game , though it was more subdued than in his first return against the Knicks . On November 27 , Lin sprained his right knee against the Atlanta Hawks , causing him to miss six games . He missed four additional games in December due to back spasms ; he started in his return on December 23 with both Harden and Beverley injured — Beverley was estimated to be out four to six weeks due to a fractured right hand . On February 1 , 2014 , Lin recorded 15 points , 11 rebounds and 10 assists — his first career triple @-@ double — in 29 minutes off the bench in a 106 – 92 home victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers . He was the first Rocket to notch a triple @-@ double off the bench since Cedric Maxwell in 1988 . However , he went into a shooting slump after the All @-@ Star break , and again experienced problems with his back . 
 He finished the season with 33 starts and averages of 12 @.@ 5 points and 4 @.@ 1 assists a game along with career highs in field goal percentage ( 44 @.@ 6 % ) , three @-@ point percentage ( 35 @.@ 8 % ) , and free throw percentage ( 82 @.@ 3 % ) . He shot 57 @.@ 8 percent off of drives during the season , exceeded only by LeBron James ( 63 @.@ 8 percent ) in the league . In the playoffs , Lin averaged 11 @.@ 3 points off the bench as Houston lost in six games to the Portland Trail Blazers . He scored 21 points in a Game 5 win that extended the Rockets season . During the offseason , the Rockets pursued Lin 's former Knicks teammate Anthony in free agency , and showed images outside of its arena of Anthony in a Houston jersey bearing Lin 's No. 7 . 
 = = = Los Angeles Lakers ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 On July 13 , 2014 , Lin was traded , along with a 2015 first and second round pick , to the Los Angeles Lakers in exchange for the rights to Sergei <unk> . The Rockets made the move to clear cap space in their attempt to sign free agent Chris Bosh . The Lakers owed Lin $ 15 million for 2014 – 15 , the final year of his contract , but only $ 8 @.@ 3 million counted against their salary cap . His role was undefined with the Lakers , who were just 21 – 61 in his only season with the team . Lin moved into the starting lineup late in the preseason after an injury to Ronnie Price , and he started the first 20 games of the season . However , he struggled in coach Byron Scott 's offense , which was based on the methodical player and ball movement of the Princeton offense , while Lin was most comfortable dominating the ball while attacking off the pick @-@ and @-@ roll as he did in New York and Houston . 
 After the team 's poor 5 – 15 start , Scott attempted to improve the Lakers ' poor defense by moving Lin to the bench in favor of the journeyman Price . Lin was disappointed in the demotion , calling it " one of the toughest situations I 've been in " . On January 23 , 2015 , Scott promoted rookie Jordan Clarkson to start over Price and chose not to play a healthy Lin in a blowout loss to San Antonio , which the Lakers trailed by as much as 23 while playing without Kobe Bryant . Lin had previously played in each game of the season , averaging 10 @.@ 5 points and 4 @.@ 5 assists in 43 games . It was the first time he was healthy and did not play since February 2 , 2012 , two days before he logged then @-@ career highs against New Jersey at the dawn of Linsanity . After Lin scored a season @-@ high 29 on March 22 in a win over Philadelphia , Scott returned him to the starting lineup . On March 24 , Lin and teammate Clarkson , who is part Filipino , became the first Asian Americans to start together in the backcourt in NBA history . Lin missed the last five games of the season due to an upper respiratory infection . 
 = = = Charlotte Hornets ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On July 9 , 2015 , Lin signed a two @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 3 million contract with the Charlotte Hornets , who used their bi @-@ annual exception in the deal . He had been open to re @-@ joining New York , but they were not interested , having drafted guard <unk> Grant to pair with veteran José Calderón at point guard . Lin was projected to back up Hornets point guard <unk> Walker , and coach Steve Clifford envisioned that the two pick @-@ and @-@ roll players would sometimes play together . 
 Lin made his debut for the Hornets in the team 's season opener against the Miami Heat on October 28 , scoring 17 points off the bench in a 104 – 94 loss . On December 17 , he scored a season @-@ high 35 points in a 109 – 99 overtime win over the Toronto Raptors . On March 21 , 2016 , he scored 15 of his 29 points in the fourth quarter to help Charlotte rally from a 30 – 7 deficit in the second quarter for a 91 – 88 comeback victory over San Antonio , snapping the Spurs ' six @-@ game winning streak . Charlotte was the first team to score seven points or fewer in the opening quarter and come back to win since 2008 . It was also the largest comeback surrendered by the Spurs in the Tim Duncan era , which began in 1997 . Lin was 11 @-@ of @-@ 18 from the field and hit all four three @-@ point attempts , including three in the fourth quarter , and provided the go @-@ ahead jumper with 48 seconds left . Lin 's first and only season with the Hornets came to an end after the Hornets were defeated by the Heat in the first round of the playoffs . 
 After declining his $ 2 @.@ 2 million player option for the 2016 – 17 season , Lin became an unrestricted free agent on July 1 , 2016 . 
 = = = Brooklyn Nets ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 7 , 2016 , Lin signed a multi @-@ year contract with the Brooklyn Nets . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = = Playoffs = = = = 
 = = International career = = 
 In addition to being a U.S. citizen , Lin is by descent through his parents a national of Taiwan ; Lin would qualify for a Taiwan passport although there is no record of him having done so . Lin has been invited to play for the Chinese Taipei men 's national basketball team in FIBA competitions . On July 28 , 2010 while in Taipei to play in Yao Ming 's charity game , Lin said he had not made a decision yet on whether he would represent Chinese Taipei ( the name used by Taiwan in international sporting competitions ) . In June 2011 , the Chinese Taipei Basketball Association ( <unk> ) included Lin in its preliminary squad of 24 players for the 2011 FIBA Asia Championship . The next month , however , the <unk> announced that Lin would not be included on their roster due to a knee injury . 
 Taiwanese media reported that Lin declined an offer from the People 's Republic of China to play in the same tournament ; however , the Chinese Basketball Management Center denied having ever approached him . 
 Lin was named to the USA Basketball Men 's Select Team to scrimmage against the 2012 USA Olympic team candidates , but he did not participate due to his restricted free agent status with the Knicks . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Apart from being a capable passer , Lin has established himself as a strong , fast @-@ paced offensive player who attacks the basket and excels at the pick @-@ and @-@ roll . He improved his outside shooting from early in his career , and became a threat from three @-@ point range . He has also been considered difficult to defend at times because of his ability to get to the free @-@ throw line . An admitted risk taker , he has been criticized for his tendency to commit turnovers , as well as his mediocre defense . 
 = = Racial issues = = 
 Sean Gregory of Time wrote of Lin 's zero Division I scholarship offers : " [ Lin ] was scrawny , but don 't doubt that a little racial profiling , intentional or otherwise , contributed to his <unk> . " Diepenbrock stated , " If [ Lin ] was African American or Caucasian , it might have been a different deal " ; he did not think Lin 's race affected his recruiting until later seeing 10 Division I coaches express interest in a black student who Diepenbrock assessed as " a nice junior college player " . Lin said : " I 'm not saying top @-@ 5 state automatically gets you offers , but I do think [ my ethnicity ] did affect the way coaches recruited me . I think if I were a different race , I would 've been treated differently . " Walters added , " People who don 't think stereotypes exist are crazy . If [ Lin 's ] white , he 's either a good shooter or heady . If he 's Asian , he 's good at math . We 're not taking him . " During Lin 's college career , fewer than 0 @.@ 5 % of men 's Division 1 basketball players were Asian @-@ American . 
 At Harvard , Lin was uncomfortable with the attention on his ethnicity as opposed to his performance . He regularly heard bigoted jeers at games such as " Wonton soup " , " Sweet and sour pork " , " Open your eyes ! " , " Go back to China " , " Orchestra is on the other side of campus , " or pseudo @-@ Chinese gibberish . Lin said this occurred at most if not all Ivy League gyms , but he did not react to it . " I expect it , I 'm used to it , it is what it is , " said Lin . The heckling came mostly from opposing fans and not as much from players . According to Harvard teammate Oliver McNally , a fellow Ivy League player once called Lin the ethnic slur chink . In January 2010 , Harvard played against Santa Clara University at the Leavey Center , just 15 miles from his hometown of Palo Alto , California . Playing to a capacity crowd that included droves of Asian Americans wanting to see his homecoming , his teammates told him , " It was like Hong Kong . " 
 Lin considers himself a basketball player more than just an Asian American . He understands that there have not been many Asians in the NBA . " Maybe I can help break the stereotype , " said Lin . " I feel like Asians in general don 't get the respect that we may deserve whether it comes to sports , basketball , or whatever it might be , " Lin said . Prior to the 2010 – 11 NBA season , Americans of Asian descent who played in the NBA included Wataru Misaka , Raymond Townsend , Corey Gaines , Rex Walters , and Robert Swift . " [ Lin 's ] carrying the hopes of an entire continent . I only had to carry the hopes of Little Rock , Arkansas . He 's accomplished a lot more than I have already , " said Derek Fisher , who had won five NBA championships with the Lakers , after his first game against Lin . Lin is setting an example for prospective Asian athletes in America who rarely see Asian @-@ Americans playing on their favorite teams . " I don 't look Japanese , " Walters said , referring to his mother 's ethnicity . " When they see [ Lin ] , it 's an Asian @-@ American . " 
 Based on comments he heard that his talents were " deceptive " , Lin stated in a 2013 60 Minutes interview that it was his " gut feeling " his ethnicity contributed to his being undrafted . NBA commissioner David Stern also believed Lin was not drafted due to discrimination . " I don 't know whether he was discriminated against because he was at Harvard . Or because he was Asian , " said Stern . Some fans and commentators wrote off his Warriors signing as a publicity stunt . Larry Riley , the team 's general manager , denied catering to the Bay Area 's large Asian population . He understood that some people would see it that way . " We evaluated him throughout summer league , " Riley said . " All that had to happen was for him to confirm what we already believed . " While the team created a campaign around him , Riley said it would not have been advisable if Lin was not a basketball player first . 
 On February 10 , 2012 , in the middle of Lin 's career game against the Lakers , Fox Sports columnist Jason Whitlock posted on Twitter , " Some lucky lady in NYC is gonna feel a couple inches of pain tonight , " a reference to Lin 's sexual prowess . Hyphen wrote that Whitlock " reinforced the insipid and insidious ' small Asian penis ' stereotype " . The Asian American Journalists Association demanded an apology . " I debased a feel @-@ good sports moment . For that , I 'm truly sorry , " apologized Whitlock . Boxer Floyd Mayweather , Jr. wrote on his Twitter page , " Jeremy Lin is a good player but all the hype is because he 's Asian . Black players do what he does every night and don 't get the same praise . " <unk> in response to Mayweather noted that " no one of any skin color in the history of basketball has done in their first four starts what Lin pulled off for the Knicks last week . " On February 15 , the MSG Network during game coverage showed a fan 's sign of Lin 's face above a fortune cookie with the words " The Knicks Good Fortune " , which some viewed as an ethnic stereotype . Sporting News wrote that the sign was " questionable " , while CBS News called it " distasteful " . Some Knicks teammates were criticized for bowing to Lin during games . On February 17 , ESPN used a racial slur on its mobile website in the headline " Chink in the Armor " after Lin had nine turnovers in New York 's loss to the Hornets . It was removed 35 minutes later , and ESPN apologized . The network fired the employee who posted the headline , and suspended ESPNews anchor Max <unk> for using the same reference earlier in the week . <unk> also apologized . Knicks radio announcer Spero Dedes also used the phrase on 1050 ESPN New York , but he was an employee of Madison Square Garden ( MSG ) and not ESPN . He apologized and was disciplined by MSG . Saturday Night Live satirized the ethnic puns being made about Lin , pointing out the difference in society 's reaction to racial jokes about Asian people versus racial jokes about black people . In the skit , three sports commentators were featured happily making jokes about Lin 's race , while a fourth drew contempt for making similar comments about black players . ESPN received emails suggesting that Lin was subjected to racial mockery in a manner that African @-@ Americans are not . Ben & Jerry 's created a frozen yogurt in honor of Lin named " Taste the Lin @-@ Sanity " . It contained lychee honey swirls and fortune cookie pieces . The company later replaced the fortune cookies with waffle cookies and apologized to anyone offended by their Lin @-@ Sanity flavor . J. A. Adande of ESPN.com wrote that the heightened ethnic sensitivity toward Asian Americans was " another way [ Lin 's ] impact resonates far beyond Madison Square Garden " . The <unk> released a set of guidelines to the media in response to what it termed as " factual inaccuracies about Lin 's background as well as an alarming number of references that rely on stereotypes about Asians or Asian Americans " . On November 14 , 2013 , ESPN SportsCenter anchor Jorge Andres apologized on @-@ air after commenting that Lin " was cooking with some hot peanut oil " after Lin 's 21 @-@ point performance helped Houston to a win over the Knicks . 
 In a 2015 interview with Pablo S. Torre in ESPN The Magazine , Lin expressed belief that perceptions of Asians had impacted his reputation as a player who was turnover @-@ prone or unable to use both hands , despite statistics that suggested he had improved in both areas . He also cited the notion that he was a poor defender due to the belief that he lacked speed , while D 'Antoni stated that Lin " was one of the quickest athletes we 've ever worked out " . However , Lin acknowledged that being a non @-@ black basketball player , his performance with the Knicks was overhyped . 
 Diepenbrock said that people without meaning any harm assume since Lin is Asian that he is not a basketball player . The first time Lin went to a Pro @-@ Am game in Kezar Pavilion in San Francisco , a security guard informed him : " Sorry , sir , there 's no volleyball here tonight . It 's basketball . " Early in his stint with the Knicks , a security guard at Madison Square Garden stopped Lin from entering the players ' entrance , mistaking him as a trainer . After signing with the Hornets , the five @-@ year NBA veteran had to convince security at Charlotte 's Time Warner Cable Arena that he was a player . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Lin has a popular YouTube account , and has made videos with YouTube personalities Nigahiga and KevJumba . Lin and former Knicks teammate Landry Fields appeared on the channel revealing their " secret handshake " . In 2014 , Lin became a content partner with Whistle Sports Network , adding his YouTube channel with roughly 400 @,@ 000 subscribers in exchange for an undisclosed equity stake . He was the first athlete from one of the four major sports leagues in the United States to produce content for the digital sports platform . 
 In a video interview conducted by Elie <unk> , he asked Lin how it felt to be representing so many people . Lin responded by stating , " It 's humbling , a privilege , and an honor . I 'm really proud of being Chinese , I 'm really proud of my parents being from Taiwan . I just thank God for the opportunity . " In July 2011 , the overseas Chinese Vivid Magazine named Lin one of its top eight influential Chinese @-@ Americans . In April 2012 , Lin was named to Time Magazine 's 2012 list of the " Top 100 Most Influential People in the World " . On June 18 , 2012 , NBA TV announced that Lin was the first @-@ ever winner of the " Social Breakout Player of the Year " Award . He was also the winner of " The EPIC Award " . In July 2012 , Lin won the ESPY Award for Breakthrough Athlete of the Year . 
 In 2014 , Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax figure of his likeness at its San Francisco branch . 
 = = = " Linsanity " = = = 
 After he became a starter for the Knicks , the Associated Press called Lin " the most surprising story in the NBA " . Bloomberg News wrote that Lin " has already become the most famous [ Asian American NBA player ] " . Knicks fans developed nicknames for him along with a new lexicon inspired by his name , Lin . Most popular was the word Linsanity , the excitement over the unheralded Lin . Time.com ran an article titled , " It 's Official : Linsanity Is for Real " . 
 Hall of Fame player Magic Johnson said , " The excitement [ Lin ] has caused in [ Madison Square ] Garden , man , I hadn 't seen that in a long time . " He appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated with the headline " Against All Odds " , which the Times called " the greatest tribute " . He also made the cover of Time in Asia ; Forbes wrote , " Congratulations Jeremy . You have now made the cover of Time the same number of times as Michael Jordan . Linsanity reigns on . " Lin 's story was also on the front @-@ page of many Taipei newspapers . " I haven 't done a computation , but it 's fair to say that no player has created the interest and the frenzy in this short period of time , in any sport , that I 'm aware of like Jeremy Lin has , " said NBA commissioner David Stern . 
 The Knicks ' success due to Lin 's play reportedly contributed to the end of a dispute that had for 48 days prevented Time Warner Cable customers from watching Knicks games and other MSG Network programs . The team quickly began selling replicas of Lin 's No. 17 jerseys and T @-@ shirts , and the sales and traffic for its online store increased more than 3 @,@ 000 % ; Lin 's merchandise dominated the displays at Knicks stores , with those for the team 's high @-@ priced stars — Anthony , Stoudemire , and Tyson Chandler — were moved to the sale racks . He had the best selling jersey in the NBA in February and March . For the one @-@ year period ending April 2012 , Lin had the second highest selling jersey in the league behind Derrick Rose . Both Nike and Adidas introduced Lin @-@ related athletic apparel , and expected that his fame would help sales in China . His popularity was attributed with growing the NBA 's popularity there since Yao Ming 's retirement in the offseason ; the audience for NBA games on television and online in China rose 39 percent over the previous season . 
 Within three weeks of his first game as a starter , at least seven e @-@ books were being published on Lin , and the Global Language Monitor declared that Linsanity had met its criteria to be considered an English @-@ language word . He appeared on a second consecutive Sports Illustrated cover , the first New York @-@ based team athlete and the third NBA player in the magazine 's history , after Jordan and Dirk Nowitzki . New York City restaurants introduced new food and bar items in honor of Lin . The city has about 450 @,@ 000 residents of Chinese or Taiwanese descent — larger than the entire populations of NBA cities like Miami , Atlanta or Cleveland — and viewing parties to watch Lin play flourished in Manhattan 's Chinatown . An airline advertised " <unk> low prices " , bids for his rookie card exceeded $ 21 @,@ 000 on eBay , and the press circulated rumors — denied by Lin — that he was dating Kim Kardashian . Foreign Policy speculated on his potential impact on Sino @-@ American relations , and Jack and Suzy Welch wrote that Lin 's rise was a lesson to business leaders to not let bureaucracy stifle unproven talent . Despite Lin 's sudden fame Sacramento Kings coach Keith Smart stated , " I knew [ Lin ] before he was <unk> . He 's still the same humble guy . The guy has not changed a bit , which is real special for a young man . " 
 Lin trademarked the word Linsanity in 2012 to preempt strangers from profiting from his likeness . Two others had attempted to trademark the term in the first week of February , but the United States Patent and Trademark Office ultimately registered the term to Lin . A documentary film about Lin , titled Linsanity , premiered on January 20 , 2013 , at the Sundance Film Festival . It was shown at numerous film festivals before making its way into art houses . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Lin has turned down most of the sponsorship deals he has been offered . He stated that he declined tens of millions of dollars of endorsement opportunities during the peak of Linsanity . " I do think my purpose is to play basketball , play well , and play for the glory of God , " he said . Lin called business outside of basketball " definitely secondary to my primary job " . 
 He has endorsed the following brands during his career : 
 Volvo 
 Nike ( 2010 – 2014 ) 
 Steiner Sports 
 Adidas ( 2014 – ) 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lin is an evangelical Christian , and was a leader in Harvard 's Asian American Christian Fellowship during his time there . He credited his NBA success to playing without pressure . " I 've surrendered that to God . I 'm not in a battle with what everybody else thinks anymore , " said Lin . He hopes to become a pastor who can head up non @-@ profit organizations , either home or abroad , and has talked of working in inner @-@ city communities to help with underprivileged children . 
 Lin 's younger brother , Joseph , plays basketball for the <unk> Braves , and his older brother , Josh , was a dental student at New York University . 
 Lin said that he understands Mandarin , though he could use some help speaking it ; he can also read and write a little . He took a few Mandarin classes while attending Harvard to try to improve . After joining the Knicks in 2012 , Lin slept on a couch in his brother 's one @-@ bedroom apartment on the Lower East Side of Manhattan , New York City . The night before his breakout game , he slept on the couch of teammate Landry Fields . He relocated to a luxury condo in White Plains , New York , after his Knicks contract became guaranteed . 
 Lin has publicly declared that one of his favorite pastimes is playing the video game Dota 2 , having been a fan of its predecessor , Defense of the Ancients , since his sophomore year of high school . He appeared in Free to Play , the 2014 documentary centered around the game , in which he described it as a " way of life " that helped him better connect with his family and friends . 
 = Khan Noonien Singh = 
 Khan Noonien Singh , commonly shortened to Khan , is a fictional villain in the Star Trek science fiction franchise . The character first appeared in the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " Space Seed " ( 1967 ) , and was portrayed by Ricardo Montalbán who reprised his role in the 1982 film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . In the 2013 film Star Trek Into Darkness , he is played by Benedict Cumberbatch . 
 The character once controlled more than a quarter of the Earth during the Eugenics Wars of the 1990s . After being revived from suspended animation in 2267 by the crew of the Starship Enterprise , Khan attempts to capture the starship , but is thwarted by James T. Kirk and exiled on Ceti Alpha V to create a new society with his people . In Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , set fifteen years after " Space Seed " , Khan escapes his exile and sets out to exact revenge upon Kirk . 
 Harve Bennett , executive producer for Star Trek II , chose Khan as the villain for the film . To reflect the time spent marooned on an inhospitable world , Khan was given a costume that looked as though it had been scavenged from different items and showed off Montalbán 's physique . Montalbán 's portrayal has been positively received by critics and fans ; Khan was voted one of the ten greatest film villains by the Online Film Critics Society . 
 In Star Trek Into Darkness , set in the alternate continuity established in Star Trek ( 2009 ) , Khan is awakened almost a decade before the events of " Space Seed . " Khan is given the false identity " John Harrison " and coerced by Admiral Marcus into building weapons for Starfleet in exchange for the lives of Khan 's crew . He ultimately rebels and comes into conflict with the crew of Enterprise . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = " Space Seed " = = = 
 Khan makes his introductory appearance in the episode " Space Seed " , first broadcast on February 16 , 1967 . According to the backstory revealed in the episode , Khan is one of a group of genetically engineered superhumans , bred to be free of the usual human mental and physical limitations , who were removed from power after the Eugenics Wars of the 1990s . Khan had been both the most successful conqueror and the most benign ruler of the group , ruling more than a quarter of the Earth 's area across Asia to the Middle East from 1992 to 1996 with a firm but generally peaceful hand until he was deposed . While most of the supermen were killed or sentenced to death , Khan and 84 others escaped Earth by way of the sleeper ship SS Botany Bay . Botany Bay is discovered by the crew of the Starship Enterprise in 2267 , with Khan and 72 of the 84 crew members of Botany Bay still alive , cryogenically frozen in suspended animation . 
 When Khan 's sleep chamber malfunctions , he is transported to Enterprise , where he reawakens and learns he is in the 23rd century . Given spacious quarters while Botany Bay is towed to a starbase , Khan fascinates and charms the ship 's historian , Marla McGivers ( Madlyn Rhue ) , while using his access to the ship 's technical manuals to learn how to take over and operate Enterprise . McGivers agrees to help Khan revive the other supermen , allowing him to organize a mutiny . To coerce the Enterprise crew to cooperate with him , Khan places Captain James T. Kirk ( William Shatner ) in the ship 's decompression chamber and threatens to kill Kirk unless the crew submits . McGivers cannot stand by as her Captain dies and frees Kirk , who neutralizes Khan 's men by using a neural gas . Khan heads to engineering and sets the ship 's engines to self @-@ destruct , whereupon he is incapacitated by Kirk . Captain Kirk conducts a hearing , sentencing Khan and his followers to exile on an <unk> world , Ceti Alpha V. Khan accepts Kirk 's challenge — invoking the fall of Lucifer in Milton 's Paradise Lost — and McGivers joins Khan rather than face court @-@ martial . Spock ( Leonard Nimoy ) wonders what the " seed " Kirk has planted will bear in a hundred years . 
 = = = Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan = = = 
 Khan returns in the 1982 feature film Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . Captain Clark Terrell ( Paul Winfield ) and First Officer Pavel Chekov ( Walter Koenig ) of USS Reliant are searching for an uninhabited world to test the Genesis device , a powerful terraforming tool . They beam down to what they believe is Ceti Alpha VI . Khan 's followers capture Terrell and Chekov , and Khan explains that the barren world is Ceti Alpha V ; the sixth planet of the system exploded shortly after Khan and his followers were marooned . The cataclysm caused massive climate disturbances , rendering the planet into a desert , and many of the survivors — including Khan 's wife — were killed by the only surviving species of animal , the Ceti eel . Only twenty of Khan 's followers survive . Swearing vengeance on Kirk , Khan implants Ceti eels in Terrell and Chekov 's brains , rendering them vulnerable to suggestion . Khan then seizes control of Reliant , intent on capturing the Genesis device . 
 Khan lures Enterprise to the space station Regula I , and he launches a surprise attack that disables Kirk 's ship . Kirk tricks Khan by using a special code to remotely lower Reliant 's shields , allowing Enterprise to inflict significant damage . Khan is forced to withdraw to make repairs . Using the mind @-@ controlled Terrell and Chekov as spies , Khan captures the Genesis device and leaves Kirk marooned on Regula I. Spock deceives Khan into thinking that Enterprise is crippled , surprising Khan when Enterprise rescues Kirk and escapes to the nearby Mutara Nebula . Goaded into following Kirk , Khan pilots Reliant into the nebula , where shields and sensors are inoperable . Due to Khan 's inexperience with three @-@ dimensional space combat , Enterprise defeats Reliant and Khan is severely wounded . Refusing to accept defeat , Khan activates the Genesis device , intent on killing his foe along with himself . Khan quotes Ahab 's words of vengeance from Moby Dick as he watches Enterprise try to escape . 
 = = = Star Trek Into Darkness = = = 
 Khan appears in the 2013 film Star Trek Into Darkness , taking place in the alternate continuity established in Star Trek ( 2009 ) . While the character ’ s backstory remains the same , Khan is revived by Starfleet Admiral Alexander Marcus rather than the crew of Enterprise . Marcus anticipates a war with the Klingons , and forces Khan to develop warships and weapons for Starfleet under the cover identity of " John Harrison " , holding Khan 's shipmates hostage . These developments include advanced long @-@ range torpedoes and the warship USS Vengeance . 
 Believing Marcus killed his crew , Khan engineers attacks on a Starfleet archive and Starfleet leadership , before fleeing to the Klingon homeworld Qo 'noS . Marcus arms Enterprise with 72 advanced torpedoes and sends Kirk and Enterprise to Qo 'noS to kill Harrison . Against orders , Kirk attempts to capture him alive . Upon learning the number of torpedoes on board Enterprise , Khan surrenders , revealing his identity , the presence of his followers in the torpedoes , and the reasons for his attacks . 
 When Marcus arrives aboard Vengeance and attacks Enterprise , Kirk and Khan work together to take control of Vengeance 's bridge . Once in control of Vengeance , Khan kills Admiral Marcus and demands that Spock return his crew . Spock , having removed Khan 's people from the torpedoes , lowers the Enterprise 's shields and allows Khan to beam the activated weapons ' warheads aboard Vengeance , crippling the ship . Khan crashes Vengeance in San Francisco in an attempt to escape , but is pursued and captured by Spock . Khan is placed back into cryogenic sleep along with his crew . 
 = = = Novels and comics = = = 
 Khan has been depicted in various novels and comic book publications . As with all non @-@ television and non @-@ film Star Trek material , the publications are outside of Star Trek canon . 
 Author Greg Cox penned three Star Trek novels featuring Khan , published by licensee Pocket Books . In the two @-@ volume The Eugenics Wars : The Rise and Fall of Khan Noonien Singh , Khan is depicted as a North Indian from a family of Sikhs . " Khan " is a title ; his adoptive parents are from Chandigarh , Punjab , India and are both eugenic scientists . At the end of the second novel , Khan and his followers are placed aboard the Botany Bay by Gary Seven as part of a deal to stop Khan 's machinations on Earth . The 2005 follow @-@ up , To Reign in Hell : The Exile of Khan Noonien Singh , relates what happened to Khan and his fellow exiles between the events of " Space Seed " and The Wrath of Khan . A different version of Khan 's exile on Ceti Alpha V is depicted in IDW Publishing 's 2010 comic miniseries Khan : Ruling in Hell . 
 From 2013 to 2014 , IDW published a five @-@ part series of comic books telling the story of the Into Darkness incarnation of Khan . The first issue in the series acknowledges the discrepancy of Khan 's physical appearance compared to that of the previous incarnation . In keeping with the prime timeline 's backstory , Khan 's beginnings , rise to power , and involvement in the Eugenics War are depicted . It is also revealed his birth name was Noonien Singh and that he adopted the title " Khan " out of admiration for Genghis Khan . The series goes on to mention that Khan 's anatomy and memories were altered per Marcus 's orders , so that Khan would initially believe himself to be the fabricated Harrison . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Initial development = = = 
 Writer Carey Wilber pitched " Space Seed " to Star Trek producers Roddenberry , Gene Coon , and Robert Justman with an 18 @-@ page outline dated August 29 , 1966 . In the outline , Wilber envisioned the crew of Botany Bay as criminals sent on a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ year journey to make room on Earth for others . Khan was represented as a Nordic criminal with a " magnificent " body , Harald Ericsson . The producers suggested changes to the outline in a series of memos ; in memos dated September 7 and 9 , Coon suggested significant changes to Ericsson . " I want to rather do more with him than you have indicated in the story outline , ” he wrote . Believing that Ericsson ( misspelled as Erickson in the memo ) could be a worthy adversary for Kirk , Coon suggested that the character be “ in fact very similar to James Kirk , our captain , except that our captain has made an adjustment to this world and this culture [ ... ] In other words , Carey , build us a giant of a man . " 
 The first draft of the script introduced the character as John <unk> — who is revealed to be a man involved in " The First World Tyranny " , named Ragnar Thorwald . The character of Thorwald was more brutal than Khan in the final version , killing guards using a phaser . In the original script , Kirk forgives <unk> and offers him and his people a chance at a fresh start — something that remained in the final episode — but the character committing murder would have precluded such an ending , as NBC censors would have necessitated the " bad guy " be punished for his actions . 
 By the final draft , Khan is Indian ; a character guesses that Khan is from Northern India , and " probably a Sikh . " Khan 's full name was based on that of Kim Noonien Singh , a pilot Gene <unk> served with during the Second World War . <unk> lost touch with his friend and had hoped that Khan 's similar name might attract his attention and renew his old acquaintance . 
 In " Space Seed " , Khan is presented as having several positive characteristics : he is gracious , smiling , fearless and generous . He is not threatened by the success of others , and encourages their self @-@ esteem . He is also ambitious , desiring a challenge commensurate with his abilities , but this ambition is not tempered by any consideration of the rights of others . Author Paul Cantor asserts that Khan is a mirror image of Kirk , sharing his aggressiveness , ambition , and even his womanizing tendencies , but possessing them in far greater degree . During the episode , several of the characters express their admiration for the man even as they oppose him , with Kirk referring to him as " the best of the tyrants , and the most dangerous . " The character 's Spanish accent and superhuman appearance strongly differentiate him from most Star Trek characters . 
 = = = The Wrath of Khan = = = 
 After the disappointing response to the first Star Trek feature film , The Motion Picture , Paramount executives appointed Harve Bennett , a television producer who had never watched Star Trek , to be executive producer for the sequel . Bennett watched all the original series episodes and chose Khan from " Space Seed " as a possible villain for the film . Early drafts of the script had Khan as a shadowy tyrant leading a planet in revolt ; later drafts added the " Genesis device " which Khan would steal . 
 Costume designer Robert Fletcher wanted to emphasize the effects of their harsh environment on Khan and his followers . " My intention with Khan was to express the fact that they had been marooned on that planet with no technical infrastructure , so they had to cannibalize from the spaceship whatever they used or wore . Therefore , I tried to make it look as if they had dressed themselves out of pieces of upholstery and electrical equipment that composed the ship , " he said . Director Nicholas Meyer told Montalbán to keep Khan 's right glove on at all times , in order to give viewers a puzzle they could form their own opinions about and add mystery to the character . Meyer has been repeatedly asked if Montalbán wore a prosthetic chest for his scenes , as his uniform was purposefully designed with an open front . Meyer replied in audio commentary for the film that Montalbán ( who was 61 during filming ) is " one strong cookie , " and that no prosthetics were applied to the actor 's sizeable frame . 
 At no point during The Wrath of Khan are Khan and Kirk in the same location ; they speak to each other only over communication links such as view screens . This was due in part to the fact that the set of the Reliant was a redress of the Enterprise bridge , and the two actors ' scenes were filmed four months apart . Montalbán recited his lines with a script assistant instead of to William Shatner . 
 Montalbán said in promotional interviews for the film he realized early on in his career that a good villain does not see himself as villainous . The villain may do villainous things , but he feels that he is doing them for righteous reasons . Montalbán further stated he always tried to find a flaw in the character , as no one is completely good or completely evil ; while Khan had a rather distorted view of reality and therefore performed acts of evil , he still felt that his vengeance was a noble cause because of the death of his wife . Khan quotes the character of Ahab from Moby @-@ Dick throughout the film , driving home his lust to make Kirk pay for the wrongs he has inflicted upon him . 
 = = = Star Trek Into Darkness = = = 
 Following the box office success of J. J. Abrams ' Star Trek reboot and the announcement that actors Chris Pine and Zachary Quinto had tentatively agreed to appear in two sequels , Internet rumors began circulating about the plot of the second film . Abrams hinted that because of the alternate timeline created in the first film , reintroducing Khan into Star Trek lore remained a possibility . Abrams told MTV , " [ Khan and Kirk ] exist — and while their history may not be exactly as people are familiar with , I would argue that a person 's character is what it is , " Abrams said of the notion that his Khan could be just as evil , even if Kirk never stranded him on Ceti Alpha V. " Certain people are destined to cross paths and come together , and Khan is out there ... even if he doesn 't have the same issues . " Writer Damon Lindelof declared that Khan 's " intense gravity , " particularly regarding the character 's delivery of monologues , made him an obligatory character to use , even if its iconic status made the crew afraid of the fan reaction . Lindelof jokingly stated that " it was never really a ' Should we or shouldn 't we ? ' as much as it was ' We really have to do this but if we don 't get it right people are going to kill us . ' " 
 As part of the secrecy campaign , Benedict Cumberbatch denied that he was playing Khan during interviews , describing Harrison as simply a terrorist with his own purposes , as well as " someone that 's activated and manufactured in a way by Starfleet , and it 's a scene that has come back to haunt him . " He discussed the character 's moral ambiguity saying it fit the adage " one man 's terrorist is another man 's freedom fighter , " adding parallels to the current world order " whether it 's U.S. foreign policy or the actions of some terrorists . " Into Darkness writers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman added that they used the character of Khan not just for his popularity with the fandom — “ It ’ s so easy to fall into the trap of doing something because you think people are going to love it . You must come up with what the movie can be on its own and then , if it turns out the villain maybe can be Khan , then you can do it . But you can ’ t start there . ” — but for fitting the sequel 's theme of " how far will we go to exact vengeance and justice on an enemy that scares us . " 
 Some fans protested Cumberbatch 's casting as Khan , believing that a person of Indian descent should have been given the role instead . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Superficially , Khan has been compared to Friedrich Nietzsche 's concept of the " Übermensch " ( superman or overman ) . Khan is mentally and physically superior to any normal human . In the Star Trek : Enterprise episode " Borderland " , Malik , the leader of a group of " supermen " created from the same genetic engineering project as Khan , quotes Nietzsche , telling Archer that " Mankind is something to be surpassed " . Professor William J. Devlin and coauthor Shai <unk> examined Khan 's character compared to the Übermensch and found that Khan 's blind pursuit of revenge is against Nietzsche 's ideals of transcendence and self @-@ creation of a meaningful life . Instead , the authors offer Spock 's self @-@ sacrifice in The Wrath of Khan as a better example of the Übermensch . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Montalbán 's performance as Khan was favorably received by critics . Discussing the Star Trek motion pictures , the Associated Press noted that Star Trek films were measured by how menacing their foe was , and that Khan was among the best in the series ; a 2002 review of the Star Trek films ranked Khan as the greatest enemy seen in any of the films . Reviewers of The Wrath of Khan , such as Roger Ebert , rated Khan as one of the strongest aspects of the film . New Yorker critic Pauline Kael said Montalbán 's performance " was the only validation he has ever had of his power to command the big screen . " 
 Critic Christopher Null notes that " it is nearly gospel now among Trekkies that ... Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan is the undisputed best of the series , and will likely never meet its equal , " and calls Khan the " greatest role of [ Montalbán 's ] career " . Though he felt that the villain of Star Trek : The Motion Picture , V 'ger , was more cerebral and interesting , author James <unk> notes that most fans and moviegoers preferred the archetypical good @-@ versus @-@ evil fight the struggle between Khan and Kirk represents . Villains in subsequent Star Trek films have been measured by the standard of Khan , with Paramount promising fans that the villain of Star Trek Generations would be equal to the genetic superman . IGN ranked Khan as the best Star Trek villain , noting that he set the pattern for revenge @-@ seeking villains in the series ; in the decades since the film 's release , " even those with a passing interest [ in Trek ] know the name . " Star Trek producer Rick Berman called the villain " threatening and memorable . " 
 Khan is also recognized as a great villain outside of the Star Trek series . The Associated Press called the character " one of sci @-@ fi 's great villains " . In 2002 , the Online Film Critics Society 's 132 members voted Khan as the 10th Greatest Screen Villain of all time , the only Star Trek character to appear in the listing . In 2006 , Emmy Magazine voted Khan " TV 's Most Out @-@ of @-@ This @-@ World Character " , beating out other science @-@ fiction characters such as The Doctor and Commander Adama . Editors wrote that " Khan was so cool we would 've bought a Chrysler Cordoba if he 'd told us to , " referring to an ad campaign Montalbán appeared in for Chrysler . The character also had a cultural impact outside of Star Trek fandom ; a clip from The Wrath of Khan featuring Kirk screaming " <unk> ! " was one popular culture appropriation that became a " popular fad " driving the success of the website <unk> . 
 In 2004 , the Star Trek franchise returned to Khan 's backstory in a three @-@ episode story arc on Star Trek : Enterprise . In " Borderland " , " Cold Station 12 " and " The Augments " , a 22nd @-@ century scientist is portrayed as having revived genetically engineered embryos from Khan 's time and raised them as " Augments " . Enterprise producer Manny Coto described these characters as " mini Khan Noonien <unk> " . 
 Benedict Cumberbatch 's performance in Star Trek Into Darkness drew praise from critics with Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine calling it a " tour @-@ de @-@ force to be reckoned with " and his character " a villain for the ages " . Joe Neumaier of New York 's Daily News wrote that Cumberbatch delivered " one of the best blockbuster villains in recent memory . " Jonathan Romney of The Independent specifically noted Cumberbatch 's voice saying it was " So <unk> resonant that it could have been synthesised from the combined timbres of Ian McKellen , Patrick Stewart and Alan Rickman holding an elocution contest down a well . " The New York Times on the other hand praised his screen presence saying " He fuses Byronic charisma with an impatient , imperious intelligence that seems to raise the ambient I.Q. whenever he ’ s on screen . " 
 Christian Blauvelt from website Hollywood.com criticized the casting of Khan in Star Trek Into Darkness as being " whitewashed into oblivion " . Star Trek : Voyager actor Garrett Wang tweeting , " The casting of Cumberbatch was a mistake on the part of the producers . I am not being critical of the actor or his talent , just the casting . " Co @-@ producer and co @-@ screenwriter Roberto Orci addressed the issue of the casting saying , " Basically , as we went through the casting process and we began honing in on the themes of the movie , it became uncomfortable for me to support demonizing anyone of color , particularly any one of Middle Eastern descent or anyone evoking that . One of the points of the movie is that we must be careful about the villain within US , not some other race . " 
 = The Boat Race 1854 = 
 The 12th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 8 April 1854 . Typically held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . The race was won by Oxford who triumphed over Cambridge by seven lengths . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by nine lengths in the previous race . Cambridge led overall with seven wins to Oxford 's four . 
 There was no Boat Race in 1853 as the Henley Royal Regatta was scheduled for the same time as that proposed by Cambridge in their challenge to Oxford . The universities did however race each other that year , in the Grand Challenge Cup , which was won by Oxford . On 11 February 1854 , a challenge was sent to Oxford by the former Light Blue cox Thomas Selby Egan , who had assumed temporary captaincy of Cambridge University Boat Club , despite having coached the Dark Blues to victory in the 1852 race . 
 Although Oxford arrived at Putney as favourites to win the race , Cambridge 's style was enough to force the odds to evens . However , in a practice race , the Dark Blues defeated a watermen scratch crew easily and restored their position as pre @-@ race favourites . Both crews rowed in 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) long boats manufactured by Searle . The umpire for the race was Charles Jasper Selwyn and the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 1 lb ( 70 @.@ 1 kg ) , 5 @.@ 75 pounds ( 2 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw one rower return from the 1852 race in F. Johnson , while Oxford 's crew contained two former Blues in <unk> and the Oxford University Boat Club president Olliver Meade King . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were pre @-@ race favourites . They won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing Cambridge the Surrey side of the river . The race commenced at <unk> , with Oxford pulling away from the start . The Dark Blues were clear of Cambridge by the time the crews reached the Crab Tree . By Hammersmith Bridge both coxes were forced to take evasive action as a result of a barge blocking their route . With a lead of two lengths after the bridge , Oxford continued to increase their lead , eventually passing the flag @-@ boat with a seven @-@ length advantage in a time of 25 minutes 29 seconds . It was their third consecutive victory and took the overall record to 7 – 5 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 In a speech in the evening 's celebrations , Charles Selwyn , who had umpired this and the previous four Boat Races , declared that he was " no longer young and active enough " to continue to act in the capacity of umpire ; he would be replaced in 1856 by W. G. Rich , the former Cambridge University Boat Club president who had rowed in both the March and December races of 1849 . 
 = Tim Breslin = 
 Timothy G. Breslin ( December 8 , 1967 – February 9 , 2005 ) was a professional ice hockey left wing . Breslin played eight seasons in the International Hockey League ( IHL ) with the Phoenix Roadrunners and Chicago Wolves and part of a season in the ECHL with the South Carolina Stingrays . He also played major league roller hockey in Roller Hockey International ( RHI ) with the Chicago Cheetahs . 
 Breslin attended Lake Superior State University . While a freshman he helped the Lakers win the school 's first national championship in 1988 . He served as an alternate captain in his senior season while also tying two school records , points in a game ( 7 ) and points in a series ( 10 ) . Undrafted out of college , he signed with the Los Angeles Kings as a free agent . He spent four years in their minor league system playing for Phoenix and South Carolina . After a brief stint in the RHI , he joined the Wolves as a free agent . As a member of the Wolves , Breslin was highly involved in charitable activities which led to him winning IHL Man of the Year honors in the 1996 – 97 season . He was a member of Chicago 's Turner Cup champion team the following year . 
 Late in 2004 Breslin was diagnosed with cancer and died 11 weeks later on February 9 , 2005 due to complications from <unk> cancer . To honor him the Wolves created the Tim Breslin Unsung Hero Award and the Tim Breslin Memorial Scholarship . As a way of helping his family financially , they hosted an exhibition game dubbed the Breslin Cup . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tim was born in Downers Grove , Illinois on December 8 , 1967 to James and Kathleen Breslin . He was one of six children , having three sisters and two brothers . Breslin grew up in Addison , Illinois where he began playing hockey at age five . He learned the game while playing with his brothers on a frozen pond near the family home and on a backyard rink his father made . As he got older Breslin played in local leagues and Driscoll Catholic High School 's club team , which afforded him the opportunity to join the Dubuque Fighting Saints in the United States Hockey League . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 Breslin joined the Fighting Saints for his high school senior year and played an additional season after graduation . His performance in Dubuque helped earn a scholarship to Lake Superior State University ( LSSU ) . In his freshman season with the Lakers , Breslin contributed 6 goals and 20 points , as LSSU finished first in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) . Advancing to the 1988 NCAA Division I Men 's Ice Hockey Tournament , the Lakers defeated Merrimack College and University of Maine to reach the championship game . In the title game LSSU defeated St. Lawrence to earn its first National Championship . For the 1988 – 89 season Breslin improved to 7 goals while remaining at 20 points . LSSU finished second in the CCHA and in the 1989 NCAA Tournament they lost to eventual national champion Harvard in the quarterfinals . In his junior season Breslin continued to produce at about the same pace , registering 8 goals and 25 points . The Lakers again finished second in the CCHA , and in the 1990 NCAA Tournament they advanced to the quarterfinals for the second straight year where they were defeated by national champion runner @-@ up Colgate . 
 In his senior season Breslin was named one of the team 's alternate captains . Playing on a line with future National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Doug Weight , Breslin had a break @-@ out season . He set career highs in goals ( 25 ) , assists ( 37 ) , and points ( 62 ) . During the year he tied a school record for points in a game with a seven @-@ point performance against Ohio State . The scoring output helped him tie another school record when the two teams played the following day . Adding another three points in the second game , Breslin brought his two @-@ game total to 10 , tying the record for points in a series . Lake Superior State finished first in the CCHA , but was again defeated in the quarterfinals of the 1991 NCAA Tournament . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Undrafted out of college , Breslin signed with the Los Angeles Kings as a free agent . He attended Kings training camp , where he played with his professional hockey hero , Wayne Gretzky . Breslin failed to make the team and Los Angeles assigned him to their International Hockey League ( IHL ) affiliate the Phoenix Roadrunners . In his first season with Phoenix , Breslin broke his arm early in the season . He returned to play just three weeks after the injury , but eventually re @-@ broke the arm and missed the remainder of the season . He finished his first professional season playing in 45 games , scoring 8 goals and 29 points . In the 1992 – 93 season Breslin improved his production to 14 goals and a career @-@ high 44 points . Phoenix finished the season with a league @-@ low 26 wins and 58 points . He began his third professional season with the Roadrunners , but after five games he was reassigned to the ECHL 's South Carolina Stingrays . Breslin played nine games for the Stingrays , registering six points , before being recalled by Phoenix . Finishing the year with the Roadrunners , he registered 9 goals and 27 points in 50 games . Phoenix improved to 85 points but failed to make the playoffs for the third straight year . At the conclusion of the season , Breslin 's contract with the Kings expired . 
 In the summer Breslin joined the Chicago Cheetahs of the Roller Hockey International ( RHI ) league for the 1994 season . Playing in just 6 games , Breslin recorded 5 goals and 13 points . Prior to the start of the 1994 – 95 IHL season , Breslin signed a one @-@ year contract with the Chicago Wolves . He was one of the first three players signed by the Wolves who began their first season as an IHL expansion team . In his first season with the Wolves , Breslin notched 7 goals and 28 points . Chicago finished with 80 points — good enough for third in their division and to qualify for the playoffs . Facing the Kalamazoo Wings in the first round , Chicago was swept in three straight games . Playing in his first professional playoffs , Breslin contributed two points playing in all three games . In the off @-@ season Breslin negotiated his own contract to stay in Chicago , signing a two @-@ year deal . Over the next two seasons , Breslin averaged 56 games played a season due to knee and shoulder injuries . As a team the Wolves qualified for the playoffs in both seasons but failed to advance beyond the second round . At the conclusion of the 1996 – 97 season , Breslin was awarded the I. John Snider trophy as IHL Man of the Year , an award given to recognize outstanding community service . 
 In the off @-@ season Breslin again re @-@ signed with the Wolves . Chicago also brought in John Anderson to be the team 's new head coach . Under Anderson , Breslin had posted a career high in assists with 26 and games played with 81 . Chicago won the West division and finished with the second @-@ best record in the league . In the postseason the Wolves stormed through the first three rounds , losing only four games , to advance to the 1998 Turner Cup Finals . In game 1 of the finals against the Detroit Vipers , Chicago blew a two @-@ goal lead early in the third period . They regained the lead with just over eight minutes to play . In the final minutes of the game , Breslin added an insurance empty net goal giving the Wolves a 4 – 2 victory . It was Breslin 's only goal of the playoffs . The series eventually went to a seventh and deciding game that the Wolves won 3 – 0 to capture the franchise 's first Turner Cup . For the 1998 – 99 season Breslin 's production dipped to 7 goals and 21 points . The Wolves advanced to the third round the playoffs , but Breslin played in only 4 of the team 's 10 games . On the first day of training camp the following year , Breslin announced his retirement from professional hockey . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Listed as a left wing , Breslin was capable of playing all three forward positions , an ability which gave his coaches flexibility and allowed him to play in any situation . Not a big player , standing six feet tall weighing 180 pounds , he played a gritty , physical , brand of hockey primary in a checking line role . As a checker it was his responsibility to shut down the opposition and keep them from scoring , emphasizing defense over offense . Because of his versatility and role , he was often a member of his team 's penalty killing unit . Breslin was known for his team @-@ first attitude and willingness to do whatever was asked of him in order to help the team succeed . Former Wolves General Manager Kevin <unk> said of Breslin , " You could always count on Tim to come and compete every night and do what was needed for the team to win " . Not the most talented of players , Breslin 's work ethic helped him to be a better player . Head coach Anderson once stated , " He is the kind of player who maybe isn 't in the very upper echelon in skill factor , but his dedication and hard work make up for that . " 
 = = Personal = = 
 Breslin married Jami <unk> , and the couple had three children , Shane , Paige , and Chase . He earned a degree in recreation management while at Lake Superior State . During his career , Breslin was involved in numerous charities . He delivered food on Thanksgiving for the Chris <unk> Foundation ; conducted self @-@ esteem workshops for an anti @-@ drug , anti @-@ gang organization ; participated in the Wolves ' Read to Succeed program , in which he read to children at local libraries ; and several others . In a 1997 interview , Breslin said that the most special charity he helped was one started by him and his wife . The Extra Effort program was started at Indian Trail Junior High School in Addison , where Jami was a teacher . Each month the program gave both a male and a female student four tickets to a Wolves game and a gift bag . The students were chosen based on attitude , effort and attendance . After retiring from professional hockey , he coached youth hockey and helped manage an Irish pub . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After complaining of stomach pains for several days , Breslin was taken to a hospital on Thanksgiving of 2004 . There he was diagnosed with <unk> cancer and underwent surgery . He died eleven weeks later on February 9 , 2005 due to complications from the cancer . The Wolves honored Breslin by wearing a helmet sticker shaped like a shamrock with his initials inside of it for the 2004 – 05 season . As a way of helping his family financially , the Wolves and Chicago Blackhawks put on a charity game called the " Breslin Cup " . The game featured 40 players , most of whom were former players from the two franchises . All the proceeds from the game went to a trust set up for the family . The game drew around 10 @,@ 000 fans , with the Wolves ' alumni defeating the Blackhawks ' alums in a shootout . The Breslin Cup and associated events raised over $ 250 @,@ 000 for the family . 
 The following season the Wolves further honored Breslin with an on @-@ ice ceremony that concluded with the raising of a banner of his name . They also created a team award called the Tim Breslin Unsung Hero Award , to be given annually to a player who " best typifies Breslin 's on @-@ ice spirit and team @-@ first attitude " , and a college scholarship , the Tim Breslin Memorial Scholarship , in his honor . A winner is chosen each season from students who fill out an entry form and write a corresponding essay . The scholarship pays for one semester of college . Breslin was inducted into the Illinois Hockey Hall of Fame in 2013 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Big Star = 
 Big Star was an American power pop band formed in Memphis , Tennessee , in 1971 by Alex Chilton , Chris Bell , Jody Stephens , and Andy Hummel . The group broke up in 1974 , and reorganized with a new line @-@ up nearly 20 years later . In its first era , the band 's musical style drew on the vocal harmonies of the Beatles , as well as the swaggering rhythms of the Rolling Stones and the jangling guitars of the Byrds . To the resulting power pop , Big Star added dark , existential themes , and produced a style that foreshadowed the alternative rock of the 1980s and 1990s . Before it broke up , Big Star created a " seminal body of work that never stopped inspiring succeeding generations " in the words of Rolling Stone , as the " quintessential American power pop band " and " one of the most mythic and influential cult acts in all of rock & roll " . 
 Big Star 's first album — 1972 's # 1 Record — was met by enthusiastic reviews , but ineffective marketing by Stax Records and limited distribution stunted its commercial success . Frustration took its toll on band relations : Bell left not long after the first record 's commercial progress stalled , and Hummel left to finish his college education after a second album , Radio City , was completed in December 1973 . Like # 1 Record , Radio City received excellent reviews , but label issues again thwarted sales — Columbia Records , which had assumed control of the Stax catalog , likewise effectively vetoed its distribution . After a third album was deemed non @-@ commercially viable and shelved before receiving a title , the band broke up late in 1974 . Four years later , the first two Big Star LPs were released together in the UK as a double album . The band 's third album was finally issued soon afterward ; titled Third / Sister Lovers , it found limited commercial success . Shortly thereafter , Chris Bell was killed in a car accident at the age of 27 . 
 The Big Star discography drew renewed attention in the 1980s when R.E.M. , and the Replacements as well as other popular bands cited the group as an influence . In 1992 , interest was further stimulated by Rykodisc 's reissues of the band 's albums , complemented by a collection of Bell 's solo work . In 1993 , Chilton and Stephens reformed Big Star with recruits Jon Auer and Ken Stringfellow of the Posies , and gave a concert at the University of Missouri . The band remained active , performing tours in Europe and Japan , and released a new studio album , In Space , in 2005 . Chilton died on March 17 , 2010 , after being admitted to a New Orleans hospital with heart problems . Hummel , who was diagnosed with cancer in 2008 , died on July 19 , 2010 . These deaths left Stephens as the sole surviving founding member . Big Star was inducted into the Memphis Music Hall of Fame in 2014 . 
 = = First era : 1971 – 1974 = = 
 = = = Formation of the band = = = 
 Alex Chilton was the lead singer for the blue @-@ eyed soul group the Box Tops from 1967 to 1970 , who scored a No. 1 hit with the song " The Letter " when he was sixteen . Following his stint with the Box Tops , he recorded a solo studio album . He was offered the role of lead vocalist for Blood , Sweat & Tears , but turned the offer down as " too commercial " . Chilton had known Chris Bell for some time : both lived in Memphis , each had spent time recording music at Ardent Studios , and each , when aged 13 , had been struck by the music of the Beatles during the band 's 1964 debut US tour . A song Chilton wrote nearly six years after he first witnessed a Beatles performance , " Thirteen " , referred to the event with the line " Rock ' n ' roll is here to stay " . Chilton asked Bell to work with him as a duo modeled on Simon & Garfunkel ; Bell declined , but invited Chilton to a performance by his own band , Icewater , comprising Bell , drummer Jody Stephens , and bassist Andy Hummel . Attracted by Icewater 's music , Chilton showed the three his new song " Watch the Sunrise " , and was asked to join the band . Both " Watch the Sunrise " and " Thirteen " were subsequently included on Big Star 's first album , # 1 Record . The now four @-@ piece band adopted the name Big Star when one member was given the idea from a grocery store often visited for snacks during recording sessions . One of many Big Star Markets outlets in the Memphis region at the time , it had a logo consisting of a five @-@ pointed star enclosing the words " Big Star " ; as well as the store 's name , the band used its logo but without the word " Star " to avoid infringing copyright . 
 = = = # 1 Record = = = 
 Although all four members contributed to songwriting and vocals on the first album , Chilton and Bell dominated as a duo intentionally modeled on John Lennon and Paul McCartney . The album was recorded by Ardent founder John Fry , with Terry Manning contributing occasional backing vocals and keyboards . The title # 1 Record was decided towards the end of the recording sessions and evinced , albeit as a playful hope rather than a serious expectation , the chart position to be achieved by a big star . Although Fry — at the band 's insistence — was credited as " executive producer " , publicly he insisted that " the band themselves really produced these records " . Fry recalled how Ardent , one of the first recording studios to use a sixteen @-@ track tape machine , worked experimentally with the band members : " We started recording the songs with the intent that if it turned out OK we 'd put it out [ ... ] I wound up being the one that primarily worked on it : I recorded all the tracks and then they would often come late at night and do overdubs . One by one , they all learned enough engineering . " 
 Describing the mix of musical styles present on # 1 Record , Rolling Stone 's Bud Scoppa notes that the album includes " reflective and acoustic " numbers , saying that " even the prettiest tunes have tension and subtle energy to them , and the rockers reverberate with power " . Scoppa finds that in each mode , " the guitar sound is sharp @-@ edged and full " . # 1 Record was released in June 1972 , and quickly received strong reviews . Billboard went as far as to say , " Every cut could be a single " . Rolling Stone judged the album " exceptionally good " , while Cashbox stated , " This album is one of those red @-@ letter days when everything falls together as a total sound " , and called it " an important record that should go to the top with proper handling " . Proper handling , however , was not forthcoming : Stax Records proved unable to either promote or distribute the record with any degree of success , and even when the band 's own efforts to get airplay generated interest , fans were unable to buy it as Stax could not make it available in many stores . Stax , in an effort to improve its catalog 's availability , signed a deal with Columbia Records , already successful distributors in the US , making Columbia responsible for the entire Stax catalog . But Columbia had no interest in dealing with the independent distributors previously used by Stax and removed even the existing copies of # 1 Record from the stores . 
 = = = Radio City = = = 
 The frustration at # 1 Record 's obstructed sales contributed to tension within the band . There was physical fighting between members : Bell , after being punched in the face by Hummel , retaliated by smashing Hummel 's new bass guitar to pieces against the wall . Hummel took revenge at a later date : finding Bell 's acoustic guitar in the latter 's unattended car , he repeatedly punched it with a screwdriver . In November 1972 , Bell quit the band . When work continued on songs for a second album , Bell rejoined , but further conflict soon erupted . A master tape of the new songs inexplicably went missing , and Bell , whose heavy drug intake was affecting his judgment , attacked Fry 's parked car . In late 1972 , struggling with severe depression , Bell quit the band once more , and by the end of the year Big Star disbanded . 
 After a few months Chilton , Stephens and Hummel decided to reform Big Star , and the three resumed work on the second album . The title chosen , Radio City , continued the play on the theme of a big star 's popularity and success , expressing what biographer Robert Gordon calls the band 's " romantic expectation " . As Hummel put it , 
 This was probably pretty lame , but in those days putting any word in front of the noun " city " to sort of emphasize the totality and pervasiveness of it was just a way of talking people had . If someone suggested going to a store but you had gotten a bad deal there you might say , " Oh no , that place is ' rip off city ' . " Calling an LP Radio City would be kind of wishful thinking . I mean we hoped it would be played on the radio a lot , making it " radio city " . Of course it didn 't pan out that way ... 
 Stephens recalled : " Radio City , for me , was just an amazing record . Being a three @-@ piece really opened things up for me in terms of playing drums . Drums take on a different role in a three @-@ piece band , so it was a lot of fun . [ ... ] Radio City was really more spontaneous , and the performances were pretty close to live performances . " 
 Although uncredited , Bell contributed to the writing of some of the album 's songs , including " O My Soul " and " Back of a Car " . Shortly before the album 's release , Hummel left the band : judging that it would not last , and in his final year at college , he elected to concentrate on his studies and live a more normal life . He was replaced by John Lightman for a short tenure prior to the band dissolving . 
 Rolling Stone 's Ken Barnes , describing the musical style of Radio City , opens by noting as a backdrop that the band 's debut , # 1 Record , established it as " one of the leading new American bands working in the mid @-@ Sixties pop and rock vein " . Radio City , Barnes finds , has " plenty of shimmering pop delights " , although " the opening tune , ' O My Soul , ' is a foreboding , sprawling funk affair " ; Barnes concludes that " Sometimes they sound like the Byrds , sometimes like the early Who , but usually like their own indescribable selves " . Radio City was released in February 1974 and , like # 1 Record , received excellent reviews . Record World reported , " The sound is stimulating , the musicianship superb , and the result is tight and <unk> rhythmic . " Billboard judged it " a highly commercial set " . Rolling Stone 's Bud Scoppa , then with Phonograph Record , affirmed , " Alex Chilton has now emerged as a major talent , and he 'll be heard from again " . Cashbox called it " a collection of excellent material that hopefully will break this deserving band in a big way " . But just as # 1 Record had fallen victim to poor marketing , so too did Radio City . Columbia , now in complete control of the Stax catalog , refused to process it following a disagreement . Without a distributor , sales of Radio City , though far greater than those of # 1 Record , were minimal at only around 20 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Third / Sister Lovers = = = 
 In September 1974 , eight months after the release of Radio City , the two remaining members of Big Star returned to Ardent Studios to work on a third album . Chilton and Stephens were assisted by producer Jim Dickinson and an assortment of musicians including drummer Richard <unk> , and Lesa Aldridge , Chilton 's girlfriend , who contributed on vocals . The sessions and mixing were completed in early 1975 , and 250 copies of the album were pressed with plain labels for promotional use . 
 Parke <unk> of Rolling Stone described Third / Sister Lovers as " extraordinary " . It is , he wrote , " Chilton 's untidy masterpiece . [ ... ] beautiful and disturbing " ; " vehemently original " ; of " haunting brilliance " : 
 To listen to it is to be " plunged into a maelstrom of conflicting emotions . Songs are drenched in strings and sweet sentiment one minute , starkly played and downcast the next . No pop song has ever bottomed out more than " Holocaust " , an anguished <unk> sung at a snail 's pace over discordant slide @-@ guitar fragments and moaning cello [ ... ] On the up side , there 's the delicious pop minuet " Stroke It Noel , " the anticipatory magic of " <unk> " ( " Caught a glance in your eyes and fell through the skies , " Chilton <unk> ) [ ... ] Big Star 's baroque , guitar @-@ driven pop reaches its apotheosis on songs like " Kizza Me , " " Thank You Friends " and " O , Dana " . [ ... ] Without question , Third is one of the most idiosyncratic , deeply felt and fully realized albums in the pop idiom . 
 Fry and Dickinson flew to New York with promotional copies and met employees of a number of record labels , but could not generate interest in the album . When a similar promotion attempt failed in California , the album was shelved as it was considered not commercial enough for release . Fry recalled , " We 'd go in and play it and these guys would look at us like we were crazy " . In late 1974 , before the album was even named , the band broke up , bringing Big Star 's first era to its end . Dickinson later said that he was " nailed for indulging Alex on Big Star Third , but I think it is important that the artist is enabled to perform with integrity . What I did for Alex was literally remove the yoke of oppressive production that he had been under since the first time he ever uttered a word into a microphone , for good or ill . " 
 Since quitting the band in 1972 , Bell had spent time in several different countries trying to develop his solo career . In 1978 , after his return to Memphis , the first two Big Star albums were released together in the UK as a double album , drawing enthusiastic reviews and interest from fans . Soon afterwards Big Star 's recognition grew further when , four years after its completion , the third album too was released in both the US and the UK . By now , the hitherto untitled Third / Sister Lovers had become known by several unofficial names including Third ( reflecting its position in the discography ) , Beale Street Green ( acknowledging the legendary site nearby , once a focal point for Memphis blues musicians ) and Sister Lovers ( because during the album 's recording sessions , Chilton and Stephens were dating sisters Lesa and Holliday Aldridge ) . 
 Not long after the release of Third / Sister Lovers , Bell died in a car accident . He apparently lost control of his car while driving alone and was killed when he struck a lamp post after hitting the curb a hundred feet before . A blood test found that he was not drunk at the time , and no drugs were found on him other than a bottle of vitamins . Bell is believed to have either fallen asleep at the wheel or become distracted . 
 = = Second era : 1993 – 2010 = = 
 Big Star returned in 1993 with a new line @-@ up when guitarist Jon Auer and bassist Ken Stringfellow joined Chilton and Stephens . Auer and Stringfellow remained members of the Posies , founded by the pair in 1986 . Stringfellow is also known for his work with R.E.M. and the Minus 5 . Hummel elected not to participate . First @-@ era material dominates Big Star 's performances , with the occasional addition of a song from the 2005 album In Space ; Stringfellow recalled that during the 1990s , " We were working out the set list and we went to this little cafe . Little did I know we 'd be playing that set for the next ten years " . The resurrected band made its debut at the 1993 University of Missouri spring music festival . A recording of the performance was issued on CD by Zoo Records as Columbia : Live at Missouri University . The concert was followed by tours of Europe and Japan , as well as an appearance on The Tonight Show . 
 Big Star 's first post @-@ reunion studio recording was the song " Hot Thing , " recorded in the mid @-@ 1990s for the Big Star tribute album Big Star , Small World . As with their prior studio release , however , the tribute album was delayed for years due to its record company going under . Originally scheduled for a 1998 release on Ignition Records , the album was eventually released in 2006 on Koch Records . 
 In Space was released on September 27 , 2005 on the Rykodisc label . Recorded during 2004 , the album consisted of new material mostly co @-@ written by Chilton , Stephens , Auer , and Stringfellow . Reviewing In Space , Rolling Stone 's David Fricke first pointed out that the context of the release was now " a world expecting that American Beatles ideal all over again " from a band that " achieved its power @-@ pop perfection when no one else was looking . " In Fricke 's estimation , this seemingly unrealistic expectation was met in part : " It 's here – in the jangly longing and ice @-@ wall harmonies of ' Lady Sweet ' " – however , Fricke found that the successful songs were interleaved with " the eccentric R & B and demo @-@ quality glam rock that have made Chilton 's solo records a mixed blessing , " and that " ' A Whole New Thing ' starts out like old T.Rex , then goes nowhere special . " Warming nevertheless to " the rough sunshine " of " Best Chance , " Fricke concluded , " In Space is no # 1 Record , but at its brightest , it is Big Star in every way . " 
 The band appeared at San Francisco 's Fillmore Auditorium on October 20 , 2007 . San Francisco @-@ based band Oranger , performed as opening act . Big Star performed at the 2008 Rhythm Festival , staged from August 29 – 31 in Bedfordshire , UK . On June 16 , 2009 , the # 1 Record / Radio City double album was reissued in remastered form . The same month , it was announced that a film of Big Star 's history , based on biographer Rob Jovanovic 's book Big Star : The Story of Rock 's Forgotten Band , was in pre @-@ production . On July 1 , 2009 , Big Star performed at a concert in Hyde Park , London , UK . On September 15 , 2009 , Rhino Records issued a four @-@ CD box set containing 98 recordings made between 1968 and 1975 . Keep an Eye on the Sky included live and demo versions of Big Star songs , solo work , and material from Bell 's earlier bands Rock City and Icewater . On November 18 , 2009 , the band performed at the Brooklyn Masonic Temple in New York City . 
 = = Post @-@ Chilton releases and tributes = = 
 = = = Alex Chilton memorial shows = = = 
 On March 17 , 2010 , Chilton suffered a fatal heart attack . He was pronounced dead on arrival at Tulane Medical Center in New Orleans . Big Star had been scheduled to play at SXSW Music Festival that same week . The remaining members , joined by special guests original bassist Andy Hummel , M. Ward , Evan Dando , R.E.M. bassist Mike Mills , and Chris Stamey , staged the concert as a tribute to him . 
 = = = " Big Star 's Third " shows = = = 
 Asked about the band 's future plans after Hummel 's death , Stephens told Billboard , " It 's music we all really love to play , and we love to play it together , so we 're trying to figure out a way forward where we can keep doing it . " In a Rolling Stone interview , Stephens said that the May 2010 tribute performance would be the group 's final show as Big Star , although not his last show with Auer and Stringfellow , stating , " I can 't see us going out as Big Star ... But I would hate to compound the loss of Alex by saying , ' That 's it ' for Ken and Jon , too . I can 't imagine not playing with them . There 's so much fun — but an emotional bond there too . " 
 In December 2010 , under the billing " Big Star 's Third , " Stephens teamed with Mitch Easter , Stamey , and Mills , along with a string section , to perform a live tribute performance of Big Star 's album Third / Sister Lovers in Chapel Hill , North Carolina . Joined by additional performers such as Matthew Sweet , Big Star 's Third was performed in a similar tribute concert in New York City on March 26 , 2011 , and at the Barbican in London on May 28 , 2012 . The project continued with concerts in Chicago and New York in 2013 , a January 2014 concert in Sydney , Australia , and a series of U.S. shows that included Seattle 's Bumbershoot festival on August 31 , 2014 . In November 2014 , Auer and Stringfellow rejoined Stephens , Easter , Stamey , and Mills for a free benefit performance in Athens , Georgia . As of 2016 , Big Star 's Third continues to perform . 
 = = = Posthumous releases = = = 
 In June 2011 , Ardent Records released the EP Live Tribute to Alex Chilton , and Stephens confirmed on the Ardent blog that the tribute performance in May 2010 was the last performance for Big Star as a band . A documentary titled Big Star : Nothing Can Hurt Me ( 2012 ) , directed by Drew DeNicola and Olivia Mori , chronicled the group 's career and band members ' solo efforts . In 2013 , the documentary was released in theatres and on DVD , and it had a limited theatrical re @-@ release in England in August 2014 . In November 2014 , Live in Memphis was released by Omnivore Recordings on CD , vinyl , and as a DVD of Big Star 's performance of October 29 , 1994 , their only known show to be professionally filmed in its entirety . According to Mojo , the DVD documents how Big Star 's 1990s lineup defied expectations and endured for another 16 years : " Chilton 's musicality is mesmerising as he drives the band .... Alternating between lead and rhythm , he plays with a mix of laser focus and utter insouciant cool . " 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Bell took up guitar when twelve or thirteen , but only on hearing the first Beatles records was he motivated to play the instrument regularly . He acted as lead and rhythm guitarist and vocalist for a sequence of bands , performing songs by the Beatles , the Rolling Stones , the Kinks , the Zombies and the Animals . Chilton 's first awareness of music came at the age of six when his brother repeatedly played a record by the Coasters . His father 's liking for jazz then exposed him over the next few years to the music of Glenn Miller , Ray Charles and Dave Brubeck . Chilton 's enthusiasm for music took hold when at age thirteen he first heard Beatles records ; he recalled having known of 1950s rock and roll but " by 1959 Elvis was syrup and Jerry Lee was pretty much gone , and the rockabilly thing was sort of over so I didn 't get really caught up in the rock scene until the Beatles came along " . 
 Chilton took up electric guitar at thirteen , playing along with Beatles songs , later saying , " I really loved the mid @-@ sixties British pop music [ ... ] all two and a half minutes or three minutes long , really appealing songs . So I 've always aspired to that same format , that 's what I like . Not to mention the rhythm and blues and the Stax stuff , too " . Chilton abandoned his guitar @-@ playing when with The Box Tops , then took up the instrument again ; he met Roger McGuinn , guitarist for the Byrds , and developed particular interest in electric guitar and acoustic folk . Stephens enjoyed the music of Otis Redding , the Isley Brothers , the Who , the Kinks and , in particular , the Beatles . Hummel likewise was a member of more than one band during his early musical years , again influenced by the Beatles and other British Invasion acts . The bassist also played acoustic guitar for personal enjoyment , following the styles of Simon & Garfunkel and Joni Mitchell and using finger @-@ picking techniques to play folk and bluegrass . Most songs on the first three albums are credited to either Bell / Chilton or Chilton , but some credit Hummel , Stephens and others , as either writer or co @-@ writer . At the only seven live performances in the original era , the last of which took place before the second album 's release , all four members contributed vocally . 
 While primarily inspired by the music of the Beatles and other British Invasion bands , acknowledging too the jangle pop and power pop of the period , Big Star also incorporated dark , nihilistic themes to produce a striking blend of musical and lyrical styles . The body of work resulting from the first era was a precursor of the alternative rock of the 1980s and 1990s , at the same time yielding material today considered an outstanding example of power pop . The stylistic range is evident from modern day critiques . Bogdanov et al . , commenting on # 1 Record in their All Music Guide to Rock , perceive in " The Ballad of El <unk> " a " luminous , melancholy ballad " , whereas John Borack 's Ultimate Power Pop Guide singles out Radio City 's " September Gurls " as a " glorious , glittering jewel " of power pop . Borack notes too that Third / Sister Lovers is " slower , darker and a good deal weirder " than the first two albums , identifying " Holocaust " as " Alex Chilton at his haunting best " , yet finds " Thank You Friends " exemplifying " left @-@ field gems " also present in which " the hooks are every bit as undeniable " as before . Jovanovic writes that when recording what Peter Buckley in his Rough Guide to Rock terms the " snarling guitar rock " of the first album 's " Don 't Lie To Me " , the band , deeming conventional instruments inadequate for the task , wheeled two Norton Commando motorcycles into the studio and gunned the engines to intensify the song 's bridge . Bogdanov et al. reserve " snarl " for a Radio City song , " Mod Lang " ; here Buckley writes that " the power of the performance and the erratic mix gave a sense of chaos which only added to the thrill " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Although Big Star 's first era came to an end in 1974 , the band acquired a cult following in the 1980s when new acts began to acknowledge the early material 's significance . R.E.M. ' s Peter Buck admitted , " We 've sort of flirted with greatness , but we 've yet to make a record as good as Revolver or Highway 61 Revisited or Exile on Main Street or Big Star 's Third . I don 't know what it 'll take to push us on to that level , but I think we 've got it in us . " Chilton , however , told an interviewer in 1992 , " I 'm constantly surprised that people fall for Big Star the way they do ... People say Big Star made some of the best rock ' n roll albums ever . And I say they 're wrong . " 
 Recently , Paul Stanley cited Big Star as influence to early Kiss moments , " We 've always been about verses , choruses , bridges ( ... ) It 's called a hook for a reason , because it grabs you . And that 's my mentality . Give me the Raspberries . Give me Small Faces . Give me Big Star . " 
 Today , critics cite Big Star 's first three albums as a profound influence on subsequent musicians . Rolling Stone notes that Big Star " created a seminal body of work that never stopped inspiring succeeding generations of rockers , from the power @-@ pop revivalists of the late 1970s to alternative rockers at the end of the century to the indie rock nation in the new millennium " . Jason Ankeny , music critic for Allmusic , identifies Big Star as " one of the most mythic and influential cult acts in all of rock & roll " , whose " impact on subsequent generations of indie bands on both sides of the Atlantic is surpassed only by that of the Velvet Underground " . Ankeny describes Big Star 's second album , Radio City , as " their masterpiece — ragged and raw guitar @-@ pop infused with remarkable intensity and spontaneity " . 
 In 1992 , Rykodisc generated further interest in the band when it reissued Third / Sister Lovers and released a posthumous compilation of Bell 's solo material , I Am the Cosmos . In his 2007 book Shake Some Action : The Ultimate Power Pop Guide , John Borack ranks the # 1 Record / Radio City double album at No. 2 in his chart " The 200 Greatest Power Pop Albums " . Rolling Stone includes # 1 Record , Radio City and Third / Sister Lovers in The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time and " September Gurls " and " Thirteen " in The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . In addition to R.E.M. , artists including Teenage Fanclub , The Replacements , Primal Scream , the Posies , and Bill Lloyd and the dB 's cite Big Star as an inspiration , and the band 's influence on Game Theory , Matthew Sweet and Velvet Crush is also acknowledged . 
 A cover version of " September Gurls " appeared on the Bangles ' 1986 triple platinum album Different Light . " September Gurls " , Borack wrote , " was and is the sine qua non of power pop , a glorious , glittering jewel with every facet cut and shined to absolute perfection .... a peerless , aching distillation of love and longing . ' September Gurls ' may not actually be the greatest song ever recorded , but for the duration of its 2 : 47 running time , you can be forgiven for believing it is . " The 1987 tribute song " Alex Chilton " , co @-@ written by three members of the Replacements , was released as a single from the album Pleased to Meet Me and contains the lyric " I never travel far without a little Big Star . " " I 'm In Love With A Girl " from Radio City features in the soundtrack of the 2009 film Adventureland . In 1998 , an ad hoc , shortened version of # 1 Record 's " In the Street " ( recorded by Todd Griffin ) was used as the theme song for the sitcom That ' 70s Show , and in 1999 , a new version titled " That ' 70s Song ( In the Street ) " was recorded by Cheap Trick also specifically for the show . " That ' 70s Song " and Big Star 's own " September Gurls " are included on the 1999 album That ' 70s Album ( Rockin ' ) released by the television program 's producers . The 2006 tribute album Big Star , Small World includes Big Star covers by the Posies , Teenage Fanclub , Gin Blossoms , Wilco , the Afghan Whigs , Whiskeytown and others . Lucero , a Memphis , Tennessee @-@ based alternative country band , covered " I 'm In Love With a Girl " on their 2015 release All a Man Should Do , an album which takes its title from a lyric in the song . Founding member Jody Stephens , and later additions to Big Star , provide backup on the track . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Alex Chilton – guitars , piano , vocals ( 1971 – 1974 , 1993 – 2010 ) 
 Jody Stephens – drums , vocals ( 1971 – 1974 , 1993 – 2010 ) 
 Chris Bell – guitars , vocals ( 1971 – 1972 ) 
 Andy Hummel – bass guitar , vocals ( 1971 – 1973 ) 
 John Lightman – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1974 ) 
 Jon Auer – guitar , vocals ( 1993 – 2010 ) 
 Ken Stringfellow – bass guitar , vocals ( 1993 – 2010 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 # 1 Record ( Ardent / Stax , 1972 ) 
 Radio City ( Ardent / Stax , 1974 ) 
 Third / Sister Lovers ( PVC , 1978 ) 
 In Space ( Rykodisc , 2005 ) 
 Live albums 
 Live ( Rykodisc , 1992 ) 
 Columbia : Live at Missouri University 4 / 25 / 93 ( Zoo , 1993 ) 
 Nobody Can Dance ( Norton , 1999 ) – rehearsals and live recordings 
 Live Tribute at the Levitt Shell ( Ardent , 2011 ) – Big Star with John Davis 
 Live in Memphis ( Omnivore , 2014 ) – Big Star live on October 29 , 1994 
 Complete Columbia : Live at University of Missouri University 4 / 25 / 93 ( Volcano / Legacy , 2016 ) 
 Compilations 
 Biggest ( Line Records , 1994 ) – greatest hits 
 The Best Of ( Ace Records , 1999 ) – greatest hits 
 Big Star Story ( Rykodisc , 2003 ) – greatest hits with one new track 
 Keep an Eye on the Sky ( Rhino , 2009 ) – box set with a live disc 
 Nothing Can Hurt Me ( Omnivore Recordings , 2013 ) – soundtrack to movie 
 Playlist ( 1972 @-@ 2005 ) ( Legacy Recordings , 2013 ) – first compilation to cover all eras of band 
 = = Videography = = 
 Big Star : Nothing Can Hurt Me ( Magnolia , DVD , 2012 ) 
 Live in Memphis ( Omnivore , DVD , 2014 ) – Big Star live on October 29 , 1994 
 = Pennsylvania Route 848 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 848 ( PA 848 ) is a 6 @.@ 66 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 10 @.@ 72 km ) state highway located in Susquehanna County in Pennsylvania . The western terminus is at U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) just south of PA 492 in New Milford . The eastern terminus is at PA 547 in Gibson Township . PA 848 remains as a former portion of PA 371 , which was originally designated in 1936 from New Milford to the New York state line . The highway was designated as PA 848 in 1961 , seven years after it was truncated from New Milford . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 848 begins at an intersection with US 11 ( Main Street ) in New Milford . The route runs east towards Cobb Street , making a bend to the southeast . Passing through a residential area , the route leaves the borough of New Milford and enters the township of New Milford . The surroundings become more rural , and at the intersection with State Route 2061 ( SR 2061 ) , the route curves to the southeast into a dense forested area . PA 848 remains a two @-@ lane road through New Milford Township . The route soon reaches SR 2063 ( Far Hill Road ) and later with SR 2081 ( Oliver Road ) , which serves as the connection between Interstate 81 's ( I @-@ 81 ) exit 219 southbound and PA 848 . After crossing over I @-@ 81 , PA 848 intersects the northbound ramps before returning to the rural Gibson Township . After the intersection with Creek Road , PA 848 enters the village of Gibson , where it terminates at an intersection with PA 547 and Township Road 574 . 
 = = History = = 
 The route of PA 848 began as an alignment of the Cochecton and Great Bend Turnpike ( a portion of the Great Bend and Newburgh Turnpike ) , a 19th Century turnpike built from Great Bend , Pennsylvania to Newburgh , New York . The road was completed in Pennsylvania in 1811 , five years after construction began . The turnpike did not fare after the mid @-@ 1800s , with the road abandoned in 1853 . When the modern state highway system for Pennsylvania debuted in 1928 , the alignment of future PA 371 was not included . In 1936 , PA 371 was designated on its alignment from New Milford to the New York state line ; however , this would only last sixteen years , as the Pennsylvania Department of Highways truncated PA 371 back to the intersection with PA 171 in Union Dale , further east in Susquehanna County . 
 In April 1961 , PA 848 was designated from Gibson to New Milford as part of the construction of I @-@ 81 to make sure interchanges were with numbered routes . The rest of the alignment was designated part of PA 374 from Lyon Street ( west of Union Dale ) to Union Dale . The rest was later designated Township Road 945 from Gibson to PA 92 intersection and SR 2034 from PA 92 to PA 374 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Susquehanna County . 
 = = PA 848 Truck = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 848 Truck is a truck route of PA 848 bypassing a weight @-@ restricted bridge over a branch of Butler Creek in Gibson Township , on which trucks over 27 tons and combination loads over 36 tons are prohibited . It follows I @-@ 81 and PA 547 . The route was signed in 2013 . 
 = Maybe This Christmas = 
 Maybe This Christmas is a holiday compilation album released in November 2002 through Nettwerk Records featuring contemporary musicians performing both classic and original Christmas songs . The album is the first in a series , named by Ron Sexsmith , of three holiday compilations released through the record label between 2002 and 2004 . A portion of the proceeds from each album in the series went to Toys for Tots , a charity supported by the United States Marine Corps . Most of the tracks exclusive to Maybe This Christmas were recorded just a few months prior to its release . The album 's cover art was designed by artist Paul Frank , creator of Julius the pictured " wide @-@ mouth monkey " . Critical reception of the compilation was mixed , with reviewers often complimenting or criticizing select tracks . In the United States , the album reached a peak position of number thirty @-@ eight on Billboard 's Top Holiday Albums chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Maybe This Christmas is the first in a series of three consecutive holiday compilation albums released through Nettwerk . Maybe This Christmas Too ? and Maybe This Christmas Tree were released in October 2003 and October 2004 , respectively . The series was named by Ron Sexsmith , who contributed the title track to the compilation . A portion of proceeds from all three albums went to Toys for Tots , a charity supported by the United States Marine Corps . Maybe This Christmas contains thirteen " rock @-@ oriented " tracks recorded by various artists . Most of the tracks exclusive to the album were recorded just a few months prior to its release . Allmusic 's MacKenzie Wilson dubbed the compilation as an " album suited for those twenty @-@ somethings searching for [ their ] not @-@ so @-@ typical Christmas collection . " The cover art was designed by artist Paul Frank , creator of Julius the " illustrated , wide @-@ mouth monkey " . 
 The album opens with Phantom Planet 's " sweet rock romp " rendition of Felix Bernard and Richard B. Smith 's " Winter Wonderland " . Sexsmith 's title track is less than minutes in length and has a shuffling beat . " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( Ralph Blane , Hugh Martin ) features a downtempo , " jazz @-@ like " solo piano performance by Chris Martin of Coldplay . Exclusive tracks to the album include Vanessa Carlton 's piano @-@ driven rendition of the traditional song " Greensleeves " as well as Bright Eyes ' cover of " Blue Christmas " ( Bill Hayes , Jay Johnson ) ; others include Sense Field 's version of John Lennon and Yoko Ono 's " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " and " What a Year for a New Year " by Dan Wilson , lead singer of the rock band <unk> . 
 Jimmy Eat World 's " 12 / 23 / 95 " , described by The Austin Chronicle 's Christopher Gray as " serious emo " and The New York Times ' Kelefa Sanneh as a " gentle ballad of apology " , previously appeared on the band 's 1999 album Clarity . The song title and date refer to Little Christmas Eve , the traditional day in which Norwegians decorate Christmas trees . Jack Johnson incorporates a " upbeat street @-@ corner " shuffle into his version of " Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer " ( Johnny Marks , Robert L. May ) , just over two minutes in length . The traditional song " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " is performed as a duet by the Barenaked Ladies and Sarah McLachlan . Following is a string of original songs , including " Bizarre Christmas Incident " by Ben Folds , " What a Year for a New Year " by Dan Wilson ) and Neil Finn 's " Sweet Secret Peace " . " Winter Wonderland , " " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " and " Bizarre Christmas Incident " were recorded previously for fans but had not been released commercially . The closing track , " Snow " ( Archibald Lampman , Loreena McKennitt ) was performed by McKennitt and has been described as a " haunting , orchestral new @-@ age hymn that could fit nicely into a midnight Mass . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Maybe This Christmas received mixed critical reception . Many reviewers complimented or criticized select tracks , though Jimmy Eat World 's " 12 / 23 / 95 " received the most praise . Allmusic 's MacKenzie Wilson awarded the album three out of five stars and described it as a " solid holiday effort " for both " casual and die @-@ hard music fans " . Wilson considered " 12 / 23 / 95 " the standout track of the album and wrote that performances by Bright Eyes , Loreena McKennitt , Sense Field and Dan Wilson provided traditional carols with " fresh face " along with their own " dash of coolness " . She also complimented Coldplay 's rendition of " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " , calling it as " endearing " as the original , and thought Sarah McLachlan 's " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " was " playfully charming " . Christopher Gray of The Austin Chronicle considered " Blue Christmas " the best and " Bizarre Christmas Incident " the " funniest " track on the compilation . 
 Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a " B " rating and called it a " mixed bag " . He described performances by Vanessa Carlton and Bright Eyes as " painful " but also complimented the Barenaked Ladies and McLachlan for their collaboration . Willman considered Wilson 's " What a Year for a New Year " the stand @-@ out track of the album . Annie Zaleski of The Phoenix rated the album 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , calling some of the collection " gorgeous and alluring " but most of it " subdued " . Zaleski complimented the title track but criticized performances by Coldplay and Bright Eyes , the latter for its " unsteady , wobbly twang " . Zaleski and Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times also praised " 12 / 23 / 95 " . Zaleski concluded : " Not exactly your traditional take on traditional holiday fare , but a pleasant alternative to all the muzak you have to put up with this time of year . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Winter Wonderland " ( Felix Bernard , Richard B. Smith ) , performed by Phantom Planet – 2 : 47 
 " Maybe This Christmas " ( Ron Sexsmith ) , performed by Ron Sexsmith – 1 : 53 
 " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( Ralph Blane , Hugh Martin ) , performed by Coldplay – 2 : 22 
 " Greensleeves " ( traditional ) , performed by Vanessa Carlton – 3 : 35 
 " Blue Christmas " ( Bill Hayes , Jay Johnson ) , performed by Bright Eyes – 2 : 21 
 " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " ( John Lennon , Yoko Ono ) , performed by Sense Field – 3 : 29 
 " 12 / 23 / 95 " ( Jimmy Eat World ) , performed by Jimmy Eat World – 3 : 37 
 " Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer " ( Johnny Marks ) , performed by Jack Johnson – 2 : 09 
 " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " ( traditional ) , performed by Barenaked Ladies and Sarah McLachlan – 3 : 30 
 " Bizarre Christmas Incident " ( Ben Folds ) , performed by Ben Folds – 2 : 24 
 " What a Year for a New Year " ( Dan Wilson ) , performed by Dan Wilson – 4 : 06 
 " Sweet Secret Peace " ( Neil Finn , Michael <unk> ) , performed by Neil Finn – 3 : 50 
 " Snow " ( Archibald Lampman , Loreena McKennitt ) , performed by Loreena McKennitt – 5 : 36 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 In the United States , Maybe This Christmas reached a peak position of number thirty @-@ eight on Billboard 's Top Holiday Albums chart . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 12 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 12 ( PA 12 ) is a 9 @.@ 566 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 15 @.@ 395 km ) state highway located in Berks County in eastern Pennsylvania . The western terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 222 ( US 222 ) and US 422 in Wyomissing . Its eastern terminus is PA 662 in Ruscombmanor Township . In the Reading area , PA 12 is a four @-@ lane freeway called the Warren Street Bypass that heads northeast through urban areas , coming to interchanges with several roads including PA 183 , PA 61 , and US 222 Bus . In Alsace Township , the route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided surface road called Pricetown Road and continues northeast through rural areas , intersecting PA 73 before ending at PA 662 . 
 Pricetown Road originally existed in the 18th century as a road to link farmers in Pricetown to markets in Reading . The Warren Street Bypass was first planned in 1949 as a widening of Warren Street in Reading leading to a new bridge over Tulpehocken Creek to Wyomissing . In the 1950s , the Warren Street Bypass was completed from Wyomissing northeast to US 222 ( Allentown Pike , now 5th Street Highway ) north of Reading , providing a bypass of Reading . US 222 was routed onto this bypass by 1976 , with the Warren Street Bypass extended northeast to Pricetown Road in 1980 . The part of the Warren Street Bypass northeast of US 222 along with Pricetown Road became State Route 2026 ( SR 2026 ) when the Location Referencing System was established . In 1998 , PA 12 was assigned to its current alignment following the rerouting of US 222 onto a new bypass of Reading . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 12 begins at an interchange with US 222 and US 422 in Wyomissing . Southwest of this interchange , the Warren Street Bypass continues as part of southbound US 222 / westbound US 422 . US 222 northbound continues northwest and US 422 eastbound continues southeast on the West Shore Bypass . PA 12 does not have access to or from the northbound direction of US 222 at this interchange . From US 222 / US 422 , the route heads northeast on the four @-@ lane divided Warren Street Bypass . PA 12 crosses Tulpehocken Creek into Reading and heads through commercial areas . Along this stretch , the route has no cross traffic , with access to some local streets as well as businesses while access to other local cross streets is blocked by barricades . The road comes to an interchange with PA 183 , with access provided from right @-@ in / right @-@ out ramps to Butler Street and Lehigh Street in the northbound direction and to Carbon Street and Lackawanna Street in the southbound direction . The PA 183 interchange provides access to Reading Regional Airport , an airport with charter flights that is also home to the Mid @-@ Atlantic Air Museum . Following this interchange , the route becomes a freeway and heads near residential neighborhoods and turns north , running to the west of Norfolk Southern 's Reading Line . PA 12 crosses the Schuylkill River and comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with River Road . 
 From here , the freeway curves to the northeast and passes under the Reading Line , heading into commercial areas within Muhlenberg Township and coming to a partial cloverleaf interchange with PA 61 that has an eastbound exit and a westbound entrance along with an eastbound entrance from northbound PA 61 . The PA 61 south exit provides access to FirstEnergy Stadium , the home ballpark of Minor League Baseball 's Reading Fightin Phils . The route passes under Norfolk Southern 's Pottsville Branch and comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 222 Bus . ; this interchange provides access from westbound PA 12 to PA 61 and northbound US 222 . Past this interchange , the freeway passes near more development , reaching a diamond interchange with 11th Street . PA 12 heads into more wooded surroundings and curves northeast . The route comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with Spring Valley Road and continues into Alsace Township , where the freeway ends . 
 After the freeway ends , PA 12 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided surface road called Pricetown Road , continuing northeast through forested areas with some homes and businesses . The road passes through the community of Alsace Manor before crossing into Ruscombmanor Township , where it intersects PA 73 . Past this intersection , the route continues through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . PA 12 ends at an intersection with PA 662 in the community of Pricetown , where Pricetown Road continues northeast as SR 2026 to an intersection with <unk> Road in the community of New Jerusalem in Rockland Township . 
 In 2014 , PA 12 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 59 @,@ 000 vehicles between the US 222 / US 422 and PA 183 interchanges to a low of 8 @,@ 600 vehicles between PA 73 and <unk> Road . The portion of PA 12 along the Warren Street Bypass is a part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 Pricetown Road dates back to the 18th century as a road linking the village of Pricetown to Reading . The road was used by farmers in the Pricetown area who traveled to Reading to buy and sell wares . Pricetown was settled in 1754 and grew into a village with three taverns and a general store that served the trade to and from Reading . In the 19th century , Pricetown Road was used to transport Montana horses from Temple to country auctions in the area . Pricetown Road was originally an unpaved road . Warren Street in Reading was constructed by 1920 , running from Fayette Street near the Tulpehocken Creek east to a dead end near the Schuylkill River . In 1927 , Pricetown Road was paved in concrete . The road was straightened at the <unk> Road intersection by 1940 . 
 In 1949 , plans were made to build a four @-@ lane bridge across Tulpehocken Creek at Warren Street . As part of this plan , Warren Street was to be widened from the proposed bridge to Schuylkill Avenue . This widened Warren Street was envisioned to become part of a bypass route of Reading . The bridge and widening were approved with the provision that Warren Street only be widened as far as Schuylkill Avenue as not to build a bypass route through a residential area . Construction on the bridge and the Warren Street Bypass between US 422 ( Harrisburg Pike , now Penn Avenue ) and PA 83 ( now PA 183 , Schuylkill Avenue ) began in 1950 . In 1953 , the Park Avenue Extension ( now a part of the Warren Street Bypass along US 222 / US 422 ) and the Warren Street Bypass from US 422 in Wyomissing to Tulpehocken Creek , along with the Tulpehocken Creek bridge , was finished , with a continuation of the Warren Street Bypass northeast from PA 83 to US 222 ( Allentown Pike , now 5th Street Highway ) proposed . Construction on the extension of the Warren Street Bypass to US 222 began in 1956 with the process of widening of the existing Warren Street . The PA 83 bridge over the bypass was built in 1957 . In 1959 , the Warren Street Bypass extension to US 222 was opened to traffic with the portion of Warren Street between Tulpehocken Creek and PA 83 widened to four lanes . The Warren Street Bypass included an interchange with the under @-@ construction Reading Bypass ( now US 422 , West Shore Bypass ) southwest of Tulpehocken Creek when it opened in 1959 . 
 An extension of the Warren Street Bypass from US 222 to Pricetown Road was proposed in 1962 . Two routes for the extension were proposed : one following a more southerly route as it does today and another following a more northerly route along Spring Valley Road , passing near the <unk> Reservoir . The extension of the bypass was intended to provide access to a growing industrial park . In 1966 , plans were made to make the portion of the Warren Street Bypass through the Glenside neighborhood of Reading limited @-@ access by eliminating at @-@ grade intersections with local streets , resulting in the streets coming to a dead end at the bypass . The more southerly route for the Warren Street Bypass extension between US 222 and Pricetown Road was selected by 1969 . On November 15 , 1975 , the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) approved for US 222 to be routed to bypass Reading , with the route following the Warren Street Bypass between US 422 in Wyomissing and Allentown Pike . In 1976 , construction began on the extension of the Warren Street Bypass between US 222 and Pricetown Road . The portion of the Warren Street Bypass between Spring Valley Road and Pricetown Road was completed in July 1979 while the portion between 11th Street and Spring Valley Road was completed in December 1979 . In 1980 , the remainder of the Warren Street Bypass extension between US 222 and 11th Street was completed . 
 With the establishment of the Location Referencing System for state roads in 1987 , the Warren Street Bypass between US 222 and Pricetown Road , along with the entire length of Pricetown Road northeast to New Jerusalem , became SR 2026 . In 1998 , US 222 was rerouted to a freeway alignment northwest of Reading following the completion of the Park Road Corridor in October of that year ; the PA 12 designation was given to the Warren Street Bypass northeast of US 222 / US 422 in Wyomissing as well as to SR 2026 up to the intersection with PA 662 in December of that year . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Berks County . 
 = Alex Hewit = 
 Alexander G. " Alex " Hewit ( November 8 , 1985 – ) is a retired lacrosse goaltender . He began playing lacrosse as a youth . He led his high school to three New Jersey state championships and was one of the most sought after high school lacrosse players in the United States . Since his older brother was studying and playing lacrosse at Princeton University , Alex decided to attend Princeton as well . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 2005 through 2008 . He was recognized as a three @-@ time United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American ( first team once ) and a three @-@ time second team All @-@ Ivy League performer . He was the 2006 National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) goaltender of the year and 2008 Princeton co @-@ captain . During his college career , Princeton lacrosse earned an Ivy League championship and two NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitations . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hewit is the son of Russell and Nan Hewit , and his siblings are Grant , Meghan and Rusty . Born November 8 , 1985 , and raised in Chatham , New Jersey , Hewitt began playing lacrosse as a youth . Both of his older brothers played and introduced him to the sport . Hewit started playing lacrosse in fourth grade in a local recreational league in his hometown . By sixth grade he was converted from an attackman to a goalie , but not until the coaches convinced his mother 's that her concern for her son 's safety were unwarranted . He met his middle school , high school and college teammate Dan Cocoziello taking an entrance exam for the Delbarton School in sixth grade . On the seventh and eighth grade team and the freshman team at the Delbarton School he also played goalie . In eighth grade , he made a New Jersey state eighth @-@ grade all @-@ star team along with Cocoziello that competed against all @-@ stars from other states . He made the varsity team as a sophomore and helped lead the team to a cumulative 63 – 4 record and three high school lacrosse state championships . He was an all @-@ state and all @-@ conference goalie who made the headmaster ’ s list as a student . He was regarded as the fifth @-@ best high school lacrosse recruit in the nation in the 2003 , according to Inside Lacrosse . Since his older brother Grant was at Princeton , the college was on his short list along with Johns Hopkins , Duke , Harvard and Dartmouth . Grant later became captain of the 2006 Tigers lacrosse team . 
 = = College career = = 
 Hewit played in six games for Princeton and started three as a freshman in 2005 . He became the starting goalie late in his freshman year . He was first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 2006 , a second team selection in 2007 and an honorable mention selection in 2008 . He was a 2006 , 2007 & 2008 second team All @-@ Ivy League selection . Hewit was a mild @-@ mannered goalie who never celebrated after making saves . His goaltending style of taking away the high and tight shots altered the way opposing teams approached scoring . During the 2006 season , he held the three highest scoring teams in the country ( Virginia , Hofstra and Cornell ) to 20 goals , which was half of their combined average . He was given the Ensign C. Markland Kelly , Jr . Award in 2006 in recognition of being the best National Collegiate Athletic Association lacrosse goaltender . The 2006 team was Ivy League co @-@ champion with Cornell . In 2007 , he entered the season with a lower goals against average ( 6 @.@ 45 ) than the NCAA Division I career record and was a preseason first team All @-@ American according to Inside Lacrosse . He served as co @-@ captain of the 2008 team . After a 5 – 7 2005 year , Princeton qualified for the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship in 2006 & 2007 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Hewit took a job with Lehman Brothers after graduating from Princeton . He was signed by New Jersey Pride for the 2008 MLL season , but he appeared in no games . 
 = Shaun Murphy ( snooker player ) = 
 Shaun Murphy ( born 10 August 1982 ) is an English professional snooker player , who won the 2005 World Championship . Nicknamed " The Magician " , Murphy is noted for his straight cue action and his long potting . 
 Born in Harlow and raised in Irthlingborough , Murphy turned professional in 1998 . His victory at the World Championship was considered a major surprise as he was only the third qualifier to lift the title . His other ranking tournament victories came in the 2007 Malta Cup , the 2008 UK Championship , the Players Tour Championship 2010 / 2011 – Finals and the 2014 World Open , while he reached a second World Championship final in 2009 and a third in 2015 . He has also won seven non @-@ ranking tournaments , including the 2015 Masters , which completed his career Triple Crown . 
 Murphy has won over £ 2 million in prize money and has compiled more than 300 century breaks in his professional career . His highest world ranking was number three , which he maintained for three seasons following 2007 / 2008 , and he is currently ranked number four . 
 = = Career = = 
 Born in Harlow , England , Murphy began playing snooker at the age of eight after his parents bought him a snooker table for Christmas . He made his first century break at the age of 10 and practised at the Rushden Snooker Centre , where players such as Stephen Hendry , Mark Williams , and Ken Doherty have also played . At the age of 13 , he secured a five @-@ year £ 5 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ year sponsorship deal with the Doc Martens shoe company and stated his ambitions of winning the World Championship and becoming world number one . He turned professional in 1998 at the age of 15 . 
 Murphy was coached by Steve Prest until the 2006 / 2007 season . Willie Thorne and Ray Reardon also gave him guidance , and when he was 15 , he was given the latter 's old cue by his father . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Murphy began his career on the UK Tour in 1998 ( renamed the Challenge Tour in 2000 ) , at the time the second @-@ level professional tour . He was runner @-@ up in the fourth event on the UK tour for the 1997 / 1998 season and , for the 2000 / 2001 season , won the third and fourth events on the Challenge Tour , topping the Order of Merit rankings . 
 In 2000 , he received the World Snooker Newcomer of the Year award and one of six Young Player of Distinction of the Year awards from the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association . In 2000 , he won the English Open Championship . 
 Murphy won his first professional tournament at the 2000 Benson & Hedges Championship , defeating Mark Davis 6 – 1 in the semi @-@ final , and Stuart Bingham 9 – 7 in the final , recovering from 2 – 5 down . Although he was not yet on the first @-@ level main tour , this victory brought qualification for the Masters — a prestigious non @-@ ranking invitation tournament with places for members of the top 16 , the winner of the qualifying tournament , and a limited number of wildcards . In the 2001 tournament , he showed promise in his first televised match , defeating world number 15 , Marco Fu , and building a 4 – 1 lead over seven @-@ time world champion Hendry , before losing the match . He made his first maximum break in the 2001 Benson & Hedges Championship . 
 = = = Early ranking results = = = 
 Murphy first reached the final stages of a ranking event at the 2002 World Championship , hosted at the Crucible Theatre , where he lost 4 – 10 to Hendry in the first round . In the 2002 / 2003 season , he reached the final stages of the Scottish Open , where he was defeated 3 – 5 by Drew Henry in the first round , and the World Championship , where he lost 9 – 10 against Doherty on the final black in the first round . 
 For the 2003 / 2004 season , Murphy was ranked number 64 and qualified for the final stages of three ranking tournaments . In the LG Cup , Murphy defeated Steve Davis 5 – 4 in the second round , before losing 2 – 5 to John Higgins in third round . After the victory over Davis , Murphy said " This is one of the greatest days in my snooker career . " In the British Open , he defeated Dave Harold 5 – 1 in the first round , before losing to Paul Hunter 2 – 5 in the second round . 
 In the Players Championship — the new name of the Scottish Open — he lost 3 – 5 to eventual champion Jimmy White in the second round . He failed to reach the World Championship , losing a qualifying match 7 – 10 against Stuart Pettman , in which Pettman was docked a frame for arriving late . 
 For the 2004 / 2005 season , Murphy was ranked number 48 and reached the final stages of four ranking events , including the World Championship victory . In the Grand Prix — the new name of the LG Cup — he lost 2 – 5 to Stephen Maguire in the first round . This was followed by his first ranking semi @-@ final , at the British Open , where he was whitewashed 0 – 6 by Higgins . In the Malta Cup , he lost 2 – 5 to Matthew Stevens in the first round . 
 = = = 2005 World Championship = = = 
 Murphy won two qualifying matches to qualify for the 2005 World Championship . He defeated former world champions Higgins 13 – 8 , Davis 13 – 4 , and Peter Ebdon 17 – 12 to reach the final to face Stevens , the world number six . He trailed Stevens 6 – 10 at the end of the first day ( the World Championship final is played over two days ) , but made a comeback to bring the score to 16 – 16 . He then made two frame @-@ winning breaks to lift the title . His 11 century breaks were the most in that year 's tournament . 
 Murphy 's victory was considered a major surprise . His pre @-@ tournament odds were 150 – 1 , and before his win he was considered an underachiever . He became only the third qualifier to win the World Championship ( or to reach the final ) after Alex Higgins in 1972 and Terry Griffiths in 1979 . At the age of 22 , Murphy was the second youngest player to win the World Championship , following Hendry who first lifted the title when he was 21 . No previous world champion had played as many matches ( seven ) to lift the title , and he was the lowest ranked player , at number 48 , to win the tournament . No player had won the World Championship as his first ranking event win since Joe Johnson in 1986 . His run in the tournament earned him the nickname " Magician " and the tournament doubled his previous career prize money , with which he purchased a Mercedes @-@ Benz and a house . After his win , in July 2005 , he married his fiancée Clare . 
 = = = 2005 / 2006 = = = 
 For the new season , he improved his ranking to number 21 , which would not usually guarantee qualification for ranking events . However , as world champion he qualified automatically for every tournament in the season as the number two seed ( and number one seed for the 2006 World Championship ) . He was invited to play in the Premier League Snooker , a non @-@ ranking tournament with a 25 @-@ a @-@ second shot clock , but he went out in the round @-@ robin stage . 
 In the inaugural , non @-@ ranking Northern Ireland Trophy , he reached the quarter @-@ finals before he was defeated 4 – 5 by Neil Robertson . In the first three ranking events of the season — the Grand Prix , the UK Championship , and the Malta Cup — he reached the last 16 , losing final @-@ frame matches to Bingham , Robertson , and Graeme Dott , respectively . After his loss to Bingham , he complained about having to play his match on an outside table , given his world champion status . In the revival of Pot Black , a single @-@ frame knockout tournament not staged since 1991 , Murphy was defeated in the final by Stevens . Murphy was awarded Sportsman of the Year at the BBC East Midlands Sports Awards in December 2005 . 
 In the Masters , Murphy lost 4 – 6 to Higgins in the quarter @-@ finals , but reached his second ranking final in the Welsh Open , losing 4 – 9 to Stephen Lee . In the World Championship , he reached the quarter @-@ finals , but fell victim to the so @-@ called " Crucible Curse " – no first @-@ time champion has successfully defended the title at the Crucible Theatre — when he was defeated 7 – 13 by Ebdon . 
 = = = 2006 / 2007 = = = 
 For the next season , Murphy moved to number five in the world rankings , entering the elite top 16 for the first time , and thereby automatically qualifying for the final stages of ranking tournaments and receiving an automatic invitation to the Masters . 
 In the Northern Ireland Trophy ( a ranking event in this season ) , he lost 4 – 5 to Lee in the quarter @-@ finals , and in the UK Championship , he lost 3 – 9 to Alan McManus in the second round . A 3 – 6 defeat by Stephen Hendry in the quarter @-@ finals of the Masters was followed by his second ranking title , when he defeated Ryan Day 9 – 4 in the final of the Malta Cup . After the victory , he said it was a relief to get rid of the one @-@ hit wonder label . In his next match , a victory over Jamie Cope in the Welsh Open , he scored centuries in four consecutive frames , becoming only the second player to do this ( after Higgins in the 2005 Grand Prix final ) and the only person to do so in a best @-@ of @-@ nine match . He went on to lose 3 – 5 to Maguire in the quarter @-@ finals . In the World Championship , Murphy defeated Stevens 13 – 12 in the quarter @-@ finals — recovering from 5 – 11 down and knocking the latter out of the top 16 — before losing 16 – 17 against Mark Selby in the semi @-@ finals . 
 = = = 2007 / 2008 = = = 
 For the 2007 / 2008 season , he was ranked number three , his highest ever ranking , and reached at least the semi @-@ finals of five ranking events , without winning any . 
 In the inaugural Shanghai Masters , he was defeated 2 – 5 by Ian McCulloch in the first round . He reached the final of the Pot Black , where he was defeated by Doherty . In the Grand Prix , he reached the semi @-@ finals , where he lost 5 – 6 against Ronnie O 'Sullivan , despite leading 5 – 2 . Further semi @-@ finals followed at the Northern Ireland Trophy and the UK Championship , where he was defeated on both occasions by Maguire , 5 – 6 and 5 – 9 , respectively , making it three consecutive semi @-@ final losses . Before the UK Championship , he was provisionally ranked number one . He successfully defended his Malta Cup title ( that year the tournament was not a ranking event ) with a 9 – 3 victory over Doherty in the final . In the China Open , he defeated Selby 6 – 3 in the semi @-@ final — his sixth semi @-@ final in the past seven ranking events — but lost 9 – 10 to Maguire in the final . Before the World Championship , he was again provisional number one . 
 In the World Championship , as one of the favourites , he reached the second round , before losing 4 – 13 to Ali Carter . After his loss , Murphy criticised the state of the tables . 
 = = = 2008 / 2009 = = = 
 Murphy maintained his number three ranking for the 2008 / 2009 season . He won the non @-@ ranking Paul Hunter Classic , defeating Selby 4 – 0 in the final , but lost in the first round of the first four ranking tournaments , including a 4 – 5 defeat by world number 47 Mike Dunn in the Bahrain Championship . In October , Murphy and his wife separated , after three years of marriage ; he did not wear his wedding ring in the Grand Prix . 
 Despite the four consecutive first @-@ round losses — which had been attributed to the split from his wife — Murphy claimed his third ranking title at the UK Championship , defeating Fu 10 – 9 in a low @-@ quality final , in which he fluked a pink in the deciding frame that was effectively match ball . The victory meant he joined Davis , Alex Higgins , Griffiths , John Parrott , Hendry , O 'Sullivan , Williams , John Higgins and Ebdon as the tenth player to have won both the World title and the UK title , cementing his place as one of the elite top players in the world . 
 In the World Championship , there were concerns that Murphy 's estranged wife would serve him divorce papers during play of his first @-@ round match against Andrew Higginson . He defeated Higginson 10 – 8 without incident , although his wife 's parents were present in the arena and were asked to leave . He went on to defeat Fu 13 – 3 , Hendry 13 – 11 , and Robertson 17 – 14 to earn a place in his second world final , with two @-@ time world champion Higgins as the opponent . In the final , he trailed 5 – 11 after the first day , and was beaten 18 – 9 by Higgins . On the first day of the final , a newspaper published a " kiss and tell " story involving Murphy . 
 = = = 2009 / 2010 = = = 
 Murphy maintained his number three ranking for a third year in the 2009 / 2010 season . He successfully defended his Paul Hunter Classic title , defeating White 4 – 0 in the final . He won the Premier League Snooker with a 7 – 3 win against O 'Sullivan in the final , ending the latter 's run of five consecutive wins in the tournament . 
 He reached the semi @-@ finals of the first ranking tournament , the Shanghai Masters , before losing 5 – 6 against Liang Wenbo . This would be his only run to the semi @-@ finals or better in a ranking tournament that season . In the UK Championship , as the defending champion , he lost 5 – 9 to eventual winner Ding Junhui in the second round . After the match , Murphy complained about Ding leaving the arena too often after frames , saying " I can 't believe anyone needs to go to the toilet after every single frame . " He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Masters , where he lost 4 – 6 against Williams . In the Welsh Open and the China Open , he lost his first @-@ round matches to Stevens and Nigel Bond , respectively . In the World Championship , he defeated Gerard Greene and Ding , but lost 12 – 13 against Carter in the quarter @-@ finals , despite leading 8 – 4 . This was the first season in which he did not reach a final or better of a ranking tournament since the 2003 / 2004 season . 
 = = = 2010 / 2011 = = = 
 After three seasons ranked number three , he dropped to number seven for the 2010 / 2011 season . He won the Wuxi Classic , a non @-@ ranking tournament held in China , defeating Ding 9 – 8 , having recovered from 2 – 8 down . Murphy reached the semi @-@ finals of the Paul Hunter Classic , now part of the Players Tour Championship minor @-@ ranking series , but lost 2 – 4 against eventual winner Judd Trump . Murphy won the Brugge Open , the second European event of the Players Tour Championship , with defeating Matthew Couch 4 – 2 in the final . He reached the final of the Ruhr Championship , but lost 2 – 4 against John Higgins . Murphy finished 1st on the Players Tour Championship Order of Merit , couldn 't defend his Premier League Snooker title , as he lost 1 – 7 against Ronnie O 'Sullivan in the final . He then reached the semi @-@ finals of the 2010 UK Championship , where he lost to eventual runner @-@ up Mark Williams 8 – 9 . 
 Murphy lost in the first round of the Masters 3 – 6 against Jamie Cope , in the second round of the German Masters 2 – 5 against Joe Swail and in the first round of the Welsh Open 0 – 4 against Matthew Stevens . Murphy then won the finals of the Players Tour Championship with a 4 – 0 victory over Martin Gould , winning his fourth ranking title . The next week Murphy also reached the final of the Championship League , but lost 1 – 3 against Matthew Stevens . Murphy reached the semi @-@ final of the China Open , where he lost 1 – 6 against Judd Trump . Murphy 's last tournament of the season was the World Championship , where he lost in the second round 10 – 13 against Ronnie O 'Sullivan . 
 = = = 2011 / 2012 = = = 
 Murphy began the 2011 / 2012 season ranked number seven . He could not defend his Wuxi Classic title , as he lost 3 – 6 against Ali Carter . Murphy reached the semi @-@ finals of the Australian Goldfields Open , but lost 2 – 6 against eventual champion Stuart Bingham . At the Shanghai Masters Murphy reached the quarter @-@ finals , but lost 4 – 5 against Mark Selby . Murphy 's next tournament was the Brazil Masters , where he defeated Graeme Dott 5 – 0 in the final . Murphy also participated at the Premier League and ended the league stage with two wins and four losses . As a result , he did not advance to the play @-@ off . Murphy then reached the quarter @-@ finals of the UK Championship , but lost 3 – 6 against Ricky Walden . He also participated at the Players Tour Championship , where his best results came at the Warsaw Classic and the Kay Suzanne Memorial Trophy , where he reached the quarter @-@ finals , but lost 3 – 4 against Neil Robertson and 2 – 4 against Matthew Stevens respectively . He finished number 37 on the Order of Merit , and could not qualify to the Finals to defend his title . 
 Murphy reached his first Masters final , but lost 6 – 10 against Neil Robertson . Murphy then reached the semi @-@ finals of the next two ranking tournaments , but lost 0 – 6 against Stephen Maguire at the German Masters , 2 – 6 against Ding Junhui at the Welsh Open . He then lost in the quarter @-@ finals of the World Open 0 – 5 against Mark Selby . Murphy ended the season with two first round losses . He lost 2 – 5 against wild @-@ card Lu Ning at the China Open and 8 – 10 against Jamie Jones at the World Snooker Championship . 
 = = = 2012 / 2013 = = = 
 Murphy began the 2012 / 2013 season ranked number six . The first tournament for Murphy was the Wuxi Classic , where he lost in the first round 1 – 5 against Ken Doherty . Murphy 's next tournament was the Six @-@ red World Championship , where he finished first in Group E with four wins out of five matches and advanced to the knock @-@ out stage . There he defeated James Wattana , Barry Hawkins , Dominic Dale and Judd Trump to reach the final , but lost 4 – 8 against Mark Davis . He then reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Australian Goldfields Open , but lost 4 – 5 against Peter Ebdon . Murphy gone one better in the next two ranking tournaments , as he reached the semi @-@ finals of the Shanghai Masters and the International Championship , but lost 3 – 6 against John Higgins and 5 – 9 against Neil Robertson respectively . Murphy than reached the final of the 2012 UK Championship courtesy of two tight victories . The first against teenager Luca Brecel in the quarter @-@ finals , after Brecel twice had the chance to pot the final pink and black to win the match , then against Ali Carter in which Murphy recovered from 4 – 8 down and 0 – 32 in points behind in the deciding frame to win 9 – 8 . He was ultimately defeated by good friend Mark Selby 10 – 6 in the final . He also participated at the Players Tour Championship , with his best result coming at the third English event , where he reached the semi @-@ finals , but lost 0 – 4 against Marco Fu . He finished number 29 on the Order of Merit , and couldn 't qualify to the Finals . 
 Murphy began the year by reaching the semi @-@ finals at the Masters , but lost 2 – 6 against Neil Robertson . He then reached the quarter @-@ final of the German Masters , but lost 4 – 5 against Robertson . In the first round of the 2013 World Snooker Championship , Murphy defeated Martin Gould 10 – 5 to advance to the second round , where he faced Graeme Dott , winning 13 – 11 . In the quarter @-@ final , he faced Judd Trump in a tense match that went to a deciding frame , after Trump won five consecutive frames from 7 – 12 down to level at 12 – 12 . Trump ultimately prevailed in a nervy last frame to go through to the semi @-@ final . 
 = = = 2013 / 2014 = = = 
 Murphy 's 2013 / 2014 season began with a shock 1 – 5 defeat by Alex Davies in the qualifying round of the 2013 Wuxi Classic . The tournament was the first to use a new format that required top @-@ 16 players to compete in qualifiers . 
 Between August 2013 and January 2014 , Murphy lost 3 stones ( 42 pounds or 19 kg ) in weight , due to a new diet and fitness regime . He stated that one of his health and fitness goals was to improve his stamina and concentration at the table . 
 In group two of the 2014 Championship League , he made his second official maximum break in his round @-@ robin match against Mark Davis . 
 In the first round of the Masters , Murphy came back from 2 – 4 behind to defeat Ding Junhui 6 – 4 . He produced another comeback in the quarter @-@ finals , where he trailed Marco Fu 1 – 4 before winning five frames in a row to clinch a 6 – 4 victory . He faced defending champion Mark Selby in the semi @-@ finals , but lost 1 – 6 . 
 In February 2014 , while playing Jamie Jones in the last 16 of the minor @-@ ranking Gdynia Open , Murphy made his second 147 break of the season and the third of his professional career . He went on to win the tournament , defeating Fergal O 'Brien 4 – 1 in the final to capture his first title in 29 months . The following month , he defeated Selby 10 – 6 in the final of the World Open , winning the fifth ranking title of his career and his first ranking title in three years . 
 At the World Championship , Murphy defeated Jamie Cope 10 – 9 and Marco Fu 13 – 8 to reach the quarter @-@ finals , where he faced defending champion Ronnie O 'Sullivan . Although Murphy won the first two frames and left O 'Sullivan requiring three snookers in the third frame , O 'Sullivan ultimately made the score 2 – 1 then won 12 of the next 13 to defeat Murphy 13 – 3 with a session to spare . 
 = = = 2014 / 2015 = = = 
 In October 2014 , he won the Bulgarian Open defeating Martin Gould 4 – 2 in the final . Two weeks later he reached the final of the General Cup but lost 6 – 7 against Ali Carter . In November , he won the Ruhr Open beating Robert Milkins 4 – 0 in the final . In the second frame of the final he achieved the fourth maximum break of his career after missing out on the maximum on two previous occasions during that day , in matches against Joe Swail where Murphy made a break of 129 before missing the blue ball and in a match against Mark Williams with the break ending on the green ball and thus 122 . In 2014 , Shaun Murphy became the first player to make three maximums in a calendar year . 
 In January 2015 , at the Masters , Murphy beat Mark Selby , Stephen Maguire and Mark Allen en route to the final against Neil Robertson . Murphy won the match 10 – 2 , completing his career Triple Crown . 
 In the World Championship , Murphy , seeded eighth , beat Robin Hull 10 – 3 , Joe Perry 13 – 5 , Anthony McGill 13 – 8 and Barry Hawkins 17 – 9 to reach his third World Championship final , meeting tenth seed Stuart Bingham . In the final , despite leading 3 – 0 and 8 – 5 , Murphy fell behind 14 – 11 in the third session . Despite fighting back to level the score at 15 – 15 , Murphy lost the next three frames and the final 18 – 15 . 
 = = Rivalry = = 
 Murphy has clashed with Stephen Maguire , another of the 2000 Young Players of Distinction , on several occasions . At the start of their 2004 Grand Prix match , there was an incident that resulted in Maguire being docked the opening frame . After they had shaken hands at the outset of the first frame , Maguire asked referee Johan <unk> for permission to leave the arena and retrieve his chalk , which he had forgotten . While Maguire was away , the referee and Murphy spoke before tournament director Mike Ganley arrived on the scene and docked Maguire a frame for technically not being ready to start at the scheduled time , which angered and surprised Maguire . Murphy refutes that the docking of the frame was down to him speaking to the referee . Maguire won the match 5 – 2 and later commented : " Rules are rules but I 've never heard of anything like that happening before " . 
 Further incidents came in subsequent years . During the 2006 World Championship , Maguire said " I don 't want to be a fat world champion " , a reference to Murphy . After beating Murphy in the 2007 Welsh Open , Maguire said of the chalk incident , " That put the icing on the cake , but we 've always had a rivalry . I dislike him and I think he dislikes me . I try hard to beat everyone , but it would have hurt more if I 'd lost to him . " Murphy currently leads the head @-@ to @-@ head 12 – 10 . 
 Murphy has been outspoken about several other of his rivals , criticising them for having too many toilet breaks and complaining about table conditions among other things . Murphy also makes collective criticisms of his fellow professionals for not attending events and has branded other players ' concerns over prize money as a joke . Murphy 's harshest criticism has been reserved for Ronnie O 'Sullivan . Murphy highlights what he perceives to be O 'Sullivan 's lack of professionalism . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Murphy is noted for his straight cue action — which Davis once called " the best cue action I 've ever seen " — his long potting , and his <unk> . Phil Yates wrote in 2008 in The Times that Murphy has improved his tactical game since his World Championship victory . He has compiled more than 300 century breaks and has made four maximum breaks . His career earnings amount to more than £ 2 million . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Murphy was born in Harlow and grew up in Irthlingborough . He was home @-@ schooled from age 13 after being bullied at school , and his parents split up when he was 14 . He lived with his father Tony , a former professional golfer , and did not see his mother again until he was 19 . During the 2007 World Championship , it was reported that he had developed a rift with his father , who was a member of the World Snooker board . He said that they had not spoken in over a year , but that he would willingly speak to his father again if the other called him . 
 Murphy moved to Rotherham during the 2004 season to be with his fiancée , Clare , whom he married in July 2005 . Murphy 's wife filed for divorce in 2009 on the grounds of infidelity after The People newspaper published an exposé revealing he had spent the night with an escort girl he had met at a religious youth group . Murphy 's then manager , Brandon Parker , issued a statement confirming that Murphy had slept with the woman but denied he had been unfaithful , stating that Murphy did not have sex with her . He also dated Claire Chorlton , who was first introduced to the viewing public backstage during the final of the 2012 UK Championship . Murphy is currently engaged to his girlfriend Elaine , after proposing marriage at a restaurant in her native Ireland during Christmas 2014 , and he now lives just outside Nottingham . 
 Murphy has been a Christian since 15 , after meeting a religious family on holiday . Murphy is well known for his charitable nature , having spent some of the summer of 2006 doing aid work in Zimbabwe with his then wife , Clare . He also donated one @-@ tenth of his 2005 World Championship winnings to the church , and at the 2012 World Snooker Championship Murphy donated £ 100 to the Royal Manchester Children 's Hospital Charity for every century he made . 
 = = Performance and rankings timeline = = 
 = = Career finals = = 
 = = = Ranking event finals : 12 ( 6 titles , 6 runners @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Minor @-@ ranking event finals : 6 ( 4 titles , 2 runner @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Non @-@ ranking event finals : 18 ( 10 titles , 8 runners @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Pro @-@ am event wins = = = 
 Paul Hunter Classic – 2008 , 2009 
 = = = Variant event finals : 1 ( 1 runner @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = Maximum breaks = = 
 = Hurricane Klaus ( 1984 ) = 
 This article is about the Hurricane Klaus of 1984 ; there was also a Hurricane Klaus that was retired in the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 Hurricane Klaus was a North Atlantic hurricane that hit the Leeward Islands from the west in November of the 1984 Atlantic hurricane season . Forming from a broad area of low pressure on November 5 , Klaus maintained a northeast movement throughout much of its path . After making landfall on extreme eastern Puerto Rico , it passed to the north of the Leeward Islands , resulting in strong southwesterly winds and rough seas . Klaus attained hurricane status and reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) before becoming extratropical over cooler waters on November 13 . The storm dropped heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico , causing minor flooding and light damage . Klaus caused heavy marine damage in the Leeward Islands , including wrecking at least three ships . The Virgin Islands experienced heavy damage as well . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A broad area of low pressure gradually developed over the extreme southeastern Caribbean Sea on November 1 . It moved slowly westward and steadily organized . By November 4 , the system stalled to the north of Curaçao , which was followed by a turn to the northeast . Convection slowly organized as a surface circulation formed , and on November 5 the system developed into Tropical Depression Fifteen . Initially weak with only 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) winds , the depression steadily organized as it moved northeastward , and a Reconnaissance Aircraft mission confirmed the existence of the cyclone on November 6 as it was located midway between Puerto Rico and the Netherlands Antilles . Late on the 6th , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Klaus while located a short distance south of Puerto Rico . 
 Tropical Storm Klaus continued northeastward , and made landfall on extreme eastern Puerto Rico early on November 7 . The storm passed a short distance north of the Lesser Antilles , and became the first tropical cyclone in recorded history to affect the islands from the west . Favorable conditions allowed the storm to continue strengthening , and Klaus attained hurricane status early on November 8 . The hurricane accelerated to the northeast , and reached its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) late on November 8 . After maintaining its peak strength for 30 hours , Klaus weakened slightly . Interaction with an upper @-@ level low turned the hurricane westward on November 11 , though an approaching trough of low pressure turned Hurricane Klaus to the northeast . Cold air and cooler waters weakened the convection around the center on November 12 , and Klaus degenerated to a subtropical storm . It accelerated to the northeast and degenerated to an extratropical storm on November 13 while located about 440 miles ( 700 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Six hours later , it was absorbed by another extratropical system . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Shortly after forming , gale warnings were issued for Puerto Rico , the Virgin Islands , the Netherlands Antilles of the Leeward Islands , Saint Kitts and Nevis , and Anguilla . Klaus was the first tropical cyclone on record to hit the Leeward Islands from the west , and as a result many were unprepared for the strong winds and rough seas from the southwest . 
 = = Impact = = 
 While moving past Puerto Rico , Tropical Storm Klaus dropped heavy rainfall peaking at 25 @.@ 69 inches ( 653 mm ) in <unk> Camp in the southeastern part of the island . Much of the southern half of Puerto Rico reported over 7 inches ( 178 mm ) . Vieques received around 7 inches ( 178 mm ) of precipitation , while Culebra experienced over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . The heavy rainfall resulted in freshwater flooding . The strongest winds of the storm remained offshore , and wind gusts peaked at 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) in Roosevelt Roads Naval Station . Winds and rainfall on the island resulted in downed trees and power lines , though damage was minimal . Klaus struck the island on election day , causing slight disruptions to the process . 
 Saint John in the United States Virgin Islands reported over 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of rainfall in association with Tropical Storm Klaus . Both Saint Thomas and Saint Croix received around 10 inches ( 250 mm ) , while rainfall in the British Virgin Islands remained below 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . Tropical Storm Klaus caused severe flooding and extensive damage throughout the U.S. Virgin Islands . Strong southwesterly winds resulted in gale force winds and rough seas along the southwestern portions of the Leeward Islands . The rough waves caused considerable damage to marine interests in the area . In Anguilla , three ships were wrecked . 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) off of Saint Martin , the rough seas wrecked a cruise ship . The 60 passengers and 23 crew members swam safely to shore , though one person was hospitalized . Rough seas also damaged local coral reefs . 10 @,@ 000 people were affected on the island of Dominica . There , the storm caused $ 2 million ( 1984 USD , $ 3 @.@ 9 million 2006 USD ) in damage and resulted in two fatalities . In Antigua , strong waves from the hurricane produced severe beach erosion , which endangered a highway behind an eroded beach . Beach erosion was reported in nearby Barbuda , as well . The British Virgin Islands sustained moderate damage totaling to $ 152 million ( 1984 USD , $ 315 million 2008 USD ) . St. Kitts and Nevis also saw much Leeward coastal damage resulting from the storm , the worst impact being the destruction of the Sandy Point town port in Saint Kitts . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Anguilla , nine ships , including three that were wrecked from the hurricane , were intentionally sunk in 1990 to create an artificial reef . About a month after the storm passed , President Ronald Reagan declared the U.S. Virgin Islands a major disaster area . The declaration permitted use of federal funds for recovery . The Federal Emergency Management Agency provided an average relief fund of $ 2 @,@ 128 ( 1984 USD , $ 4 @,@ 147 2006 USD ) per affected person , the smallest return rate for a declared disaster in the Virgin Islands . 
 Because damage was not significant , the name Klaus was not retired after this year , but a different Hurricane Klaus in 1990 was retired , and was replaced by Kyle in 1996 . 
 = The Boat ( The Office ) = 
 " The Boat " is the sixth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 182nd episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC on November 8 , 2012 . It guest stars Josh Groban as Andy 's brother Walter . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) must help his family when his dad loses all of their money , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) is pranked into thinking he is a guest on a radio show , and Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) learns of Oscar Martinez 's ( Oscar Nunez ) affair with Angela Martin 's husband . 
 " The Boat " received positive reviews from television critics . The episode was also viewed by 4 @.@ 83 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 percent rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , ranking third in its timeslot , making it the highest rated episode of the season at the time of its airing . The episode ultimately ranked as the second @-@ highest rated NBC series of the night , after The Voice . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) learns that his father took all the family money and fled to Argentina with his mistress . Left to pick up the pieces , Andy sells off family heirlooms , and is upset that he has to sell the family boat for lack of any other means for his mother to support herself . Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) convinces him that before he sells the boat , they should take it out for one last sunset cruise , and they drive to Stamford , Connecticut , where the boat is docked . Andy starts to hoist the main sail , but is stopped by a broker who is to sail it to the Caribbean for the buyer . With Erin 's encouragement , Andy decides to take the boat to the Caribbean himself . He then finds his drunken brother Walter ( Josh Groban ) passed out in the liquor closet . Walter comes to and tells Andy he wanted to get the first relapse out of the way before checking into rehab . Andy invites him on the trip , saying they both need family time together and leaves , thanking Erin for her encouragement . Erin says to the camera that she would have loved to go with him if he asked . Back in the office that evening , Pete ( Jake Lacy ) asks Erin to join him for drinks , and she accepts . 
 A local radio show schedules an interview with Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) to discuss Dunder Mifflin , but the interview is later canceled . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) suggests they all use this to their advantage , and stage an interview for Dwight 's benefit . Dwight believes he is talking to the interviewer through the phone in the break room , but is actually talking to Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) who is using an American accent . They convince him that the information he is giving leads to a hostage situation with CEO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) cornered in his house . Dwight calls David and tries to talk him into surrendering to the police . David is confused but nonetheless responds in a way that leads Dwight to believe he was successful . He emerges from the break room and is greeted by a round of applause from his coworkers . 
 Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) overhears Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) confessing to the camera that he is having an affair with Angela 's ( Angela Kinsey ) husband Robert Lipton ( Jack Coleman ) . Oscar makes Kevin promise not to reveal anything . During the day , Angela constantly makes unconscious double entendres and foreshadowing , sorely tempting Kevin to let out what he knows . Afraid that Kevin cannot keep his secret , Oscar tries to frame Kevin so that Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) will have him fired , but later confesses to him that he lied . Later , Robert visits the office , and Oscar asks unnaturally nervous around him . Before Angela 's suspicions can be aroused , Kevin interrupts to cheer Robert on about his upcoming election . Oscar says to the camera that he is proud of how Kevin kept the secret , but Kevin then reveals that he momentarily forgot all about the secret , and begins to laugh uncontrollably . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Boat " was written by executive producer Dan Sterling , his first credit for the series . He was hired before production on the ninth season started as executive producer , to replace Mindy Kaling , who departed full @-@ time involvement on the series following the eighth season . The episode was also directed by series cast member John Krasinski , his third directing credit for the series after the sixth season episode " Sabre " and the eighth season episode , " Lotto " . The episode features the return of Andy 's brother , Walter Jr . , played by Josh Groban , who is now a drunk . He previously appeared in the eighth season episode , " Garden Party " . The episode also guest stars Andy Buckley in voice only . Buckley portrayed David Wallace , the CFO of Dunder Mifflin from seasons two to six . He was recently brought back on board near the end of season eight . Following this episode , Ed Helms will be written out of several episodes , in order to film The Hangover Part III . 
 The official website of The Office included several cut scenes from " The Boat " within a week of the episode 's release . In the first 57 @-@ second clip , Dwight gets mad when Jim is called a superior salesman and when Nellie claims beet farmers and Battlestar Galactica fans have low IQ levels , during the radio show prank . In the second 53 @-@ second clip , Erin goes through several attempts to cheer up Andy . In the third 37 @-@ second clip , more scenes from the false hostage situation are seen . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dwight claims that the radio is using Gotcha journalism . In order to cover up for Oscar , Kevin starts chanting " U @-@ S @-@ A ! " , a popular Olympic chant . When Oscar admits that he lied to Toby , Toby goes on a tangential rant about the Scranton Strangler , a reference to a minor plot development that occurred during the show 's sixth and seventh seasons . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Boat " was originally scheduled to air on NBC on November 1 , 2012 but was replaced with a rerun of The Voice . NBC claimed it was for those affected by Hurricane Sandy , however the schedule change happened nationwide . It eventually aired a week later , on November 8 , 2012 . In its original broadcast , " The Boat " was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 83 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked an increase in the ratings from the previous episode , " Here Comes Treble " , which had reached a series low in the ratings . The episode tied with the Fox series Glee for third in its timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 3 / 8 percent rating and an entry of the CBS drama Person of Interest , which received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 percent rating . The Office was also the second highest @-@ rated NBC television program of the night , after an episode of The Voice . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Boat " received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The A.V. Club reviewer Erik Adams called it " another solid late @-@ period episode " , praising Rainn Wilson 's commitment to Dwight throughout the main plotline . He also complimented the Andy @-@ Erin subplot , and considered it superior to the previous episode for featuring more consistency in Andy 's characterization . He also complimented Dan Sterling and John Krasinski 's work on the episode , saying that the script made " good on previous hints that Andy and Erin ’ s story won ’ t end like Jim and Pam ’ s " and that Krasinski 's direction added " just enough energy not to feel overwhelming " . He gave the episode a " B + " . IGN writer Cindy White called the episode a " pleasant surprise " , for its use of the supporting characters and its development of the season 's plotlines . She complimented most of the subplots , and compared Pete and Erin 's romance to Jim and Pam 's from the early seasons of the series . Her only complaint was Andy 's characterization throughout the episode and the ninth season , as a whole , for being " mopey and self @-@ obsessed . " Despite this , she gave the episode an 8 @.@ 0 / 10 , calling it " Great " . WhatCulture ! reviewer Joseph Kratzer gave the episode four stars out of five , praising the episode for making the previously unsuccessful Oscar @-@ Senator storyline and the Andy 's bankrupt family storyline entertaining . He also complimented the fact that Jim and Pam 's bickering from the previous episode was not expanded upon , and praised their prank on Dwight , calling it a " great bit " and " an excellent comedic balance to the more serious story of Andy ’ s inner demons . " 
 Michael Tedder of New York called the episode " the single funniest episode of the show since Steve Carell left " and praised Brian Baumgartner 's performance for hitting " notes of sweetness , frustration , and emotional confusion that normally get written for the <unk> " . He also praised the plotlines , writing that " what made this episode so great was that not only did every plot line work [ ... ] but every moment positively sang " . He gave the episode five stars , concluding that " The Office still has some surprises in it " . 
 = Great Lakes Storm of 1913 = 
 The Great Lakes Storm of 1913 , historically referred to as the " Big Blow , " the " Freshwater Fury , " or the " White Hurricane , " was a blizzard with hurricane @-@ force winds that devastated the Great Lakes Basin in the Midwestern United States and the province of Ontario in Canada from November 7 through November 10 , 1913 . The storm was most powerful on November 9 , battering and overturning ships on four of the five Great Lakes , particularly Lake Huron . Deceptive lulls in the storm and the slow pace of weather reports contributed to the storm 's destructiveness . 
 The deadliest and most destructive natural disaster ever to hit the lakes , the Great Lakes Storm killed more than 250 people , destroyed 19 ships , and stranded 19 others . The financial loss in vessels alone was nearly US $ 5 million ( or about $ 119 @,@ 714 @,@ 000 in today 's dollars ) . This included about $ 1 million at current value in lost cargo totalling about 68 @,@ 300 tons , such as coal , iron ore , and grain . 
 The storm , an extratropical cyclone , originated as the convergence of two major storm fronts , fueled by the lakes ' relatively warm waters — a seasonal process called a " November gale " . It produced 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) wind gusts , waves over 35 feet ( 11 m ) high , and whiteout snowsqualls . Analysis of the storm and its impact on humans , engineering structures , and the landscape led to better forecasting and faster responses to storm warnings , stronger construction ( especially of marine vessels ) , and improved preparedness . 
 = = Background = = 
 The immense volume of water in the five Great Lakes holds heat that allows the lakes to remain relatively warm for much later into the year and postpones the Arctic spread in the region . During the autumn months , two major weather tracks converge over the area . Cold , dry air moves south / southeast from the province of Alberta and northern Canada ; warm , moist air moves north / northeast from the Gulf of Mexico , along the lee of the central Rocky Mountains . The collision of these masses forms large storm systems in the middle of the North American continent , including the Great Lakes . When the cold air from these storms moves over the lakes , it is warmed by the waters below and picks up a spin . As the cyclonic system continues over the lakes , its power is intensified by the jet stream above and the warm waters below . 
 The result is commonly referred to as a " November gale " or " November witch . " Such a storm can maintain hurricane @-@ force wind gusts , produce waves over 50 feet ( 15 m ) high , and dump several inches of rain or feet of snow . Fuelled by the warm lake water , these powerful storms may remain over the Great Lakes for days . Intense winds ravage the lakes and surrounding shores , severely eroding and flooding the shorelines . 
 November gales have been a bane of the Great Lakes , with at least 25 killer storms striking the region since 1847 . During the Big Blow of 1905 , 27 wooden vessels were lost . During a November gale in 1975 , the giant ore bulk carrier SS Edmund Fitzgerald sank suddenly with all hands , without a distress signal . 
 = = Prelude to the storm = = 
 The storm was first noticed on Thursday , November 6 , on the western side of Lake Superior , moving rapidly toward northern Lake Michigan . The weather forecast in The Detroit News called for " moderate to brisk " winds for the Great Lakes , with occasional rains Thursday night or Friday for the upper lakes ( except on southern Lake Huron ) , and fair to unsettled conditions for the lower lakes . 
 Around midnight , the steamer Cornell , while 50 miles ( 80 km ) west of Whitefish Point in Lake Superior , ran into a sudden northerly gale and was badly damaged . This gale lasted until late November 10 , almost forcing Cornell ashore . 
 = = Storm = = 
 = = = November 7 = = = 
 On Friday , the weather forecast in the Port Huron Times @-@ Herald of Port Huron , Michigan , described the storm as " moderately severe . " By then , the storm was centered over the upper Mississippi Valley and had caused moderate to brisk southerly winds with warmer weather over the lakes . The forecast predicted increased winds and falling temperatures over the next 24 hours . 
 At 10 : 00 a.m. , Coast Guard stations and United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) Weather Bureau offices at Lake Superior ports raised white pennants above square red flags with black centers , indicating a storm warning with northwesterly winds . By late afternoon , the storm signal flags were replaced with a vertical sequence of red , white , and red lanterns , indicating that a hurricane with winds over 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) was coming . The winds on Lake Superior had already reached 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , and an accompanying blizzard was moving toward Lake Huron . 
 = = = November 8 = = = 
 By Saturday , the storm 's status had been upgraded to " severe " . The storm was centered over eastern Lake Superior , covering the entire lake basin . The weather forecast of the Port Huron Times @-@ Herald stated that southerly winds had remained " moderate to brisk " . Northwesterly winds had reached gale strength on northern Lake Michigan and western Lake Superior , with winds of up to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at Duluth , Minnesota . 
 A false lull in the storm ( a " sucker hole " ) allowed traffic to begin flowing again , both down the St. Marys River and up Lake Erie , and the Detroit and St. Clair rivers , into Lake Huron . Gale wind flags were raised at more than a hundred ports , but were ignored by many ship captains . Long ships traveled all that day through the St. Marys River , all night through the Straits of Mackinac , and early Sunday morning up the Detroit and St. Clair rivers . 
 = = = November 9 = = = 
 By noon on Sunday , weather conditions on lower Lake Huron were close to normal for a November gale . Barometric pressures in some areas began to rise , bringing hope of an end to the storm . The low pressure area that had moved across Lake Superior was moving northeast , away from the lakes . 
 The Weather Bureau had issued the first of its twice @-@ daily reports at approximately 8 : 00 a.m. ; it did not send another report to Washington , D.C. until 8 : 00 p.m. This proved to be a serious problem : the storm would have the better part of a day to build up hurricane forces before the Bureau headquarters in Washington , D.C. , would have detailed information . 
 Along southeastern Lake Erie , near the city of Erie , Pennsylvania , a southern low @-@ pressure area was moving toward the lake . This low had formed overnight , so was absent from Friday 's weather map . It had been traveling northward and began moving northwestward after passing over Washington , D.C. 
 The intense counterclockwise rotation of the low was made apparent by the changing wind directions around its center . In Buffalo , New York , morning northwest winds had shifted to northeast by noon and were blowing southeast by 5 : 00 p.m. , with the fastest gusts , 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , occurring between 1 : 00 p.m. and 2 : 00 p.m. Just 180 miles ( 290 km ) to the southwest , in Cleveland , winds remained northwest during the day , shifting to the west by 5 : 00 p.m. , and maintaining speeds of more than 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . The fastest gust in Cleveland , 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) , occurred at 4 : 40 p.m. There was a dramatic drop in barometric pressure at Buffalo , from 29 @.@ 52 inHg ( 999 @.@ 7 hPa ) at 8 : 00 a.m. to 28 @.@ 77 inHg ( 974 @.@ 3 hPa ) at 8 : 00 p.m. 
 The rotating low continued along its northward path into the evening , bringing its counterclockwise winds in phase with the northwesterly winds already hitting Lakes Superior and Huron . This resulted in an explosive increase in northerly wind speeds and swirling snow . Ships on Lake Huron that were south of Alpena , Michigan — especially around Harbor Beach and Port Huron in Michigan and Goderich and Sarnia in Ontario — were battered with massive waves moving southward toward St. Clair River . 
 From 8 : 00 p.m. to midnight , the storm became what modern meteorologists call a " weather bomb " . Sustained hurricane @-@ speed winds of more than 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ravaged the four western lakes . The worst damage was done on Lake Huron as numerous ships scrambled for shelter along its southern end . Gusts of 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) were reported off Harbor Beach , Michigan . The lake 's shape allowed northerly winds to increase unchecked , because of the lower surface friction of water compared to land , and the wind following the lake 's long axis . 
 In retrospect , weather forecasters of the time did not have enough data or understanding of atmospheric dynamics to predict or comprehend the events of Sunday , November 9 . Frontal mechanisms , referred to then as " squall lines " , were not yet understood . Surface observations were collected only twice daily at stations around the country , and by the time these data were collected and hand @-@ drawn maps created , the information lagged actual weather conditions by hours . 
 = = = November 10 and 11 = = = 
 On Monday morning , the storm had moved northeast of London , Ontario , dragging lake effect blizzards in its wake . An additional 17 inches ( 43 cm ) of snow were dumped on Cleveland , Ohio that day , filling the streets with snowdrifts 6 feet ( 2 m ) high . Streetcar operators stayed with their stranded , powerless vehicles for two nights , eating whatever food was provided by local residents . Travelers were forced to take shelter and wait for things to clear . 
 By Tuesday , the storm was rapidly moving across eastern Canada . Without the warm lake waters , it lost power quickly . This also meant less snowfall , both because of the fast motion of the storm and the lack of lake effect snow . All shipping was halted on Monday and part of Tuesday along the St. Lawrence River around Montreal , Quebec . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Historically , storms of such magnitude and with such high wind velocities have not lasted more than four or five hours . The Great Lakes storm , however , raged for more than 16 hours , with an average speed of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) , and frequent bursts of more than 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . It crippled traffic on the lakes and throughout the Great Lakes basin region . 
 = = = Surrounding shoreline = = = 
 Along the shoreline , blizzards shut down traffic and communication , causing hundreds of thousands of dollars in damage . A 22 @-@ inch ( 56 cm ) snowfall in Cleveland , Ohio , put stores out of business for two days . There were four @-@ foot ( 122 cm ) snowdrifts around Lake Huron . Power was out for several days across Michigan and Ontario , cutting off telephone and telegraph communications . A recently completed US $ 100 @,@ 000 Chicago breakwater , intended to protect the Lincoln Park basin from storms , was swept away in a few hours . The Milwaukee harbor lost its entire south breakwater and much of the surrounding South Park area that had been recently renovated . 
 After the final blizzards hit Cleveland , the city was paralyzed under feet of ice and snow and was without power for days . Telephone poles had been broken , and power cables lay in tangled masses . The November 11 Plain Dealer described the aftermath : 
 " Cleveland lay in white and mighty solitude , mute and deaf to the outside world , a city of lonesome <unk> , storm @-@ swept from end to end , when the violence of the two @-@ day blizzard lessened late yesterday afternoon . " 
 William H. Alexander , Cleveland 's chief weather forecaster , observed : 
 " Take it all in all — the depth of the snowfall , the tremendous wind , the amount of damage done and the total unpreparedness of the people — I think it is safe to say that the present storm is the worst experienced in Cleveland during the whole forty @-@ three years the Weather Bureau has been established in the city . " 
 = = = On the lakes = = = 
 The greatest damage was done on the lakes . Major shipwrecks occurred on all but Lake Ontario , with most happening on southern and western Lake Huron . Lake masters recounted that waves reached at least 35 feet ( 11 m ) in height . Being shorter in length than waves ordinarily formed by gales , they occurred in rapid succession , with three waves frequently striking in succession . Masters also stated that the wind often blew in directions opposite to the waves below . This was the result of the storm 's cyclonic motion , a phenomenon rarely seen on the Great Lakes . 
 In the late afternoon of November 10 , an unknown vessel was spotted floating upside @-@ down in about 60 feet ( 18 m ) of water on the eastern coast of Michigan , within sight of <unk> Beach and the mouth of the St. Clair River . Determining the identity of this " mystery ship " became of regional interest , resulting in daily front @-@ page newspaper articles . The ship eventually sank , and it was not until early Saturday morning , November 15 , that it was finally identified as the Charles S. Price . ( This was the first time in Great Lakes history that a fully loaded ore carrier had been capsized . ) The front page of that day 's Port Huron Times @-@ Herald extra edition read , " BOAT IS <unk> — <unk> IS BAKER — <unk> <unk> " . Milton Smith , an assistant engineer who decided at the last moment not to join his crew on premonition of disaster , aided in identifying any bodies that were found . 
 The final tally of financial loss included US $ 2 @,@ 332 @,@ 000 for vessels totally lost , $ 830 @,@ 900 for vessels that became constructive total losses , $ 620 @,@ 000 for vessels stranded but returned to service , and approximately $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in lost cargoes . This figure did not include financial losses in coastal cities . 
 The storm had several long @-@ term consequences . Complaints against the USDA Weather Bureau of alleged unpreparedness resulted in increased efforts to achieve more accurate weather forecasting and faster realization and communication of proper storm warnings . Criticism of the shipping companies and shipbuilders led to a series of conferences with insurers and mariners to seek safer designs for vessels . This resulted in the construction of ships with greater stability and more longitudinal strength . Immediately following the blizzard of Cleveland , Ohio , the city began a campaign to move all utility cables underground , in tubes beneath major streets . The project took half a decade . 
 = = Ships foundered = = 
 The following list includes ships that sank during the storm , killing their entire crews . It does not include the three victims from the freighter William Nottingham , who volunteered to leave the ship on a lifeboat in search of assistance . While the boat was being lowered into the water , a breaking wave smashed it into the side of the ship . The men disappeared into the near @-@ freezing waters below . The following shipwreck casualties have been documented : 
 Lake Superior 
 Leafield : 18 victims 
 Henry B. Smith : 25 victims 
 Lake Michigan 
 Plymouth ( barge ) : 7 victims 
 Lake Huron 
 Argus : 28 victims 
 James Carruthers : 22 victims 
 Hydrus : 25 victims 
 John A. <unk> : 28 victims 
 Charles S. Price : 28 victims 
 Regina : 20 victims 
 Isaac M. Scott : 28 victims 
 Wexford : 20 victims 
 Lake Erie 
 Lightship LV 82 , Buffalo : 6 victims 
 Of the twelve ships that sank in the storm , three have never been found : Leafield , James Carruthers , and Plymouth . The most recent discovery is Hydrus , which was located in the summer of 2015 . The last wreck found previous to Hydrus was Henry B. Smith in 2013 . 
 = Star Fox Command = 
 Star Fox Command ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Sutā <unk> Komando ) is the fifth game in Nintendo 's Shoot ' em up Star Fox series , published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS in 2006 and 2007 . Released in Japan on August 3 , 2006 and in North America on August 28 , 2006 , it was first announced at the E3 2005 conference , under the name Star Fox DS . Command is the first Star Fox game for a handheld , and supports the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , making it the first online Star Fox game . Star Fox Command returns the series to its roots as an air @-@ combat game . Fox 's redesign here would later go on to be used in future iterations of Nintendo 's hit fighting series , Super Smash Bros. 
 The game 's plot involves the protagonist Fox McCloud and his team setting out to defend their homes from aliens known as the Anglar . Q @-@ Games originally worked on a puzzle game , which Nintendo decided to turn into a DS game . The game was generally well @-@ received ; it has achieved an average score of 76 % from Game Rankings , a reviews aggregate . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Star Fox Command has two types of single @-@ player gameplay : a strategic map mode , and a battle mode . The overworld @-@ like map mode is where the player takes command of several ships . This mode is used to get ships into the battle mode and is essentially a simple turn @-@ based strategy game . Up to four ships can be maneuvered at a time . The object of this mode is to prevent enemy ships from reaching the Great Fox . This mode also allows players to fire missiles from the Great Fox that they have picked up from exploring in this mode , or from meeting certain conditions in the battle mode ( usually destroying all enemies ) . When a craft that is controlled by the player encounters an enemy group or missile in this mode , the gameplay switches to the battle mode . 
 Battle mode is similar to the " all @-@ range mode " employed in Star Fox 64 for some bosses and levels . Like the cancelled Star Fox 2 the game is completely all @-@ range , as opposed to the " on @-@ rails " levels featured in most other Star Fox games ( however , the game will sometimes force the player to engage in classic " chase " missions in order to complete an objective ) . The usual objectives are to destroy a base ship , destroy all enemies , or collect a number of cores to complete the battle mode . Once the battle mode is completed , the game returns to the map mode . As players progress through the game , they will be able to choose to go different routes upon completing certain levels . Each route has its own character dialogue to accompany it , and players will be able to visit differing planets depending on what routes they choose . The game features 9 different endings altogether , and gamers can access all of them by playing the game multiple times , selecting different routes each time . Instead of merely giving different perspectives on what happens to the Star Fox team , each ending is unique — the characters go in various directions depending on what ending is watched . Star Fox Command does not feature traditional voice acting . Instead it outputs gibberish akin to the " voices " in Star Fox for the SNES , or the " Lylat speech " present in Lylat Wars ( but not Star Fox 64 ) . Players can also record their own voices into the game ’ s " gibberish generator " using the built @-@ in DS microphone where it is converted into the garbled speech of the various characters . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Star Fox Command supports six players in local wireless multiplayer matches via DS Download Play and up to three players on the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . In Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection matches , only the Arwing II is available . Players score not by killing opponents , but by collecting stars from them when they have been destroyed . It is also possible to collect a star from an opponent not killed by the player . This is a modified version of the mode from Star Fox 64 / Lylat Wars . Nintendo WiFi uses a ranking system based on rankings of the alphabet with Z being the lowest and A being the highest . Players work their way up from Z by collecting wins ( it could be based on points ) . For every win a player gains a certain amount of percent and once they reach 100 % they move to the next letter . The highest rank a player can get is 100 % of the A rank . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 This installment of the Star Fox series is once again in the Lylat system , using a similar map as Star Fox 64 to switch between each area . However , not all the planets seen in Star Fox 64 are visited , such as <unk> and Macbeth , and do not appear on the map . <unk> , only seen in the Nintendo Power Star Fox comic , is mentioned in one of the <unk> has the largest number of playable characters in any Star Fox game , with a total of fourteen , which include Fox McCloud , Falco Lombardi , Krystal , Slippy Toad , Peppy Hare , Wolf O 'Donnell , Panther <unk> , Leon <unk> , Amanda ( Slippy 's fianceé ) , Lucy Hare ( Peppy 's daughter ) , Bill Grey , Katt Monroe , Dash Bowman ( Andross ' grandson ) , and James <unk> <unk> is one of the game 's bosses . <unk> Toad makes an appearance during a mission briefing . <unk> 64 is not playable , but pilots the Great Fox when on the map screen . <unk> <unk> appears as a boss in two of Falco 's stories . The ghost of Andross , possessing a different bioweapon ( Monarch <unk> , <unk> , Killer Bee , or Dune Worm ) depending on the mission , appears as a boss on Titania . <unk> , an F @-@ Zero racer , appears as a boss in certain <unk> and Venom missions . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The planet Venom 's forces were all but destroyed , and there is thought to be peace . This is not to be , however , as a race of beings known as the Anglar rise from the acidic oceans of Venom , thought to be unable to support life . The leader of the Anglar plans on destroying the Lylat system , which Fox McCloud and crew set out to save once again . The Star Fox team has broken up , but re @-@ assembles to fight this new threat . Peppy is made the General of the <unk> Army , replacing Pepper . Fox flew around the Lylat system with <unk> on patrol , and Krystal broke off her relationship with Fox after she left the team , because he was afraid she would receive injury and it would affect him . Slippy finds love with a frog named Amanda , and thus spends less time with the team . Falco left the team and went around on solo missions ( as he has done before in Star Fox Adventures ) . There are nine endings depending on paths chosen by the player , though the player is required to finish the game before having the options . Designers have hinted that a possible Star Fox game in the future may begin in the middle of Star Fox Command , revealing a true ending . Many fans suspect the first ending ( Fox getting back together with Krystal and the <unk> team continuing with Amanda as its newest member ) is the real ending . At the same time , in the same interview , Takaya Imamura stated that " the story ends here " , which has thrown some fans for a loop . 
 = = Development = = 
 Developer Q @-@ Games was working on a puzzle game called <unk> for Nintendo when they were approached to do a mock up of the game demo . After three months , using the original Star Fox , it was shown to Takaya Imamura at Nintendo who said that the company would redesign it for better compatibility with the Nintendo DS and add some ideas from Star Fox 2 . Nintendo EAD was responsible for the music and production of the game , while Q @-@ Games handled the main development . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Star Fox Command debuted on the Japanese best seller list as number 14 , selling over 20 @,@ 000 copies on the first day . In the United States , it was the 5th best seller in the first <unk> Fox Command has received mostly positive reviews , with a Metacritic score of 76 / 100 and a GameRankings score of 76 % . IGN gave it an 8 out of 10 , or " Impressive " , calling it a " surprisingly rich and faithful action game " that had similar game play to Star Fox and Star Fox 64 . Star Fox Command received IGN DS 's August 2006 Game of the Month Award for capturing " the fun and essence of what made the series so significant . " Famitsu gave a 32 / 40 , and was cited as an influence for the games large initial sales . It received a 4 out of 5 star rating on G4 's X @-@ Play , which stated that " Fox is finally back in the Arwing -- where he belongs , Stylus control is mostly excellent , Strategy elements work well . " The Associated Press noted the game for having developed the game to work well with the DS controls , but had mixed feelings about the turn @-@ based sections of gameplay . Electronic Gaming Monthly claimed that while the game has its own charm , it lacks the original gameplay from Star Fox and Star Fox 64 and becomes repetitive . UK website <unk> gave Command a three out of five stars , stating that " Star Fox Command can ’ t hold a candle to previous games in the series . " Command was nominated in three categories in Nintendo Power 's annual vote @-@ in awards , although it did not win in any of them . Star Fox Command has also received an 8 from Game Informer magazine . Although it was criticized for its brevity , the game was lauded for its solid gameplay mechanics , and one reviewer stated that " His place is in the cockpit . That 's where he 's at his best . " 
 = Blink ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Blink " is the tenth episode of the third series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was first broadcast on 9 June 2007 on the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) . The episode was directed by Hettie MacDonald and is the only episode in the 2007 series written by Steven Moffat . The episode is based on a previous short story written by Moffat for the 2006 Doctor Who Annual , entitled " ' What I Did on My Christmas Holidays ' By Sally Sparrow " . 
 In the episode , the Doctor — a time travelling alien played by David Tennant — and his companion Martha Jones ( Freema Agyeman ) are trapped in the past and try to communicate with a young woman , Sally Sparrow ( Carey Mulligan ) , to prevent the Weeping Angels from taking control of the TARDIS . Sparrow and her best friend 's brother , Larry Nightingale ( Finlay Robertson ) , must unravel a set of cryptic clues sent through time by the marooned Doctor . 
 The Doctor and his companion have very little screen time , which allowed for another episode to be filmed simultaneously ; " Blink " is consequently referred to as a " Doctor @-@ lite " episode . The scenes at Wester Drumlins were shot in a derelict house in Newport . To create the angels , two actresses wore makeup and prosthetics . The episode was seen by 6 @.@ 62 million viewers in the United Kingdom . 
 " Blink " received widespread critical acclaim , and is widely considered to be one of the best episodes of the show . Moffat won the BAFTA Craft and BAFTA Cymru awards for Best Writer , and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , while for her single performance in the series , Mulligan won the Constellation Award for Best Female Performance in a 2007 Science Fiction Television Episode . In 2009 the episode was voted the second best Doctor Who story ever by readers of Doctor Who Magazine . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2007 , Sally Sparrow enters an abandoned house to look for subjects to photograph . Instead she finds eerie statues and a message from the Doctor behind peeling wallpaper addressed to her , warning her about the Weeping Angels . Sally returns the next day with her friend Kathy Nightingale to explore further but Kathy disappears at the same time a young man knocks at the door . He claims to be Kathy 's grandson and delivers a letter to Sally . The letter explains that Kathy suddenly found herself in the 1920s in Hull . She settled down with a husband and led a peaceful life and requests that Sally tell Kathy 's brother Larry of her disappearance . Sally sees a Yale key hanging from the hand of one of the statues and takes it before leaving . 
 Sally visits Larry at a DVD shop and is told that he has been documenting an " Easter egg " in seventeen apparently unrelated DVDs . The egg contains video clips of a man calling himself The Doctor , having half of a conversation with the viewer . Larry gives Sally a list of the DVDs and she leaves for the police station . There she meets DI Billy Shipton , who explains that there have been several disappearances at the abandoned house and shows her an impound lot containing a locked fake police box . Sally leaves but remembers the Yale key and returns to find that Billy and the phone box have disappeared . She immediately receives a call from a much older Billy , who is on his death bed at the hospital . She visits him and he explains that after she left the lot , he discovered the Angels trying to retrieve the police box . He then suddenly found himself in 1969 , where he met the Doctor and was asked to relay a message to Sally decades later . Billy subsequently married and started a video production house that was responsible for putting the Easter egg on the DVDs . Before Billy dies he tells Sally the Doctor 's message , which instructs her to look at the list . Sally realises that the list is her own DVD collection and that the Easter egg is meant for her . 
 Sally and Larry return to the house with several of the DVDs and a portable DVD player . They select a DVD to watch the Easter egg and Larry places another into his pocket . Sally discovers she can converse with the Doctor in the past , as he possesses a transcript that is currently being compiled by Larry as he listens . The Doctor explains that he and Martha were transported to the past by the Weeping Angels . The Angels are " quantum locked " , allowing them to move unbelievably fast when unobserved , while they turn to stone , making them become statues that are difficult to destroy , when they are observed . They will cover their eyes when near other angels to avoid looking at each other , giving them their weeping appearance . If they ever look at another angel , they become permanently locked in statue form . He warns Sally not to look away or even blink when they are around . The Doctor tells them they are seeking his TARDIS to acquire its potential power . The Doctor comes to the end of the transcript and Sally realises Larry has stopped writing it due to the presence of an Angel in the room . They make their way to the basement of the house and discover the Angels and the TARDIS . The Angels attack and Sally and Larry use Sally 's key to hide inside the TARDIS . Once in the control room , a hologram of the Doctor informs them that they have a control disk with them . Larry takes a now glowing DVD from his pocket and inserts it into the console . The TARDIS dematerialises , leaving a panicking Sally and Larry behind . With the TARDIS gone , the Angels have been tricked into looking at each other and have become permanently frozen as statues . 
 One year later , Sally and Larry have opened a DVD store . Sally insists on keeping a folder of the events but Larry wants her to move on and indicates he has feelings for her . Sally gently rebuffs him and Larry steps out on an errand . Sally sees the Doctor and Martha hurriedly leave a taxi in front of the shop and goes outside to meet them . They don 't recognise her and she realises that they have yet to experience the events that sent them to the past . She hands the Doctor the folder , warning him that he will need it in his future . The Doctor and Sally say goodbye as Larry returns , surprised to see the man from the Easter egg . Sally and Larry return to the shop hand in hand , hinting that she is now ready for a romantic relationship . The episode ends with a repeat of the Doctor 's warning to Sally , this time directed at the viewer and overlaid with flashes of famous statues , implying any statue in the world can be a Weeping Angel . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Blink " was written by Steven Moffat . Part of the story for " Blink " is based on Moffat 's own Ninth Doctor short story from the Doctor Who Annual 2006 called " ' What I Did on My Christmas Holidays ' by Sally Sparrow " . The short story is presented as a homework essay from Sally , though only 12 years old , who encounters evidence of the Doctor 's presence from the past in her aunt 's house while visiting . " What I Did " includes several elements that are reused in " Blink " , including messages under the wallpaper and an ontological paradox involving a conversation between Sally and the Doctor , prerecorded on a video cassette , based on a written transcript — the essay itself ; however , instead of the Angels , " What I Did " features the Doctor and the TARDIS inadvertently separated twenty years in time by a fault in the time machine , and the Doctor is able to instruct Sally how to bring it back to him in the past . 
 Moffat had held the idea of the Weeping Angels since seeing an angel statue in a graveyard whilst on a family holiday , and had planned to use them for the next series in the episodes that became " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " . However , after withdrawing from the writing of series three 's first two @-@ part story — Helen Raynor took over these episodes , writing " Daleks in Manhattan " and " Evolution of the Daleks " — Moffat volunteered to write the series ' Doctor @-@ lite episode and opted to use the Weeping Angels in what would become " Blink " . Moffat was also inspired to write the episode based on the popular children 's game Statues , which he always found " frightening " . Murray Gold , the composer for the series , later compared the creatures to the moving ghostly topiary animals in Stephen King 's 1977 horror novel The Shining . 
 " Blink " is the third story of the revived series to be adapted for television by the same writer from a piece of their spin @-@ off writing . It follows the " Human Nature " and " The Family of Blood " story arc , which was adapted by Paul Cornell from his 1995 novel Human Nature ; and " Dalek " , which used the basic premise as well as several scenes and lines of dialogue adapted by Robert Shearman from his 2003 audio drama Jubilee . " Blink " is referred to as a " Doctor @-@ Lite " episode because the Doctor and his companion have very little screen time . This allowed two episodes to be filmed simultaneously , a process known as " double banking " . The practice had begun with the 2006 entry " Love & Monsters " , and would continue for episodes such as " Turn Left " , " Midnight " , and " The Girl Who Waited " . Moffat stated that he felt relaxed when he was writing the script for " Blink " , for if it proved to be unpopular , he could blame the " Doctor @-@ lite " structure of the episode . Due to the show 's tight schedule , " Blink " had only one script meeting . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " Blink " was directed by Hettie MacDonald , making her the first female director of a Doctor Who episode since the Sixth Doctor serial The Mark of the Rani . Russell T Davies , the series ' executive producer , later noted that , due to MacDonald 's work , the episode included some of " the most beautiful [ visuals ] we 've ever had " . British actress Carey Mulligan was chosen to play Sally Sparrow ; Mulligan was reportedly ecstatic to have been cast in the series . She was initially concerned with the fact that Tennant would have little screen time , but after the episode aired was very pleased with the final result . 
 Location shooting for scenes set at the Police Station Garage took place at the Coal Exchange and Mount Stuart Square , Cardiff Bay on 21 November 2006 . Fields House , located in Newport , filled in for Wester Drumlins . The house was already abandoned and falling into disrepair when the filming crews arrived . Moffat noted that " very little of it was tarted up " for the shoot ; Moffat later called the location " the creepiest house " he had ever seen . The name was taken from a previous residence that Moffat lived in during the late 1990s . Larry describes the residence as " Scooby @-@ Doo 's house " , a reference to the dilapidated mansions that the Scooby @-@ Doo gang would usually visit . The BBC Fact File for the episode notes that 1969 — the year Martha , the Doctor and Billy are sent to — is the first year Scooby @-@ Doo , Where Are You ! aired . 
 Originally , the producers considered having Michael Obiora play both the young and old version of Billy Shipton . However , it was decided that Obiora in makeup would look too fake , and so Louis Mahoney was cast to play the older version . Initially , Obiora played the role with a London accent ; Mahoney , however , has a thick accent . Obiora had to re @-@ dub his lines to match . Billy mentions that the windows of the TARDIS are the wrong size for a real police box . In 2004 , when the first photographs of the new series ' TARDIS prop were revealed , there was a vigorous discussion of the box 's dimensions on the Outpost Gallifrey Doctor Who discussion forum , in which some fans complained that the prop 's windows were too big . Moffat has confirmed that this line is an in @-@ joke aimed at the Outpost Gallifrey forum . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Moffat joked that " since I was a kid , I 've been thinking of Doctor Who monsters , just now when I do , it costs the art department [ … ] a lot of money " . To create the rigid structure of the angels ' dresses , prosthetics supervisors Rob Mayor soaked fabric in fibreglass resin , which was then painted over . Although they are never shown moving on screen , all of the Weeping Angels were played by actresses Aga Blonska and Elen Thomas wearing makeup and prosthetics . The actresses wore two distinct masks : one that was more docile looking , and one with fangs bared . Blonska later noted that " I 'm partly painted , partly glued into the costume , but it 's quite comfortable . " Although the actresses were slightly " wobbly " when they stood still , the producers used digital effects to , in essence , freeze the angels on film . Moffat was very pleased with the results , and called them " fantastic " . Mulligan later called the effects " so good " and " really creepy " . 
 To create the effect of the Angels rocking the TARDIS Mulligan and Robertson threw themselves around the ship 's set . The camera 's operator then shook the camera in the opposite direction that Mulligan and Robertson threw themselves . The scene wherein the Doctor talks to Sally via a DVD extra was created by writing a conversation , removing Sally 's lines , then having David Tennant record his lines . Moffat felt that this one @-@ way filming made the performance more convincing . Moffat initially wrote placeholder dialogue in the script for the scene where the Doctor tells Sally that he can hear her in the DVD shop , because he knew the lines that appeared would have to play " double duty later on " and be authentic and fresh both times . Gold called the sequences " the heart of the Chinese puzzle " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Blink " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 9 June 2007 . Overnight ratings showed that it was watched by 6 @.@ 1 million viewers , which rose to 6 @.@ 62 once time @-@ shifted viewers were taken into account . The episode was the seventh most watched episode on BBC One for the week ending 10 June and was the lowest @-@ rated episode of Doctor Who 's third series . It received an Appreciation Index of 87 , considered " excellent " . In its initial broadcast , a short clip of a card reading " One Year Later " was shown before the episode 's denouement . In the syndicated and the DVD version , this shot has been removed . 
 A Region 2 DVD containing " Blink " together with the episodes " Human Nature " and " The Family of Blood " was released on 23 July 2007 . It was re @-@ released as part of the complete series three DVD on 5 November 2007 . 
 = = = Critical reception and accolades = = = 
 " Blink " received universal critical acclaim , with many praising the acting , the script , the level of fear and the Weeping Angels themselves . The Guardian 's Stephen Brook called it a " wonderfully creepy episode " that " ultimately made sense " despite " barely featur [ ing ] the Doctor and Martha " . David Bradley of SFX awarded " Blink " five out of five stars , saying that it could have featured any of the previous Doctors and predicted that its " timelessness " would ensure that it would " [ go ] down as one of the finest , scariest , cleverest Who episodes ever " . IGN 's Travis Fickett gave the episode 9 @.@ 1 out of 10 , praising the way the audience felt they had known Sally Sparrow for a while , as well as the strength of Mulligan 's performance , although he noted that " all of the performances in this episode are exceptional " . He concluded that , " it 's difficult to believe that so much was accomplished in such a short amount of time . The story of not one , but two relationships was told , several time lines intersected and a new and rather frightening enemy was vanquished without The Doctor ever coming face to face with them " . Ross <unk> of Slant Magazine believed that the episode was not just the best Doctor Who episode , but also a great episode of the science fiction and horror genre that could allow it to stand alone . He also praised the fear @-@ inducing concept of the Weeping Angels as well the " tenderness of the story and the characters " which were " quite intricate given how much is going on in these 45 minutes " . The Daily Telegraph named the episode one of the best of the show 's entire run , noting that , while the Doctor " is somewhat on the periphery here " , it " adds to the threat " . 
 Many critics consider the episode one of the strongest during Tennant 's time as the Doctor . IGN 's Matt Wales named it the sixth best episode of Tennant 's tenure , while Sam McPherson of TVOvermind listed it as the second best Tenth Doctor episode . In 2011 , before the second half of the sixth series , The Huffington Post labelled " Blink " as one of the five essential episodes for new viewers to watch . The Weeping Angels also received critical praise . In 2009 SFX named the climax with the Weeping Angels advancing on Sally and Larry the scariest moment in Doctor Who 's history , describing it as " a terrifying combination of scary concept and perfect direction " . The Weeping Angels came in at number three in Neil Gaiman 's " Top Ten New Classic Monsters " in Entertainment Weekly , while TV Squad named them the third scariest television characters . They were also rated the third " baddie " in Doctor Who by The Daily Telegraph , behind the Nestene Consciousness and Daleks . In 2009 SFX listed the Angels in their list of favourite things of the revival of Doctor Who , writing , " Scariest . Monsters . Ever . " 
 Writer Steven Moffat was awarded the 2008 BAFTA Craft and BAFTA Cymru awards for Best Writer for his work on this episode . " Blink " won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , and Carey Mulligan received the Constellation Award for Best Female Performance in a 2007 Science Fiction Television Episode . The episode was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Script , but lost to Pan 's Labyrinth by Guillermo del Toro . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 " Blink " received the award for Best Story in the Doctor Who Magazine 2007 Survey . In Doctor Who Magazine 's 2009 poll to find the greatest Doctor Who story ever , it came in second place after Peter Davison 's final story , The Caves of Androzani . In a 2007 poll conducted by the BBC , taking votes from 2 @,@ 000 readers of the Doctor Who Adventures magazine , the Weeping Angels were voted the scariest monsters of 2007 with 55 % of the vote ; the Master and the Daleks took second and third place with 15 % and 4 % of the vote . In a 2012 poll of over ten thousand respondents conducted by the Radio Times , the Weeping Angels were again voted the best Doctor Who monster with 49 @.@ 4 % of the vote . In Doctor Who Magazine 's 2014 fan poll of the greatest episodes of all time , " Blink " again came in second , this time behind the 2013 episode " The Day of the Doctor " . 
 Moffat , after becoming lead writer of the programme , wrote " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " for the fifth series as a more action @-@ oriented sequel , believing that good monsters should come back with a different style of story . They also returned in " The Angels Take Manhattan " , seventh series episode , and have featured in " Good as Gold " , a mini @-@ episode written by children for a Blue Peter contest , and the New Series Adventures novel Touched by an Angel by Jonathan Morris . 
 A line spoken by the Doctor , " The angels have the phone box " , is rhetorically repeated by Larry and prompts him to say " I 've got that on a T @-@ shirt " . As expected by Moffat and Gold , this led online retailers such as <unk> , and Zazzle , among others , to offer versions of such a product for sale . In addition , the " wibbly @-@ wobbly timey @-@ wimey " line has been used to describe several of Moffat 's complex time travel stories , such as " Let 's Kill Hitler " and " The Big Bang " . The line was also referenced in the first episode of the fifth series , " The Eleventh Hour " , when the Eleventh Doctor ( Matt Smith ) scans the crack in young Amelia Pond 's ( Caitlin Blackwood ) wall with his sonic screwdriver . BBC America created a series of four specials prior to the seventh series premiere of Doctor Who , including one entitled " The <unk> @-@ <unk> Stuff of Doctor Who " . 
 British " <unk> rock " band Chameleon Circuit , composed of YouTube bloggers Alex Day and Charlie McDonnell among others , wrote a song about the episode , also entitled " Blink " , and released it on their debut eponymous album . 
 = Westminster tube station = 
 Westminster is a London Underground station in the City of Westminster . It is served by the Circle , District and Jubilee lines . On the Circle and District lines , the station is between St. James 's Park and Embankment and , on the Jubilee line it is between Green Park and Waterloo . It is in Travelcard Zone 1 . The station is located at the corner of Bridge Street and Victoria Embankment and is close to the Houses of Parliament , Westminster Abbey , Parliament Square , Whitehall , Westminster Bridge and the London Eye . Also close by are Downing Street , the Cenotaph , Westminster Millennium Pier , the Treasury , the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Supreme Court . 
 The station is in two parts : sub @-@ surface platforms opened in 1868 by the District Railway ( DR ) as part of the company 's first section of the Inner Circle route and deep level platforms opened in 1999 as part of the Jubilee line extension from Green Park to Stratford . A variety of underground and main line services have operated over the sub @-@ surface tracks , but the original station was completely rebuilt in conjunction with the construction of the deep level platforms and Portcullis House which sits above the station . 
