 = = History = = 
 = = = Sub @-@ surface station = = = 
 The station was opened as Westminster Bridge on 24 December 1868 by the steam @-@ operated District Railway ( DR ) ( now the District line ) when the railway opened the first section of its line from South Kensington . It was originally the eastern terminus of the DR and the station cutting ended at a concrete wall buffered by timber sleepers . The approach to the station from the west runs in cut and cover tunnel under the roadway of Broad Sanctuary and diagonally under Parliament Square . In Broad Sanctuary the tunnel is close to Westminster Abbey and St Margaret 's church and care was required to avoid undermining their foundations when excavating in the poor ground found there . 
 The original station building was a temporary structure positioned over the tracks and the platforms were sheltered with individual awnings rather than the all @-@ over glazed roof provided at the DR 's other stations . Access to the station was via a passageway from Bridge Street and a pedestrian subway under the road . On 30 May 1870 , the railway was extended to Blackfriars . 
 The DR connected to the Metropolitan Railway ( MR , later the Metropolitan line ) at South Kensington and , although the two companies were rivals , each company operated its trains over the other 's tracks in a joint service known as the Inner Circle . On 1 February 1872 , the DR opened a northbound branch from its station at Earl 's Court to connect to the West London Extension Joint Railway ( WLEJR , now the West London Line ) at Addison Road ( now Kensington ( Olympia ) ) . From that date the Outer Circle service began running over the DR 's tracks . The service was run by the North London Railway ( NLR ) from its terminus at Broad Street ( now demolished ) in the City of London via the North London Line to Willesden Junction , then the West London Line to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House – at that time the eastern terminus of the DR. 
 From 1 August 1872 , the Middle Circle service also began operations through South Kensington , running from Moorgate along the MR 's tracks on the north side of the Inner Circle to Paddington , then over the Hammersmith & City Railway ( H & CR ) track to Latimer Road , then , via a now demolished link , on the WLEJR to Addison Road and the DR to Mansion House . The service was operated jointly by the H & CR and the DR. On 30 June 1900 , the Middle Circle service was shortened to terminate at Earl 's Court , and , on 31 December 1908 , the Outer Circle service was withdrawn from the DR tracks . As part of efforts to improve competitiveness , the DR 's tracks were electrified during 1905 and new electric rolling stock was brought into use . In 1907 , the station was given its present name , Westminster . 
 By the mid @-@ 1890s the station entrance had been incorporated into a larger building . In 1922 , a new entrance and canopy was designed for the Bridge Street entrance by Charles Holden and , in 1924 , he designed a plainly rendered replacement elevation for the eastern entrance on to the Embankment . These were the first of many projects by the architect for the London Electric Railway ( the main forerunner of London Transport and Transport for London ) . The station platforms were also refurbished with new wall tiling in the green , blue , black and white tiling scheme used later by Holden on many stations of the period and still visible at neighbouring St James 's Park station . In 1949 , the Metropolitan line @-@ operated Inner Circle route was given its own identity on the tube map as the Circle line . 
 Between late 1962 and early 1964 the east ends of the platforms were extended to allow longer 8 @-@ car trains to be operated . This involved carefully enlarging the tunnels under the Metropolitan Police 's original headquarters at New Scotland Yard ( now Norman Shaw Buildings ) . The station was completely rebuilt to incorporate new deep @-@ level platforms for the Jubilee line when it was extended to the London Docklands in the 1990s . During the works , the level of the sub @-@ surface platforms was lowered to enable ground level access to Portcullis House . This was achieved in small increments which were carried out when the line was closed at night . 
 = = = Deep @-@ level station = = = 
 When the first section of the Jubilee line was planned in the 1970s , the second phase of the project was intended to continue the line eastwards from the terminus at Charing Cross to the City of London , Woolwich and Thamesmead . Westminster station would not have been on this planned route , but the need to provide transport infrastructure for the redevelopment of the London Docklands in east and south @-@ east London led to a redirection of the route to run via Westminster to connect Waterloo and London Bridge stations with the new developments . For the Jubilee Line Extension , the buildings around the station were demolished and the sub @-@ surface station was completely reconstructed together with the erection of a parliamentary office building , Portcullis House , which sits above the station . Both projects were designed by Michael Hopkins & Partners . 
 The construction of the deep @-@ level station involved the excavation of a 39 @-@ metre ( 128 ft ) deep void around and beneath the sub @-@ surface station to house the escalators to the Jubilee line platforms . The void , known as the station box , was the deepest ever excavation in central London and was carried out between thick reinforced concrete diaphragm walls stiffened and braced horizontally for stability . Under Bridge Street , on the south side of the station box , the two Jubilee line platform tunnels are arranged with the westbound platform below the eastbound . The depth of the station box excavation and the proximity of the tunnels represented a significant risk to the stability of the foundation of the Houses of Parliament 's clock tower ( popularly known as Big Ben ) , which stands only 34 metres ( 112 ft ) from the edge of the station box . To protect the foundation and manage settlement in the sub @-@ soil , a series of 50 @-@ metre ( 160 ft ) long steel tubes was installed horizontally around and beneath the clock tower 's 3 @-@ metre ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) thick foundation . The tubes were provided with a control system through which grout was injected into the ground to compensate for settlement detected from detailed measurements of the clock tower 's position . As excavation of the station box and the tunnels took place , grout was injected on 22 occasions between January 1996 and September 1997 . The process limited the movement of the clock tower to an acceptable maximum of 35 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) . Without the grout injection , the movement would have been at least 120 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) causing cracking to the structure of the tower and the Houses of Parliament . The Jubilee line platforms were opened on 22 December 1999 , although trains had been running through the station without stopping since 20 November 1999 . 
 The station 's architecture is an austere combination of concrete and stainless steel , with stacked banks of escalators supported from the cross @-@ bracing structures spanning the station box and routes for passengers entering or leaving the station separated from those changing between lines . As with the other underground stations on the extension , the Jubilee line platforms feature platform screen doors to improve airflow through the system and increase safety . The station design won a number of awards including Civic Trust awards in 2000 and 2002 , the Royal Fine Art Commission Millennium Building of the Year award in 2000 and the RIBA Award for Architecture in 2001 . Both projects were jointly short @-@ listed in 2001 for the RIBA 's prestigious Stirling Prize . 
 = = = Design Icon = = = 
 As part of the Transported by Design programme of activities , in 15 October 2015 , after two months of public voting , Westminster tube station was elected by Londoners as one of the 10 favourite transport design icons . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 1 . On the District and Circle lines , the station is between St James 's Park and Embankment , and , on the Jubilee line , it is between Green Park and Waterloo . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally District line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 25 to 00 : 38 eastbound and 05 : 49 to 00 : 37 westbound ; they are supplemented by Circle line trains every 8 – 12 minutes from approximately 05 : 49 to 00 : 24 clockwise and 05 : 36 to 00 : 19 anticlockwise . Jubilee line trains operate every 2 – 5 minutes from approximately 05 : 28 to 00 : 48 eastbound and 05 : 38 to 00 : 31 northbound . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Buses routes 3 , 11 , 12 , 24 , 53 , 87 , 88 , 148 , 159 , 211 and 453 and night routes N2 , N3 , N11 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , N155 and <unk> serve the station . 
 = Franco @-@ Mongol alliance = 
 Several attempts at a Franco @-@ Mongol alliance against the Islamic caliphates , their common enemy , were made by various leaders among the Frankish Crusaders and the Mongol Empire in the 13th century . Such an alliance might have seemed an obvious choice : the Mongols were already sympathetic to Christianity , given the presence of many influential Nestorian Christians in the Mongol court . The Franks ( Western Europeans and those in the Crusader States of the Levant ) were open to the idea of support from the East , in part owing to the long @-@ running legend of the mythical Prester John , an Eastern king in a magical kingdom who many believed would one day come to the assistance of the Crusaders in the Holy Land . The Franks and Mongols also shared a common enemy in the Muslims . However , despite many messages , gifts , and emissaries over the course of several decades , the often @-@ proposed alliance never came to fruition . 
 Contact between Europeans and Mongols began around 1220 , with occasional messages from the papacy and European monarchs to Mongol leaders such as the Great Khan , and subsequently to the Ilkhans in Mongol @-@ conquered Iran . Communications tended to follow a recurring pattern : the Europeans asked the Mongols to convert to Western Christianity , while the Mongols responded with demands for submission and tribute . The Mongols had already conquered many Christian and Muslim nations in their advance across Asia , and after destroying the Muslim Abbasid and Ayyubid dynasties , for the next few generations fought the remaining Islamic power in the region , the Egyptian Mamluks . Hethum I , king of the Christian nation of Cilician Armenia , had submitted to the Mongols in 1247 , and strongly encouraged other monarchs to engage in a Christian @-@ Mongol alliance , but was only able to persuade his son @-@ in @-@ law , Prince Bohemond VI of the Crusader State of Antioch , who submitted in 1260 . Other Christian leaders such as the Crusaders of Acre were more mistrustful of the Mongols , perceiving them as the most significant threat in the region . The Barons of Acre therefore engaged in an unusual passive alliance with the Muslim Mamluks , allowing Egyptian forces to advance unopposed through Crusader territory to engage and defeat the Mongols at the pivotal Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260 . 
 European attitudes began to change in the mid @-@ 1260s , from perceiving the Mongols as enemies to be feared , to potential allies against the Muslims . The Mongols sought to capitalize on this , promising a re @-@ conquered Jerusalem to the Europeans in return for cooperation . Attempts to cement an alliance continued through negotiations with many leaders of the Mongol Ilkhanate in Iran , from its founder Hulagu through his descendants Abaqa , Arghun , Ghazan , and Öljaitü , but without success . The Mongols invaded Syria several times between 1281 and 1312 , sometimes in attempts at joint operations with the Franks , but the considerable logistical difficulties involved meant that forces would arrive months apart , never able to coordinate activities in any effective way . The Mongol Empire eventually dissolved into civil war , and the Egyptian Mamluks successfully recaptured all of Palestine and Syria from the Crusaders . After the Fall of Acre in 1291 , the remaining Crusaders retreated to the island of Cyprus . They made a final attempt to establish a bridgehead at the small island of Ruad off the coast of Tortosa , again in an attempt to coordinate military action with the Mongols , but the plan failed , and the Muslims responded by besieging the island . With the Fall of Ruad in 1302 or 1303 , the Crusaders lost their last foothold in the Holy Land . 
 Modern historians debate whether an alliance between the Franks and Mongols would have been successful in shifting the balance of power in the region , and if it would have been a wise choice on the part of the Europeans . Traditionally , the Mongols tended to see outside parties as either subjects or enemies , with little room in the middle for a concept such as an ally . 
 = = Background ( 1209 – 1244 ) = = 
 Among Western Europeans , there had long been rumors and expectations that a great Christian ally would come from the East . These rumors circulated as early as the First Crusade ( 1096 – 1099 ) , and usually surged in popularity after the Crusaders lost a battle . A legend arose about a figure known as Prester John , who lived in far @-@ off India , Central Asia , or perhaps even Ethiopia . This legend developed a life of its own , and some individuals who came from the East were greeted with expectations that they might be forces sent by the long @-@ awaited Prester John . In 1210 , news reached the West of the battles of the Mongol Kuchlug ( d . 1218 ) , leader of the largely Christian tribe of the <unk> . Kuchlug 's forces had been battling the powerful Khwarezmian Empire , whose leader was the Muslim Muhammad II of Khwarezm . Rumors circulated in Europe that Kuchlug was the mythical Prester John , again battling the Muslims in the East . 
 During the Fifth Crusade ( 1213 – 1221 ) , as the Christians were unsuccessfully laying siege to the Egyptian city of Damietta , the legend of Prester John became conflated with the reality of Genghis Khan 's rapidly expanding empire . Mongol raiding parties were beginning to invade the eastern Islamic world , in Transoxania and Persia in 1219 – 1221 . Rumors circulated among the Crusaders that a " Christian king of the Indies " , a King David who was either Prester John or one of his descendants , had been attacking Muslims in the East and was on his way to help the Christians in their crusades . In a letter dated June 20 , 1221 , Pope Honorius III even commented about " forces coming from the Far East to rescue the Holy Land " . 
 After Genghis Khan 's death in 1227 , his empire was divided by his descendants into four sections or <unk> , which degenerated into civil war . The northwestern Kipchak Khanate , known as the Golden Horde , expanded towards Europe , primarily via Hungary and Poland , while its leaders simultaneously opposed the rule of their cousins back at the Mongol capital . The southwestern section , known as the Ilkhanate , was under the leadership of Genghis Khan 's grandson Hulagu . He continued to support his brother , the Great Khan , and was therefore at war with the Golden Horde , while at the same time continuing an advance towards Persia and the Holy Land . 
 = = Papal overtures ( 1245 – 1248 ) = = 
 The first official communications between Western Europe and the Mongol Empire occurred between Pope Innocent IV ( fl . 1243 – 1254 ) and the Great Khans , via letters and envoys that were sent overland and could take years to arrive at their destination . The communications initiated what was to become a regular pattern in European – Mongol communications : the Europeans would ask the Mongols to convert to Christianity , and the Mongols would respond with demands for submission . 
 The Mongol invasion of Europe ended in 1242 , in part because of the death of the Great Khan Ögedei , successor to Genghis Khan . When one Great Khan died , Mongols from all parts of the empire were recalled to the capital to decide who should be the next Great Khan . In the meantime , the Mongols ' relentless march westward had displaced the <unk> Turks , who themselves moved west , eventually allying with the Ayyubid Muslims in Egypt . Along the way , the Turks took Jerusalem from the Christians in 1244 . After the subsequent loss at the Battle of La <unk> , Christian kings began to prepare for a new crusade ( the Seventh Crusade ) , declared by Pope Innocent IV in June 1245 at the First Council of Lyon . The loss of Jerusalem caused some Europeans to look to the Mongols as potential allies of Christendom , provided the Mongols could be converted to Western Christianity . In March 1245 , Pope Innocent IV had issued multiple papal bulls , some of which were sent with an envoy , the Franciscan John of Plano <unk> , to the " Emperor of the Tartars " . In a letter now called the Cum non <unk> , Pope Innocent expressed a desire for peace , and asked the Mongol ruler to become a Christian and to stop killing Christians . However , the new Mongol Great Khan Güyük , installed at Karakorum in 1246 , replied only with a demand for the submission of the pope , and a visit from the rulers of the West in homage to Mongol power : 
 You should say with a sincere heart : " I will submit and serve you . " Thou thyself , at the head of all the Princes , come at once to serve and wait upon us ! At that time I shall recognize your submission . If you do not observe God 's command , and if you ignore my command , I shall know you as my enemy . 
 A second mission sent in 1245 by Pope Innocent was led by the Dominican <unk> of Lombardia , who met with the Mongol commander <unk> near the Caspian Sea in 1247 . <unk> , who had plans to capture Baghdad , welcomed the possibility of an alliance and sent a message to Rome via his envoys <unk> and Serkis . They then returned a year later with Pope Innocent 's letter , <unk> <unk> <unk> , in which he appealed to the Mongols to " cease their menaces " . 
 = = Christian vassals = = 
 As the Mongols of the Ilkhanate continued to move towards the Holy Land , city after city fell to the Mongols . The typical Mongol pattern was to give a region one chance to surrender . If the target acquiesced , the Mongols absorbed the populace and warriors into their own Mongol army , which they would then use to further expand the empire . If a community did not surrender , the Mongols forcefully took the settlement or settlements and slaughtered everyone they found . Faced with the option of subjugation to or combat with the nearby Mongol horde , many communities chose the former , including some Christian realms . 
 Christian Georgia was repeatedly attacked starting in 1220 , and in 1243 Queen Rusudan formally submitted to the Mongols , turning Georgia into a vassal state which then became a regular ally in the Mongol military conquests . Hethum I of Cilician Armenia submitted in 1247 , and over the following years encouraged other monarchs to enter into a Christian @-@ Mongol alliance . He sent his brother Sempad to the Mongol court in Karakorum , and Sempad 's positive letters about the Mongols were influential in European circles . 
 = = = Antioch = = = 
 The Principality of Antioch was one of the earliest Crusader States , founded in 1098 during the First Crusade . At the time of the Mongol advance , it was under the rule of Bohemond VI . Under the influence of his father @-@ in @-@ law , Hethum I , Bohemond too submitted Antioch to Hulagu in 1260 . A Mongol representative and a Mongol garrison were stationed in the capital city of Antioch , where they remained until the Principality was destroyed by the Mamluks in 1268 . Bohemond was also required by the Mongols to accept the restoration of a Greek Orthodox patriarch , Euthymius , as a way of strengthening ties between the Mongols and the Byzantines . In return for this loyalty , Hulagu awarded Bohemond all the Antiochene territories which had been lost to the Muslims in 1243 . However , for his relations with the Mongols , Bohemond was also temporarily excommunicated by Jacques Pantaléon , the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , though this was lifted in 1263 . 
 Around 1262 or 1263 , the Mamluk leader Baibars attempted an attack on Antioch , but the principality was saved by Mongol intervention . In later years the Mongols were not able to offer as much support . In 1264 – 1265 the Mongols were able to attack only the frontier fort of al @-@ <unk> . In 1268 Baibars completely overran the rest of Antioch , ending the 170 @-@ year @-@ old principality . 
 In 1271 , Baibars sent a letter to Bohemond threatening him with total annihilation and taunting him for his alliance with the Mongols : 
 Our yellow flags have repelled your red flags , and the sound of the bells has been replaced by the call : " Allâh Akbar ! " ... Warn your walls and your churches that soon our siege machinery will deal with them , your knights that soon our swords will invite themselves in their homes ... We will see then what use will be your alliance with <unk> . 
 Bohemond was left with no estates except the County of Tripoli , which was itself to fall to the Mamluks in 1289 . 
 = = Saint Louis and the Mongols = = 
 Louis IX of France had communications with the Mongols throughout his own crusades . During his first venture to Outremer , he was met on December 20 , 1248 in Cyprus by two Mongol envoys , Nestorians from Mosul named David and Marc , who brought a letter from the Mongol commander in Persia , Eljigidei . The letter communicated a more conciliatory tone than previous Mongol demands for submission , and Eljigidei 's envoys suggested that King Louis should land in Egypt while Eljigidei attacked Baghdad , as a way of preventing the Muslims of Egypt and those of Syria from joining forces . Louis responded by sending the emissary Andrew of Longjumeau to the Great Khan Güyük , but Güyük died from drink before the emissary arrived at his court . Güyük 's widow <unk> <unk> simply gave the emissary a gift and a condescending letter to take back to King Louis , instructing him to continue sending tributes each year . 
 Louis 's campaign against Egypt did not go well . He successfully captured Damietta , but lost his entire army at the Battle of Al Mansurah , and was himself captured by the Egyptians . His release was eventually negotiated in return for a ransom ( some of which was a loan from the Templars ) and the surrender of the city of Damietta . A few years later , in 1252 , Louis tried unsuccessfully to ally with the Egyptians , and then in 1253 he sought allies among both the Ismaili Assassins and the Mongols . When he saw a letter from Hethum 's brother , the Armenian noble Sempad , which spoke well of the Mongols , Louis dispatched the Franciscan William of Rubruck to the Mongol court . But the Mongol leader Möngke replied with only a letter via William in 1254 , asking for the King 's submission to Mongol authority . 
 Louis attempted a second crusade ( the Eighth Crusade ) in 1270 . The Mongol Ilkhanate leader Abaqa wrote to Louis IX offering military support as soon as the Crusaders landed in Palestine , but Louis instead went to Tunis in modern Tunisia . His intention was evidently to first conquer Tunis , and then to move his troops along the coast to reach Alexandria in Egypt . The French historians Alain <unk> and Jean Richard suggest that this crusade may still have been an attempt at coordination with the Mongols , in that Louis may have attacked Tunis instead of Syria following a message from Abaqa that he would not be able to commit his forces in 1270 , and asking to postpone the campaign to 1271 . <unk> from the Byzantine emperor , the Armenians and the Mongols of Abaqa were present at Tunis , but events put a stop to plans for a continued crusade when Louis died of illness . According to legend , his last word was " Jerusalem " . 
 = = Relations with the Ilkhanate = = 
 = = = Hulagu ( 1256 – 1265 ) = = = 
 Hulagu Khan , a grandson of Genghis Khan , was an avowed shamanist , but was nevertheless very tolerant of Christianity . His mother <unk> Beki , his favorite wife Doquz Khatun , and several of his closest collaborators were Nestorian Christians . One of his most important generals , Kitbuqa , was a Nestorian Christian of the Naiman tribe . Military collaboration between the Mongols and their Christian vassals became substantial in 1258 – 1260 . Hulagu 's army , with the forces of his Christian subjects Bohemond VI of Antioch , Hethum I of Armenia , and the Christian Georgians , effectively destroyed two of the most powerful Muslim dynasties of the era : the Abbasids in Baghdad and the Ayyubids in Syria . 
 = = = = Fall of Baghdad ( 1258 ) = = = = 
 The Abbasid Caliphate , supposedly founded by Muhammad 's uncle Abbas in the 8th century , had ruled northeastern Africa , Arabia , and the Near East . Their seat of power for 500 years was Baghdad , a city considered to be the jewel of Islam and one of the largest and most powerful cities in the world . But under attack from the Mongols , the city fell on February 15 , 1258 , a loss often considered in the Muslim world as the single most catastrophic event in the history of Islam , the end of the Islamic Golden Age . The Christian Georgians had been the first to breach the walls , and as described by historian Steven Runciman , " were particularly fierce in their destruction " . When Hulagu conquered the city , the Mongols demolished buildings , burned entire neighborhoods , and massacred nearly 80 @,@ 000 men , women , and children . But at the intervention of Doquz Khatun , the Christian inhabitants were spared . 
 For Asiatic Christians , the fall of Baghdad was cause for celebration . Hulagu and his Christian queen came to be considered as God 's agents against the enemies of Christianity , and were compared to the influential 4th @-@ century Christian Emperor Constantine the Great and his revered empress mother , Saint Helen , an icon of the Christian church . The Armenian historian <unk> of <unk> praised the Mongol royal couple in texts for the Armenian Church , and Bar Hebraeus , a bishop of the Syriac Orthodox Church , also referred to them as a Constantine and Helena , writing of Hulagu that nothing could compare to the " king of kings " in " wisdom , high @-@ mindedness , and splendid deeds " . 
 = = = = Invasion of Syria ( 1260 ) = = = = 
 After Baghdad , in 1260 the Mongols with their Christian subjects conquered Muslim Syria , domain of the Ayyubid dynasty . They took together the city of Aleppo in January , and in March , the Mongols with the Armenians and the Franks of Antioch took Damascus , under the Christian Mongol general Kitbuqa . With both the Abbasid and Ayyubid dynasties destroyed , the Near East , as described by historian Steven Runciman , " was never again to dominate civilization . " The last Ayyubid sultan An @-@ Nasir Yusuf died shortly thereafter , and with the Islamic power centers of Baghdad and Damascus gone , the center of Islamic power transferred to the Egyptian Mamluks in Cairo . However , before the Mongols could continue their advance towards Egypt , they needed to withdraw because of the death of the Great Khan . Hulagu was needed back at the capital and took the bulk of his forces with him , leaving a small force under Kitbuqa to occupy Palestine during his absence . Mongol raiding parties were sent south into Palestine towards Egypt , with small Mongol garrisons of about 1 @,@ 000 established in Gaza . 
 = = = = Battle of Ain Jalut = = = = 
 Despite the cooperation between the Mongols and their Christian subjects in Antioch , other Christians in the Levant regarded the Mongol approach with unease . Jacques Pantaléon , the Patriarch of Jerusalem , saw the Mongols as a clear threat , and had written to the Pope to warn him about them in 1256 . The Franks did , however , send the Dominican David of Ashby to the court of Hulagu in 1260 . In Sidon , Julian Grenier , Lord of Sidon and Beaufort , described by his contemporaries as irresponsible and light @-@ headed , took an opportunity to raid and plunder the area of the Beqaa Valley in Mongol territory . One of the Mongols killed was Kitbuqa 's nephew , and in retaliation , Kitbuqa raided the city of Sidon . These events added to the level of distrust between the Mongols and the Crusader forces , whose own center of power was now in the coastal city of Acre . 
 The Franks of Acre did their best to maintain a position of cautious neutrality between the Mongols and the Mamluks . Despite their long history of enmity with the Mamluks , the Franks acknowledged that the Mongols were a greater threat , and after careful debate , chose to enter into a passive truce with their previous adversaries . The Franks allowed the Mamluk forces to move northward through Christian territory to engage the Mongols , in exchange for an agreement that the Franks could purchase any captured Mongol horses at a low price . The truce allowed the Mamluks to camp and re @-@ supply near Acre , and engage the Mongols at Ain Jalut on September 3 , 1260 . The Mongol forces were already depleted due to their main force withdrawing , so with the passive assistance of the Franks , the Mamluks were able to achieve a decisive and historic victory over the Mongols . The remainder of the Mongol army retreated to Cilician Armenia , where they were received and re @-@ equipped by Hethum I. Ain Jalut marked a major turning point in the history of the Mongols , as it was the first major battle that they had lost , and set the western border for what had seemed an unstoppable expansion of the Mongol Empire . 
 = = = = Papal communications = = = = 
 In the 1260s , a change occurred in the European perception of the Mongols , and they became regarded less as enemies , and more as potential allies in the fight against the Muslims . As recently as 1259 , Pope Alexander IV had been encouraging a new crusade against the Mongols , and had been extremely disappointed in hearing that the monarchs of Antioch and Cilician Armenia had submitted to Mongol overlordship . Alexander had put the monarchs ' cases on the agenda of his upcoming council , but died in 1261 just months before the Council could be convened , and before the new crusade could be launched . For a new pope , the choice fell to Pantaléon , the same Patriarch of Jerusalem who had earlier been warning of the Mongol threat . He took the name Pope Urban IV , and tried to raise money for a new crusade . 
 On April 10 , 1262 , the Mongol leader Hulagu sent through John the Hungarian a new letter to King Louis IX of France , again offering an alliance . The letter explained that previously , the Mongols had been under the impression that the pope was the leader of the Christians , but now they realized that the true power rested with the French monarchy . The letter mentioned Hulagu 's intention to capture Jerusalem for the benefit of the pope , and asked for Louis to send a fleet against Egypt . Hulagu promised the restoration of Jerusalem to the Christians , but also still insisted on Mongol sovereignty , in the Mongols ' quest for conquering the world . It is unclear whether or not King Louis actually received the letter , but at some point it was transmitted to Pope Urban , who answered in a similar way as his predecessors . In his papal bull <unk> cor nostrum , Urban congratulated Hulagu on his expression of goodwill towards the Christian faith , and encouraged him to convert to Christianity . 
 Historians dispute the exact meaning of Urban 's actions . The mainstream view , exemplified by British historian Peter Jackson , holds that Urban still regarded the Mongols as enemies at this time . This perception began changing a few years later , during the pontificate of Pope Clement IV ( 1265 – 68 ) , when the Mongols were seen more as potential allies . However , the French historian Jean Richard argues that Urban 's act signaled a turning point in Mongol @-@ European relations as early as 1263 , after which the Mongols were considered as actual allies . Richard also argues that it was in response to this forming coalition between the Franks , Ilkhanid Mongols and Byzantines , that the Mongols of the Golden Horde allied with the Muslim Mamluks in return . However , the mainstream view of historians is that though there were many attempts at forming an alliance , the attempts proved unsuccessful . 
 = = = Abaqa ( 1265 – 1282 ) = = = 
 Hulagu died in 1265 , and was succeeded by Abaqa ( 1234 – 1282 ) , who further pursued Western cooperation . Though a Buddhist , upon his succession he married Maria Palaiologina , an Orthodox Christian and the illegitimate daughter of the Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos . Abaqa corresponded with Pope Clement IV through 1267 and 1268 , sending envoys to both Clement and King James I of Aragon . In a 1268 message to Clement , Abaqa promised to send troops to aid the Christians . It is unclear if this was what led to James 's unsuccessful expedition to Acre in 1269 . James initiated a small crusade , but a storm descended on his fleet as they attempted their crossing , forcing most of the ships to turn back . The crusade was ultimately handled by James 's two sons Fernando Sanchez and Pedro Fernandez , who arrived in Acre in December 1269 . Abaqa , despite his earlier promises of assistance , was in the process of facing another threat , an invasion in Khorasan by Mongols from Turkestan , and so could only commit a small force for the Holy Land , which did little but brandish the threat of an invasion along the Syrian frontier in October 1269 . He raided as far as Harim and <unk> in October , but retreated as soon as Baibars ' forces advanced . 
 = = = = Edward I 's crusade ( 1269 – 1274 ) = = = = 
 In 1269 , the English Prince Edward ( the future Edward I ) , inspired by tales of his great @-@ uncle , Richard the Lionheart , and the second crusade of the French King Louis , started on a crusade of his own , the Ninth Crusade . The number of knights and retainers that accompanied Edward on the crusade was quite small , possibly around 230 knights , with a total complement of approximately 1 @,@ 000 people , transported in a flotilla of 13 ships . Edward understood the value of an alliance with the Mongols , and upon his arrival in Acre on May 9 , 1271 , he immediately sent an embassy to the Mongol ruler Abaqa , requesting assistance . Abaqa answered positively to Edward 's request , asking him to coordinate his activities with his general <unk> , whom he sent on an offensive against the Mamluks with 10 @,@ 000 Mongols to join Edward 's army . But Edward was able only to engage in some fairly ineffectual raids that did not actually achieve success in gaining new territory . For example , when he engaged in a raid into the Plain of Sharon , he proved unable to even take the small Mamluk fortress of Qaqun . However , Edward 's military operations , limited though they were , were still of assistance in persuading the Mamluk leader Baibars to agree to a 10 @-@ year truce between the city of Acre and the Mamluks , signed in 1272 . Edward 's efforts were described by historian Reuven Amitai as " the nearest thing to real Mongol @-@ Frankish military coordination that was ever to be achieved , by Edward or any other Frankish leader . " 
 = = = = Council of Lyon ( 1274 ) = = = = 
 In 1274 Pope Gregory X convened the Second Council of Lyon . Abaqa sent a delegation of 13 to 16 Mongols to the Council , which created a great stir , particularly when three of their members underwent a public baptism . Abaqa 's Latin secretary Rychaldus delivered a report to the Council which outlined previous European @-@ Ilkhanid relations under Abaqa 's father , Hulagu , affirming that after Hulagu had welcomed Christian ambassadors to his court , he had agreed to exempt Latin Christians from taxes and charges , in exchange for their prayers for the Khan . According to Rychaldus , Hulagu had also prohibited the molestation of Frank establishments , and had committed to return Jerusalem to the Franks . Rychaldus assured the assembly that even after Hulagu 's death , his son Abaqa was still determined to drive the Mamluks from Syria . 
 At the Council , Pope Gregory promulgated a new crusade in liaison with the Mongols , putting in place a vast program in his " Constitutions for the zeal of the faith " , with four main elements : imposing a new tax for three years , forbidding trade with the <unk> ( Muslims ) , arranging the supply of ships by the Italian maritime republics , and the alliance of the West with both Byzantium and the Mongol Ilkhan Abaqa . Abaqa then sent another embassy , led by the Georgian <unk> brothers , to further notify Western leaders of military preparations . Gregory answered that his legates would accompany the crusade , and that they would be in charge of coordinating military operations with the Ilkhan . 
 However , the papal plans were not supported by the other European monarchs , who had lost enthusiasm for the Crusades . Only one western monarch attended the Council , the elderly James I of Aragon , who could only offer a small force . There was fundraising for a new crusade , and plans were made , but never followed through . The projects essentially came to a halt with the death of Pope Gregory on January 10 , 1276 , and the money which had been raised to finance the expedition was instead distributed in Italy . 
 = = = = Invasion of Syria ( 1280 – 1281 ) = = = = 
 Without support from the Europeans , some Franks in Outremer , particularly the Knights Hospitaller of the fortress of Marqab , and to some extent the Franks of Cyprus and Antioch , attempted to join in combined operations with the Mongols in 1280 – 1281 . The death of the Egyptian leader Baibars in 1277 led to disorganization in the Muslim territories , making conditions ripe for a new action by other factions in the Holy Land . The Mongols seized the opportunity , organized a new invasion of Syria , and in September 1280 occupied Bagras and <unk> , followed by Aleppo on October 20 . The Mongol leader Abaqa , taking advantage of his momentum , sent envoys to Edward I of England , the Franks of Acre , King Hugh of Cyprus , and Bohemond VII of Tripoli ( son of Bohemond VI ) , requesting their support for the campaign . But the Crusaders were not organized enough themselves to be of much help . In Acre , the Patriarch 's Vicar replied that the city was suffering from hunger , and that the king of Jerusalem was already embroiled in another war . Local Knights Hospitaller from Marqab ( in the area which had previously been Antioch / Tripoli ) were able to make raids into the Beqaa Valley , as far as the Mamluk @-@ held Krak des Chevaliers in 1280 and 1281 . Hugh and Bohemond of Antioch mobilized their armies , but their forces were prevented from joining those of the Mongols by Baibars ' successor , the new Egyptian Sultan Qalawun . He advanced north from Egypt in March 1281 , positioned his own army between the Franks and Mongols , and then further divided the potential allies by renewing a truce with the Barons of Acre on May 3 , 1281 , extending it for another ten years and ten months ( a truce he would later breach ) . He also renewed a second 10 @-@ year truce with Bohemond VII of Tripoli on July 16 , 1281 , and affirmed pilgrim access to Jerusalem . 
 In September 1281 the Mongols returned , with 50 @,@ 000 of their own troops , plus 30 @,@ 000 others including Armenians under Leo III , Georgians , and 200 Knights Hospitaller from Marqab , who sent a contingent even though the Franks of Acre had agreed a truce with the Mamluks . The Mongols and their auxiliary troops fought against the Mamluks at the Second Battle of Homs on October 30 , 1281 , but the encounter was indecisive , with the Sultan suffering heavy losses . In retaliation , Qalawun later besieged and captured the Hospitaller fortress of Marqab in 1285 . 
 = = = Arghun ( 1284 – 1291 ) = = = 
 Abaqa died in 1282 and was briefly replaced by his brother Tekuder , who had converted to Islam . Tekuder reversed Abaqa 's policy of seeking an alliance with the Franks , offering instead an alliance to the Mamluk Sultan Qalawun , who continued his own advance , capturing the Hospitaller fortress of Margat in 1285 , <unk> in 1287 , and the County of Tripoli in 1289 . However , Tekuder 's pro @-@ Muslim stance was not popular , and in 1284 , Abaqa 's Buddhist son Arghun , with the support of the Great Khan Kublai , led a revolt and had Tekuder executed . Arghun then revived the idea of an alliance with the West , and sent multiple envoys to Europe . 
 The first of Arghun 's embassies was led by Isa <unk> , a Nestorian scientist who had been head of Kublai Khan 's Office of Western Astronomy . <unk> met with Pope Honorius IV in 1285 , offering to " remove " the Saracens ( Muslims ) and divide " the land of Sham , namely Egypt " with the Franks . The second embassy , and probably the most famous , was that of the elderly cleric Rabban Bar Sauma , who had been visiting the Ilkhanate during a remarkable pilgrimage from China to Jerusalem . 
 Through Bar Sauma and other later envoys , such as <unk> de <unk> , Arghun promised the European leaders that if Jerusalem were conquered , he would have himself baptized and would return Jerusalem to the Christians . Bar Sauma was greeted warmly by the European monarchs , but Western Europe was no longer as interested in the Crusades , and the mission to form an alliance was ultimately fruitless . England did respond by sending a representative , Geoffrey of Langley , who had been a member of Edward I 's Crusade 20 years earlier , and was sent to the Mongol court as an ambassador in 1291 . 
 = = = = Genoese <unk> = = = = 
 Another link between Europe and the Mongols was attempted in 1290 , when the Genoese endeavored to assist the Mongols with naval operations . The plan was to construct and man two galleys to attack Mamluk ships in the Red Sea , and operate a blockade of Egypt 's trade with India . As the Genoese were traditional supporters of the Mamluks , this was a major shift in policy , apparently motivated by the attack of the Egyptian Sultan Qalawun on the Cilician Armenians in 1285 . To build and man the fleet , a squadron of 800 Genoese carpenters , sailors and crossbowmen went to Baghdad , working on the Tigris . However , due to a feud between the Guelphs and Ghibellines , the Genoese soon degenerated into internal bickering , and killed each other in Basra , putting an end to the project . Genoa finally cancelled the agreement and signed a new treaty with the Mamluks instead . 
 All these attempts to mount a combined offensive between the Franks and Mongols were too little and too late . In May 1291 , the city of Acre was conquered by the Egyptian Mamluks in the Siege of Acre . When Pope Nicholas IV learned of this , he wrote to Arghun , again asking him to be baptized and to fight against the Mamluks . But Arghun had died on March 10 , 1291 , and Pope Nicholas died as well in March 1292 , putting an end to their efforts towards combined action . 
 = = = Ghazan ( 1295 – 1304 ) = = = 
 After Arghun 's death , he was followed in rapid succession by two brief and fairly ineffective leaders , one of whom only held power for a few months . Stability was restored when Arghun 's son Ghazan took power in 1295 , though to secure cooperation from other influential Mongols , he made a public conversion to Islam when he took the throne , marking a major turning point in the state religion of the Ilkhanate . Despite being an official Muslim , however , Ghazan remained tolerant of multiple religions , and worked to maintain good relations with his Christian vassal states such as Cilician Armenia and Georgia . 
 In 1299 , he made the first of what were to be three attempts to invade Syria . As he launched his new invasion , he also sent letters to the Franks of Cyprus ( Henry II , King of Cyprus ; and the heads of the military orders ) , inviting them to come join him in his attack on the Mamluks in Syria . The Mongols successfully took the city of Aleppo , and were there joined by their vassal King Hethum II , whose forces participated in the rest of the offensive . The Mongols soundly defeated the Mamluks in the Battle of Wadi al @-@ Khazandar , on December 23 or 24 , 1299 . This success in Syria led to wild rumors in Europe that the Mongols had successfully re @-@ captured the Holy Land , and had even conquered the Mamluks in Egypt and were on a mission to conquer Tunisia in northern Africa . But in reality , Jerusalem had been neither taken nor even besieged . All that had been managed were some Mongol raids into Palestine in early 1300 . The raids went as far as Gaza , passing through several towns , probably including Jerusalem . But when the Egyptians again advanced from Cairo in May , the Mongols retreated without resistance . 
 In July 1300 , the Crusaders launched naval operations to press the advantage . A fleet of sixteen galleys with some smaller vessels was equipped in Cyprus , commanded by King Henry of Cyprus , accompanied by his brother Amalric , Prince of Tyre , the heads of the military orders , and Ghazan 's ambassador " <unk> " ( <unk> the Pisan ) . The ships left Famagusta on July 20 , 1300 , to raid the coasts of Egypt and Syria : Rosette , Alexandria , Acre , Tortosa , and <unk> , before returning to Cyprus . 
 = = = = Ruad expedition = = = = 
 Ghazan announced that he would return by November 1300 , and sent letters and ambassadors to the West so that they could prepare themselves . After their own naval raids , the Cypriots attempted a major operation to re @-@ take the former Syrian Templar stronghold of Tortosa . They prepared the largest force they could muster at the time , approximately 600 men : 300 under Amalric , and similar contingents from the Templars and Hospitallers . In November 1300 they attempted to occupy Tortosa on the mainland , but were unable to gain control of the city . The Mongols were delayed , and the Cypriots moved offshore to the nearby island of Ruad to establish a base . The Mongols continued to be delayed , and the bulk of the Crusader forces returned to Cyprus , leaving only a garrison on Ruad . In February 1301 , Ghazan 's Mongols finally made a new advance into Syria . The force was commanded by the Mongol general <unk> , who was joined by Armenian troops , and Guy of Ibelin and John , lord of <unk> . But despite a force of 60 @,@ 000 , <unk> could do little else than engage in some raids around Syria , and then retreated . 
 Plans for combined operations between the Franks and the Mongols were again made for the following winter offensives , in 1301 and 1302 . But in mid @-@ 1301 the island of Ruad was attacked by the Egyptian Mamluks . After a lengthy siege , the island surrendered in 1302 or 1303 . The Mamluks slaughtered many of the inhabitants , and captured the surviving Templars to send them to prison in Cairo . In late 1301 , Ghazan sent letters to the pope asking him to send troops , priests , and peasants , to make the Holy Land a Frank state again . 
 In 1303 , Ghazan sent another letter to Edward I , via <unk> de <unk> , who had also been an ambassador for Arghun . The letter reiterated their ancestor Hulagu 's promise that the Ilkhans would give Jerusalem to the Franks in exchange for help against the Mamluks . That year , the Mongols again attempted to invade Syria , appearing in great strength ( about 80 @,@ 000 ) together with the Armenians . But they were again defeated at Homs on March 30 , 1303 , and at the decisive Battle of <unk> , south of Damascus , on April 21 , 1303 . It is considered to be the last major Mongol invasion of Syria . Ghazan died on May 10 , 1304 , and Frankish dreams of a rapid reconquest of the Holy Land were destroyed . 
 = = = Oljeitu ( 1304 – 1316 ) = = = 
 Oljeitu , also named Mohammad <unk> , was great @-@ grandson of Ilkhanate founder Hulagu , and brother and successor of Ghazan . In his youth he at first converted to Buddhism , and then later to Sunni Islam with his brother Ghazan , and changed his first name to the Islamic Muhammad . In April 1305 , Oljeitu sent letters to Philip IV of France , Pope Clement V , and Edward I of England . As had his predecessors , Oljeitu offered a military collaboration between the Mongols and the Christian nations of Europe , against the Mamluks . European nations prepared a crusade , but were delayed . In the meantime Oljeitu launched a last campaign against the Mamluks ( 1312 – 1313 ) , in which he was unsuccessful . A final settlement with the Mamluks would only be found when Oljeitu 's son Abu Sa 'id signed the Treaty of Aleppo in 1322 . 
 = = Last contacts = = 
 In the 14th century , diplomatic contact continued between the Franks and the Mongols , until the Ilkhanate dissolved in the 1330s , and the ravages of the Black Death in Europe caused contact with the East to be severed . A few marital alliances between Christian rulers and the Mongols of the Golden Horde continued , such as when the Byzantine emperor Andronicus II gave daughters in marriage to <unk> 'a ( d . 1312 ) and later to his successor Uzbek ( 1312 – 1341 ) . 
 After Abu Sa 'id , relations between Christian princes and the Ilkhanate became very sparse . Abu Sa 'id died in 1335 with neither heir nor successor , and the Ilkhanate lost its status after his death , becoming a plethora of little kingdoms run by Mongols , Turks , and Persians . 
 In 1336 , an embassy to the French Pope Benedict XII in Avignon was sent by <unk> <unk> , the last Yuan emperor in Dadu . The embassy was led by two Genoese travelers in the service of the Mongol emperor , who carried letters representing that the Mongols had been eight years ( since Archbishop John of Montecorvino 's death ) without a spiritual guide , and earnestly desired one . Pope Benedict appointed four ecclesiastics as his legates to the khan 's court . In 1338 , a total of 50 ecclesiastics were sent by the pope to Peking , among them John of Marignolli , who returned to Avignon in 1353 with a letter from the Yuan emperor to Pope Innocent VI . But soon , the Han Chinese rose up and drove the Mongols out of China , establishing the Ming Dynasty in 1368 . By 1369 , all foreign influences , from Mongols to Christians , Manichaeans , and Buddhists , were expelled by the Ming Dynasty . 
 In the early 15th century , Timur ( Tamerlane ) resumed relations with Europe , attempting to form an alliance against the Egyptian Mamluks and the Ottoman Empire , and engaged in communications with Charles VI of France and Henry III of Castile , but died in 1405 . 
 = = = Cultural contacts = = = 
 In the cultural sphere , there were some Mongol elements in Western medieval art , especially in Italy , of which most surviving examples are from the 14th century , after the chance of a military alliance had faded . These included the depiction of textiles from the Mongol Empire and Mongol script in various contexts , the latter often anachronistic . Imports of textiles had a considerable influence on Italian textile design . Mongol military costume is sometimes worn by soldiers , typically those acting against Christian figures , as in martyrdoms or Crucifixion scenes . These were perhaps copied from drawings made of Mongol envoys to Europe , or ones brought back from Outremer . 
 = = Views from historians = = 
 Most historians describe the contacts between the Mongol Empire and the Western Europeans as a series of attempts , missed opportunities , and failed negotiations . Christopher Atwood , in the 2004 Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire , summed up the relations between Western Europe and the Mongols : " Despite numerous envoys and the obvious logic of an alliance against mutual enemies , the papacy and the Crusaders never achieved the often @-@ proposed alliance against Islam . " 
 A few other historians argue there was an actual alliance , but do not agree on the details : Jean Richard wrote that an alliance began around 1263 . Reuven Amitai stated that the closest thing to actual Mongol @-@ Frankish military coordination was when Prince Edward of England attempted to coordinate activities with <unk> in 1271 . Amitai also mentioned the other attempts towards cooperation , but said , " In none of these episodes , however , can we speak of Mongols and troops from the Frankish West being on the Syrian mainland at the same time . " Timothy May described the alliance as having its peak at the Council of Lyon in 1274 , but that it began to unravel in 1275 with the death of Bohemond , and May too admitted that the forces never engaged in joint operations . Alain <unk> , in his own book The Last Templar , said that an alliance was not sealed until 1300 . 
 There also continues to be debate about whether or not an alliance would have been a wise idea , and whether the Crusaders at that point in history were even relevant to the Persian @-@ Mongol conflict . The 20th @-@ century historian Glenn Burger said , " The refusal of the Latin Christian states in the area to follow Hethum 's example and adapt to changing conditions by allying themselves with the new Mongol empire must stand as one of the saddest of the many failures of Outremer . " This was similar to the view of Steven Runciman , who argued , " Had the Mongol alliance been achieved and honestly implemented by the West , the existence of Outremer would almost certainly have been prolonged . The <unk> would have been crippled if not destroyed ; and the Ilkhanate of Persia would have survived as a power friendly to the Christians and the West " . However , David Nicolle , describing the Mongols as " potential allies " , said that early historians were writing from the benefit of hindsight , and that overall the major players were the Mamluks and the Mongols , with Christians just " pawns in a greater game . " 
 = = Reasons for failure = = 
 There has been much discussion among historians as to why the Franco @-@ Mongol alliance never became a reality and why , despite all the diplomatic contacts , it stayed a chimera or fantasy . Many reasons have been proposed : one was that the Mongols at that stage in their empire were not entirely focused on expanding to the West . By the late 13th century , the Mongol leaders were several generations removed from the great Genghis Khan , and internal disruption was brewing . The original nomadic Mongols from the day of Genghis had become more settled , and had turned into administrators instead of conquerors . Battles were springing up that were Mongol against Mongol , which took troops away from the front in Syria . There was also confusion within Europe as to the differences between the Mongols of the Ilkhanate in the Holy Land , and the Mongols of the Golden Horde , who were attacking Eastern Europe in Hungary and Poland . Within the Mongol Empire , the Ilkhanids and the Golden Horde considered each other enemies , but it took time for Western observers to be able to distinguish between the different parts of the Mongol Empire . From the Mongol side , there were also concerns as to just how much clout the Franks could have brought to bear , especially as there was decreased interest in Europe in pursuing the Crusades . Court historians of Mongol Iran made no mention whatsoever of the communications between the Ilkhans and the Christian West , and barely mentioned the Franks at all . The communications were evidently not seen as important by the Mongols , and may have even been considered embarrassing . The Mongol leader Ghazan , a converted Muslim since 1295 , might not have wanted to be perceived as trying to gain the assistance of infidels against his fellow Muslims in Egypt . When Mongol historians did make notes of foreign territories , the areas were usually categorized as either " enemies " , " conquered " , or " in rebellion " . The Franks , in that context , were listed in the same category as the Egyptians , in that they were enemies to be conquered . The idea of " ally " was foreign to the Mongols . 
 Some European monarchs responded positively to Mongol inquiries , but became vague and evasive when asked to actually commit troops and resources . Logistics also became more complex – the Egyptian Mamluks were genuinely concerned about the threat of another wave of Crusader forces , so each time the Mamluks captured another castle or port , instead of occupying it , they systematically destroyed it so that it could never be used again . This both made it more difficult for the Crusaders to plan military operations , and increased the expense of those operations . Monarchs in Western Europe often gave lip service to the idea of going on crusade , as a way of making an emotional appeal to their subjects , but in reality they would take years to prepare , and sometimes never actually left for Outremer . Internal wars in Europe , such as the War of the Vespers , were also distracting attention , and making it less likely for European nobles to want to commit their military to the Crusades , when they were more needed at home . 
 The Europeans were also concerned about the long @-@ term goals of the Mongols . Early Mongol diplomacy had been not a simple offer of cooperation , but straightforward demands for submission . It was only in later communications that Mongol diplomats started to adopt a more conciliatory tone ; but they still used language that implied more command than entreaty . Even the Armenian historian Hayton of <unk> , the most enthusiastic advocate of Western @-@ Mongol collaboration , freely admitted that the Mongol leadership was not inclined to listen to European advice . His recommendation was that even if working together , European armies and Mongol armies should avoid contact because of Mongol arrogance . European leaders were aware that the Mongols would not have been content to stop at the Holy Land , but were on a clear quest for world domination . If the Mongols had achieved a successful alliance with the West and destroyed the Mamluk Sultanate , they certainly would have eventually turned upon the Franks of Cyprus and the Byzantines . They also would have surely conquered Egypt , from which they could have continued an advance into Africa , where no strong state could have stood in their way until Morocco and the Islamic caliphates in the Maghreb . 
 And lastly , there was not much support among the general populace in Europe for a Mongol alliance . Writers in Europe were creating " recovery " literature with their ideas about how best to recover the Holy Land , but few mentioned the Mongols as a genuine possibility . In 1306 , when Pope Clement V asked the leaders of the military orders , Jacques de Molay and Fulk de Villaret , to present their proposals for how the Crusades should proceed , neither of them factored in any kind of a Mongol alliance . A few later proposals talked briefly about the Mongols as being a force that could invade Syria and keep the Mamluks distracted , but not as a force that could be counted on for cooperation . 
 = Chen Chi @-@ mai = 
 Chen Chi @-@ mai ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Chén <unk> ; Wade – Giles : <unk> Ch <unk> @-@ <unk> ; born December 23 , 1964 ) is a Taiwanese politician and member of the Legislative Yuan . He is also currently the spokesperson of the Democratic Progressive Party and the chief executive officer of the its Policy Research and Coordinating Committee . A physician from Keelung , Chen started his political career by becoming member of the Legislative Yuan in 1996 and served as legislator for almost eight years before becoming the spokesperson of the Executive Yuan . 
 In 2005 , Chen succeeded to the mayoralty of Kaohsiung after then @-@ mayor Frank Hsieh 's appointment as premier . Chen became the Deputy Secretary @-@ General of the Presidential Office in 2007 and served until the inauguration of President Ma Ying @-@ jeou . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chen Chi @-@ mai was born in Keelung City , Taiwan , on December 23 , 1964 . He is the son of Chen Che @-@ nan , who is also a politician and was also a Deputy Secretary @-@ General of the Presidential Office before Chen took office in 2007 . 
 Chen studied medicine at the Chung Shan Medical University in Taichung , where he earned his MB degree in 1991 . He got his MS degree in preventive medicine at the National Taiwan University in 1994 . He practiced medicine at the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital ( <unk> ) for about three years and became a lecturer at the Taipei Medical University in 1996 . 
 Chen made his early entry into public affairs when he , as a student , served as an assistant to his father , a legislator at the time . 
 = = Rise in politics = = 
 A member of the Democratic Progressive Party ( DPP ) , Chen was elected legislator three times serving from 1996 to 2004 . During his term , he became the secretary @-@ general of the Justice Alliance faction of the DPP in 1998 and the legislative caucus leader in 1999 . He also became members of various committees within the Legislative Yuan , including the Foreign Affairs , Judiciary , National Defense , and Transportation Committees . 
 Before the DPP became the ruling party , Chen suggested that then @-@ incumbent magistrate of Taoyuan County Annette Lu would be a better choice for Chen Shui @-@ bian 's presidential running mate than any other party member . Lu was eventually selected as his running mate . 
 After Shui @-@ bian 's successful presidential campaign , Chen Chi @-@ mai , as a leader of the Justice Alliance faction , supported the proposal of another member to revise the pro @-@ independence guideline . Although many party members had similar views , the proposal was sent back to the party 's policy research department for review . 
 In 2004 , Chen was appointed a Minister without Portfolio and spokesperson of the Executive Yuan . Soon after , another proposal to modify pro @-@ independence guidelines was created . Several DPP legislators believed that the change of the national title from " Republic of China " to " Taiwan , " which is one of the ultimate goals of Taiwan 's <unk> campaign and localization movement , was not necessary . Chen also supported the proposal . The proposal was documented in an essay called New Culture Discourse , drafted by DPP legislator Lee Wen @-@ chung of the New Tide faction . After the essay was leaked to the media , many politicians , including Chen , denied being involved in drafting the document . The document was proved too controversial and was attacked within the party as a result , although some members believed that it was only based on the 1999 Resolution on Taiwan 's Future . 
 In January 2005 , following the death of former CCP General Secretary Zhao Ziyang , Chen represented the Taiwanese cabinet in delivering a message to the Chinese government . In his address , Chen urged China 's leaders to pursue democratization . Chen stated that Beijing should " face the truth about Tiananmen Square ... We urge the Chinese government to learn from Mr. Zhao 's tolerance and to push for democratic reforms . " 
 Later in January 2005 , Chen Chi @-@ mai was nominated to serve as acting mayor of Kaohsiung by premier @-@ designate Frank Hsieh . 
 = = Mayoralty = = 
 After becoming the mayor of Kaohsiung , Chen sought to continue construction of the Kaohsiung Mass Rapid Transit ( <unk> ) , a major construction started during Frank Hsieh 's mayoral term . The Red Line of the system is opened , and the Orange Line is scheduled to be opened in August 2008 . 
 Chen also worked to turn Kaohsiung into the a film location hub by encouraging filmmakers to shoot their films in the port city . He offered filmmakers , such as Tsai Ming @-@ liang , various incentives for their award @-@ winning films . He presented a NT $ 10 million ( approx . US $ 323 thousand ) prize to Tsai for his film The Wayward Cloud . Tsai in returned said he will soon shoot a new film in Kaohsiung and praised the city 's efforts to develop Kaohsiung into an international city . 
 On July 25 , 2005 , Kaohsiung officially became the host city of World Games 2009 , which will be the largest international sports event hosted in Taiwan , after Chen received the flag of the World Games . Chen later announced the construction of a world @-@ class stadium built for the event . 
 In August 2005 , Thai workers rioted over the draconian treatment they received as foreign workers . These workers lived in poor conditions and had limited freedom . The Chen administration vowed to take action on August 25 . Chen apologized to the public for the social turmoil caused by the incident and offered to resign three times . Then @-@ premier Frank Hsieh authorized Chen 's resignation on September 12 , and replaced him with former vice premier Yeh Chu @-@ lan . 
 = = Post @-@ mayoralty = = 
 After a temporary period of research at the London School of Economics in England , Chen was appointed the Deputy Secretary @-@ General of the Presidential Office in February 2007 . His appointment drew mixed reactions , with the support from the DPP legislative caucus and opposition from the Kuomintang legislative caucus . Chen served with Lin Chia @-@ lung , former director of the Government Information Office . 
 After the DPP chairmanship election in May 2008 , chairwoman @-@ elect Tsai Ing @-@ wen announced the appointment of Chen as the deputy secretary @-@ general of the party . He held the position with Cho Jung @-@ tai until 2009 . Chen is now concurrently serving as both the spokesperson of the Democratic Progressive Party and the chief executive officer of the party 's Policy Research and Coordinating Committee since May 2011 . 
 In the 2012 legislative elections , Chen was placed on the DPP electoral list , from which 13 members were elected based on the amount of votes the DPP received . Being the 8th member on the list , Chen returned to the Legislative Yuan once again as a legislator in February 2012 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Chen is married and has a son and daughter . 
 He is a Master Scuba Diver . 
 = My Hands = 
 " My Hands " is a song recorded by British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis for her second studio album Echo ( 2009 ) . It was written by Arnthor Birgisson and Ina Wroldsen and produced by the former . Alongside Birgisson , Lewis was involved with the song 's vocal production . Lyrically , it is about life after the end of a relationship . The strings were performed by Urban Soul Orchestra , who were led by Simon Fischer . 
 " My Hands " was selected as the official theme song for the English version of the video game Final Fantasy XIII . Lewis decided to accept the offer of her track being used as she felt as though she connected with the video game 's female protagonist , Lightning . The song garnered a mixed response from music critics , who described it as forgettable , despite noting that Lewis performs the song undeniably well . In March 2010 , " My Hands " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 145 . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " My Hands " was recorded for Lewis 's second studio album , Echo , which was released in November 2009 . It was written by Arnthor Birgisson and Ina Wroldsen , and produced by Birgisson . Both Lewis 's vocals and the instrumentation for the track were recorded by Seth Waldmann at Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , United States , Dean Street Studios in London , England and The Vault in Stockholm , Sweden . Birgisson and Lewis carried the vocal production . The strings were performed by Urban Soul Orchestra , who were led by Simon Fischer ; they were arranged and conducted by Stephen Hussey . 
 Additionally , the strings were recorded and engineered by Rich Cooper at British Groove Studios in London . All guitars were provided for by Esbjörn <unk> , while the choir was organised and arranged by Lawrence Johnson . The vocals performed by the choir were recorded by Neil Tucker at Metropolis Studios in London . " My Hands " was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , California ; he was assisted in the process by Christian Plata and Erik Madrid . <unk> Simmonds contributed background vocals . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 Lasting for a duration of 4 : 12 , " My Hands " is a song about " life after the end of a relationship . " It is composed in the key of D major using common time and is 80 beats per minute . " My Hands " garnered a negative response from music critics . Andy Gill for The Independent listed it as one of the top four tracks to download from Echo , along with " Happy " , " Lost Then Found " and " Brave " . A reviewer for CBBC 's Newsround labelled the song , along with another track from the album called " Broken " , as " pretty forgettable . " The reviewer continued to write that although Lewis 's performs the songs undeniably well , they do not stand out compared to " Happy " and " I Got You " . Michael Cragg for musicOMH wrote that the chorus of " My Hands " " erupts " and " bludgeons the listener into submission " and that its meaning becomes overshadowed . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 " My Hands " was selected as the official theme song for the trailer of Final Fantasy XIII . The video game was first released in Japan on 17 December 2009 , which uses a different theme song called " Kimi Ga Iru Kara " , written by Masashi Hamauzu and sung by Sayuri Sugawara . However , international versions produced by NTSC and PAL feature " My Hands " as the official theme song . Gabriel Zamora for Examiner.com wrote that despite sounding " loud " compared to Hamauzu 's song , " My Hands " suits the nature of the video game and " seems to fit well . " She continued to write that fans had hoped that " My Hands " would not replace " Kimi Ga Iru Kara " completely , instead wanting a new track called " Eternal Love " to be the official theme song . Although , she noted that the use of Lewis 's track for the entirety of the trailer seemed to make this an " unlikely " notion . 
 As part of promotion for the video games release , Lewis recorded a promotional advert for Square Enix ( the video game 's developer and publisher ) and spoke about how she was happy to have been approached about the use of " My Hands " on the trailer and that it had some personal meaning . She said " I 'm thrilled to be collaborating with Square Enix on such a groundbreaking game . I never would have imagined ' My Hands ' as such a perfect fit for Final Fantasy XIII , but the strong female protagonist struck a chord with me and I can 't wait to see Lightning do her thing . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Standard edition 
 " My Hands " – 4 : 12 
 United States standard version 
 " My Hands " – 4 : 12 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Conway Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California , United States ; Dean Street Studios , London , England and The Vault , Stockholm , Sweden . 
 Choir vocals recorded at Metropolis Studios , London , England . 
 Mixed at Larrabee Studios , Universal City , California , United States . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Echo . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Five months after the release of Echo , " My Hands " debuted at number 145 on the UK Singles Chart on 20 March 2010 . 
 = Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando = 
 Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando ( known as Ratchet & Clank 2 : Locked and Loaded in Europe and Australia , and Ratchet & Clank 2 in Japan ) is a 2003 3D platform video game developed by Insomniac Games and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 2 . Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando is the second game in the Ratchet & Clank series , following Ratchet & Clank and preceding Ratchet & Clank : Up Your Arsenal . 
 The game begins with an interview of Ratchet and Clank that is seen by Megacorp CEO Abercrombie Fizzwidget . Fizzwidget contacts Ratchet and Clank and explains that a top secret experiment was stolen from Megacorp . Ratchet and Clank are given the task of tracking down the experiment but run into difficulties as they journey across the galaxy . 
 The gameplay of Going Commando is similar to that of the original Ratchet & Clank . The player controlled protagonists are seen in a third @-@ person perspective ; the player uses various weapons and gadgets to defeat enemies and solve puzzles , while exploring planets , completing platforming sections and minigames , and progressing through the story . The game features many improvements over the original game , such as the aesthetics , and introduces many new gameplay aspects , such as weapon upgrading . 
 Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando was released roughly a year after its predecessor , and received critical acclaim , with some calling it one of the best PlayStation 2 games ever made . Critics noted the game 's improved graphics , engaging gameplay , longer story , and overall sound as being major improvements over the original , but criticized the game for its high difficulty level , and certain minigames . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls Ratchet from a third @-@ person perspective , and uses weapons to defeat enemies . The player can also use gadgets to explore new areas . The player travels to planets in the " Bogon " Galaxy and completes main objectives and optional side quests . " Bolts " , the game world 's currency , are primarily obtained by defeating enemies and breaking crates located throughout the game 's levels . Going Commando also includes four types of " maxi @-@ games " , or minigames . These games include arena battles , spherical world battles , hover bike races , and space races / battles . After completing the game , the player may also enter " challenge mode " which is more difficult but the player starts with the weapons and health that they had when they finished the game the first time , additional weapon upgrades are also unlocked . 
 Going Commando introduces eighteen new weapons , such as the Blitz Gun , Seeker and Lava Gun . Each weapon has a " growth bar " , which increases when the weapon is used to defeat enemies . The weapon is upgraded once the bar is filled , increasing its power and changing the design of it . Certain devices from the original Ratchet & Clank make a return , such as the <unk> , while others are new to Going Commando . The player can use a save file from the original Ratchet & Clank to get " retro " weapons from the first game for free . 
 As with weapons , Ratchet gains experience with each enemy destroyed . When Ratchet 's experience bar fills , he gains a new level of " nanotech " . This awards him with additional health bubbles , up to a maximum of 80 . Ratchet 's health can also be increased by finding nanotech upgrades . The game introduces armor vendors , which are able to provide up to four additional levels of protection . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After defeating Drek in the previous game , Ratchet and Clank become celebrities , though their lives remain otherwise uneventful . After giving an interview for the <unk> show Behind the Hero , Ratchet and Clank are suddenly teleported to the Bogon galaxy by Abercrombie Fizzwidget , the founder and CEO of Megacorp , the galaxy 's largest maker of consumer goods and electronics , who offers them a job recovering a stolen biological experiment . Upon completing an extensive training regime , the duo is sent to a flying laboratory on planet <unk> where the experiment was last seen . Before they can retrieve it , however , a masked thief appears and swipes it for himself . Escaping unharmed , Ratchet returns to his ship and contacts Fizzwidget , who provides him with coordinates to track the experiment . 
 The duo proceed to pursue the thief across several planets , eventually confronting him on planet <unk> . The thief escapes , but Ratchet manages to reclaim the experiment . Fizzwidget arranges a meeting to take custody , but " accidentally " maroons the duo in the desert afterwards . The thief arrives and reveals his true identity as Angela Cross , a former Megacorp scientist . Claiming that the experiment is a threat to the entire galaxy , she gives them the location of a testing facility on planet <unk> where it was created . 
 Following her lead , the duo infiltrate the facility and discover a video recording of the experiment on a violent rampage . Angela then contacts them with news that Megacorp is hosting an event on planet <unk> to promote the experiment as the " Protopet " , with Fizzwidget in attendance . Convinced that Fizzwidget is unaware of the Protopet 's flaws , Ratchet goes to warn him , only to discover that the whole thing was a trap set by private mercenaries on Megacorp 's payroll . Captured , they are then sent to a remote prison over <unk> , but manage to reunite and escape . Tracking the mercenaries to their hideout on planet <unk> , they rescue a captive Angela and set out to confront Fizzwidget at Megacorp headquarters . 
 To their surprise , " Fizzwidget " turns out to be none other than disgraced hero Captain Qwark . In a bid to restore his reputation , Qwark intends to unleash the Protopet upon the galaxy , so he can use a device created by Angela to defeat the creatures and make himself famous again . When he demonstrates the device , however , it malfunctions and transforms the original Protopet into a gigantic beast that devours him . While Angela goes to rescue the real Fizzwidget , Ratchet subdues the Protopet and saves Qwark 's life . With Clank 's help , Angela fixes the device and broadcasts a signal through Megacorp 's TV transponders , neutralizing the <unk> and restoring peace to the Bogon galaxy . In the game 's epilogue , Ratchet , Clank , Angela , and a female <unk> that Clank had met at several points in the game hang out at Clank 's apartment , where Angela informs Ratchet that Qwark has been assigned to work as a test subject for Megacorp as punishment for his crimes . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Going Commando was approved for development five months before the first game 's release , after highly positive reviews from the original 's playtesters . In August 2002 , Insomniac Games started designing the visual concepts for Going Commando , while still fixing bugs in the original game . Brian Hastings , Insomniac 's Vice President of Programming , said in a 2003 interview that the first step in the game 's design was to " try to come up with a few ' Big Ideas ' . These are the things we think will really grab people 's attention and give the game that Wow @-@ Factor . In the case of Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando the big ideas were RPG elements ( like weapon upgrades and health upgrades ) , spherical planets and space combat . " Hastings said that the inspiration for the game 's spherical worlds came in part from the cover of the 1943 novel The Little Prince . Designing the spherical worlds required changing about 50 @,@ 000 lines of the game 's code , to account for the different handling of gravity . Development took a total of ten months , during which time Insomniac 's design team doubled from 40 to 80 members . 
 One common criticism of the original Ratchet & Clank was the design and personality of Ratchet . Ted Price , the game 's producer , said that to fix this they made Ratchet " less cocky , he is much more friendly to Clank , and he 's able to handle himself better in stressful situations without being impetuous , which is what he was in Ratchet 1 . " The character of Captain Qwark was a late addition to the game . 
 Going Commando was released in North America on November 11 , 2003 , Europe on November 21 , 2003 , and Japan on December 11 , 2003 . In 2004 , Sony added Going Commando to their Greatest Hits series of games for the PlayStation 2 , and it was similarly added to the Platinum Range used in the PAL region on August 13 , 2004 , and to the Japanese list of The Best games on July 8 , 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Going Commando received critical acclaim . 1UP.com said that " Everything that Ratchet & Clank did , Going Commando does better , and the tweaks and additions just push it further over the top . " Game Informer 's Andy McNamara said that the game has " the best and most compelling content [ Insomniac ] has put out to date . " 
 The game 's arena combat and racing levels were praised by Andrew Reiner of Game Informer , and Benjamin Turner of GameSpy similarly said that " it 's surprising how fun it can be to play interstellar gladiator . " GamePro praised the game 's pacing , saying that the first game felt like it didn 't " really show its true colors until about halfway through " , but that Going Commando had the same feeling by the end of the second level . GameSpot mentioned that the " great sense of humor " of the original game is also noticeable in Ratchet & Clank : Going Commando , a statement echoed by GameZone when they said that the game 's cut @-@ scenes " represent some of the most thought @-@ out and gut @-@ <unk> funny sequences ever witnessed in a platforming game . " 
 Going Commando 's graphics were praised by reviewers , who specifically mentioned Ratchet 's improved character design . Game Informer said that " the graphical details will leave you speechless ... " GameSpot considered the reuse of graphics for the menus and mission screens to be " a little lazy " , but praised the graphics and sound effects of the game 's weapons . GameSpy mentioned that " Going Commando is easily the most graphically impressive platformer on the market " . GameZone reported that the game 's sound was well @-@ done , including the music , weapon effects , and dialogue . 
 Criticism of the game was aimed at its level of difficulty , which is higher than that of its predecessor ; 1UP.com mentioned that this was most noticeable near the end of the game , where " there are levels that consist of nothing but wave after wave of difficult enemies thrown at you to deplete your ammo , and then more waves of enemies after that . " GameSpy , however , praised this aspect of the game , saying that it made Going Commando more interesting than the original . Some reviewers also felt that the game 's space combat was poorly done in comparison to the rest of the game , and that the " Giant Clank " levels were " brainless and boring " . 
 The game was awarded 11th place on IGN 's 2007 list of " The Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time " . IGN also awarded both Going Commando and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 their Game of the Month award for November 2003 in their first " Game of the Month " feature to cover two games . 
 While the first Ratchet and Clank suffered , in my opinion , because of its immensely generic homogenization of character and because of its relative ease , Ratchet and Clank Going Commando tries to solve these problems in typical Insomniac fashion . Ratchet too annoying ? Let him grow up and take charge . Game too easy ? Increase the quantity and kinds of weapons for Ratchet and for the enemies . But Insomniac didn 't just fix problems . It looked at every detail of the first game and from the ground up improved everything wholesale . It upgraded everything , and then it added new stuff . [ ... ] Throughout its core fabric , Going Commando is improved in every way . 
 = False potto = 
 The false potto ( Pseudopotto martini ) is a lorisoid primate of uncertain taxonomic status found in Africa . Anthropologist Jeffrey H. Schwartz named it in 1996 as the only species of the genus Pseudopotto on the basis of two specimens ( consisting only of skeletal material ) that had previously been identified as pottos ( Perodicticus potto ) . The precise <unk> of the two specimens are uncertain , but at least one may have come from Cameroon . Schwartz thought the false potto could even represent a separate family , but other researchers have argued that the supposed distinguishing features of the animal do not actually distinguish it from the potto ; specifically , the false potto shares several features with West African pottos . 
 The false potto generally resembles a small potto , but according to Schwartz it differs in having a longer tail , shorter spines on its neck and chest vertebrae , a smaller , less complex spine on the second neck vertebra , an entepicondylar foramen ( an opening in the humerus , or upper arm bone ) , a lacrimal fossa ( a depression in the skull ) that is located inside the eye socket , a smaller upper third premolar and molar , and higher @-@ crowned cheekteeth , among other traits . However , many of these traits are variable among pottos ; for example , one researcher found entepicondylar foramina in almost half of the specimens in his sample of pottos . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In a series of potto ( Perodicticus potto ) skeletons in the collections of the Anthropological Institute and Museum of the University of Zurich at <unk> , anthropologist Jeffrey H. Schwartz recognized two specimens with traits he believed distinct from all pottos , and in 1996 he used these two specimens to describe a new genus and species of primate , Pseudopotto martini . The generic name , Pseudopotto , combines the element <unk> ( Greek for " false " ) with " potto " , referring to superficial similarities between the new form and the potto . The specific name , martini , honors primatologist Robert D. Martin . The exact provenance of the two specimens is unknown , and one is represented by a complete skeleton ( but no skin ) and the other by a skull only . Schwartz placed both specimens in a single species , but noted that further study might indicate that the two represent distinct species . He thought the relationships of the new form were unknown and difficult to assess and did not assign it to any family , but provisionally placed it closest to the family Lorisidae , together with the potto , the angwantibos , and the lorises . The discovery , published in the Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History , was featured in Scientific American and Science ; the Science account noted that Schwartz thought Pseudopotto may represent a new family of primates . 
 In 1998 , the journal African Primates published three papers by primatologists on the false potto . Colin Groves affirmed that it was probably distinct from the potto and Simon Bearder cited it as an example of unrecognized taxonomic diversity in lorisids , but Esteban Sarmiento compared the new taxon to specimens of the potto and found that the alleged distinctive traits of the false potto in fact fell within the range of variation of the potto , and that the false potto was probably not even a species distinct from Perodicticus potto . In 2000 , primatologist B.S. Leon agreed that the false potto was not distinct from the subspecies Perodicticus potto potto , but noted that various forms of potto were distinct enough from each other that there may indeed be more than one species of potto . Opinions since then have been divided : a 2003 compilation of African primate diversity concluded that there was insufficient evidence that the false potto is a distinct species , the primate chapter of the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World , written by Groves , listed Pseudopotto as a genus but noted that it was " controversial " ; and Schwartz continued to recognize the false potto as a genus in 2005 . Also in 2005 , primatologist David Stump reviewed some of the distinguishing features of Pseudopotto in the context of studying variation among pottos , and found that some but not all of the false potto 's traits were found in some pottos , mainly western populations ( subspecies potto ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 One of the specimens , AMZ 6698 , is an adult female that lived in Zürich Zoo . It is represented by a virtually complete skeleton , but the skin was not preserved . According to Schwartz , the skeleton shows signs of osteoporosis and periodontitis ( common in zoo animals ) , but not of other pathologies or abnormalities . The right teeth were removed before Schwartz studied the specimen . Schwartz selected this specimen as the holotype . The other specimen , AMZ @-@ AS 1730 , is a subadult male collected in the wild , of which only the skull , including the mandible ( lower jaw ) , was preserved . The dentition includes both permanent and deciduous teeth . Specimens of Pseudopotto are at least superficially similar to pottos , but according to Schwartz , they differ in a number of traits . Among lorisids , Schwartz saw similarities between the false potto and true pottos as well as angwantibos and slow lorises ( Nycticebus ) . The false potto is comparable in size to the smallest pottos , but falls within their range of metrical variation ; small size is also seen in western pottos . 
 The tail , according to Schwartz , is longer than in the potto . He does not provide measurements of the tail of AMZ 6698 and notes that at least one vertebra is missing , but Sarmiento counted 11 caudal vertebrae in an illustration of AMZ 6698 and Groves counted at least 15 . However , Sarmiento found that the number of caudal vertebrae ranges from 5 to 17 , with an average of 11 , in pottos . Relatively long tails are also common in the western form of the potto , , though according to Stump the tail of Pseudopotto is longer than any seen in pottos . The false potto allegedly has shorter spines on its cervical ( neck ) and first and second thoracic ( chest ) vertebrae , but Leon notes that this feature is also seen in western pottos . Schwartz writes that the false potto differs from pottos and angwantibos in lacking a bifid ( two @-@ tipped ) spine on the second cervical vertebra , but Sarmiento found this feature in 3 out of 11 potto specimens he examined . 
 The ulnar <unk> process ( a projection on the ulna , one of the bones of the forearm , where it meets the wrist ) is not as hooked as in other lorisids , according to Schwartz , which Groves suggests may indicate that the wrist is more mobile . Another alleged diagnostic feature is the presence of an entepicondylar foramen ( an opening near the distal , or far , end of the bone ) on the humerus ( upper arm bone ) ; however , Sarmiento found this feature in 4 out of 11 specimens , and on one side of a fifth , and Stump noted that the foramen occurred in specimens from across the potto 's range . 
 The lacrimal fossa , a depression in the skull , is located on the upper surface of the skull in most lorisids , but Schwartz found that it was further to the back , inside the orbit ( eye socket ) in the false potto and the slow loris . Sarmiento found this feature in 3 out of 11 pottos examined . The coronoid process of the mandible is said to be more hooked in the false potto than in the potto and slow loris . 
 Other distinguishing features of the false potto are in the dentition . Sarmiento notes , however , that captive specimens may develop abnormalities in the teeth and that some dental characters Schwartz uses are quite variable , sometimes even from one side of the same individual to another . The third upper molar ( M3 ) is more reduced in the false potto than in any other prosimian , according to Schwartz , but Leon notes that western pottos also have a relatively small M3 . The third upper premolar ( P3 ) is also reduced , resembling the condition in the fork @-@ marked lemurs ( Phaner ) . Stump writes that small <unk> are also common in western pottos , although the false potto 's P3 is shaped differently . Groves notes that P1 is quite long , another point of similarity with the fork @-@ marked lemurs . The lower premolars are compressed laterally in Pseudopotto , the cusps on the cheekteeth are higher , and the cristid obliqua ( a crest connected to the protoconid cusp ) is at a relatively buccal position ( in the direction of the cheeks ) . 
 In AMZ 6698 , skull length is 59 @.@ 30 mm ( 2 @.@ 335 in ) and length of the right humerus is 57 @.@ 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 27 in ) . 
 = = Distribution and status = = 
 According to records in the Anthropological Institute and Museum , AMZ 6698 , the holotype , is from " Equatorial Africa " , and AMZ @-@ AS 1730 is from the " Cameroons " . According to mammalogist Ronald Nowak , these designations imply that the latter came either from modern Cameroon or far eastern Nigeria ( British Cameroons ) and the former from Cameroon or a neighboring state . In 1999 , Simon Bearder claimed , citing a personal communication by C. Wild , that Pseudopotto had been seen in the wild and in 2001 , ornithologist Christopher Bowden noted the occurrence of Pseudopotto on Mount Kupe in Cameroon , also citing C. Wild . However , the IUCN Red List notes that while sightings of the false potto at 820 to 940 m ( 2690 to <unk> ft ) on Mount Kupe had been reported , surveys had failed to confirm its occurrence there , though pottos , some with long tails , had been found . The false potto is not listed separately from the potto in the Red List , because the evidence that it is a distinct species is considered insufficient . 
 = Tropical Storm Trudy ( 2014 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Trudy was a short @-@ lived tropical cyclone in October 2014 that caused significant flooding in southern Mexico . The storm originated from an area of low pressure associated with a monsoon trough near Central America in early October . A slow @-@ moving system , the low eventually consolidated into a tropical depression on October 17 near the Mexican coastline . Favorable environmental conditions aided rapid development of Trudy . Within 15 hours of its designation , an eye formed over the storm 's center . Trudy ultimately achieved its peak as a strong tropical storm with 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) winds as it made landfall just southeast of Marquelia , Mexico . The region 's mountainous terrain quickly weakened Trudy and the cyclone dissipated early on October 19 . Though the cyclone dissipated , its remnant energy later contributed to the formation of Tropical Storm Hanna in the Atlantic . 
 Prior to Trudy 's landfall , the Government of Mexico issued multiple watches and warnings for the threatened region . Forecasters highlighted the threat of heavy rains and mudslides . Guerrero experienced the greatest effects from Trudy , with landslides and flooding claiming eight lives in the state . Over 4 @,@ 000 people were evacuated in the region . A ninth fatality took place in Campeche . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 8 , a weak area of low pressure developed within a monsoon trough over the extreme eastern edge of the Pacific basin . Environmental conditions ahead of the system were forecast to become gradually favorable for tropical cyclogenesis . Situated near Costa Rica , scattered convection accompanied the well @-@ defined system . This low became less defined over the following days while remaining in the same general area . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the system for long @-@ term cyclogenesis on October 13 , at which time the low was situated 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Guatemala . Organization was prolonged and slow ; however , the convergence of a Kelvin wave and a Gulf of Tehuantepec gap wind event on October 15 spurred a significant increase in convection . 
 Marked structural improvements took place on October 17 and the NHC assessed a high probability of the system becoming a tropical cyclone within 48 hours . That evening , corroborating data from ships , satellite imagery , and scatterometer estimates indicated the formation of a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC . With the cyclone located over warm waters of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) and within a very moist region with low wind shear , intensification was a certainty as the depression approached Mexico . Uncertainties existed as to how fast the system would move . Some forecast models depicting the system as stalling just offshore for several days , though forecasters indicated that a steady northward movement would lead to dissipation within 48 hours . 
 Owing to the aforementioned environmental conditions , the depression intensified to a tropical storm by 18 : 00 UTC on October 17 ; it was subsequently assigned the name Trudy by the NHC . Very deep convection blossomed over both the center and accompanying banding features . During the morning of October 18 , a central dense overcast became increasingly defined ; microwave satellite imagery and coastal radars depicted the formation of a 12 to 17 mi ( 19 to 27 km ) wide eye by 03 : 00 UTC . It is estimated that Trudy reached its peak intensity around 09 : 15 UTC on October 18 with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 998 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 47 inHg ) . Simultaneously the storm made landfall just southeast of Marquelia , or roughly 70 mi ( 110 km ) east of Acapulco . Interaction with the mountainous terrain of Mexico quickly took its toll on Trudy , with the system degrading to a tropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC . The low @-@ level circulation of the depression dissipated early on October 19 , with its mid @-@ level remnants continuing northeastward over Mexico . The remnant system emerged over the Bay of Campeche on October 20 and subsequently developed into Atlantic Tropical Depression Nine — which later became Tropical Storm Hanna — on October 22 . Due to the dissipation of its surface low , Trudy and Hanna are considered separate tropical cyclones by the NHC . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon the designation of Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E on October 17 , a tropical storm warning was issued for coastal areas of Mexico between Tecpán de Galeana and Lagunas de Chacahua . Forecasters at the NHC noted that the greatest threat from the system would be torrential rains across Guerrero and Oaxaca that could trigger life @-@ threatening flash floods and mudslides . Rapid organization of the system prompted a hurricane watch to be issued by 09 : 00 UTC on October 18 for areas between Acapulco and Lagunas de Chacahua . This watch was soon discontinued as Trudy failed to reach hurricane intensity before moving inland over Mexico . The tropical storm warning was subsequently allowed to expire by 21 : 00 UTC as Trudy weakened to a depression . In addition to the above watches and warnings , a " yellow " alert was activated for Guerrero on October 17 . Upon abruptly intensifying prior to landfall , a " red " alert was activated for southeastern Guerrero and southwestern Oaxaca while the rest of Guerrero and Oaxaca were placed under an " orange " alert . A total of 35 shelters were opened across eastern areas of Guerrero . 
 Heavy rains across Guerrero wreaked havoc , causing widespread flooding and damage . A total of 4 @,@ 075 people were evacuated from the most at @-@ risk areas in the state . A further 300 residents were urged to leave as a river threatened to over @-@ top its banks . Wall collapses attributed to the storm resulted in four deaths : three in Ometepec and one in <unk> . A landslide in <unk> killed two people , while flooding elsewhere killed two people . Road access to 16 towns was cut off and the main road to Acapulco was damaged by landslides and flooding . Approximately 5 @,@ 000 homes were affected by the storm , with 218 damaged by flooding and 6 destroyed . More than 20 @,@ 000 households lost power due to the storm , though the vast majority was restored within a day . A state of emergency was later declared for 35 towns in Guerrero . 
 Oaxaca experienced similar impacts to Guerrero , with flooding and landslides mostly causing damage to road infrastructure . Notably , a 39 ft ( 12 m ) bridge in San Martín <unk> collapsed , leaving several villages isolated . At least 160 ft ( 50 m ) of Mexican Federal Highway 125 was washed away , requiring a repair bill of 8 million pesos ( US $ 532 @,@ 000 ) . An emergency declaration was made for 100 municipalities in Oaxaca . Trudy was also blamed for one death in Campeche . 
 = History of Singapore = 
 The written history of Singapore dates back to the third century . Later , the Kingdom of Singapura rose in importance during the 14th century under the rule of Sultan Iskandar Shah and Singapore became an important port . Until it was invaded by the Majapahit in 1398 . It then came under the Malacca Sultanate and then the Portuguese , then rapidly becoming a major port city . 
 During World War II , Singapore was conquered and occupied by the Japanese Empire from 1942 to 1945 . When the war ended , Singapore reverted to British control , with increasing levels of self @-@ government being granted , culminating in Singapore 's merger with the Federation of Malaya to form Malaysia in 1963 . But social unrest and disputes between Singapore 's ruling People 's Action Party and Malaysia 's Alliance Party resulted in Singapore 's separation from Malaysia . Singapore became an independent republic on August 9 , 1965 . 
 Facing severe unemployment and a housing crisis , Singapore embarked on a modernization programme beginning in the late 1960s through the 1970s that focused on establishing a manufacturing industry , developing large public housing estates and investing heavily on public education . 
 By the 1990 , the country had become one of the world 's most prosperous nations , with a highly developed free market economy , strong international trading links , and the highest per capita gross domestic product in Asia outside Japan . 
 = = Ancient Singapore = = 
 The series of raids launched by the Chola Empire in the 11th century had weakened the once glorious Malay empire of Srivijaya . Although Greco @-@ Roman astronomer Ptolemy ( 90 – 168 ) identified a place called Sabana in the general area , the earliest written record of Singapore occurs in a Chinese account from the third century , describing the island of Pu Luo Chung ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . This was itself a transliteration from the Malay name " Pulau Ujong " , or " island at the end " ( of the Malay Peninsula ) . The Sejarah Melayu ( Malay Annals ) contains a tale of a prince of Srivijaya , Seri Teri <unk> ( also known as Sang Nila Utama ) , who landed on the island during the 13th century . When he saw a lion , the prince took this as an auspicious sign and founded a settlement called Singapura , which means " Lion City " in Sanskrit . 
 In 1320 , the Mongol Empire sent a trade mission to a place called Long Ya Men ( or Dragon 's Tooth Strait ) , which is believed to be Keppel Harbour , at the southern part of the island . The Chinese traveler Wang Dayuan , visiting the island around 1330 , described a small settlement called Dan Ma Xi ( <unk> , from Malay <unk> ) with Malay and Chinese residents . The Nagarakretagama , a Javanese epic poem written in 1365 , also referred to a settlement on the island called Temasek ( Sea Town ) . Recent excavations in Fort Canning found evidence indicating that Singapore was an important port in the 14th century . Singapore is the oldest location where a Chinese community is known to exist outside China , as corroborated by both historical records and archaeological evidence . 
 In the 1370s , Singapore was caught in the struggle between Siam ( now Thailand ) and the Java @-@ based Majapahit Empire for control over the Malay Peninsula . According to Sejarah Melayu , Singapore was defeated in one Majapahit attack . The last king , Sultan Iskandar Shah ruled the island for several years , before being forced to Melaka where he founded the Sultanate of Malacca . Singapore became an important trading port of the Malacca Sultanate and later the Sultanate of Johor . 
 In the early 15th century , Singapore was a Thai vassal state , but the Malacca Sultanate , which Iskandar had founded , quickly extended its authority over the island . After the Portuguese seizure of Malacca in 1511 , the Portuguese destroyed the settlements in Singapore in 1587 and the island sank into obscurity for the next two centuries . 
 = = Founding of modern Singapore ( 1819 ) = = 
 Between the 16th and 19th centuries , the Malay Archipelago was gradually taken over by the European colonial powers , beginning with the arrival of the Portuguese at Malacca in 1509 . The early dominance of the Portuguese was challenged during the 17th century by the Dutch , who came to control most of the ports in the region . The Dutch established a monopoly over trade within the archipelago , particularly in spices , then the region 's most important product . Other colonial powers , including the British , were limited to a relatively minor presence . 
 In 1818 , Sir Stamford Raffles was appointed as the Lieutenant Governor of the British colony at Bencoolen . He was determined that Great Britain should replace the Netherlands as the dominant power in the archipelago , since the trade route between China and British India , which had become vitally important with the institution of the opium trade with China , passed through the archipelago . The Dutch had been stifling British trade in the region by prohibiting the British from operating in Dutch @-@ controlled ports or by subjecting them to a high tariff . Raffles hoped to challenge the Dutch by establishing a new port along the Straits of Malacca , the main ship passageway for the India @-@ China trade . He convinced Lord Hastings , the Governor @-@ General of India and his superior at the British East India Company , to fund an expedition to seek a new British base in the region . 
 Raffles arrived in Singapore on 28 January 1819 and soon recognised the island as a natural choice for the new port . It lay at the southern tip of the Malay peninsula , near the Straits of Malacca , and possessed a natural deep harbor , fresh water supplies , and timber for repairing ships . Raffles found a small Malay settlement , with a population of about a thousand , at the mouth of the Singapore River , headed by Temenggong Abdu 'r Rahman . The island was nominally ruled by the Sultan of Johor , who was controlled by the Dutch and the Bugis . However , the Sultanate was weakened by factional division and Temenggong Abdu 'r Rahman and his officials were loyal to Tengku Rahman 's elder brother Tengku Hussein ( or Tengku Long ) who was living in exile in Riau . With the Temenggong 's help , Raffles managed to smuggle Hussein back into Singapore . He offered to recognize Hussein as the rightful Sultan of Johor and provide him with a yearly payment ; in return , Hussein would grant the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore . A formal treaty was signed on 6 February 1819 and modern Singapore was born . 
 Before Raffles arrived , there were around 1 @,@ 000 people living in Singapore , mostly Malays and a few dozen Chinese . By 1869 , due to migration from Malaya and other parts of Asia , Singapore 's population had reached 100 @,@ 000 . Many Chinese and Indian immigrants came to Singapore to work in the rubber plantations and tin mines , and their descendants later formed the bulk of Singapore 's population . 
 = = Early growth ( 1819 – 1826 ) = = 
 Raffles returned to Bencoolen soon after the signing of the treaty and left Major William Farquhar in charge of the new settlement , with some artillery and a small regiment of Indian soldiers . Establishing a trading port from scratch was a daunting endeavor . Farquhar 's administration was fairly funded and was prohibited from collecting port duties to raise revenue as Raffles had decided that Singapore would be a free port . Farquhar invited settlers to Singapore , and stationed a British official on St. John 's Island to invite passing ships to stop in Singapore . As news of the free port spread across the archipelago , Bugis , Peranakan Chinese , and Arab traders flocked to the island , seeking to circumvent the Dutch trade restrictions . During the starting year of operation , $ 400 @,@ 000 ( Spanish dollars ) worth of trade passed through Singapore . By 1821 , the island 's population had gone up to around 5 @,@ 000 , and the trade volume was $ 8 million . The population reached the 10 @,@ 000 mark in 1825 , and with a trade volume of $ 22 million , Singapore surpassed the long @-@ established port of Penang . 
 Raffles returned to Singapore in 1822 and became critical of many of Farquhar 's decisions , despite Farquhar 's success in leading the settlement through its difficult early years . For instance , in order to generate much @-@ needed revenue , Farquhar had resorted to selling licenses for gambling and the sale of opium , which Raffles saw as social evils . Shocked at the disarray of the colony , Raffles set about drafting a set of new policies for the settlement . He also organized Singapore into functional and ethnic subdivisions under the Raffles Plan of Singapore . Today , remnants of this organization can still be found in the ethnic neighborhoods . William Farquhar was also stripped off his post . Farquhar later died in Perth , Scotland . 
 On 7 June 1823 , John Crawfurd signed a second treaty with the Sultan and Temenggong , which extended British possession to most of the island . The Sultan and Temenggong traded most of their administrative rights of the island , including the collection of port taxes for lifelong monthly payments of $ 1500 and $ 800 respectively . This agreement brought the island under the British Law , with the provision that it would take into account Malay customs , traditions and religion . Raffles replaced Farquhar with John Crawfurd , an efficient and frugal administrator , as the new governor . In October 1823 , Raffles departed for Britain and would never return to Singapore as he died in 1826 , at the age of 44 . In 1824 , Singapore was ceded in perpetuity to the East India Company by the Sultan . 
 = = Colonial Singapore ( 1819 – 1942 ) = = 
 = = = The Straits Settlements ( 1826 – 1867 ) = = = 
 The status of a British outpost in Singapore seemed initially in doubt as the Dutch government soon protested to Britain for violating the Netherlands ' sphere of influence . But as Singapore rapidly emerged as an important trading post , Britain consolidated its claim on the island . The Anglo @-@ Dutch Treaty of 1824 cemented the status of Singapore as a British possession , carving up the Malay archipelago between the two colonial powers with the area north of the <unk> , Singapore was grouped by the British East India Company together with Penang and Malacca to form the Straits Settlements , administered by the British East India Company . In 1830 , the Straits Settlements became a residency , or subdivision , of the Presidency of Bengal in British India . 
 During the subsequent decades , Singapore grew to become an important port in the region . Its success was due to several reasons including the opening of the Chinese market , the advent of ocean @-@ going steamships , and the production of rubber and tin in Malaya . Its status as a free port provided a crucial advantage over other colonial port cities in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) and Manila where tariffs were levied , and it drew many Chinese , Malay , Indian , and Arab traders operating in South @-@ East Asia to Singapore . The later opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 would further boost trade in Singapore . By 1880 , over 1 @.@ 5 million tons of goods were passing through Singapore each year , with around 80 % of the cargo transported by steamships . The main commercial activity was entrepôt trade which flourished under no taxation and little restriction . Many merchant houses were set up in Singapore mainly by European trading firms , but also by Jewish , Chinese , Arab , Armenian , American and Indian merchants . There were also many Chinese middlemen who handled most of the trade between the European and Asian merchants . 
 By 1827 , the Chinese had become the largest ethnic group in Singapore . They consisted of <unk> , who were descendants of early Chinese settlers , and Chinese coolies who flocked to Singapore to escape economic hardship in southern China . Their numbers were swelled by those fleeing the turmoil caused by the First Opium War ( 1839 – 1842 ) and Second Opium War ( 1856 – 1860 ) . Many arrived in Singapore as impoverished indentured laborers . The Malays were the second largest ethnic group until the 1860s and they worked as fishermen , craftsmen , or as wage earners while continued to live mostly in <unk> . By 1860 , the Indians had become the second largest ethnic group . They consisted of unskilled laborers , traders , and convicts who were sent to carry out public works projects such as clearing jungles and laying out roads . There were also Indian Sepoy troops garrisoned at Singapore by the British . 
 Despite Singapore 's growing importance , the administration governing the island was understaffed , ineffectual and unconcerned with the welfare of the populace . Administrators were usually posted from India and were unfamiliar with local culture and languages . While the population had quadrupled during 1830 to 1867 , the size of the civil service in Singapore had remained unchanged . Most people had no access to public health services and diseases such as cholera and smallpox caused severe health problems , especially in overcrowded working @-@ class areas . As a result of the administration 's ineffectiveness and the predominantly male , transient , and uneducated nature of the population , the society was lawless and chaotic . In 1850 there were only twelve police officers in the city of nearly 60 @,@ 000 people . Prostitution , gambling , and drug abuse ( particularly of opium ) were widespread . Chinese criminal secret societies ( analogous to modern @-@ day triads ) were extremely powerful , and some had tens of thousands of members . Turf wars between rival societies occasionally led to hundreds of deaths and attempts to suppress them had limited success . 
 The situation created deep concern in the European population of the island . In 1854 the Singapore Free Press complained that Singapore was a " small island " full of the " very dregs of the population of south eastern Asia " . 
 = = = Straits Settlements Crown Colony ( 1867 – 1942 ) = = = 
 As Singapore continued to grow , the deficiencies in the Straits Settlements administration became serious and Singapore 's merchant community began agitating against British Indian rule . The British government agreed to establish the Straits Settlements as a separate Crown Colony on 1 April 1867 . This new colony was ruled by a governor under the supervision of the Colonial Office in London . An executive council and a legislative council assisted the governor . Although members of the councils were not elected , more representatives for the local population were gradually included over the years . 
 The colonial government embarked on several measures to address the serious social problems facing Singapore . A Chinese Protectorate under Pickering was established in 1877 to address the needs of the Chinese community , especially in controlling the worst abuses of the coolie trade and protecting Chinese women from forced prostitution . In 1889 Governor Sir Cecil Clementi Smith banned secret societies , driving them underground . Nevertheless , many social problems persisted up through the post @-@ war era , including an acute housing shortage and poor health and living standards . In 1906 , the Tongmenghui , a revolutionary Chinese organisation dedicated to the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and led by Sun Yat @-@ sen , founded its Nanyang branch in Singapore , which served as the organisation 's headquarters in Southeast Asia . The members of the branch included Dr. Wong Hong @-@ Kui ( <unk> ) , Mr. Tan Chor Lam ( <unk> , 1884 @-@ 1971 , originally a rubber manufacturer ) and Mr. Teo Eng Hock ( <unk> , originally a rubber shoe manufacturer ) . Chan Cho @-@ Nam , Cheung Wing @-@ Fook and Chan Po @-@ Yin ( <unk> , 1883 @-@ 1965 ) started the revolution @-@ related Chong Shing Chinese Daily Newspaper ( <unk> , <unk> meaning China revival ) , with the inaugural issue on 20 August 1907 and a daily distribution of 1000 copies . The newspaper ended in 1910 , presumably due to the revolution in 1911 . Working with other Cantonese people , Chan , Cheung and Chan opened the revolution @-@ related Kai Ming Bookstore ( <unk> , <unk> meaning open wisdom ) in Singapore . For the revolution , Chan Po @-@ Yin raised over 30 @,@ 000 yuan for the purchase and shipment ( from Singapore to China ) of military equipment and for the support of the expenses of people travelling from Singapore to China for revolutionary work . The immigrant Chinese population in Singapore donated generously to Tongmenghui , which organised the 1911 Xinhai Revolution that led to the establishment of the Republic of China . 
 World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) did not deeply affect Singapore : the conflict did not spread to Southeast Asia . The only significant local military event during the war was a 1915 mutiny by the British Muslim Indian sepoys garrisoned in Singapore . After hearing rumors of plans to send them to fight the Ottoman Empire , the soldiers revolted , killing their officers and several British civilians before troops arriving from Johor and Burma suppressed the unrest . 
 After the war , the British government devoted significant resources into building a naval base in Singapore , as a deterrent to the increasingly ambitious Japanese Empire . Completed in 1939 at a staggering cost of $ 500 million , the naval base boasted what was then the largest dry dock in the world , the third @-@ largest floating dock , and enough fuel tanks to support the entire British navy for six months . It was defended by heavy 15 @-@ inch naval guns and by Royal Air Force squadrons stationed at Tengah Air Base . Winston Churchill touted it as the " Gibraltar of the East . " Unfortunately , it was a base without a fleet . The British Home Fleet was stationed in Europe and the plan was for it to sail quickly to Singapore when needed . However , after World War II broke out in 1939 , the Fleet was fully occupied with defending Britain . Lieutenant General Sir William George Shedden Dobbie was appointed governor of Singapore and General Officer Commanding Malaya Command on 8 November 1935 , holding the post based in The Istana until shortly before the outbreak of World War II in 1939 . He was responsible for forming The Dobbie Hypothesis on the fall of Singapore which , had it been heeded , may have prevented the fall of Singapore during the Second World War . 
 = = The Battle for Singapore and Japanese occupation ( 1942 – 1945 ) = = 
 In December 1941 , Japan attacked Pearl Harbor and the east coast of Malaya , causing the Pacific War to begin in earnest . Both attacks occurred at the same time , but due to the international dateline , the Honolulu attack is dated December 7 while the Kota Bharu attack is dated December 8 . One of Japan 's objectives was to capture Southeast Asia and secure the rich supply of natural resources to feed its military and industry needs . Singapore , the main Allied base in the region , was an obvious military target because of its flourishing trade and wealth . The British military commanders in Singapore had believed that the Japanese attack would come by sea from the south , since the dense Malayan jungle in the north would serve as a natural barrier against invasion . Although they had drawn up a plan for dealing with an attack on northern Malaya , preparations were never completed . The military was confident that " Fortress Singapore " would withstand any Japanese attack and this confidence was further reinforced by the arrival of Force Z , a squadron of British warships dispatched to the defense of Singapore , including the battleship HMS Prince of Wales , and cruiser HMS Repulse . The squadron was to have been accompanied by a third capital ship , the aircraft carrier HMS Indomitable , but it ran aground en route , leaving the squadron without air cover . 
 On 8 December 1941 , Japanese forces landed at Kota Bharu in northern Malaya . Just two days after the start of the invasion of Malaya , Prince of Wales and Repulse were sunk 50 miles off the coast of Kuantan in Pahang , by a force of Japanese bombers and torpedo bomber aircraft , in the worst British naval defeat of World War II . Allied air support did not arrive in time to protect the two capital ships . After this incident , Singapore and Malaya suffered daily air raids , including those targeting civilian structures such as hospitals or shophouses with casualties ranging from the tens to the hundreds each time . 
 The Japanese army advanced swiftly southward through the Malay Peninsula , crushing or bypassing Allied resistance . The Allied forces did not have tanks , which they considered unsuitable in the tropical rainforest , and their infantry proved powerless against the Japanese light tanks . As their resistance failed against the Japanese advance , the Allied forces were forced to retreat southwards towards Singapore . By 31 January 1942 , a mere 55 days after the start of the invasion , the Japanese had conquered the entire Malay Peninsula and were poised to attack Singapore . 
 The causeway linking Johor and Singapore was blown up by the Allied forces in an effort to stop the Japanese army . However , the Japanese managed to cross the Straits of Johor in inflatable boats days after . Several fights by the Allied forces and volunteers of Singapore 's population against the advancing Japanese , such as the Battle of Pasir Panjang , took place during this period . However , with most of the defenses shattered and supplies exhausted , Lieutenant @-@ General Arthur Percival surrendered the Allied forces in Singapore to General Tomoyuki Yamashita of the Imperial Japanese Army on Chinese New Year , 15 February 1942 . About 130 @,@ 000 Indian , Australian and British troops became prisoners of war , many of whom would later be transported to Burma , Japan , Korea , or Manchuria for use as slave labour via prisoner transports known as " hell ships . " The fall of Singapore was the largest surrender of British @-@ led forces in history . Japanese newspapers triumphantly declared the victory as deciding the general situation of the war . 
 Singapore , renamed <unk> @-@ to ( <unk> <unk> @-@ tō , " Light of the South Island " in Japanese ) , was occupied by the Japanese from 1942 to 1945 . The Japanese army imposed harsh measures against the local population , with troops , especially the Kempeitai or Japanese military police , particularly ruthless in dealing with the Chinese population . The most notable atrocity was the Sook Ching massacre of Chinese civilians , undertaken in retaliation against support of the war effort in China . The Japanese screened citizens ( including children ) to check if they were " anti @-@ Japanese " . If so , the " guilty " citizens would be sent away in a truck to be executed . These mass executions claimed between 25 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 lives in Malaya and Singapore . The rest of the population suffered severe hardship throughout the three and a half years of Japanese occupation . The Malay and Indians were forced to build the " Death Railway " , a railway between Thailand and Burma ( Myanmar ) . Most of them died while building the railway . The Eurasians were also caught as POWs ( Prisoners of War ) . 
 = = Post @-@ war period ( 1945 – 1955 ) = = 
 After the Japanese surrender to the Allies on 15 August 1945 , Singapore fell into a brief state of anomie ; looting and revenge @-@ killing were widespread . British troops led by Lord Louis Mountbatten , Supreme Allied Commander for Southeast Asia Command , returned to Singapore to receive formal surrender of the Japanese forces in the region from General Itagaki <unk> on behalf of General <unk> Terauchi on 12 September 1945 , and a British Military Administration was formed to govern the island until March 1946 . Much of the infrastructure had been destroyed during the war , including electricity and water supply systems , telephone services , as well as the harbor facilities at the Port of Singapore . There was also a shortage of food leading to malnutrition , disease , and rampant crime and violence . High food prices , unemployment , and workers ' discontent culminated into a series of strikes in 1947 causing massive stoppages in public transport and other services . By late 1947 , the economy began to recover , facilitated by a growing demand for tin and rubber around the world , but it would take several more years before the economy returned to pre @-@ war levels . 
 The failure of Britain to defend Singapore had destroyed its credibility as infallible ruler in the eyes of Singaporeans . The decades after the war saw a political awakening amongst the local populace and the rise of anti @-@ colonial and nationalist sentiments , epitomized by the slogan Merdeka , or " independence " in the Malay language . The British , on their part , were prepared to gradually increase self @-@ governance for Singapore and Malaya . On 1 April 1946 , the Straits Settlements was dissolved and Singapore became a separate Crown Colony with a civil administration headed by a Governor . In July 1947 , separate Executive and Legislative Councils were established and the election of six members of the Legislative Council was scheduled in the following year . 
 = = = First Legislative Council ( 1948 – 1951 ) = = = 
 The first Singaporean elections , held in March 1948 , were limited as only six of the twenty @-@ five seats on the Legislative Council were to be elected . Only British subjects had the rights to vote , and only 23 @,@ 000 or about 10 % of those eligible registered to vote . Other members of the Council were chosen either by the Governor or by the chambers of commerce . Three of the elected seats were won by a newly formed Singapore Progressive Party ( SPP ) , a conservative party whose leaders were businessmen and professionals and were disinclined to press for immediate self @-@ rule . The other three seats were won by independents . 
 Three months after the elections , an armed insurgency by communist groups in Malaya – the Malayan Emergency – broke out . The British imposed tough measures to control left @-@ wing groups in both Singapore and Malaya and introduced the controversial Internal Security Act , which allowed indefinite detention without trial for persons suspected of being " threats to security " . Since the left @-@ wing groups were the strongest critics of the colonial system , progress on self @-@ government was stalled for several years . 
 = = = Second Legislative Council ( 1951 – 1955 ) = = = 
 A second Legislative Council election was held in 1951 with the number of elected seats increased to nine . This election was again dominated by the SPP which won six seats . While this contributed to the formation of a distinct local government of Singapore , the colonial administration was still dominant . In 1953 , with the communists in Malaya suppressed and the worst of the Emergency over , a British Commission , headed by Sir George Rendel , proposed a limited form of self @-@ government for Singapore . A new Legislative Assembly with twenty @-@ five out of thirty @-@ two seats chosen by popular election would replace the Legislative Council , from which a Chief Minister as head of government and Council of Ministers as a cabinet would be picked under a parliamentary system . The British would retain control over areas such as internal security and foreign affairs , as well as veto power over legislation . 
 The election for the Legislative Assembly held on 2 April 1955 was a lively and closely fought affair , with several new political parties joining the fray . Unlike previous elections , voters were automatically registered , expanding the electorate to around 300 @,@ 000 . The SPP was soundly defeated in the election , winning only four seats . The newly formed , left @-@ leaning Labour Front was the biggest winner with ten seats and it formed a coalition government with the UMNO @-@ MCA Alliance , which won three seats . Another new party , the leftist People 's Action Party ( PAP ) , won three seats . 
 = = Self @-@ government ( 1955 – 1963 ) = = 
 = = = Partial internal self @-@ government ( 1955 – 1959 ) = = = 
 David Marshall , leader of the Labour Front , became the first Chief Minister of Singapore . He presided over a shaky government , receiving little cooperation from either the colonial government or the other local parties . Social unrest was on the rise , and in May 1955 , the Hock Lee bus riots broke out , killing four people and seriously discrediting Marshall 's government . In 1956 , the Chinese middle school riots broke out among students in The Chinese High School and other schools , further increasing the tension between the local government and the Chinese students and unionists who were regarded of having communist sympathies . 
 In April 1956 , Marshall led a delegation to London to negotiate for complete self @-@ rule in the Merdeka Talks , but the talks failed when the British were reluctant to give up control over Singapore 's internal security . The British were concerned about communist influence and labour strikes which were undermining Singapore 's economic stability , and felt that the local government was ineffective in handling earlier riots . Marshall resigned following the failure of the talk . 
 The new Chief Minister , Lim Yew Hock , launched a crackdown on communist and leftist groups , imprisoning many trade union leaders and several pro @-@ communist members of the PAP under the Internal Security Act . The British government approved of Lim 's tough stance against communist agitators , and when a new round of talks was held beginning in March 1957 , they agreed to grant complete internal self @-@ government . A State of Singapore would be created , with its own citizenship . The Legislative Assembly would be expanded to fifty @-@ one members , entirely chosen by popular election , and the Prime Minister and cabinet would control all aspects of government except defense and foreign affairs . The governorship was replaced by a Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara or head of state . In August 1958 , the State of Singapore Act was passed in the United Kingdom Parliament providing for the establishment of the State of Singapore . 
 = = = Full internal self @-@ government ( 1959 – 1963 ) = = = 
 Elections for the new Legislative Assembly were held in May 1959 . The People 's Action Party ( PAP ) won the polls in a landslide victory , winning forty @-@ three of the fifty @-@ one seats . They accomplished this by courting the Chinese @-@ speaking majority , particularly those in the labour unions and radical student organizations . Its leader Lee Kuan Yew , a young Cambridge @-@ educated lawyer , became the first Prime Minister of Singapore . 
 The PAP 's victory was at first viewed with dismay by foreign and local business leaders because some party 's members were pro @-@ communists . Many businesses promptly shifted their headquarters from Singapore to Kuala Lumpur . Despite these ill omens , the PAP government embarked on a vigorous program to address Singapore 's various economic and social problems . Economic development was overseen by the new Minister of Finance Goh Keng Swee , whose strategy was to encourage foreign and local investment with measures ranging from tax incentives to the establishment of a large industrial estate in Jurong . The education system was revamped to train a skilled workforce and the English language was promoted over the Chinese language as the language of instruction . To eliminate labour unrest , existing labour unions were consolidated , sometimes forcibly , into a single umbrella organisation , called the National Trades Union Congress ( NTUC ) with strong oversight from the government . On the social front , an aggressive and well @-@ funded public housing program was launched to solve the long @-@ standing housing problem . More than 25 @,@ 000 high @-@ rise , low @-@ cost apartments were constructed during the first two years of the program . 
 = = = Campaign for merger = = = 
 Despite their successes in governing Singapore , the PAP leaders , including Lee and Goh , believed that Singapore 's future lay with Malaya . They felt that the historic and economic ties between Singapore and Malaya were too strong for them to continue as separate nations . Furthermore , Singapore lacked natural resources , and faced both a declining entrepôt trade and a growing population which required jobs . It was thought that the merger would benefit the economy by creating a common market , eliminating trade tariffs , and thus supporting new industries which would solve the ongoing unemployment woes . 
 Although the PAP leadership campaigned vigorously for a merger , the sizable pro @-@ communist wing of the PAP were strongly opposed to the merger , fearing a loss of influence as the ruling party of Malaya , United Malays National Organisation , was staunchly anti @-@ communist and would support the non @-@ communist faction of PAP against them . The UMNO leaders were also skeptical of the idea of a merger due to their distrust of the PAP government and concerns that the large Chinese population in Singapore would alter the racial balance on which their political power base depended . The issue came to a head in 1961 when pro @-@ communist PAP minister Ong Eng Guan defected from the party and beat a PAP candidate in a subsequent by @-@ election , a move that threatened to bring down Lee 's government . 
 Faced with the prospect of a takeover by the pro @-@ communists , UMNO changed their minds about the merger . On 27 May , Malaya 's Prime Minister , Tunku Abdul Rahman , mooted the idea of a Federation of Malaysia , comprising existing Federation of Malaya , Singapore , Brunei and the British Borneo territories of North Borneo and Sarawak . The UMNO leaders believed that the additional Malay population in the Borneo territories would offset Singapore 's Chinese population . The British government , for its part , believed that the merger would prevent Singapore from becoming a haven for communism . 
 On 9 July 1963 , the leaders of Singapore , Malaya , North Borneo and Sarawak signed the Malaysia Agreement to establish the Federation of Malaysia . 
 = = Singapore in Malaysia ( 1963 – 1965 ) = = 
 = = = Merger = = = 
 On 16 September 1963 , Malaya , Singapore , North Borneo and Sarawak were merged and Malaysia was formed . The union was rocky from the start . During the 1963 Singapore state elections , a local branch of United Malays National Organisation ( UMNO ) took part in the election despite an earlier UMNO 's agreement with the PAP not to participate in the state 's politics during Malaysia 's formative years . Although UMNO lost all its bids , relations between PAP and UMNO worsened . The PAP , in a tit @-@ for @-@ tat , challenged UMNO candidates in the 1964 federal election as part of the Malaysian Solidarity Convention , winning one glorious seat in Malaysian Parliament , compared to the empty @-@ handed Malaysia government . 
 = = = Racial tension = = = 
 Racial tensions increased as the Chinese in Singapore disdained being discriminated against by the federal policies of affirmative action , which granted special privileges to the Malays guaranteed under Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia . There were also other financial and economic benefits that were preferentially given to Malays . Lee Kuan Yew and other political leaders began advocating for the fair and equal treatment of all races in Malaysia , with a rallying cry of " Malaysian Malaysia ! " . 
 Meanwhile , the Malays in Singapore were being increasingly incited by the federal government 's accusations that the PAP was mistreating the Malays . The external political situation was also tense ; Indonesian President Sukarno declared a state of Konfrontasi ( Confrontation ) against Malaysia and initiated military and other actions against the new nation , including the bombing of MacDonald House in Singapore 10 March 1965 by Indonesian commandos , killing three people . Indonesia also conducted sedition activities to provoke the Malays against the Chinese . Numerous racial riots resulted and curfews were frequently imposed to restore order . The most notorious riots were the 1964 Race Riots that first took place on Prophet Muhammad 's birthday on 21 July with twenty three people killed and hundreds injured . During the unrest , the price of food skyrocketed when transport system was disrupted , causing further hardship for the people . 
 The state and federal governments also had conflicts on the economic front . UMNO leaders feared that the economic dominance of Singapore would inevitably shift political power away from Kuala Lumpur . Despite earlier agreement to establish a common market , Singapore continued to face restrictions when trading with the rest of Malaysia . In retaliation , Singapore refused to provide Sabah and Sarawak the full extent of the loans previously agreed to for the economic development of the two eastern states . The Bank of China branch of Singapore was closed by the Central Government in Kuala Lumpur as it was suspected of funding communists . The situation escalated to such an extent that talks between UMNO and the PAP broke down , and abusive speeches and writings became rife on both sides . UMNO extremists called for the arrest of Lee Kuan Yew . 
 = = = Separation = = = 
 Seeing no alternative to avoid further bloodshed , the Malaysian Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman decided to expel Singapore from the federation . Goh Keng Swee , who had become skeptical of merger 's economic benefits for Singapore , convinced Lee Kuan Yew that the separation had to take place . UMNO and PAP representatives worked out the terms of separation in extreme secrecy in order to present the British government , in particular , with a fait accompli . 
 On the morning of 9 August 1965 , the Parliament of Malaysia voted 126 – 0 in favor of a constitutional amendment expelling Singapore from the federation ; hours later , the Parliament of Singapore passed the Republic of Singapore Independence Act , establishing the island as an independent and sovereign republic . A tearful Lee Kuan Yew announced in a televised press conference that Singapore had become a sovereign , independent nation . In a widely remembered quote , he stated : " For me , it is a moment of anguish . All my life , my whole adult life , I have believed in merger and unity of the two territories . " The new state became the Republic of Singapore , with Yusof bin Ishak appointed as its first President . 
 = = Republic of Singapore ( 1965 – present ) = = 
 = = = 1965 to 1979 = = = 
 After gaining independence abruptly , Singapore faced a future filled with uncertainties . The Konfrontasi was on @-@ going and the conservative UMNO faction strongly opposed the separation ; Singapore faced the dangers of attack by the Indonesian military and forcible re @-@ integration into the Malaysia Federation on unfavorable terms . Much of the international media was skeptical of prospects for Singapore 's survival . Besides the issue of sovereignty , the pressing problems were unemployment , housing , education , and the lack of natural resources and land . Unemployment was ranging between 10 – 12 % , threatening to trigger civil unrest . 
 Singapore immediately sought international recognition of its sovereignty . The new state joined the United Nations on 21 September 1965 , becoming the 117th member ; and joined the Commonwealth in October that year . Foreign minister <unk> Rajaratnam headed a new foreign service that helped assert Singapore 's independence and establishing diplomatic relations with other countries . On 22 December 1965 , the Constitution Amendment Act was passed under which the Head of State became the President and the State of Singapore became the Republic of Singapore . Singapore later co @-@ founded the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) on 8 August 1967 and was admitted into the Non @-@ Aligned Movement in 1970 . 
 The Economic Development Board had been set up in 1961 to formulate and implement national economic strategies , focusing on promoting Singapore 's manufacturing sector . Industrial estates were set up , especially in Jurong , and foreign investment was attracted to the country with tax incentives . The industrialization transformed the manufacturing sector to one that produced higher value @-@ added goods and achieved greater revenue . The service industry also grew at this time , driven by demand for services by ships calling at the port and increasing commerce . This progress helped to alleviate the unemployment crisis . Singapore also attracted big oil companies like Shell and Esso to establish oil refineries in Singapore which , by the mid @-@ 1970s , became the third largest oil @-@ refining centre in the world . The government invested heavily in an education system that adopted English as the language of instruction and emphasised practical training to develop a competent workforce well suited for the industry . 
 The lack of good public housing , poor sanitation , and high unemployment led to social problems from crime to health issues . The proliferation of squatter settlements resulted in safety hazards and caused the Bukit Ho Swee Fire in 1961 that killed four people and left 16 @,@ 000 others homeless . The Housing Development Board set up before independence continued to be largely successful and huge building projects sprung up to provide affordable public housing to resettle the squatters . Within a decade , the majority of the population had been housed in these apartments . The Central Provident Fund ( CPF ) Housing Scheme , introduced in 1968 , allows residents to use their compulsory savings account to purchase HDB flats and gradually increases home ownership in Singapore . 
 British troops had remained in Singapore following its independence , but in 1968 , London announced its decision to withdraw the forces by 1971 . With the secret aid of military advisers from Israel , Singapore rapidly established the Singapore Armed Forces , with the help of a national service program introduced in 1967 . Since independence , Singaporean defense spending has been approximately five percent of GDP . Today , the Singapore Armed Forces are among the best @-@ equipped in Asia . 
 = = = The 1980s and 1990s = = = 
 Further economic success continued through the 1980s , with the unemployment rate falling to 3 % and real GDP growth averaging at about 8 % up until 1999 . During the 1980s , Singapore began to upgrade to higher @-@ technological industries , such as the wafer fabrication sector , in order to compete with its neighbours which now had cheaper labour . Singapore Changi Airport was opened in 1981 and Singapore Airlines was developed to become a major airline . The Port of Singapore became one of the world 's busiest ports and the service and tourism industries also grew immensely during this period . Singapore emerged as an important transportation hub and a major tourist destination . 
 The Housing Development Board ( HDB ) continued to promote public housing with new towns , such as Ang Mo Kio , being designed and built . These new residential estates have larger and higher @-@ standard apartments and are served with better amenities . Today , 80 – 90 % of the population lives in HDB apartments . In 1987 , the first Mass Rapid Transit ( MRT ) line began operation , connecting most of these housing estates and the city centre . 
 The political situation in Singapore continues to be dominated by the People 's Action Party . The PAP won all the parliamentary seats in every election between 1966 and 1981 . The PAP rule is termed authoritarian by some activists and opposition politicians who see the strict regulation of political and media activities by the government as an infringement on political rights . The conviction of opposition politician Chee Soon Juan for illegal protests and the defamation lawsuits against J. B. Jeyaretnam have been cited by the opposition parties as examples of such authoritarianism . The lack of separation of powers between the court system and the government led to further accusations by the opposition parties of miscarriage of justice . 
 The government of Singapore underwent several significant changes . Non @-@ Constituency Members of Parliament were introduced in 1984 to allow up to three losing candidates from opposition parties to be appointed as MPs . Group Representation Constituencies ( GRCs ) was introduced in 1988 to create multi @-@ seat electoral divisions , intended to ensure minority representation in parliament . Nominated Members of Parliament were introduced in 1990 to allow non @-@ elected non @-@ partisan MPs . The Constitution was amended in 1991 to provide for an Elected President who has veto power in the use of national reserves and appointments to public office . The opposition parties have complained that the GRC system has made it difficult for them to gain a foothold in parliamentary elections in Singapore , and the plurality voting system tends to exclude minority parties . 
 In 1990 , Lee Kuan Yew passed the reins of leadership to Goh Chok Tong , who became the second prime minister of Singapore . Goh presented a more open and consultative style of leadership as the country continued to modernise . In 1997 , Singapore experienced the effect of the Asian financial crisis and tough measures , such as cuts in the CPF contribution , were implemented . 
 Lee 's programs in Singapore had a profound effect on the Communist leadership in China , who made a major effort , especially under Deng Xiaoping , to emulate his policies of economic growth , entrepreneurship , and subtle suppression of dissent . Over 22 @,@ 000 Chinese officials were sent to Singapore to study its methods . 
 = = = 2000 – present = = = 
 = = = = Early 2000s = = = = 
 In the early 2000s , Singapore went through some post @-@ independence crises , including the SARS outbreak in 2003 and the threat of terrorism . In December 2001 , a plot to bomb embassies and other infrastructure in Singapore was uncovered and as many as 36 members of the Jemaah Islamiyah group were arrested under the Internal Security Act . Major counter @-@ terrorism measures were put in place to detect and prevent potential terrorist acts and to minimise damages should they occur . More emphasis was placed on promoting social integration and trust between the different communities . 
 In 2004 , Lee Hsien Loong , the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew , became the third prime minister of Singapore . He introduced several policy changes , including the reduction of national service duration from two and a half years to two years , and the legalisation of casino gambling . Other efforts to raise the city 's global profile included the reestablishment of the Singapore Grand Prix in 2008 , and the hosting of the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics . 
 The general election of 2006 was a landmark election because of the prominent use of the internet and blogging to cover and comment on the election , circumventing the official media . The PAP returned to power , winning 82 of the 84 parliamentary seats and 66 % of the votes . In 2005 , Wee Kim Wee and Devan Nair , two former Presidents , died . 
 = = = = 2010 – 2015 = = = = 
 The general election of 2011 was yet another watershed election due to the first time a GRC was lost by the ruling party PAP , to the opposition party WP . Four years later , Lee Kuan Yew , founding father and the first Prime Minister of Singapore , died on 23 March 2015 . Singapore declared a period of national mourning from 23 – 29 March . There was a golden jubilee weekend , featuring an extra holiday in 2015 . Fun packs , which are usually given to people who attend the National Day Parade was given to every Singaporean and PR household . The NDP was the first one without the founding prime minister Lee Kuan Yew . Therefore , there was a tribute to him the NDP . The NDP was also the first which foreign dignitaries were invited over to see the parade . 
 = Bob Muglia = 
 Bob Muglia ( born 1959 ) is an American business executive and research and development specialist . He is currently the Chief Executive Officer of Snowflake Computing , a data warehousing startup . Muglia is known for managing divisions at Microsoft that supported the Microsoft Office Suite , Windows Server and MSN Network product families . He was one of four presidents that reported directly to Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer . 
 Muglia held several executive positions at Microsoft before resigning from the company in 2011 . He worked briefly for Juniper Networks , then accepted his current position as CEO of Snowflake Computing in June 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bob Muglia was born in 1959 in Connecticut . His father was an automotive parts salesman . Muglia started working at his first job when he was 15 years old . He moved to Michigan and earned an undergraduate degree from the University of Michigan in 1981 . After graduating , he started working for <unk> Corporation . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Microsoft = = = 
 = = = = Windows and business software = = = = 
 Bob Muglia started his Microsoft career in 1988 . He was the first product manager for SQL Server . Muglia also served as the director of Windows NT Program Management and User Education . He was promoted to vice president of the Windows NT division in October 1995 . Muglia later held the position of vice president of the Server Application group , until he was promoted to senior vice president of the Applications and Tools group in February 1998 . 
 Bob Muglia was influential in a corporate restructuring at Microsoft in 1999 , which assigned business divisions to customer types , rather than technologies . As part of the re @-@ structuring , Muglia became head of the business @-@ productivity group , which oversaw Microsoft Office , Exchange and other business software . According to Computer <unk> News , Muglia pushed developers to visit customers , created customer advisory boards and led other efforts to incorporate customer input into product development at Microsoft . 
 Muglia testified in the United States v. Microsoft Corp. anti @-@ trust lawsuit , and in a case between Microsoft and Sun Microsystems regarding Microsoft 's use of Java . According to New York Times reporters Steve Lohr and Koel Brinkley , the judge embarrassed Muglia by rebuking him for his persistent characterization of an email from Bill Gates . Muglia also negotiated aggressively with RealNetworks , regarding an anti @-@ trust dispute between the two companies . 
 In August 2000 , Muglia was appointed to vice president of a new .NET Services Group . The following year he was reassigned to focus on database technologies as senior vice president of the Enterprise Storage Services Group . He helped develop Microsoft 's plan for autonomic computing , which was announced in March 2003 . By early 2004 , Muglia held the position of senior vice president of the Windows Server Division . 
 = = = = Servers and tools division = = = = 
 Another re @-@ organization at Microsoft in 2005 resulted in Muglia taking the position of Senior Vice President of Servers and Tools before being promoted to president of the division in 2009 . This made Muglia one of four presidents at Microsoft . 
 During his tenure , the business group grew its revenues more than ten percent each year for six years . The division accounted for more than 20 percent of Microsoft 's revenues by January 2009 . In this position , Muglia led Microsoft 's ten @-@ year plan for data center and desktop automation products , its Dynamic Systems Initiative and its Dynamic IT strategy . In October 2010 , developers criticized Muglia for suggesting Microsoft would put less emphasis on <unk> ; a statement he later retracted . 
 Muglia announced his resignation from Microsoft in January 2011 ; he was replaced by Satya <unk> , now Microsoft 's CEO . He was the fourth executive reporting directly to Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer to resign between early 2010 and 2011 . According to Financial Times , Ballmer credited Muglia for growing the servers and tools division , but implied the departure was related to disagreements between the two executives about the company 's cloud computing strategy . 
 = = = Juniper = = = 
 In July 2011 , a few months prior to Muglia 's last day at Microsoft , Juniper Networks announced it would hire Muglia as the executive vice president of its software division . He reported to then Juniper CEO Kevin Johnson , who ( along with other Juniper staff ) is also a former Microsoft executive . Muglia was hired to consolidate Juniper 's software groups under a new division called Software Solutions . He also helped develop Juniper 's software @-@ defined networking ( SDN ) strategy . 
 In December 2013 Muglia quit Juniper , a month after Shaygan Kheradpir was appointed as the company 's new CEO . Several other Juniper executives also left around this time . 
 = = = Snowflake computing = = = 
 Bob Muglia is currently the Chief Executive Officer of Snowflake Computing , a cloud @-@ based data @-@ warehousing startup . He joined the company in June 2014 , a couple years after it was founded in 2012 . Snowflake Computing came out of stealth mode that October . 
 = Mark Oliphant = 
 Sir Marcus " Mark " Laurence Elwin Oliphant , AC , KBE , FRS , FAA ( 8 October 1901 – 14 July 2000 ) was an Australian physicist and humanitarian who played an important role in the first experimental demonstration of nuclear fusion and also the development of nuclear weapons . 
 Born and raised in Adelaide , South Australia , Oliphant graduated from the University of Adelaide in 1922 . He was awarded an 1851 Exhibition Scholarship in 1927 on the strength of the research he had done on mercury , and went to England , where he studied under Sir Ernest Rutherford at the University of Cambridge 's Cavendish Laboratory . There , he used a particle accelerator to fire heavy hydrogen nuclei ( deuterons ) at various targets . He discovered the nuclei of helium @-@ 3 ( helions ) and tritium ( tritons ) . He also discovered that when they reacted with each other , the particles that were released had far more energy than they started with . Energy had been liberated from inside the nucleus , and he realised that this was a result of nuclear fusion . 
 Oliphant left the Cavendish Laboratory in 1937 to become the Poynting Professor of Physics at the University of Birmingham . He attempted to build a 60 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) cyclotron at the university , but its completion was postponed by the outbreak of the Second World War in Europe in 1939 . He became involved with the development of radar , heading a group at the University of Birmingham that included John Randall and Harry Boot . They created a radical new design , the cavity magnetron , that made microwave radar possible . Oliphant also formed part of the MAUD Committee , which reported in July 1941 , that an atomic bomb was not only feasible , but might be produced as early as 1943 . Oliphant was instrumental in spreading the word of this finding in the United States , thereby starting what became the Manhattan Project . Later in the war , he worked on it with his friend Ernest Lawrence at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley , California , developing electromagnetic isotope separation . 
 After the war , Oliphant returned to Australia as the first Director of the Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering at the new Australian National University , where he initiated the design and construction of the world 's largest ( 500 megajoule ) homopolar generator . He retired in 1976 , but was appointed Governor of South Australia on the advice of Premier , Don Dunstan . He assisted in the founding of the Australian Democrats political party , and he was the chairman of the meeting in Melbourne in 1977 at which the party was launched . Late in life he watched his wife , Rosa , suffer before her death in 1987 , and he became an advocate for voluntary euthanasia . He died in Canberra in 2000 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Marcus " Mark " Laurence Elwin Oliphant was born on 8 October 1901 in Kent Town , a suburb of Adelaide . His father was Harold George " Baron " Oliphant , a civil servant with the South Australian Engineering and Water Supply Department and part @-@ time lecturer in Economics with the Workers ' Educational Association . His mother was Beatrice Edith Fanny Oliphant , née Tucker , an artist . He was named after Marcus Clarke , the Australian author , and Laurence Oliphant , the British traveller and mystic . Most people called him Mark ; this became official when he was knighted in 1959 . He had four younger brothers , Roland , Keith , Nigel and Donald . His parents were theosophists , and as such were opposed to eating meat . Marcus became a lifelong vegetarian while a boy , after witnessing the slaughter of pigs on a farm . He was found to be completely deaf in one ear and he needed glasses for severe astigmatism and short @-@ sightedness . 
 Oliphant was first educated at primary schools in Goodwood and <unk> , after the family moved there in 1910 . He attended Unley High School in Adelaide , and , for his final year in 1918 , Adelaide High School . After graduation he failed to obtain a bursary to attend university , and so got a job cleaning floors for a jewellery manufacturer . He then got a cadetship with the State Library of South Australia , which allowed him to take courses at the University of Adelaide at night . 
 In 1919 , Oliphant began studying at the University of Adelaide . At first he was interested in a career in medicine , but later in the year Kerr Grant , the physics professor , offered him a cadetship in the Physics Department . It paid 10 shillings a week ( equivalent to AUD $ 34 in 2010 ) , the same amount that Oliphant received for working at the State Library , but it allowed him to take any university course that did not conflict with his work for the department . He received his Bachelor of Science ( BSc ) degree in 1921 and then did honours the following year , supervised by Kerr Grant . Roy Burdon , who acted as head of the department when Kerr went on sabbatical in 1925 , worked with Oliphant to produce two papers in 1927 on the properties of mercury , " The Problem of the Surface Tension of Mercury and the Action of Aqueous Solutions on a Mercury Surface " and " Absorption of Gases on the Surface of Mercury " . Oliphant later recalled that Burdon taught him " the extraordinary exhilaration there was in even minor discoveries in the field of physics " . 
 Oliphant married Rosa Louise Wilbraham , who was also from Adelaide , on 23 May 1925 . The two had known each other since they were teenagers . He made Rosa 's wedding ring in the laboratory from a gold nugget ( from the Coolgardie Goldfields ) that his father had given him . 
 = = Cavendish Laboratory = = 
 In 1925 , Oliphant heard a speech given by the New Zealand physicist , Sir Ernest Rutherford , and he decided he wanted to work for him – an ambition that he fulfilled by earning a position at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge in 1927 . He applied for an 1851 Exhibition Scholarship on the strength of the research he had done on mercury with Burdon . It came with a living allowance of £ 250 per annum ( equivalent to AUD $ 17 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) . When word came through that he had been awarded a fellowship , he wired Rutherford and Trinity College , Cambridge . Both accepted him . 
 Rutherford 's Cavendish Laboratory was carrying out some of the most advanced research into nuclear physics in the world at the time . Oliphant was invited to afternoon tea by Rutherford and Lady Rutherford . He soon got to meet other researchers at the Cavendish Laboratory , including Patrick Blackett , Edward Bullard , James Chadwick , John Cockcroft , Charles Ellis , Peter Kapitza , Philip Moon and Ernest Walton . There were two fellow Australians : Harrie Massey and John Keith Roberts . Oliphant would become especially close friends with Cockcroft . The laboratory had considerable talent but not a lot of money to spare , and tended to use a " string and sealing wax " approach to experimental equipment . Oliphant had to buy his own equipment , at one point spending £ 24 ( equivalent to AUD $ 800 in 2010 ) of his allowance on a vacuum pump . 
 Oliphant submitted his PhD thesis on " The Neutralization of Positive Ions at Metal Surfaces , and the Emission of Secondary Electrons " in December 1929 . For his viva , he was examined by Rutherford and Ellis . Receiving his degree was the attainment of a major life goal , but it also meant the end of his 1851 Exhibition Scholarship . Oliphant secured an 1851 Senior Studentship , of which there were five awarded each year . It came with a living allowance of £ 450 per annum ( equivalent to A $ 30 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) for two years , with the possibility of a one @-@ year extension in exceptional circumstances , which Oliphant was also awarded . 
 A son , Geoffrey Bruce Oliphant , was born 6 October 1930 , but he died of meningitis on 5 September 1933 , and was interred in an unmarked grave in the Ascension Parish Burial Ground in Cambridge alongside Timothy Cockcroft , the infant son of Sir John and Lady Elizabeth Cockcroft , who had died the year before . Unable to have more children , the <unk> adopted a four @-@ month @-@ old boy , Michael John , in 1936 , and a daughter , Vivian , in 1938 . 
 In 1932 and 1933 , the scientists at the Cavendish Laboratory made a series of ground @-@ breaking discoveries . Cockroft and Walton bombarded lithium with high energy protons and succeeded in transmuting it into energetic nuclei of helium . This was one of the earliest experiments to change the atomic nucleus of one element to another by artificial means . Then Chadwick devised an experiment that discovered a new , uncharged particle with roughly the same mass as the proton : the neutron . In 1933 , Blackett discovered tracks in his cloud chamber that confirmed the existence of the positron and revealed the opposing spiral traces of positron – electron pair production . 
 Oliphant followed up the work by constructing a particle accelerator that could fire protons with up to 600 @,@ 000 electronvolts of energy . He soon confirmed the results of Cockroft and Walton on the artificial disintegration of the nucleus and positive ions . He produced a series of six papers over the following two years . In 1933 , the Cavendish Laboratory received a gift from the American physical chemist Gilbert N. Lewis of a few drops of heavy water . The accelerator was used to fire heavy hydrogen nuclei ( deuterons , which Rutherford called <unk> ) at various targets . Working with Rutherford and others , Oliphant thereby discovered the nuclei of Helium @-@ 3 ( helions ) and tritium ( tritons ) . 
 Oliphant used electromagnetic separation to separate the isotopes of lithium . He was the first to experimentally demonstrate nuclear fusion . He found that when deuterons reacted with nuclei of Helium @-@ 3 , tritium or with other deuterons , the particles that were released had far more energy than they started with . Binding energy had been liberated from inside the nucleus . Following Arthur Eddington 's 1920 prediction that energy released by fusing small nuclei together could provide the energy source that powers the stars , Oliphant speculated that nuclear fusion reactions might be what powered the sun . With its higher cross section , the deuterium – tritium nuclear fusion reaction became the basis of a hydrogen bomb . Oliphant had not foreseen this development : 
 ... we had no idea whatever that this would one day be applied to make hydrogen bombs . Our curiosity was just curiosity about the structure of the nucleus of the atom , and the discovery of these reactions was purely , as the Americans would put it , coincidental . 
 In 1934 , Cockcroft arranged for Oliphant become a fellow of St John 's College , Cambridge , which paid about £ 600 . When Chadwick left the Cavendish Laboratory for the University of Liverpool in 1935 , Oliphant and Ellis both replaced him as Rutherford 's Assistant Director for Research . The job came with a salary of £ 600 ( equivalent to AUD $ 49 @,@ 900 in 2010 ) . With the money from St John 's , this gave him a comfortable income . Oliphant soon fitted out a new accelerator laboratory with a 1 @.@ 23 MeV generator at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to AUD $ 499 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) while he designed an even larger 2 MeV generator . He was the first to conceive of the proton synchrotron , a new type of cyclic particle accelerator . In 1937 , he was elected to the Royal Society . When he died he was its longest @-@ serving fellow . 
 = = University of Birmingham = = 
 Samuel Walter Johnson Smith 's imminent mandatory retirement at age 65 prompted a search for a new Poynting Professor of Physics at the University of Birmingham . The University wanted not just a replacement , but a well @-@ known name , and was willing to spend lavishly in order to build up nuclear physics expertise at Birmingham . Neville Moss , its Professor of Mining Engineering and the Dean of its Faculty of Science approached Oliphant , who presented his terms . In addition to his salary of £ 1 @,@ 300 ( equivalent to AUD $ 103 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) , he wanted the University to spend £ 2 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to A $ 158 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) to upgrade the laboratory , and another £ 1 @,@ 000 per annum ( equivalent to A $ 79 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) on it . And he did not wish to start until October 1937 , to enable him to wrap up his work at the Cavendish Laboratory . Moss agreed to Oliphant 's terms . 
 To obtain funding for the 60 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) cyclotron that he wanted , Oliphant wrote to the prime minister , Neville Chamberlain , who was from Birmingham . Chamberlain took up the matter with his friend Lord Nuffield , who provided £ 60 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to AUD $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) for the project , enough for the cyclotron , a brand new building to house it , and a trip to Berkeley , California , so Oliphant could confer with Ernest Lawrence , the inventor of the cyclotron . Lawrence was supportive of the project , sending Oliphant the plans of the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron that he had under construction at Berkeley , and inviting Oliphant to visit him at the Radiation Laboratory . Oliphant sailed for New York on 10 December 1938 , and met Lawrence in Berkeley . The two men got along very well , dining at Trader Vic 's in Oakland . Oliphant was aware of the problems in building cyclotrons encountered by Chadwick at the University of Liverpool and Cockcroft at the Cavendish Laboratory , and intended to avoid these and get his cyclotron built on time and on budget by following Lawrence 's specifications as closely as possible . He hoped that it would be running by Christmas 1939 , but the outbreak of the Second World War quashed his hopes . The Nuffield Cyclotron would not be completed until after the war . 
 = = = Radar = = = 
 In 1938 , Oliphant became involved with the development of radar , then still a secret . While visiting prototype radar stations , he realised that shorter @-@ wavelength radio waves were needed urgently , especially if there was to be any chance of building a radar set small enough to fit into an aircraft . In August 1939 , he took a small group to Ventnor , on the Isle of Wight , to examine the Chain Home system first hand . He obtained a grant from the Admiralty to develop radar systems with wavelengths less than 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) ; the best available at the time was 150 centimetres ( 59 in ) . 
 Oliphant 's group at Birmingham worked on developing two promising devices , the klystron and the magnetron . Working with James Sayers , Oliphant managed to produce an improved version of the klystron capable of generating 400W . Meanwhile , two more members of his Birmingham team , John Randall and Harry Boot , worked on a radical new design , a cavity magnetron . By February 1940 , they had an output of 400W with a wavelength of 9 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) , just the kind of short wavelengths needed for good airborne radars . The magnetron 's power was soon increased a hundred @-@ fold , and Birmingham concentrated on magnetron development . The first operational magnetrons were delivered in August 1941 . This invention was one of the key scientific breakthroughs during the war and played a major part in defeating the German U @-@ boats , intercepting enemy bombers , and in directing Allied bombers . 
 In 1940 , the Fall of France , and the possibility that Britain might be invaded , prompted Oliphant to send his wife and children to Australia . The Fall of Singapore in February 1942 led him to offer his services to John Madsen , the Professor of Electrical Engineering at the University of Sydney , and the head of the Radiophysics Laboratory at the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research , which was responsible for developing radar . He embarked from Glasgow for Australia on <unk> Dominion Monarch on 20 March . The voyage , part of a 46 @-@ ship convoy , was a slow one , with the convoy frequently zigzagging to avoid U @-@ boats , and the ship did not reach Fremantle until 27 May . 
 The Australians were already preparing to produce radar sets locally . Oliphant persuaded Professor Thomas Laby to release Eric Burhop and Leslie Martin from their work on optical munitions to work on radar , and they succeeded in building a cavity magnetron in their laboratory at the University of Melbourne in May 1942 . Oliphant worked with Martin on the process of moving the magnetrons for the laboratory to the production line . Over 2 @,@ 000 radar sets were produced in Australia during the war . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 At the University of Birmingham in March 1940 , Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls examined the theoretical issues involved in developing , producing and using atomic bombs in a paper that became known as the Frisch – Peierls memorandum . They considered what would happen to a sphere of pure uranium @-@ 235 , and found that not only could a chain reaction occur , but it might require as little as 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 to unleash the energy of hundreds of tons of TNT . The first person they showed their paper to was Oliphant , and he immediately took it to Sir Henry Tizard , the chairman of the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Warfare ( CSSAW ) . As a result , a special subcommittee of the CSSAW known as the MAUD Committee was created to investigate the matter further . It was chaired by Sir George Thomson , and its original membership included Oliphant , Chadwick , Cockcroft and Moon . In its final report in July 1941 , the MAUD Committee concluded that an atomic bomb was not only feasible , but might be produced as early as 1943 . 
 Great Britain was at war and authorities there thought that the development of an atomic bomb was urgent , but there was much less urgency in the United States . Oliphant was one of the people who pushed the American program into motion . Oliphant flew to the United States in late August 1941 in an unheated bomber , ostensibly to discuss the radar @-@ development program , but was assigned to find out why the United States was ignoring the findings of the MAUD Committee . He later recalled : " the minutes and reports had been sent to Lyman Briggs , who was the Director of the Uranium Committee , and we were puzzled to receive virtually no comment . I called on Briggs in Washington [ DC ] , only to find out that this inarticulate and unimpressive man had put the reports in his safe and had not shown them to members of his committee . I was amazed and distressed . " 
 Oliphant then met with the Uranium Committee . Samuel K. Allison , a new member of the Committee , was a talented experimental physicist and a protégé of Arthur Compton at the University of Chicago . Oliphant " came to a meeting " , Allison recalls , " and said ' bomb ' in no uncertain terms . He told us we must concentrate every effort on the bomb , and said we had no right to work on power plants or anything but the bomb . The bomb would cost 25 million dollars , he said , and Britain did not have the money or the manpower , so it was up to us . " Allison was surprised that Briggs had kept the committee in the dark . Oliphant visited his friend Ernest Lawrence , and also spoke with James Conant and Enrico Fermi . He not only managed to convince the Americans that an atomic bomb was feasible , but also inspired Lawrence to convert his 37 @-@ inch ( 94 cm ) cyclotron into a giant mass spectrometer for isotope separation , a technique Oliphant had pioneered in 1934 . Leo Szilard later wrote , " if Congress knew the true history of the atomic energy project , I have no doubt but that it would create a special medal to be given to meddling foreigners for distinguished services , and that Dr Oliphant would be the first to receive one . " 
 On 26 October 1942 , Oliphant embarked from Melbourne , taking Rosa and the children back with him . The wartime sea voyage on the French Desirade was again a slow one , and they did not reach Glasgow until 29 February 1943 . But he had to leave them behind once more in November 1943 after he joined the Manhattan Project in the United States as part of the British Mission . Oliphant was one of the scientists whose services the Americans were most eager to secure , and Robert Oppenheimer , the head of the Los Alamos Laboratory attempted to persuade Oliphant to join . The work on the bomb itself made him uneasy , and he preferred to head the team assisting his friend Lawrence at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley to develop the electromagnetic uranium enrichment – a vital but less overtly military part of the project . 
 Oliphant secured the services of fellow Australian physicist Harrie Massey , who had been working for the Admiralty on magnetic mines , along with James Stayers and Stanley Duke , who had worked with him on the cavity magnetron . This initial group set out for Berkeley in a B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber in November 1943 . Oliphant became Lawrence 's de facto deputy , and was in charge of the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory when Lawrence was absent . Although based in Berkeley , he often visited Oak Ridge , Tennessee , where the separation plant was , and was an occasional visitor to Los Alamos . He made efforts to involve Australian scientists in the project , and had Sir David Rivett , the head of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research , release Eric Burhop to work on the Manhattan Project . He briefed Stanley Bruce , the Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , on the project , and urged the Australian government to secure Australian uranium deposits . 
 Oliphant returned to England in March 1945 , and resumed his post as a professor of physics at the University of Birmingham . He was on holiday in Wales with his family when he first heard of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . He was later to remark that he felt " sort of proud that the bomb had worked , and absolutely appalled at what it had done to human beings " . Oliphant became a harsh critic of nuclear weapons and a member of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs , saying , " I , right from the beginning , have been terribly worried by the existence of nuclear weapons and very much against their use . " His wartime work would have earned him a Presidential Medal of Freedom with Gold Palm , but the Australian government vetoed this honour , as government policy at the time was not to confer honours on civilians . 
 = = Later years in Australia = = 
 In April 1946 , the Prime Minister , Ben Chifley , asked Oliphant if he would be a technical advisor to the Australian delegation to the newly formed United Nations Atomic Energy Commission ( UNAEC ) , which was debating international control of nuclear weapons . Oliphant agreed , and joined the Minister for External Affairs , H. V. Evatt and the Australian Representative at the United Nations , Paul Hasluck , to hear the Baruch Plan . The attempt at international control was unsuccessful , and no agreement was reached . 
 Chifley , and the Minister for Post @-@ War Reconstruction , Dr H. C. " Nugget " Coombs , also discussed with Oliphant a plan to create a new research institute that would attract the world 's best scholars to Australia and lift the standard of university education nationwide . They hoped to start by attracting three of Australia 's most distinguished expatriates : Oliphant , Howard Florey and Keith Hancock . 
 It was academic suicide ; Australia was far from the centres where the latest research was being carried out , and communications were much poorer at that time . But Oliphant accepted , and in 1950 returned to Australia as the first Director of the Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering at the Australian National University . Within the school he created a Department of Particle Physics , which he headed himself , a Department of Nuclear Physics under Ernest Titterton , a Department of Geophysics under John Jaeger , a Department of Astronomy under Bart Bok , a Department of Theoretical Physics under Kevin <unk> and a Department of Mathematics under Bernhard Neumann . 
 Oliphant was an advocate of nuclear weapons research . He served on the post @-@ war Technical Committee that advised the British government on nuclear weapons , and publicly declared that Britain needed to develop its own nuclear weapons independent of the United States to " avoid the danger of becoming a lesser power " . The establishment of a world @-@ class nuclear physics research capability in Australia was intimately linked with the government 's plans to develop nuclear power and weapons . Locating the new research institute in Canberra would place it close to the Snowy Mountains Scheme , which was planned to be the centrepiece of a new nuclear power industry . Oliphant hoped that Britain would assist with the Australian program , and the British were interested in cooperation because Australia had uranium ore and weapons testing sites , and there were concerns that Australia was becoming too closely aligned with the United States . Arrangements were made for Australian scientists to be seconded to the British Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell , but the close cooperation he sought was stymied by security concerns arising from Britain 's commitments to the United States . 
 Oliphant envisaged Canberra one day becoming a university town like Oxford or Cambridge . A threat to the future of the University arose in the wake of the 1949 election , when the Liberal Party of Australia led by Robert Menzies won . Many Liberals were opposed to the University , which they saw as an extravagance . Menzies defended it , but in 1954 he announced that it had entered a period of consolidation , with a funding ceiling , ending the possibility of successful competition with universities in Europe and North America . A further blow came in 1959 , when the Menzies government amalgamated it with the Canberra University College . Henceforth , it would no longer be a research university , but a regular one , with responsibility for teaching undergraduates . Nonetheless , parts of the university stayed committed to the old mission , and the ANU remained a university where research is central to its activities . Despite the setbacks , by 2014 the vision of Canberra as a university town would be well on its way to becoming a reality . 
 In September 1951 , Oliphant applied for a visa to travel to the United States for a nuclear physics conference in Chicago . The visa was not refused , nor was Oliphant accused of subversive activities , but neither was it issued . This was the height of the Red Scare . The American McCarran Act restricted travel to the United States , and in Australia the Menzies government was attempting to ban the Communist Party , and was not inclined to support Oliphant against the American government . A subsequent request to travel to Canada via Hawaii in September 1954 was refused by the United States Department of State . Although Oliphant was granted a special waiver that allowed him to transit the US , he preferred to cancel the trip rather than accept this humiliation . The Menzies government subsequently excluded him from participating in or observing the British nuclear tests at Maralinga , nor was he allowed access to classified nuclear information for fear of antagonising the US . 
 In 1955 , Oliphant initiated the design and construction of a 500 megajoule homopolar generator ( HPG ) , the world 's largest . This massive machine contained three discs 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) in diameter and weighing 38 tonnes ( 37 long tons ) . He obtained £ 40 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to A $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) initial funding from the Australian Atomic Energy Commission . Completed in 1963 , the HPG was intended to be the power source for a synchrotron , but this was not built . Instead , it was used to power the LT @-@ 4 <unk> and a large @-@ scale railgun that was used as a scientific instrument for experiments with plasma physics . It was decommissioned in 1985 . 
 Oliphant founded the Australian Academy of Science in 1954 , teaming up with David Martyn to overcome the obstacles that had frustrated previous attempts . Oliphant was its president until 1956 . Deciding that the Academy of Science should have its own special building , Oliphant raised the required money from donations . As chairman of the Building Design Committee , he selected and oversaw the construction of one of Canberra 's most striking architectural designs . He also delivered the Academy of Science 's 1961 Matthew Flinders Lecture , on the subject of " Faraday in his time and today " . 
 Oliphant retired as Professor of Particle Physics in 1964 , and was appointed Professor of Ionised Gases . In this chair he produced his first research papers since the 1930s . He was appointed Professor Emeritus in 1967 . He was invited by the premier , Don Dunstan , to become the Governor of South Australia , a position he held from 1971 to 1976 . During this period , he caused great concern to Dunstan when he strongly supported the decision of the Governor @-@ General , Sir John Kerr , in the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis . 
 The Age reported in 1981 that " Sir Mark Oliphant warned the Dunstan Government of the ' grave dangers ' of appointing an Australian Aborigine , Sir Douglas Nicholls , to succeed him as South Australia 's Governor " . Oliphant had secretly written , " [ t ] here is something inherent in the personality of the Aborigine which makes it difficult for him to adapt fully to the ways of the white man . " The authors of Oliphant 's biography noted that " that was the prevailing attitude of almost the entire white population of Australia until well after World War II " . 
 Oliphant was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in 1959 , and was made a Companion of the Order of Australia ( AC ) in 1977 " for eminent achievement and merit of the highest degree in the field of public service and in service to the crown " . 
 Late in life he watched his wife , Rosa , suffer before her death in 1987 , and he became an advocate for voluntary euthanasia . On 14 July 2000 , he died in Canberra , at the age of 98 . His body was cremated . He was survived by his daughter Vivian , his son Michael having died from colon cancer in 1971 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Places and things named in honour of Sir Mark Oliphant include the Oliphant Building at the Australian National University , the Mark Oliphant Conservation Park , a South Australian high schools science competition , the Oliphant Wing of the Physics Building at the University of Adelaide , and a high school in Munno Para West , South Australia . His papers are in the Adolph Basser Library at the Australian Academy of Science , and the Barr Smith Library at the University of Adelaide . Oliphant 's nephew , Pat Oliphant , is a Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning cartoonist . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 1937 Elected Fellow of the Royal Society 
 1943 Awarded Hughes Medal by the Royal Society 
 1946 Awarded <unk> Thomson Medal , Institute of Radiology 
 1948 Awarded Faraday Medal by the Institution of Engineers 
 1954 Elected ( Foundation ) Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science 
 1954 Elected ( Foundation ) President of the Australian Academy of Science 
 1955 Invited to deliver the Bakerian Lecture by the Royal Society 
 1955 Invited to deliver the Rutherford Memorial Lecture by the Royal Society 
 1956 Awarded Galathea Medal by King Frederick IX of Denmark 
 1959 Created Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire 
 1961 Awarded Matthew Flinders Medal and Lecture 
 1977 Appointed Companion of the Order of Australia 
 Memorials to Mark Oliphant 
 = Tropical Depression Auring ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Auring formed as a tropical disturbance late on December 30 , 2008 , to the southeast of Manila in the Philippines . Over the next few days the disturbance gradually developed before early on January 3 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) , reported that the disturbance had intensified into the first tropical depression of the season with PAGASA assigning the name Auring to the depression . As the Depression was moving into a high level of vertical wind shear , it did not develop any further and late on January 5 as the baroclinic zone approached Auring , it was downgraded to an area of low pressure by PAGASA before the JMA followed suit the next day as it was declared as dissipated by the JTWC . 
 Heavy rain from Auring produced severe flooding in the eastern Philippines . Two people were killed and nine others were left missing . A total of 305 homes were destroyed and another 610 were damaged . In addition , an estimated 53 hectares ( 130 @.@ 9 acres ) of rice and 3 @.@ 5 hectares ( 8 @.@ 6 acres ) of corn were damaged . About 43 @,@ 851 people were affected by the depression and damages were estimated at PHP 23 million ( $ 498 @,@ 318 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on January 1 , 2009 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that an area of deep atmospheric convection had persisted for the last 48 hours about 730 km ( 455 mi ) , to the southeast of Manila in the Philippines . Deep convection was developing over the northern quadrant of a weak low level circulation center . A subtropical ridge of pressure was helping to guide the disturbance and was providing good outflow as well as low to moderate vertical wind shear . However , as the disturbance was moving into a higher level of vertical wind shear the depression was not expected to develop into a significant tropical cyclone within 48 hours . During the next 48 hours the disturbance gradually developed , with the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) and the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) reporting early on January 3 that it had become the first tropical depression of the season , with the name Auring being assigned to the depression by PAGASA whilst it was located about 140 km ( 85 mi ) east of Surigao City on the Philippine island of Mindanao . This came after the low level circulation center had started to consolidate as deep convection was being fueled by a poleward diffluence despite being in an area of strong vertical wind shear . Over the next couple of days as Auring moved towards the east , dry air started to wrap in to its low level circulation center which started to weaken the depression after it had peaked with winds of 45 km / h , ( 30 mph ) 10 @-@ min sustained and a peak pressure of 1006 hPa / <unk> . As the baroclinic zone approached the depression late on January 5 , PAGASA downgraded the depression to an area of low pressure as the baroclinic zone was approaching the depression , as vertical wind shear had increased and outflow became hindered . However the JMA continued to issue warnings on the depression until early the next morning when the depression was declared dissipated by the JTWC and the JMA . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon being classified as a tropical depression , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration issued Public Storm Warning Signal # 1 for Samar , Leyte , the Camotes Islands , Surigao del Norte , Siargao Island , and <unk> Island as winds up to 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) were expected to affect those areas . Three hours later , <unk> Island was also put under the warning signal . On January 4 , all signals , except in Eastern Samar , were lifted as Auring recurved and moved away from the Philippines . The warning signal for Eastern Samar was lifted early the next day . 
 Heavy rains from Auring triggered flooding across the eastern provinces of the Philippines . A total of 38 @,@ 764 people were evacuated to avoid floodwaters . The rains caused the Cagayan River to swell , leading to the death of a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy in <unk> City . In <unk> City , Cebu , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old woman was killed after she was electrocuted by a steel wire which was knocked down by high winds produced by Auring . Nine other people , all of whom are children , were listed as missing . About 12 @,@ 211 people were left stranded at ports due to dangerous conditions caused by the depression . An additional 14 trucks , 44 light cars , 75 passenger buses , 27 vessels and 295 rolling cargoes were also stranded . Severe flooding destroyed 305 homes , 199 of which were in <unk> . Another 610 homes sustained damage . An estimated 53 hectares ( 130 @.@ 9 acres ) of rice and 3 @.@ 5 hectares ( 8 @.@ 6 acres ) of corn were damaged . About 43 @,@ 851 people were affected by the storm , mainly along the Cagayan River . The remnants of Auring brought heavy rains to the flooded areas again on January 7 , triggering several landslides which blocked off roads and damaging power lines , leaving parts of the Catanduanes without power for several hours . Damages from the depression were estimated at PHP 23 million ( $ 498 @,@ 318 USD ) and an estimated 5 @,@ 000 families were left homeless . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The severe flooding on Siargao Island led to the issuance of a state of calamity . In addition to the state of calamity in Siargao Island , 16 villages within Cagayan de Oro City were declared calamity areas . In the wake of Auring , the Department of Social Welfare and Development ( <unk> ) provided family food packets and assistance to flooded areas , valued at PHP 372 @,@ 760 ( $ 8 @,@ 120 USD ) . Relief funds of PHP 292 @,@ 189 @.@ 11 ( $ 6 @,@ 365 USD ) , stockpiles of food valued at PHP 77 @,@ 431 @.@ 2 ( $ 1 @,@ 686 USD ) , and non @-@ food items valued at PHP 413 @,@ 568 ( $ 9 @,@ 009 USD ) were available if needed . Residents who were left homeless in <unk> City were provided with assistance at an estimated cost of PHP 1 @,@ 129 @,@ 870 ( $ 24 @,@ 613 USD ) . 
 The Robinson ’ s Supermarket donated 97 packs of <unk> , 77 packets of <unk> <unk> , 525 packs of <unk> , and 208 cans of carne <unk> ; Cagayan de Oro Hotel and Restaurant Association donated 12 bags of linen ; Nestlé provided 51 boxes of <unk> ; Grains Retailers Confederations of the Philippines sent 30 sacks of rice ; National Transmission Corporation provided nine boxes of assorted canned goods ; Rotary International District <unk> donated six sacks of rice , one box of used clothing , and 40 loaves of bread ; STI Rotary Club of Center Point provided 50 boxes assorted goods and food items ; SM City Cagayan donated 180 family food packs ; <unk> Pharmacy provided one box of assorted medicine ; Xavier Estates Catholic Groups sent assorted clothing and boxes of food ; Bombo Radyo Philippines donated three boxes of bottled water and assorted food items , and <unk> provided 36 sacks of rice , 18 boxes of sardines , and 38 boxes of noodles . 
 = Comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 = 
 Comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 ( formally designated D / 1993 F2 ) was a comet that broke apart in July 1992 and collided with Jupiter in July 1994 , providing the first direct observation of an extraterrestrial collision of Solar System objects . This generated a large amount of coverage in the popular media , and the comet was closely observed by astronomers worldwide . The collision provided new information about Jupiter and highlighted its role in reducing space debris in the inner Solar System . 
 The comet was discovered by astronomers Carolyn and Eugene M. Shoemaker and David Levy . Shoemaker – Levy 9 had been captured by Jupiter and was orbiting the planet at the time . It was located on the night of March 24 , 1993 in a photograph taken with the 40 cm ( 16 in ) Schmidt telescope at the Palomar Observatory in California . It was the first comet observed to be orbiting a planet , and had probably been captured by Jupiter around 20 – 30 years earlier . 
 Calculations showed that its unusual fragmented form was due to a previous closer approach to Jupiter in July 1992 . At that time , the orbit of Shoemaker – Levy 9 passed within Jupiter 's Roche limit , and Jupiter 's tidal forces had acted to pull apart the comet . The comet was later observed as a series of fragments ranging up to 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in diameter . These fragments collided with Jupiter 's southern hemisphere between July 16 and July 22 , 1994 at a speed of approximately 60 km / s ( 37 mi / s ) or 216 @,@ 000 km / h ( 134 @,@ 000 mph ) . The prominent scars from the impacts were more easily visible than the Great Red Spot and persisted for many months . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 While conducting a program of observations designed to uncover near @-@ Earth objects , the Shoemakers and Levy discovered Comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 on the night of March 24 , 1993 in a photograph taken with the 0 @.@ 4 m ( 1 @.@ 3 ft ) Schmidt telescope at the Palomar Observatory in California . The comet was thus a serendipitous discovery , but one that quickly overshadowed the results from their main observing program . 
 Comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 was the ninth periodic comet ( a comet whose orbital period is 200 years or less ) discovered by the Shoemakers and Levy , hence its name . It was their eleventh comet discovery overall including their discovery of two non @-@ periodic comets , which use a different nomenclature . The discovery was announced in IAU Circular <unk> on March 27 , 1993 . 
 The discovery image gave the first hint that comet Shoemaker – Levy 9 was an unusual comet , as it appeared to show multiple nuclei in an elongated region about 50 arcseconds long and 10 arcseconds wide . Brian G. Marsden of the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams noted that the comet lay only about 4 degrees from Jupiter as seen from Earth , and that although this could of course be a line of sight effect , its apparent motion in the sky suggested that it was physically close to it . Because of this , he suggested that the Shoemakers and David Levy had discovered the fragments of a comet that had been disrupted by Jupiter 's gravity . 
 = = Jupiter @-@ orbiting comet = = 
 Orbital studies of the new comet soon revealed that it was orbiting Jupiter rather than the Sun , unlike all other comets known at the time . Its orbit around Jupiter was very loosely bound , with a period of about 2 years and an apoapsis ( the point in the orbit farthest from the planet ) of 0 @.@ 33 astronomical units ( 49 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) . Its orbit around the planet was highly eccentric ( e = 0 @.@ <unk> ) . 
 Tracing back the comet 's orbital motion revealed that it had been orbiting Jupiter for some time . It seems most likely that it was captured from a solar orbit in the early 1970s , although the capture may have occurred as early as the mid @-@ 1960s . Several other observers found images of the comet in precovery images obtained before March 24 , including Kin <unk> from a photograph exposed on March 15 , S. Otomo on March 17 , and a team led by Eleanor Helin from images on March 19 . No precovery images dating back to earlier than March 1993 have been found . Before the comet was captured by Jupiter , it was probably a short @-@ period comet with an aphelion just inside Jupiter 's orbit , and a perihelion interior to the asteroid belt . 
 The volume of space within which an object can be said to orbit Jupiter is defined by Jupiter 's Hill sphere ( also called the Roche sphere ) . When the comet passed Jupiter in the late 1960s or early 1970s , it happened to be near its aphelion , and found itself slightly within Jupiter 's Hill sphere . Jupiter 's gravity nudged the comet towards it . Because the comet 's motion with respect to Jupiter was very small , it fell almost straight toward Jupiter , which is why it ended up on a Jupiter @-@ centric orbit of very high eccentricity – that is to say , the ellipse was nearly flattened out . 
 The comet had apparently passed extremely close to Jupiter on July 7 , 1992 , just over 40 @,@ 000 km ( 25 @,@ 000 mi ) above its cloud tops — a smaller distance than Jupiter 's radius of 70 @,@ 000 km ( 43 @,@ 000 mi ) , and well within the orbit of Jupiter 's innermost moon Metis and the planet 's Roche limit , inside which tidal forces are strong enough to disrupt a body held together only by gravity . Although the comet had approached Jupiter closely before , the July 7 encounter seemed to be by far the closest , and the fragmentation of the comet is thought to have occurred at this time . Each fragment of the comet was denoted by a letter of the alphabet , from " fragment A " through to " fragment W " , a practice already established from previously observed broken @-@ up comets . 
 More exciting for planetary astronomers was that the best orbital calculations suggested that the comet would pass within 45 @,@ 000 km ( 28 @,@ 000 mi ) of the center of Jupiter , a distance smaller than the planet 's radius , meaning that there was an extremely high probability that SL9 would collide with Jupiter in July 1994 . Studies suggested that the train of nuclei would plow into Jupiter 's atmosphere over a period of about five days . 
 = = Predictions for the collision = = 
 The discovery that the comet was likely to collide with Jupiter caused great excitement within the astronomical community and beyond , as astronomers had never before seen two significant Solar System bodies collide . Intense studies of the comet were undertaken , and as its orbit became more accurately established , the possibility of a collision became a certainty . The collision would provide a unique opportunity for scientists to look inside Jupiter 's atmosphere , as the collisions were expected to cause eruptions of material from the layers normally hidden beneath the clouds . 
 Astronomers estimated that the visible fragments of SL9 ranged in size from a few hundred metres to two kilometres across , suggesting that the original comet may have had a nucleus up to 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) across — somewhat larger than Comet Hyakutake , which became very bright when it passed close to the Earth in 1996 . One of the great debates in advance of the impact was whether the effects of the impact of such small bodies would be noticeable from Earth , apart from a flash as they disintegrated like giant meteors . The most optimistic prediction was that large , asymmetric ballistic fireballs would rise above the limb of Jupiter and into sunlight to be visible from Earth . Other suggested effects of the impacts were seismic waves travelling across the planet , an increase in stratospheric haze on the planet due to dust from the impacts , and an increase in the mass of the Jovian ring system . However , given that observing such a collision was completely unprecedented , astronomers were cautious with their predictions of what the event might reveal . 
 = = Impacts = = 
 Anticipation grew as the predicted date for the collisions approached , and astronomers trained terrestrial telescopes on Jupiter . Several space observatories did the same , including the Hubble Space Telescope , the ROSAT X @-@ ray @-@ observing satellite , and significantly the Galileo spacecraft , then on its way to a rendezvous with Jupiter scheduled for 1995 . Although the impacts took place on the side of Jupiter hidden from Earth , Galileo , then at a distance of 1 @.@ 6 AU from the planet , was able to see the impacts as they occurred . Jupiter 's rapid rotation brought the impact sites into view for terrestrial observers a few minutes after the collisions . 
 Two other satellites made observations at the time of the impact : the Ulysses spacecraft , primarily designed for solar observations , was pointed towards Jupiter from its location 2 @.@ 6 AU away , and the distant Voyager 2 probe , some 44 AU from Jupiter and on its way out of the Solar System following its encounter with Neptune in 1989 , was programmed to look for radio emission in the 1 – 390 kHz range . 
 The first impact occurred at 20 : 13 UTC on July 16 , 1994 , when fragment A of the nucleus entered Jupiter 's southern hemisphere at a speed of about 60 km / s . Instruments on Galileo detected a fireball that reached a peak temperature of about 24 @,@ 000 K , compared to the typical Jovian <unk> temperature of about 130 K , before expanding and cooling rapidly to about 1500 K after 40 s . The plume from the fireball quickly reached a height of over 3 @,@ 000 km . A few minutes after the impact fireball was detected , Galileo measured renewed heating , probably due to ejected material falling back onto the planet . Earth @-@ based observers detected the fireball rising over the limb of the planet shortly after the initial impact . 
 Despite published predictions , astronomers had not expected to see the fireballs from the impacts and did not have any idea in advance how visible the other atmospheric effects of the impacts would be from Earth . Observers soon saw a huge dark spot after the first impact . The spot was visible even in very small telescopes , and was about 6 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 700 mi ) ( one Earth radius ) across . This and subsequent dark spots were thought to have been caused by debris from the impacts , and were markedly asymmetric , forming crescent shapes in front of the direction of impact . 
 Over the next six days , 21 distinct impacts were observed , with the largest coming on July 18 at 07 : 33 UTC when fragment G struck Jupiter . This impact created a giant dark spot over 12 @,@ 000 km across , and was estimated to have released an energy equivalent to 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 megatons of TNT ( 600 times the world 's nuclear arsenal ) . Two impacts 12 hours apart on July 19 created impact marks of similar size to that caused by fragment G , and impacts continued until July 22 , when fragment W struck the planet . 
 = = Observations and discoveries = = 
 = = = Chemical studies = = = 
 Observers hoped that the impacts would give them a first glimpse of Jupiter beneath the cloud tops , as lower material was exposed by the comet fragments punching through the upper atmosphere . Spectroscopic studies revealed absorption lines in the Jovian spectrum due to diatomic sulfur ( S2 ) and carbon disulfide ( CS2 ) , the first detection of either in Jupiter , and only the second detection of S2 in any astronomical object . Other molecules detected included ammonia ( NH3 ) and hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) . The amount of sulfur implied by the quantities of these compounds was much greater than the amount that would be expected in a small cometary nucleus , showing that material from within Jupiter was being revealed . Oxygen @-@ bearing molecules such as sulfur dioxide were not detected , to the surprise of astronomers . 
 As well as these molecules , emission from heavy atoms such as iron , magnesium and silicon was detected , with abundances consistent with what would be found in a cometary nucleus . Although a substantial amount of water was detected spectroscopically , it was not as much as predicted beforehand , meaning that either the water layer thought to exist below the clouds was thinner than predicted , or that the cometary fragments did not penetrate deeply enough . The relatively low levels of water were later confirmed by Galileo 's atmospheric probe , which explored Jupiter 's atmosphere directly . 
 = = = Waves = = = 
 As predicted beforehand , the collisions generated enormous waves that swept across Jupiter at speeds of 450 m / s ( 1 @,@ 476 ft / s ) and were observed for over two hours after the largest impacts . The waves were thought to be travelling within a stable layer acting as a waveguide , and some scientists thought the stable layer must lie within the hypothesised tropospheric water cloud . However , other evidence seemed to indicate that the cometary fragments had not reached the water layer , and the waves were instead propagating within the stratosphere . 
 = = = Other observations = = = 
 Radio observations revealed a sharp increase in continuum emission at a wavelength of 21 cm after the largest impacts , which peaked at 120 % of the normal emission from the planet . This was thought to be due to synchrotron radiation , caused by the injection of relativistic electrons — electrons with velocities near the speed of light — into the Jovian magnetosphere by the impacts . 
 About an hour after fragment K entered Jupiter , observers recorded auroral emission near the impact region , as well as at the antipode of the impact site with respect to Jupiter 's strong magnetic field . The cause of these emissions was difficult to establish due to a lack of knowledge of Jupiter 's internal magnetic field and of the geometry of the impact sites . One possible explanation was that upwardly accelerating shock waves from the impact accelerated charged particles enough to cause auroral emission , a phenomenon more typically associated with fast @-@ moving solar wind particles striking a planetary atmosphere near a magnetic pole . 
 Some astronomers had suggested that the impacts might have a noticeable effect on the Io torus , a torus of high @-@ energy particles connecting Jupiter with the highly volcanic moon Io . High resolution spectroscopic studies found that variations in the ion density , rotational velocity , and temperatures at the time of impact and afterwards were within the normal limits . 
 = = Post @-@ impact analysis = = 
 Several models were devised to compute the density and size of Shoemaker – Levy 9 . Its average density was calculated to be about 0 @.@ 5 g cm − 3 ; the breakup of a much less dense comet would not have resembled the observed string of objects . The size of the parent comet was calculated to be about 1 @.@ 8 km in diameter . These predictions were among the few that were actually confirmed by subsequent observation . 
 One of the surprises of the impacts was the small amount of water revealed compared to prior predictions . Before the impact , models of Jupiter 's atmosphere had indicated that the break @-@ up of the largest fragments would occur at atmospheric pressures of anywhere from 30 kilopascals to a few tens of megapascals ( from 0 @.@ 3 to a few hundred bar ) , with some predictions that the comet would penetrate a layer of water and create a bluish shroud over that region of Jupiter . 
 Astronomers did not observe large amounts of water following the collisions , and later impact studies found that fragmentation and destruction of the cometary fragments in an ' airburst ' probably occurred at much higher altitudes than previously expected , with even the largest fragments being destroyed when the pressure reached 250 kPa ( 36 psi ) , well above the expected depth of the water layer . The smaller fragments were probably destroyed before they even reached the cloud layer . 
 = = Longer @-@ term effects = = 
 The visible scars from the impacts could be seen on Jupiter for many months . They were extremely prominent , and observers described them as even more easily visible than the Great Red Spot . A search of historical observations revealed that the spots were probably the most prominent transient features ever seen on the planet , and that although the Great Red Spot is notable for its striking color , no spots of the size and darkness of those caused by the SL9 impacts have ever been recorded before . 
 Spectroscopic observers found that ammonia and carbon disulfide persisted in the atmosphere for at least fourteen months after the collisions , with a considerable amount of ammonia being present in the stratosphere as opposed to its normal location in the troposphere . 
 <unk> , the atmospheric temperature dropped to normal levels much more quickly at the larger impact sites than at the smaller sites : at the larger impact sites , temperatures were elevated over a region 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 km ( 9 @,@ 300 to 12 @,@ 400 mi ) wide , but dropped back to normal levels within a week of the impact . At smaller sites , temperatures 10 K higher than the surroundings persisted for almost two weeks . Global stratospheric temperatures rose immediately after the impacts , then fell to below pre @-@ impact temperatures 2 – 3 weeks afterwards , before rising slowly to normal temperatures . 
 = = Frequency of impacts = = 
 SL9 is not unique in having orbited Jupiter for a time ; five comets , ( including <unk> / <unk> , <unk> / Kushida – Muramatsu , and 111P / Helin – Roman – Crockett ) are known to have been temporarily captured by the planet . Cometary orbits around Jupiter are unstable , as they will be highly elliptical and likely to be strongly perturbed by the Sun 's gravity at <unk> ( the furthest point on the orbit from the planet ) . 
 By far the most massive planet in the Solar System , Jupiter can capture objects relatively frequently , but the size of SL9 makes it a rarity : one post @-@ impact study estimated that comets 0 @.@ 3 km in diameter impact the planet once in approximately 500 years and those 1 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) in diameter do so just once in every 6 @,@ 000 years . 
 There is very strong evidence that comets have previously been fragmented and collided with Jupiter and its satellites . During the Voyager missions to the planet , planetary scientists identified 13 crater chains on Callisto and three on Ganymede , the origin of which was initially a mystery . Crater chains seen on the Moon often radiate from large craters , and are thought to be caused by secondary impacts of the original ejecta , but the chains on the Jovian moons did not lead back to a larger crater . The impact of SL9 strongly implied that the chains were due to trains of disrupted cometary fragments crashing into the satellites . 
 = = = Impact of July 19 , 2009 = = = 
 On July 19 , 2009 , a new black spot about the size of the Pacific Ocean appeared in Jupiter 's southern hemisphere . Thermal infrared measurements showed the impact site was warm and spectroscopic analysis detected the production of excess hot ammonia and silica @-@ rich dust in the upper regions of Jupiter 's atmosphere . Scientists have concluded that another impact event had occurred , but this time a more compact and strong object , probably a small undiscovered asteroid , was the cause . 
 = = Jupiter as a " cosmic vacuum cleaner " = = 
 The impact of SL9 highlighted Jupiter 's role as a " cosmic vacuum cleaner " ( or in deference to the ancients ' planetary correspondences to the major organs in the human body , a " cosmic liver " ) for the inner Solar System . The planet 's strong gravitational influence leads to many small comets and asteroids colliding with the planet , and the rate of cometary impacts on Jupiter is thought to be between 2000 @-@ 8000 times higher than the rate on Earth . 
 The extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous period is generally thought to have been caused by the Cretaceous – Paleogene impact event , which created the Chicxulub crater , demonstrating that impacts are a serious threat to life on Earth . Astronomers have speculated that without Jupiter to mop up potential impactors , extinction events might have been more frequent on Earth , and complex life might not have been able to develop . This is part of the argument used in the Rare Earth hypothesis . 
 In 2009 , it was shown that the presence of a smaller planet at Jupiter 's position in the Solar System might increase the impact rate of comets on the Earth significantly . A planet of Jupiter 's mass still seems to provide increased protection against asteroids , but the total effect on all orbital bodies within the Solar System is unclear . Computer simulations in 2016 have continued to erode the theory . 
 = 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament = 
 The 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament was a professional wrestling single @-@ elimination X Cup Tournament produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion . It was the second @-@ ever Super X Cup tournament and the last held as of 2016 . The competition began on July 19 , 2005 and concluded on August 14 , 2005 at TNA 's Sacrifice pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event . Then @-@ TNA X Division Champion Christopher Daniels called the contest the " Christopher Daniels Invitational " . 
 The tournament featured eight TNA wrestlers : A.J. Styles , Alex Shelley , Chris Sabin , Michael Shane , Petey Williams , Samoa Joe , Shocker , and Sonjay Dutt . The event was preceded by a four @-@ way qualification match at TNA 's No Surrender PPV event on July 17 , 2005 in which Dutt defeated Elix Skipper , Mikey Batts and Shark Boy . Samoa Joe and A.J. Styles passed through the quarterfinals and the semifinals to make it to the tournament final at Sacrifice . Joe defeated Styles at the event , thus winning the Super X Cup trophy and becoming number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . Despite losing to Joe , Styles was added to the title match Joe received for winning the competition due to storyline reasons . TNA held a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship between Daniels , Joe , and Styles at the Unbreakable PPV event on September 11 , 2005 , which Styles won to become the new TNA X Division Champion . 
 Canadian Online Explorer columnist Corey David Lacroix reviewed Sacrifice , giving the Super X Cup final a rating of 8 out of 10 . Lacorix said the final " could have been a certified Match of the Year contender if someone in the back had not decided to make Daniels interfere in this contest . " He went on to say the match " was a thing of beauty that got stained . " Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the Super X Cup final four out of five stars . Keller wrote that it was a " four @-@ star match that was begging to be given an extra ten minutes to be a match of the year candidate . " 
 = = Background = = 
 TNA editor Bill Banks announced the tournament in July 2005 in his " Bank Shot " column , adding that the final would be held at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event on August 14 , 2005 . The 2005 tournament was the second Super X Cup held . The first was the 2003 TNA Super X Cup Tournament , won by Chris Sabin in September 2003 . Winners of Super X Cup tournaments receive trophies and a future TNA X Division Championship match . 
 TNA announced the final list of eight participants in July 2005 : A.J. Styles , Alex Shelley , Sabin , Michael Shane , Petey Williams , Samoa Joe , Shocker , and Sonjay Dutt . Dutt defeated Elix Skipper , Mikey Batts , and Shark Boy in a Four Way Super X Cup qualification match on July 27 , 2005 at TNA 's No Surrender PPV event on July 17 , 2005 to enter the tournament . 
 = = Tournament = = 
 The 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament featured seven matches involving numerous wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes and less distinguishable characters in scripted events that built tension and culminated in wrestling matches . 
 The tournament consisted of three rounds : the quarterfinals , semifinals , and finals . The quarterfinals and the semifinals took place on TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , while the finals were held at Sacrifice . The quarterfinals were taped on July 19 and aired on the July 22 and July 29 episodes of Impact ! . The semifinals were also taped on July 19 before airing on August 5 and August 10 episodes of Impact ! Then @-@ TNA X Division Champion Christopher Daniels provided commentary for each encounter . Daniels nicknamed the competition the " Christopher Daniels Invitational " . 
 Quarterfinals 
 In the first of two quarterfinal matches aired on July 22 , Samoa Joe fought Sonjay Dutt in a match lasting 9 minutes and 32 seconds . Joe won after forcing Dutt to submit with his signature Coquina Clutch submission hold . The second bout pitted A.J. Styles against Michael Shane . Before the match began , Shane announced he was changing his stage name to Matt Bentley . Styles won after America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) interfered . Harris distracted the referee , allowing Storm to kick Bentley in the face . 
 The third and fourth quarterfinal bouts aired on July 29 . Alex Shelley fought Shocker in the first match of the episode , winning with a pinning combination at 5 minutes and 28 seconds . Petey Williams faced Chris Sabin in the second match . A @-@ 1 interfered during the encounter by distracting the referee and tossing Williams a hockey stick , which Williams used to hit Sabin across the stomach . He then performed his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver , forcing Sabin 's head into the mat and winning the match at 11 minutes and 45 seconds . 
 Semifinals 
 Joe , Shelley , Styles , and Williams advanced to the semifinals . The first match took place on the August 5 episode of Impact ! between Joe and Shelley . Joe slammed Shelley back @-@ first into the mat with his signature Muscle Buster maneuver and then choked him unconscious with the Coquina Clutch at 9 minutes and 4 seconds to win and advance to the finals . In the second semifinal match on August 10 , Styles defeated Williams with a small package pin at 9 minutes and 19 seconds . 
 Finals 
 The tournament final between A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe took place on August 14 at Sacrifice . As Styles laid against the ring ropes at the beginning of the match , Joe ran across the ring and kicked him in the face , causing him to fly out of the ring and crash down on the floor . Joe followed by diving through the ring ropes and smashing Styles in the face with his forearm as Styles reached his feet . Joe later held Styles in an STF submission hold , which he was forced to release when Styles touched the bottom rope . Styles then gained the advantage with a dropkick and front @-@ flip splash from the ring ropes . He held Joe on his shoulders before twisting him off into a powerbomb , or what he calls a Rack Bomb . During the move , referee Andrew Thomas was kicked in the face and knocked unconscious , allowing Daniels to interfere in the contest . Daniels attacked Styles and attempted to hit Joe with the X Division Title belt before Styles threw Daniels from the ring . Joe followed by lifting Styles up and performing his Muscle Buster maneuver , then placing Styles in his Coquina Clutch submission hold . Styles submitted to the move as the referee came to , giving the victory to Joe . The final bout lasted 15 minutes and 15 seconds . 
 Joe 's win gave him the Super X Cup trophy and made him the number @-@ one contender for the TNA X Division Championship . He earned a title match against Daniels at TNA 's Unbreakable PPV event on September 11 . 
 Tournament bracket 
 = = Reception = = 
 James Caldwell of Pro Wrestling Torch called the Samoa Joe versus Sonjay Dutt encounter in the quarterfinals " another phenomenal match involving Samoa Joe , " and wrote that it was " another reason to build the X Division – and the promotion – around Joe . " Caldwell also praised the A.J. Styles versus Matt Bentley bout in the quarterfinals , calling it a " solid , methodical match that told a story in the ring . " Canadian Online Explorer journalist Chris Sokol said the Styles versus Bentley contest was a " great match . " Caldwell said of the July 29 quarterfinal between Alex Shelley and Shocker that " with Shelley winning the match using Shocker 's traditional roll up pinning combination , Shelley looked strong coming out of the match for outsmarting his opponent . " He went on to say if the bout had lasted longer it " could have allowed the match to tell a more complete story , but the match was good for delivering the intended purpose . " Sokol said in a column about the show that it was an " excellent match " . On the quarterfinal between Sabin and Williams , Caldwell said the two men " put together a solid finish that was ruined by yet another round of outside interference by Team Canada " . Sokol called it " another excellent match . " 
 Reviews of the semifinal matches on August 5 and 10 were also generally positive . Caldwell said the Joe versus Shelley contest was " another outstanding Samoa Joe match . " Sokol said the Styles versus Williams bout was a " back and forth match " , and Caldwell said it was " a solid match " that was " nothing spectacular or particularly breathtaking , but it didn 't need to be because the crowd was into the match simply because of who was in the ring . " He went on to say that the wrestlers " didn 't need to pull of a four star match with amazing spots to wow the crowd because they had the audience captivated from the get @-@ go . " 
 Canadian Online Explorer columnist Corey David Lacroix reviewed Sacrifice , giving the Super X Cup Final an 8 out of 10 rating . Lacorix wrote that the Super X Cup Final " could have been a certified Match of the Year contender if someone in the back had not decided to make Daniels interfere in this contest . " He went on to say the match " was a thing of beauty that got stained . " Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the Super X Cup Final four stars out of five , calling it a " four star match that was begging to be given an extra ten minutes to be a match of the year candidate . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A.J. Styles suffered a tendon injury during his title bout with Samoa Joe at Sacrifice . TNA management kept him out of the following Impact ! tapings , hoping to keep him rested and not risk any further injury despite expectations that he would not be sidelined long . Styles , however , canceled an appearance in the Ring of Honor promotion on August 20 . He came back for a promotion on August 27 at their Dragon 's Gate Invasion event , losing a match to CIMA . 
 After winning the 2005 TNA Super X Cup tournament , Samoa Joe was set to face Christopher Daniels for the TNA X Division Championship at Unbreakable . On the August 19 episode of Impact ! , however , Styles assaulted Daniels in an act of revenge for Daniels ' interference at Sacrifice . Daniels demanded Styles be suspended for this action . NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko denied the request , and instead added Styles to the planned encounter at Unbreakable , thus making it a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship . TNA promoted the match as an X Division " Dream Bout " pitting the top competitors in the division against each other for the championship . Styles won the match and the title by pinning Daniels . Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer bestowed a rare 5 Star match rating to the bout between A.J. Styles , Christopher Daniels and Samoa Joe . 
 The three @-@ way match began an extended storyline involving its participants . At TNA 's Bound for Glory PPV event on October 23 , Styles defeated Daniels in a 30 @-@ minute Iron Man match to retain the TNA X Division Championship . TNA then held a Four @-@ on @-@ Four Elimination X match at the Genesis PPV event on November 13 . In that match , the team of Alex Shelley , Daniels , Joe , and Roderick Strong defeated the team of Austin Aries , Chris Sabin , Matt Bentley , and Sonjay Dutt . After the contest , Joe assaulted Daniels , performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver on him twice , the second time on a steel chair . Daniels suffered an injury in the storyline in the attack , sidelining him until December 11 's TNA Turning Point PPV event . At that event , Daniels saved Styles from an assault by Joe following Joe 's victory over Styles to win the TNA X Division Championship . Daniels then challenged Joe for the championship at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on January 15 , 2006 , but Joe retained the title . At TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 12 , 2006 , Daniels , Joe , and Styles competed in another three @-@ way match for the TNA X Division Championship ; Joe gained the pinfall to retain the title . The three competed again in a three @-@ way Ultimate X match for the championship at TNA 's Destination X PPV event on March 12 , 2006 . Daniels won , becoming the new TNA X Division Champion . The rivalry ended on the April 13 , 2006 episode of Impact ! when Joe defeated Daniels to win back the championship . 
 Due to the popularity of the rivalry between the three in 2005 and 2006 , TNA held another three @-@ way match at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on November 15 , 2009 , this time for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Then @-@ champion Styles retained his title , beating Daniels and Joe . Styles went on to successfully defend the title against Daniels at the following TNA PPV event , Final Resolution , on December 20 , 2009 . 
 Most of the wrestlers involved in the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament , excluding Bentley , Styles , and Joe , went on to compete in the Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament . In that contest , eight tag teams were drawn at random , and veteran wrestlers were matched with younger wrestlers . Shelley partnered with Sean Waltman , Sabin and Shocker were placed together , Dutt was placed with Ron Killings , and Kip James and Petey Williams teamed up in the tournament . Sabin and Shocker ended faced Shelley and Waltman in the tournament final on the September 9 , 2005 episode of Impact ! . Shelley and Waltman won to win the Chris Candido Cup . 
 = Clarke Carlisle = 
 Clarke James Carlisle ( born 14 October 1979 ) is an English former professional footballer who played as a defender and was chairman of the Professional Footballers ' Association . 
 Born in Preston , he began playing football at a young age , taking inspiration from his father who played semi @-@ professionally . Carlisle represented his home county of Lancashire at youth level . The start of his professional career was his Football League debut for Blackpool in September 1997 . He moved to Queens Park Rangers in May 2000 . In the same year , Carlisle won three caps for the England under @-@ 21 national team . He missed a number of games for Queens Park Rangers due to a posterior cruciate ligament injury which at one stage led doctors to believe that his career was over . He then missed one month of the 2003 – 04 season because of an alcohol @-@ related problem , and left Queens Park Rangers at the end of that season . In the summer of 2004 , he joined Leeds United on a free transfer . 
 Carlisle spent just one season with Leeds United before signing for Championship side Watford in August 2005 . In the 2005 – 06 season , his first with Watford , the team finished third in the division and achieved promotion to the Premier League via the play @-@ offs . However , a thigh injury caused Carlisle to miss the majority of the team 's inaugural top @-@ flight season . In March 2007 he had a one @-@ month loan spell at Luton Town . In August 2007 , Burnley manager Steve Cotterill bought Carlisle from Watford for a transfer fee of £ 200 @,@ 000 . In the 2008 – 09 season he played over 40 matches as Burnley reached the semi @-@ finals of the League Cup and finished fifth in the league , earning a place in the play @-@ offs . Carlisle was named man of the match for his performance in the play @-@ off final as Burnley beat Sheffield United 1 – 0 to return to the top tier of English football for the first time in 33 years . 
 An imposing figure in the centre of defence thanks to his stature , Carlisle also provided an attacking threat from set pieces . He is a practising Christian and regularly attends church . He attended Balshaw 's Church of England High School where he attained 10 A @-@ grades at GCSE and studied mathematics and politics at A @-@ level , and in 2002 was awarded the title of " Britain 's <unk> Footballer " in a TV game show . He has been an ambassador for the Kick It Out campaign and is a former Chairman of the Management Committee of the Professional Footballers ' Association . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Carlisle was born in Preston , Lancashire . He grew up in the town with his parents , Mervin and Rose ( née Edgar ) . As a teenager , he attended Balshaw 's Church of England High School in Leyland and attained 10 A @-@ grades at GCSE . He went on to study A @-@ level mathematics and politics at Ealing , Hammersmith and West London College while he was unable to play football due to an injury . Carlisle has a degree in Professional Sports Writing and Broadcasting from Staffordshire University , and has also considered taking up teaching work after his football career is over . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Carlisle was inspired to become a footballer by his father , Mervin , who played semi @-@ professionally for Morecambe and Southport . Carlisle started playing at a young age and represented Lancashire at under @-@ 15 level , before being signed by Blackpool where he became a trainee with the youth team . Carlisle signed a professional contract with the club on 13 August 1997 and moved into the first team squad . On 2 September 1997 , he made his debut for Blackpool in the side 's 4 – 3 victory over Wrexham in the Second Division . He scored his first goal as a professional footballer with the 90th @-@ minute winner in the following match , a 2 – 1 win against Carlisle United at Blackpool 's home ground , Bloomfield Road . He was shown the first red card of his career in Blackpool 's 1 – 0 victory against Wigan Athletic in the quarter @-@ final of the Football League Trophy on 27 January 1998 . He played 12 matches in his first season , scoring two goals . 
 The following season , he played 43 games as Blackpool achieved a 14th @-@ placed finish in the Second Division . His single goal of the campaign came in a 3 – 1 victory over Stoke City at the Victoria Ground . In the 1999 – 2000 season , he played 51 times and scored five goals as Blackpool finished 22nd and were relegated to the Third Division . He scored on his 93rd and final league appearance for the club in a 1 – 1 draw with Oldham Athletic at Boundary Park . Despite the team 's relegation , Carlisle 's strong defensive performances during his three years at Blackpool attracted the attention of Iain Dowie , who at the time was a scout for Queens Park Rangers . 
 = = = Queens Park Rangers = = = 
 Dowie recommended Carlisle to Queens Park Rangers manager Gerry Francis , who paid a transfer fee of £ 250 @,@ 000 to sign him on 25 May 2000 . He played his first game for the side on 12 August 2000 in the 0 – 0 draw with Birmingham City at Loftus Road . He made a further 31 appearances in the 2000 – 01 season and scored three times , earning himself a call @-@ up to the England national under @-@ 21 team . However , his season was cut short on 31 January 2001 , when he suffered his first major injury after a tackle by Rufus <unk> during the 2 – 0 defeat to Fulham . It was found that Carlisle had torn his posterior cruciate ligament , an injury which kept him sidelined for a year and caused doctors to believe that his career might be over . While he was out of action , Queens Park Rangers suffered relegation to the Second Division after finishing 23rd in the league . Soon after the injury he attempted suicide , and years later was diagnosed with major depressive disorder . Upon his return to football , Carlisle was injured again in a reserve team match against Bristol City , sparking fears that he had aggravated his previous injury . The damage proved not to be particularly severe , although it delayed his return to training by a further month . 
 After missing the entire 2001 – 02 campaign , Carlisle returned to competitive football on 7 September 2002 in Queens Park Rangers ' 4 – 0 victory over Mansfield Town . He scored two goals in 41 matches in the 2002 – 03 season , helping the side to a fourth @-@ placed finish and a spot in the Second Division play @-@ offs . The club reached the 2003 Football League Second Division play @-@ off Final , but were defeated 1 – 0 by Cardiff City at the Millennium Stadium on 25 May 2003 . During the following season , Carlisle developed personal problems , including an alcohol addiction , although he continued to play for a number of months . In September 2003 , as the team were travelling to Colchester United for a league fixture , he was found drunk by manager Ian Holloway . He subsequently missed one month of the season after being admitted to Sporting Chance , a clinic run by former England international footballer Tony Adams , for 28 days for treatment for alcohol @-@ related problems . He later had counselling for the problem before returning to action in October 2003 . Upon his return to the side , Carlisle won the Second Division Player of the Month award for November 2003 . He scored one goal in 39 games in 2003 – 04 as Queens Park Rangers finished as runners @-@ up in the league , achieving promotion to the Championship . Carlisle 's contract with Queens Park Rangers ended at the conclusion of the 2003 – 04 campaign . 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 In June 2004 , Carlisle agreed to join recently relegated Championship outfit Leeds United on a free transfer . He was offered a new contract by Queens Park Rangers , but he was keen to return to northern England and cut short his summer holiday in Tenerife to sign for the West Yorkshire outfit on a two @-@ year contract . His contract with Leeds began on 1 July 2004 , and he made his debut for the club in the 1 – 1 draw with Nottingham Forest on 21 August . He scored his first goal for Leeds two games later , netting the first goal in the side 's 3 – 0 victory against Coventry City . He was a regular in the team during the first half of the season , playing in every match from the start of September until the end of November . However , he then experienced another major injury set @-@ back , tearing his ankle ligaments during the 1 – 0 defeat to Rotherham United on 29 November 2004 , an injury which left him out of action for a number of weeks . 
 When fit again , Carlisle found it difficult to break into the first team as his place in the centre of defence had been taken by Matthew <unk> . His return came on 28 December 2004 , when he was brought on as an 80th @-@ minute substitute for Frazer Richardson in the 2 – 1 win against Plymouth Argyle . He started the next league match , against Coventry City , but was shown a red card late on in the 2 – 1 victory at Highfield Road . After his return from suspension , he was dropped from the team , making just a handful of substitute appearances in the following two months . Carlisle regained his place in the team towards the end of the season , starting in each of the final four matches of the campaign . He left Leeds in the summer of 2005 , having spent one season at the club , playing 38 matches and scoring four times for the side as they reached the third round of the League Cup and attained a 14th @-@ placed finish in the league . At the end of the 2004 – 05 campaign it was revealed that two clubs , Watford and Stoke City , were both competing to sign Carlisle . Leeds United accepted bids of £ 100 @,@ 000 from both clubs but Carlisle chose to sign for Watford , and he agreed a three @-@ year contract with the club on 5 August 2005 . The deal taking him to Vicarage Road included a clause in his contract stipulating that he would not be played against Leeds in the following season . 
 = = = Watford and Luton Town = = = 
 Watford manager Aidy Boothroyd , who had been a coach at Leeds during the previous season , was pleased with the signing , stating that Carlisle was " exactly the type of defender I wanted " . Carlisle was placed straight into Watford 's starting line @-@ up and played his first game for his new club on 6 August 2005 , but he could not prevent the side losing 2 – 1 to Preston North End at Vicarage Road . On 29 August 2005 , Carlisle scored his first goal for the club , claiming the winning header in a 2 – 1 victory over Derby County at Pride Park . Soon after , Carlisle scored two goals in a competitive match for the first time in his career , grabbing both in Watford 's 2 – 1 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the second round of the League Cup . 
 On 4 November 2005 , Wolverhampton Wanderers manager Glenn Hoddle accused Carlisle of stamping on goalkeeper Michael Oakes in the match the previous weekend , and threatened to report him to the Football Association . However , the referee did not show Carlisle a red or yellow card during the match , and no further action was taken against the player . During the 2005 – 06 campaign , Carlisle made 35 appearances and five three goals , helping Watford to achieve a place in the play @-@ offs after finishing third in the Championship . However , towards the end of the season he suffered yet another injury , being forced off the pitch in Watford 's penultimate league match away at Queens Park Rangers . The thigh problem caused him to be unavailable for the play @-@ offs as Watford defeated Leeds 3 – 0 at the Millennium Stadium to win promotion to the FA Premier League . 
 The injury forced Carlisle to miss the first eight months of the 2006 – 07 Premier League season , and he eventually returned to full training in February 2007 . He played in two reserve team matches for Watford in order to regain some fitness , hoping to break into the first team and make his Premier League debut . On 2 March 2007 , Carlisle joined local rivals Luton Town on a one @-@ month emergency loan deal in an attempt to return to full match fitness . He made his debut for Luton the following day in the 3 – 2 away defeat to Wolverhampton Wanderers in the Championship , coming on as a substitute for Matthew Spring , who had himself joined the club from Watford earlier in the season after failing to break into the first team . Carlisle went on to play five games for Luton . He made his final appearance on 31 March 2007 , in a 0 – 0 draw with Burnley at Turf Moor , before returning to Watford on 2 April 2007 . He finally played his first Premier League match on 9 April 2007 , starting in the 4 – 2 victory over Portsmouth . He was selected to play in the team 's following match , an FA Cup semi @-@ final against Manchester United , but despite being named man of the match for his performance , Watford were defeated 4 – 1 at Villa Park . Carlisle went on to play in Watford 's following three league games of the season as their relegation back to the Championship was confirmed after a 1 – 1 draw with Manchester City at Vicarage Road . 
 = = = Burnley and loan spells = = = 
 On 14 August 2007 , Steve Cotterill , manager of fellow Championship club Burnley , made an offer of £ 200 @,@ 000 for Carlisle , who signed a three @-@ year contract at Turf Moor two days later . Helped along by the club captain Steven Caldwell , Carlisle settled in well at Burnley . Two days after signing , he made his debut for his new club in the 2 – 0 defeat away to Scunthorpe United . Carlisle scored his first goal for Burnley on 22 September 2007 , netting a stoppage time minute equaliser with an overhead kick in the 2 – 2 draw with Bristol City at Ashton Gate . On 28 September 2007 , the day before a Championship match , he was involved in a serious car crash after spinning and crashing into a ditch causing his car to be written off . Steve Cotterill praised Carlisle 's character for playing the next day in the 1 – 1 draw with Crystal Palace . He and Caldwell formed a solid defensive partnership and played most matches of the season together . Carlisle was named in the official Team of the Week for his performance in Burnley 's 3 – 1 away win at Charlton Athletic . His partnership with Caldwell was broken towards the end of the campaign as Carlisle was given suspensions after being sent off twice in his last four games of the season , first in the 1 – 2 loss to Preston and then in the last match of the season , a 0 – 5 defeat at Crystal Palace . Carlisle ended the 2007 – 08 season with two goals in 35 appearances . 
 The 2008 – 09 campaign was Burnley 's first full season with Owen Coyle as manager . Carlisle managed to keep his place in the side under the new regime and was a regular fixture in the team for the first six months of the season . However , he was dropped from the side for the match against Charlton on 31 January 2009 due to a lack of form . He remained out of the team for the whole of February 2009 . He made his return to action on 3 March 2009 , starting in the centre of defence in the 1 – 0 win over his old team , Blackpool , at Bloomfield Road . On his next league appearance he scored Burnley 's first goal in a 4 – 2 victory against Crystal Palace at Turf Moor . He went on to score three further goals in the last two months of the season , getting his name on the scoresheet against Nottingham Forest , Southampton and his former team , Queens Park Rangers . His goals helped Burnley to a fifth @-@ placed finish in the Championship , and a place in the play @-@ offs . He played in both legs of the semi @-@ final against Reading as the side won 3 – 0 on aggregate to secure a place in the play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium . Carlisle was handed the man of the match award for his performance as Burnley triumphed 1 – 0 against Sheffield United to earn promotion to the Premier League for the 2009 – 10 season . 
 Prior to the start of the campaign , Carlisle stated his belief that Burnley could avoid relegation back to the Championship . He was selected in the team to play Burnley 's first top @-@ flight match in 33 years on 15 August 2009 , when the side were defeated 2 – 0 by Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium . He also played in the following match as Burnley recorded their first ever Premier League victory , a 1 – 0 win over reigning champions Manchester United at Turf Moor . During the early part of the season , he formed a defensive pairing with new signing André <unk> . He was reunited with Caldwell in the centre of defence for the 2 – 1 victory over Birmingham on 3 October 2009 . In the away loss to Wolverhampton Wanderers on 20 December 2009 , Carlisle suffered a groin injury which kept him sidelined over the Christmas period . After over a month out of the Burnley side with the injury , he made his first start under new manager Brian Laws in the 1 – 0 defeat to Bolton Wanderers on 26 January 2010 . Although the team was relegated from the Premier League at the end of the season , Carlisle was one of several players offered a new contract , and he signed a two @-@ year extension in May 2010 . 
 In the first away match of the 2010 – 11 season , he scored an injury @-@ time equaliser against Ipswich Town ; the goal was Burnley 's first from a corner kick for 15 months . After serving a three @-@ match suspension in October 2010 following a red card in the 1 – 1 draw away at Millwall , Carlisle returned to the side for the League Cup tie against Aston Villa and scored an 89th @-@ minute equaliser to take the match to extra time . He made 41 appearances during the campaign but was not deemed a first @-@ choice player by new manager Eddie Howe , and in July 2011 he joined his hometown club Preston North End on loan for the duration of the 2011 – 12 season . 
 Carlisle made his Preston debut in the opening match of the campaign , a 4 – 2 home defeat against Colchester on 6 August 2011 . Three games later , he scored his first goal for the club , netting the opening goal from a corner kick in the 2 – 0 away win over Chesterfield . He was a regular starter for Preston during the opening months of the season and also played in the cup competitions as the side reached the third round of the League Cup before being eliminated by Southampton and progressed to the same stage of the Football League Trophy with penalty shoot @-@ out victories over Morecambe and Rochdale . He was handed a one @-@ match ban after receiving his fifth yellow card of the campaign in the FA Cup first round defeat to Southend United on 22 November 2011 . Preston manager Phil Brown brought in Jamie McCombe on loan as cover for Carlisle , and the Huddersfield Town loanee kept his place in the starting line @-@ up throughout December 2011 . Carlisle returned to the Preston team for the visit to Rochdale on 2 January 2012 , when he was selected to play alongside Craig Morgan by caretaker managers Graham Alexander and David Unsworth . He played five times during that month , scoring on his 27th and final appearance for the club in the 1 – 2 loss to Yeovil Town . Following the appointment of Graham Westley as Preston manager , Carlisle struggled to fit the new training regime in with his commitments as chairman of the Professional Footballers ' Association and his loan deal was cancelled by mutual consent on 31 January 2012 . 
 Later the same day , Carlisle signed for League Two side Northampton Town , managed by former Watford boss Aidy Boothroyd , on loan for the remainder of the season . He made his first start for Northampton in the 1 – 0 win over AFC Wimbledon at the <unk> Stadium on 14 February 2012 . Carlisle was appointed captain upon his arrival at the club and was a regular first team player , often playing alongside fellow centre @-@ back Kelvin Langmead . He scored his first goal for the side in the 3 – 1 home defeat to Bradford City on 14 April 2012 . Carlisle played 18 matches and scored one goal for Northampton during his three months with the club , making his final appearance in the final game of the campaign , a 1 – 1 draw away at Rotherham . He was released by Burnley in May 2012 after the expiry of his contract . 
 = = = York City and Northampton Town return = = = 
 Carlisle signed for newly promoted League Two side York City on 30 August 2012 on a contract lasting until January 2013 , having previously turned down a contract offer from Northampton . He made his debut two days later in York 's 3 – 1 victory at home to Oxford United . On 19 November 2012 , Carlisle re @-@ signed for Northampton on loan until January 2013 , when he would sign permanently , having made 14 appearances for York . He made his second debut the following day in Northampton 's 3 – 0 home win over Morecambe . After making five appearances on loan , Carlisle completed his permanent move to Northampton on a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year contract on 4 January 2013 . He played for Northampton in their 3 – 0 defeat to Bradford in the 2013 Football League Two play @-@ off Final at Wembley on 18 May 2013 . 
 On 23 May 2013 , Carlisle announced his retirement from playing . 
 = = International career = = 
 While playing for Queens Park Rangers , Carlisle was selected to play for the England national under @-@ 21 team on three occasions . He was called up to the squad by Howard Wilkinson , and made his debut for his country on 31 August 2000 , coming on as a substitute in England 's 6 – 1 friendly victory over Georgia at the Riverside Stadium in Middlesbrough . His second appearance for England , also from the substitutes ' bench , came in a 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualifying match on 6 October 2000 in the 1 – 1 draw with Germany at Pride Park . He played his third and final game for England four days later , again coming on as a substitute in the 2 – 2 draw with Finland at the <unk> <unk> stadium in <unk> . Despite playing well in the second half of the match , he was not selected for the under @-@ 21 team again . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Carlisle 's predominant playing position is as a centre @-@ back and he has been described as a " defensive lynchpin " . He has stated that as a youngster , he modelled his style of play on defenders such as Steve Bruce and Gary Pallister . However , he says that their style was too " ruthless " for modern football , and he now attempts to read the opponents ' attacking plays . He is not known for his pace , and this has caused him some disciplinary problems as he has received eight red cards during his career . Former Leeds United teammate Michael Duberry described Carlisle as a " strong " defender . Carlisle is recognised as being a highly intelligent footballer , and is often seen as an imposing figure in the centre of the defence thanks to his 6 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) stature . He also looks to use his size to cause an attacking threat from set pieces such as free kicks and corners , and scored 39 goals in his career . 
 = = PFA roles = = 
 Carlisle is an ambassador for the Kick It Out scheme , which campaigns for inclusion and equality in football . He is also currently on the Management Committee of the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) , and it was announced on 17 November 2010 that Carlisle would succeed Chris Powell as the chairman of the PFA . As part of his work with the PFA , he collects the views of his fellow professionals and reports back to the committee . He also visits local schools to give talks to the students . Carlisle was among those who criticised FIFA president Sepp Blatter following his comments in November 2011 that racism was no longer a problem in football . In February 2012 , he was part of a PFA delegation that met with British Prime Minister David Cameron to discuss the issues of racism and homophobia in the sport . 
 = = Media work = = 
 In October 2009 , Carlisle made his first appearance on the BBC television football programme Match of the Day 2 . He has since appeared as a pundit for Sky Sports and ITV Sport during numerous televised football matches . Carlisle has made two appearances on the BBC panel debate show Question Time , becoming the first footballer to appear on the programme . In July 2012 , he presented a documentary on BBC Three titled Is Football Racist ? , in which he interviewed former footballers Stan Collymore , Chris Hughton and John Barnes about their experiences of racism during their careers , as well as investigating the history of racism in English football on the pitch and in the stands . He also presented a second documentary for BBC Three , Football 's Suicide Secret , on the issue of mental health in football on 9 July 2013 . He published his autobiography , You Don 't Know Me , But ... A Footballer 's Life in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Carlisle is of Dominican descent . His grandfather , James Carlisle , was born in Dominica but he travelled and now resides in England . From an early age , Carlisle was encouraged to follow Christianity by his parents . He adopted those beliefs , and became a regular churchgoer during his time at Watford . Carlisle is married to Gemma , whom he met just prior to his admission to the Sporting Chance clinic . The couple married on the island of Antigua , where some of Carlisle 's family also resides . The couple lived in <unk> , West Yorkshire with their son , Marley , who was born in 2007 , and daughter Honey , born 2010 . Carlisle also has a daughter named Francesca , born in 1999 , from a previous relationship . He is close friends with Adebayo Akinfenwa , his former teammate at Northampton . 
 On 30 January 2002 , Carlisle was awarded the accolade of " Britain 's <unk> Footballer " in a television quiz . Carlisle appeared as a contestant on the Channel 4 game show Countdown on 24 February 2010 , winning his first match against the defending champion to stay on the show for the following programme . Carlisle then won his second contest , achieving a larger score than the previous day to stay on for another match . In his third match on 26 February 2010 , he was defeated by three points . He was banned from driving for one year and eight months and fined £ 2 @,@ 365 after pleading guilty of drink driving at Bury Magistrates Court on 11 October 2011 . 
 In the morning of 22 December 2014 , Carlisle was hit by a lorry on the A64 near <unk> , North Yorkshire , and was airlifted to Leeds General Infirmary having suffered cuts , bruises , internal bleeding , a broken rib and a shattered left knee . He had surgery soon after and his wife reported that he was " very poorly " but " alive and stable " . Burnley and Liverpool supporters performed a minute 's applause in support of Carlisle starting in the fifth minute of their match on 26 December 2014 , in reference to Carlisle wearing the number five shirt for Burnley . On 30 December 2014 , it was announced that Carlisle was charged with a drink @-@ driving offence on 20 December 2014 . He appeared at Highbury Corner Magistrates ' Court on 20 January 2015 . In February 2015 , after leaving hospital , Carlisle said that he had been trying to kill himself when he was hit by the lorry in December 2014 . 
 Carlisle and his wife Gemma separated in early 2015 over his depression and recent suicide attempt . On 14 May 2015 , Clarke was banned from driving for three years , ordered to carry out 150 hours unpaid work and pay £ 145 in costs . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Queens Park Rangers 
 Football League Second Division runner @-@ up : 2003 – 04 
 Burnley 
 Football League Championship play @-@ offs : 2008 – 09 
 = Battle of Atlanta = 
 The Battle of Atlanta was a battle of the Atlanta Campaign fought during the American Civil War on July 22 , 1864 , just southeast of Atlanta , Georgia . Continuing their summer campaign to seize the important rail and supply center of Atlanta , Union forces commanded by William T. Sherman overwhelmed and defeated Confederate forces defending the city under John B. Hood . Union Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson was killed during the battle . Despite the implication of finality in its name , the battle occurred midway through the campaign , and the city did not fall until September 2 , 1864 , after a Union siege and various attempts to seize railroads and supply lines leading to Atlanta . After taking the city , Sherman 's troops headed south @-@ southeastward toward Milledgeville , the state capital , and on to Savannah with the March to the Sea . 
 The fall of Atlanta was especially noteworthy for its political ramifications . In the 1864 election , former Union general George B. McClellan , a Democrat , ran against President Lincoln , on a peace platform calling for a truce with the Confederacy . The capture of Atlanta and Hood 's burning of military facilities as he evacuated were extensively covered by Northern newspapers , significantly boosting Northern morale , and Lincoln was reelected by a large margin . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the Atlanta Campaign , Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman commanded the Union forces of the Western Theater . The main Union force in this battle was the Army of the Tennessee , under Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson . He was one of Sherman 's and Grant 's favorite commanders , as he was very quick and aggressive . Within Sherman 's army , the XV Corps was commanded by Maj. Gen. John A. Logan , the XVI Corps was commanded by Maj. Gen. Grenville M. Dodge , and Maj. Gen. Frank P. Blair Jr. commanded the XVII Corps . 
 During the months leading up to the battle , Confederate Gen. Joseph E. Johnston had repeatedly retreated from Sherman 's superior force . All along the railroad line , from Chattanooga , Tennessee , to Marietta , Georgia , a pattern was played and replayed : Johnston took up a defensive position , Sherman marched to outflank the Confederate defenses , and Johnston retreated again . After Johnston 's withdrawal following the Battle of Resaca , the two armies clashed again at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain , but the Confederate senior leadership in Richmond was unhappy with Johnston 's perceived reluctance to fight the Union army , even though he had little chance of winning . Thus , on July 17 , 1864 , as he was preparing for the Battle of Peachtree Creek , Johnston was relieved of his command and replaced by Lt. Gen. John Bell Hood . The dismissal and replacement of Johnston was one of the most controversial decisions of the civil war . Hood , who was fond of taking risks , lashed out at Sherman 's army at Peachtree Creek , but the attack failed with more than two thousand five hundred Confederate casualties . 
 Hood needed to defend the city of Atlanta , which was an important rail hub and industrial center for the Confederacy , but his army was small in comparison to the armies that Sherman commanded . He decided to withdraw , enticing the Union troops to come forward . McPherson 's army closed in from Decatur , Georgia , to the east side of Atlanta . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Union forces = = = 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 = = Battle = = 
 Meanwhile , Hood ordered Lt. Gen. William J. Hardee 's corps on a march around the Union left flank , had Maj. Gen. Joseph Wheeler 's cavalry march near Sherman 's supply line , and had Maj. Gen. Benjamin Cheatham 's corps attack the Union front . However , it took longer than expected for Hardee to get his men into position , and , during that time , McPherson had correctly deduced a possible threat to his left flank , and sent XVI Corps , his reserve , to help strengthen it . Hardee 's men met this other force , and the battle began . Although the initial Confederate attack was repulsed , the Union left flank began to retreat . About this time , McPherson , who had ridden to the front to observe the battle , was shot and killed by Confederate infantry . 
 Near Decatur , Brig. Gen. John W. Sprague , in command of the 2nd Brigade , 4th Division of the XVI Corps , was attacked by Wheeler 's cavalry . Wheeler had taken the Fayetteville Road , while Hardee 's column took the Flat Shoals Road toward McPherson 's position . The Federals fled the town in a stampede , but managed to save the ordnance and supply trains of the XV , XVI , XVII , and XX corps . With the failure of Hardee 's assault , Wheeler was in no position to hold Decatur , and fell back to Atlanta that night . Sprague was later awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions . 
 The main lines of battle now formed an " L " shape , with Hardee 's attack forming the lower part of the " L , " and Cheatham 's attack on the Union front as the vertical member of the " L " . Hood intended to attack the Union troops from both east and west . The fighting centered on a hill east of the city known as Bald Hill . The Federals had arrived two days earlier , and began to shell the city proper , killing several civilians . A savage struggle , sometimes hand @-@ to @-@ hand , developed around the hill , lasting until just after dark . The Federals held the hill while the Confederates retired to a point just south of there . Meanwhile , two miles to the north , Cheatham 's troops had broken through the Union lines at the Georgia railroad . In response , twenty artillery pieces were positioned near Sherman 's headquarters at <unk> Hill , and shelled the Confederates , while Logan 's XV Corps regrouped and repulsed the Southern troops . 
 The Union had suffered 3 @,@ 641 casualties , including Maj. Gen. McPherson , to the Confederate 's 5 @,@ 500 . This was a devastating loss for the already reduced Confederate army , but they still held the city . 
 = = Siege and closure = = 
 Sherman settled into a siege of Atlanta , shelling the city and sending raids west and south of the city to cut off the supply lines from Macon , Georgia . Both of Sherman 's cavalry raids were defeated by superior southern horsemen . Following the failure to break the Confederates ' hold on the city , Sherman began to employ a new strategy . He swung his entire army in a broad flanking maneuver to the west . Finally , on August 31 , at Jonesborough , Georgia , Sherman 's army captured the railroad track from Macon , pushing the Confederates to Lovejoy 's Station . With his supply lines fully severed , Hood pulled his troops out of Atlanta the next day , September 1 , destroying supply depots as he left to prevent them from falling into Union hands . He also set fire to eighty @-@ one loaded ammunition cars , which led to a conflagration watched by hundreds . 
 On September 2 , Mayor James Calhoun , along with a committee of Union @-@ leaning citizens including William Markham , Jonathan Norcross , and Edward Rawson , met a captain on the staff of Maj. Gen. Henry W. Slocum , and surrendered the city , asking for " protection to non @-@ combatants and private property " . Sherman , who was in Jonesborough at the time of surrender , sent a telegram to Washington on September 3 , reading , " Atlanta is ours , and fairly won " . He then established his headquarters there on September 7 , where he stayed for over two months . On November 15 , the army departed east toward Savannah , on what became known as " Sherman 's March to the Sea " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The fall of Atlanta and the success of the overall Atlanta Campaign were extensively covered by Northern newspapers , and were a boon to Northern morale and to President Lincoln 's political standing . The 1864 election was between former Union general George B. McClellan , a Democrat , and Abraham Lincoln . McClellan ran a conflicted campaign - McClellan was a Unionist who advocated continuing the war until the defeat of the Confederacy , but the Democratic platform included calls for negotiations with the Confederacy on the subject of a potential truce . The capture of Atlanta and Hood 's burning of military facilities as he evacuated showed that a successful conclusion of the war was in sight , weakening support for a truce . Lincoln was reelected by a comfortable margin , with 212 out of 233 electoral votes . 
 Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson , who was one of the highest @-@ ranking Union officers killed in action during the Civil War , was mourned and honored by Sherman , who declared in his official report : 
 His public enemies , even the men who directed the fatal shot , ne 'er spoke or wrote of him without expressions of marked respect ; those whom he commanded loved him even to idolatry ; and I , his associate and commander , fail in words adequate to express my opinion of his great worth . I feel assured that every patriot in America , on hearing this sad news , will feel a sense of personal loss , and the country generally will realize that we have lost , not only an able military leader , but a man who , had he survived , was qualified to heal the national strife which has been raised by designing and ambitious men . 
 Despite the damage caused by the war , Atlanta recovered from its downfall relatively quickly ; as one observer noted as early as November 1865 , " A new city is springing up with marvelous rapidity " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1880 , Atlanta ranked among the fifty largest cities in the United States . The battlefield is now urban , residential , and commercial land , with many markers memorializing notable events of the battle , including McPherson 's place of death . The marker was erected in 1956 by the Georgia Historical Commission . To commemorate the 140th anniversary of the battle , in 2004 , two new markers were erected in the Inman Park neighborhood . The Atlanta Cyclorama building , built in 1921 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is a museum located in Grant Park containing a panoramic painting of the battle . 
 One notable establishment destroyed by Union soldiers was the Potter ( or Ponder ) House , built in 1857 , and owned by Ephraim G. Ponder , a holder of 65 slaves before the war . In the battle , it was used by Confederate sharpshooters until Union artillery inflicted heavy damage . It was never rebuilt . One of Ponder 's slaves , Festus Flipper , was the father of Henry Ossian Flipper , who later became the first African American cadet to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point . 
 In 1962 , two years short of the centennial of the battle , the country music singer / songwriter Claude King of Shreveport , Louisiana , released the hit song , " The Burning of Atlanta " . 
 = = = Memoirs and primary sources = = = 
 Sherman , William T. , Memoirs of General W.T. Sherman , 2nd ed . , D. Appleton & Co . , 1913 ( 1889 ) . Reprinted by the Library of America , 1990 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 65 @-@ 3 . 
 U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1880 – 1901 . 
 = Taboo Tuesday ( 2004 ) = 
 Taboo Tuesday ( 2004 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by AT & T which took place on October 19 , 2004 at the Bradley Center in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . It was the first annual Taboo Tuesday event , marking the first time in which the fans were given the chance to vote on stipulations for the matches . The voting for the event started on October 18 , 2004 and ended during the event . Eight professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card . The buildup to the matches and the scenarios that took place before , during , and after the event were planned by WWE 's script writers . The event starred wrestlers from the Raw brand : a storyline expansion of the promotion where employees are assigned to a wrestling brand under the WWE banner . 
 The main event was a Steel cage match , which is fought in a cage with four sheets of mesh metal around , in , or against the edges of the wrestling ring , in which Randy Orton defeated Ric Flair by pinfall . Two bouts were featured on the undercard . In respective singles matches , World Heavyweight Champion Triple H defeated Shawn Michaels to retain his title and Gene Snitsky defeated Kane in a Weapon of Choice match , a match in which the use of foreign objects , which is usually illegal under the standard rules of professional wrestling , is allowed . 
 Taboo Tuesday grossed over $ 215 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 3 @,@ 500 and received 174 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . This event helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ <unk> compared to the previous year . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of seventh on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . 
 Taboo Tuesday was the first regularly @-@ scheduled pay @-@ per @-@ view held by WWE on a Tuesday since 1991 's This Tuesday in Texas , the first regularly @-@ scheduled non @-@ Sunday pay @-@ per @-@ view since the 1994 Survivor Series , and the first non @-@ Sunday pay @-@ per @-@ view of any kind since In Your House 8 : Beware of Dog 2 in 1996 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Unlike most WWE events , where rules and participants for matches were determined by WWE 's creative staff , this was the first event where at least some part of each match was determined by votes from WWE fans conducted on WWE 's official website . The event was scheduled to feature eight professional wrestling matches . Various wrestlers were involved in pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines leading to the matches taking place at this event . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of tension @-@ building events . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from the Raw brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its on @-@ air talent to separate television brands . 
 The main event at Taboo Tuesday was a match between Randy Orton and Ric Flair where the online fan vote would determine whether the match was a steel cage match , a Falls Count Anywhere match , or a submission match . On the September 27 , 2004 , episode of Raw — one of WWE 's primary television programs — Orton was given an opportunity to face Triple H at Taboo Tuesday for the World Heavyweight Championship if he was able to win a match against Batista , but he was not able to do so . During the singles match , Ric Flair interfered on behalf of Batista . This led to Orton blaming his loss on Flair . Orton commented on everything Flair had accomplished in the WWE and criticized him for calling Triple H the greatest wrestler of all . Flair responded to Orton 's comments . He asserted that despite Orton 's claim of being a " Legend Killer " , wrestlers whom he had defeated such as Shawn Michaels and Mick Foley are not truly legends and therefore do not make Orton a true " Legend Killer " . Flair also announced that he and Orton would meet in a match at Taboo Tuesday and the fans would have the opportunity to choose what type of match they would compete in . 
 One of the featured matches on the under @-@ card was contested for the World Heavyweight Championship , in which Triple H would have to defend the title against the fans ' choice of three possible opponents : Chris Benoit , Edge , or Shawn Michaels . At Unforgiven , Raw 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Triple H defeated Randy Orton to capture the World Heavyweight Championship . The following night on Raw , Triple H had a celebration thrown in his honor , complete with women , confetti , streamers and a giant cake . Orton , however , sought revenge by coming out of the cake and assaulting the three members of Evolution , Triple H 's stable with Ric Flair and Batista , which Orton had previously been a part of . On the October 4 episode of Raw , it was announced that because Orton has not won the opportunity to challenge Triple H , fans would be able to choose between three potential contenders for Triple H 's World title at Taboo Tuesday . Chris Benoit and Edge were revealed as two of the candidates . Shawn Michaels , however , competed in a qualifying match , which saw him defeat Christian , to become the third candidate . On the October 18 episode of Raw , a standard match involving three wrestlers , called a Triple Threat match , was scheduled between Benoit , Edge , and Michaels . Edge won the match after he pinned Benoit by using the ring ropes for unfair leverage . During the match , Michaels legitimately injured his left knee , tearing his meniscus . 
 The other featured preliminary match was between Kane and Gene Snitsky . At Unforgiven , Shawn Michaels defeated Kane in a no disqualification match , a match where neither wrestler can be disqualified , allowing for weapons and outside interference . The next night on Raw , Kane demanded that authority figure Eric Bischoff , a portrayed match @-@ maker and rule @-@ enforcer , give him a rematch against Michaels , but Bischoff refused to do so as Michaels was preoccupied with appearing in Chris Jericho 's interview segment , The Highlight Reel . Bischoff , however , scheduled Kane in a no disqualification match against an opponent of Bischoff 's choice . Kane 's opponent was revealed to be Gene <unk> . During the match , Kane 's scripted wife , Lita , who was pregnant in the storyline , entered the ring . This led to Kane accidentally falling on top of her after Snitsky hit Kane with a steel chair , ending the match . Trainers and emergency medical technicians rushed to the scene and took Lita away in an ambulance for medical attention . The following week , Kane was informed by doctors that Lita suffered a scripted miscarriage following the events of the previous week . On the September 27 episode of Raw , in an interview with Todd Grisham , Kane informed Grisham that he sought revenge against Snitsky for his actions . The following week , Lita gave her first interview since the miscarriage and revealed that she and Kane would get payback against Snitsky . During the same episode , Snitsky was interviewed by Raw commentator Jim Ross and told Ross that the death of the couple 's unborn child was not his fault . Kane interrupted the interview segment , but Snitsky attacked Kane with a lead pipe in self @-@ defense . This led Bischoff to announce a Weapon of Choice match for Taboo Tuesday , where fans would be able to vote on whether a lead pipe , a steel chain , or a steel chair would be legal for use in the match . 
 The main Divas feud entering the event was between Christy Hemme and Carmella DeCesare , the two finalists in the Raw Diva Search . On the September 20 episode of Raw , Christy was announced as the winner of the Diva Search and received a one @-@ year contract with WWE and $ 250 @,@ 000 . After the Diva Search , Carmella became a villainess and began a feud with Christy , due to jealousy of Christy winning the Diva Search . On the last edition of Raw before Taboo Tuesday , it was announced that Christy and Carmella would face each other at the pay @-@ per @-@ view with the fans choosing what type of match they would compete in . The choices were a Lingerie Pillow Fight , an Evening Gown Match , or an Aerobics Challenge . After the announcement was made , Carmella attacked Christy . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Sgt. Slaughter defeated Muhammad Hassan , who was accompanied by Daivari , by disqualification in a dark match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first televised match was for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , in which Chris Jericho defended the title against Shelton Benjamin , who won the fans ' vote with 37 % . The match started off with Jericho performing an enzuigiri , an attack that strikes the back of the head . This was followed with Jericho on the top ropes , which was countered when Benjamin jumped on the ropes and performed a superplex on Jericho . Later in the match , Jericho performed variety of signature move attempts , such as grabbing Benjamin 's head and driving his face into the mat and springboarding the middle rope to perform a backflip , but Benjamin countered the attacks . The match came to an end when Benjamin performed a T @-@ Bone Suplex on Jericho and gaining the pinfall victory and becoming the new Intercontinental Champion . 
 The voting results for Triple H 's opponent for the World Heavyweight Championship were then revealed , with Shawn Michaels winning . The next match was a Fulfill Your Fantasy Battle Royal match for the WWE Women 's Championship between Molly Holly , Stacy Keibler , Victoria , Gail Kim , Jazz , Nidia , and Trish Stratus , an elimination style match where the last person in the ring is the winner . The first to be eliminated was Nidia , which was followed with the elimination of Jazz . Kim performed a hurricanrana on Victoria , a move that is executed by jumping forward and straddling on a standing opponent 's shoulders , but Victoria countered the move as she sent Kim out of the ring , thus being eliminated from the match . Victoria was eliminated afterwards by both Stratus and Molly , after they double teamed Victoria . Stratus and Molly continued working together , as they got the upper hand over Keibler . Molly eliminated Keibler from the match . This led Stratus to catch Molly off @-@ guard , as she pushed her through the ropes to retain her WWE Women 's Championship . 
 The third match was between Gene Snitsky and Kane ( with Lita ) . The match was a Weapons of Choice match , which gained 41 % of the vote . The match began with Kane , as he grabbed a chain and used it against Snitsky 's head . Snitsky regained the momentum by grabbing the chain and swinging the chain onto Kane 's head and proceeding to choke Kane with it . Back and forth action took place ; the match , however , came to an end when Snitsky came off of the second rope onto a steel chair that was wrapped around Kane 's neck and pinned him for the win . 
 The next match was between General Manager Eric Bischoff and Eugene in a " Choose the Loser 's Fate " . The match saw Eugene defeat Bischoff , after Eugene performed a leg drop to get the pinfall victory . After the match ended , the audience voted that Bischoff get his head shaved . Jonathan Coachman , however , announced that the audience instead voted " Loser is Winners Servant " , in which he and Bischoff would be Eugene 's servants for five minutes . WWE Chairman Vince McMahon came out and reversed the stipulation and announced that Bischoff would get his head shaved . McMahon warned that if Bischoff did not go through it , he would be fired . Eugene shaved Bischoff 's hair and Coachman was forced to wear a dress for messing up the outcome of the match . 
 The fifth match was for the World Tag Team Championships between La Résistance ( Sylvain Grenier and Robért Conway ) against Edge and Chris Benoit , the two individuals who were not chosen to face Triple H for the World Heavyweight championship . There was back and forth action between the two teams , as all the superstars were able to participate in the match . Edge abandoned Benoit during the match , which forced Benoit to wrestle both members of La Résistance by himself . Benoit fought them off , and he was able to get the upper hand over Grenier . The match concluded with Benoit winning the World Tag Team Championship , after he locked his hands together and pulled Conway 's face and pulling his neck backwards , a move which Benoit calls the Crippler Crossface , making Conway submit to the hold . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The next match was between Christy Hemme and Carmella DeCesare . The match was a Lingerie Pillow Fight , which gained 57 % of the fans ' vote . During this match , Hemme and DeCesare began hitting each other with pillows while wearing lingerie . The match ended when Hemme covered DeCesare to win the match via pinfall . The seventh match was the World Heavyweight Championship match , where the fans ' chose Shawn Michaels by 38 % , to face the champion , Triple H for the championship . Coming into the match , Michaels ' knee was legitimately injured . Triple H used the injury to his advantage during the beginning of the bout , as he hit and targeted the leg , including applying a Figure four leglock on Michaels . Michaels would however , gain the advantage when he countered a maneuver by Triple H , which had him hit the steel ring post . Later into the match , as Michaels was about to perform Sweet Chin Music on Triple H , Edge interfered in the match and hit Michaels with a spear . Following this , Triple H covered Michaels to win the match via pinfall and retain the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 The main event and final match of the night was between Randy Orton and Ric Flair . The match was a steel cage match , which gained 68 % of the vote . During the match , both Orton and Flair managed to get the upper hand . A spot in the match saw Flair hit a low blow on Orton and proceeding to send him crashing head @-@ first into the steel cage , causing Orton to bleed from the head , the blood loss results from previous cuts that wrestlers perform before a match called blading . Orton regained the momentum by sending Flair into the steel cage , thus resulting in Flair to bleed from the head . The match concluded with Orton performing an RKO , a move where you jump to the opponent 's head while parallel to the ground , applying a three @-@ quarter facelock and then slam your opponent 's head to the mat , Orton then pinned Flair for the pinfall victory . After the match , they shook hands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Taboo Tuesday , Evolution ( Triple H , Ric Flair and Batista ) were put in charge of Raw , after Eric Bischoff took the night off , following his match the night before . Triple H granted Flair the match of his choice ; Flair wanted a rematch against Randy Orton , as he lost a steel cage match to Orton the previous night . Orton accepted Flair 's challenge , with a stipulation that if he defeated Flair he would get an opportunity to face Triple H for the World Heavyweight Championship at the November pay @-@ per @-@ view Survivor Series . Orton did not receive the opportunity , as he lost to Flair . On the November 1 episode of Raw , Bischoff scheduled a traditional 8 @-@ man elimination tag team match involving Team Orton ( Randy Orton , Chris Jericho , Maven and Chris Benoit ) facing off against Team Triple H ( Triple H , Batista , Edge and Gene Snitsky ) at Survivor Series . The winning team would be granted absolute control of running the show for a month , and the winning members would all get a week to be in charge of the program . At the November event , Team Orton defeated Team Triple H and the team were given the opportunity to be in charge of Raw for a week . 
 On the October 25 episode of Raw , a rematch for the Intercontinental Championship was scheduled between Shelton Benjamin and Chris Jericho . The match saw Benjamin defeat Jericho and retain the title . After the match , Benjamin was attacked by Christian , which led Christian to <unk> Benjamin 's arms and pivoted him to an 180 ° thus driving his face onto the mat , a move Christian calls the Unprettier . The following week , Bischoff scheduled an Intercontinental championship match between Benjamin and Christian at Survivor Series . At Survivor Series , Benjamin retained the Intercontinental championship . 
 In November 2004 , Lita returned to the women 's division . She began a feud with Trish Stratus after Stratus called Lita " chubby " because of her pregnancy weight gain . Lita challenged Stratus to a WWE Women 's Championship match at Survivor Series , however , due to the months of humiliation and being verbally berated by Stratus , Lita was more concerned with doing as much damage as possible , leading to her disqualification . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Bradley Center had a maximum capacity of 18 @,@ 000 , which was reduced for the event . This event grossed over $ 215 @,@ 000 from an approximate attendance of 3 @,@ 500 . It also received 174 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . Taboo Tuesday helped World Wrestling Entertainment earn $ 24 @.@ 7 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events versus $ 18 @.@ 5 million the previous year , which was later confirmed by Linda McMahon on November 23 , 2004 in a quarterly result . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event 5 out of 10 stars . The rating was lower than the Taboo Tuesday event in 2005 , which was rated 7 out of 10 stars . The Steel cage match was rated a ten of ten stars . The Lingerie Pillow Fight match was rated zero out of 10 stars . 
 The event was released on DVD on November 23 , 2004 . The DVD was distributed by the label , Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Battle royal eliminations = = = 
 = = = Voting results = = = 
 = Nicolo Giraud = 
 Nicolo or Nicolas Giraud ( born c . 1795 – after 1815 ) was a friend and possibly a lover of the English Romantic poet Lord Byron . The two met in 1809 while Byron was staying in Athens . Giraud was reported to have taught him Italian , and was his travel companion in Greece . Byron paid for Giraud 's education and left him £ 7 @,@ 000 ( about £ 450 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in his will . Years after they parted company , Byron changed his will to exclude Giraud . Other than his involvement with Byron , little is known of Giraud 's life . 
 The friendship between Byron and Giraud has become a topic of interest among scholars and biographers of Byron . Many believe that the pair 's relationship was platonic , but correspondence between Byron and his friends has been used since the late 20th century to argue that the two were engaged in a love affair . The earliest claim of a sexual relationship between them comes from George Colman 's poem Don Leon , in which Byron is the principal character and Giraud is portrayed as his liberator from the sexual prejudices in Britain . The poem is not biographical ; it promotes Colman 's own social and political views . 
 = = Life = = 
 Nicolas Giraud was born in Greece to French parents ; the name by which he is most commonly known , Nicolo , was given to him by Byron . Giraud may have been the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Giovanni Battista Lusieri , a Roman painter and broker for Lord Elgin . Demetrius <unk> , Byron 's guide in Greece , informed Byron that the 60 @-@ year @-@ old Lusieri was unmarried , and was courting two women , each of whom believed that Lusieri was to marry her . Lusieri certainly had a close relationship with Giraud , so it is possible that the two were related in another way , perhaps as father and son . Byron met Giraud in Athens in January 1809 , and the two were companions until Byron resumed his travels in March . 
 During the following year , Giraud was working at a Capuchin monastery when he was assigned to teach Byron Italian after the latter 's return to Greece . The two spent their days studying , swimming , and taking in the landscape as Byron composed poetry . In a letter to John Hobhouse , dated 23 August 1810 and written at the Capuchin monastery of <unk> near Athens where he was residing , Byron states : 
 But my friend , as you may easily imagine , is Nicolo who by @-@ the @-@ by , is my Italian master , and we are already very philosophical . I am his " <unk> " and his " <unk> " , and the Lord knows what besides . It is about two hours since , that , after informing me he was most desirous to follow him ( that is me ) over the world , he concluded by telling me it was proper for us not only to live , but " morire <unk> " [ die together ] . The latter I hope to avoid – as much of the former as he pleases . 
 Byron took Giraud to visit Charles <unk> , an English doctor who recounted the visit in his memoirs and noted Byron 's vivid interest in the boy . Afterward , rumours were spread by Byron 's servant that the consultation concerned an anal rupture . <unk> was a travelling companion with Michael Bruce and Lady Hester Stanhope , one of Byron 's friends . Accounts from Bruce and Howe Browne , both witnesses to Byron 's interactions with Giraud , provided confirmation of the relationship to Byron 's early biographer Thomas Moore , although in disparaging terms . In mid @-@ 1810 , Giraud acted as Byron 's majordomo on their travels to the Peloponnese , and took care of Byron during his illness while at Patras , eventually becoming ill himself . After recovering , although still weak , the pair continued on their travels , arriving at Athens on 13 October . By November they were joined by Lusieri , Louis François Sébastien <unk> , who was a French consul , and a group of German academics . 
 Byron and Giraud parted ways in Valletta , Malta . Byron saw to Giraud 's education by paying for his schooling in a monastery on the island . The two stayed in contact by letter , and after a year Giraud left the monastery , telling Byron that he was tired of the company of monks . Shortly after Giraud left Malta , Byron drew up for him in his will a bequest of £ 7 @,@ 000 ( £ 450 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , almost twice as much as he later lent for refitting the Greek Navy . The will read : " To Nicolo Giraud of Athens , subject of France , but born in Greece , the <unk> of seven thousand pounds sterling , to be paid from the sale of such parts of Rochdale , Newstead or elsewhere , as may enable the said Nicolo Giraud ... to receive the above sum on his attaining the age of twenty @-@ one years . " Byron later removed Giraud from his will ( as he did with John <unk> – who predeceased him – and other boyhood companions ) . 
 Giraud wrote to Byron in January 1815 : 
 My most precious Master , I cannot describe the grief of my heart at not seeing you for such a long time . Ah , if only I were a bird and could fly so as to come and see you for one hour , and I would be happy to die at the same time . Hope tells me that I shall see you again and that is my consolation for not dying immediately . It is two years now since I spoke English . I have completely forgotten it . 
 Byron had not been responding to Nicolo 's letters , which Nicolo mentions in the letter : " It is now almost three years that I am at Athens ; and have sent you many letters , but I have not received any answer " . It is possible that Byron did not respond because he was married and , according to the 20th @-@ century Byron biographer Phyllis <unk> , " Nicolo was the last person he would have wanted to hear from . " 
 = = Relationship with Byron = = 
 Giraud 's relationship with Byron has been a topic discussed by many of Byron 's biographers . Moore , Byron 's early biographer , described the relationship between Byron and Giraud as : 
 one of those extraordinary friendships – if attachment to persons so inferior to himself can be called by that name – of which I have already mentioned two or three instances in his younger days , and in which the pride of being a protector , and the pleasure of exerting gratitude , seem to have constituted to his mind the chief , pervading charm . The person , whom he now adopted in this manner , and from similar feelings to those which had inspired his early attachments to the cottage @-@ boy near Newstead , and the young chorister at Cambridge , was a Greek youth , named Nicolo Giraud , the son , I believe , of a widow lady , in whose house the artist Lusieri lodged . In this young man he appear [ s ] to have taken the most lively , and even brotherly , interest . 
 Moore 's work was commented on by Byron 's close friend , John Hobhouse , who noted that " Moore had not the remotest guess at the real reason which induced Lord B. at that time to prefer having no Englishman immediately or constantly near him . " Regardless of Moore 's bias against the lower class and Byron 's spending time with other boys during his times in Greece , Byron was close to Giraud while the two were together . 
 Early 20th @-@ century biographer André Maurois argues that " what Byron was capable of loving in another was a certain kind of innocence and youthfulness " and that the relationship was one of Byron 's " protective passions " . Likewise , G. Wilson Knight , in his 1953 biography of Byron , believes that Byron became protective over Giraud just as he did with all of the children he met during his travels . Giraud was special to Byron , and , according to Knight , " it was probably of Nicolo that he was thinking when he wrote that Greece was ' the only place I was ever contented in ' " . In Byron : A Biography , published in 1957 , Marchand points out that Byron " wished Hobhouse there to share the nonsensical gaiety " of when Byron and Giraud were together , but changed his mind after remembering that Hobhouse 's personality would not be conducive to entertainment . Their time together " was a relaxed pleasure that [ Byron ] was to remember more fondly than most of the adventures of his travels " . 
 A few critics disagree with the speculation over Giraud 's and Byron 's relationship . The early 20th @-@ century biographer Ethel Mayne points out both the frequency of such relationships in Byron 's life and their inherent ambiguity when she says , " His stay was also marked by one of those ambiguous friendships with a youth infinitely below him in rank which have already been seen to recur in his life ... The patron was supposed to be learning Italian from [ Girard ] ; this made a pretext for giving him , on their parting at Malta in 1811 ... a considerable sum of money " . Elizabeth Longford , in her 1976 biography , disagrees with the claims that there was a physical relationship between the two and argues , " Byron 's especial favourite among the ' <unk> ' was Nicolo Giraud . He had first taken up with Nicolo while Hobhouse was away in Euboea the year before , but there is no evidence that his feelings for Nicolo were anything but romantic and protective . " Jerome Christensen followed this view in 1993 and adds , " we know little more than what Byron tells us " . 
 Christensen points out that " although there is no evidence that Lord Byron , padrone and <unk> , was ever so vulgar as to set an exact market value on his sexual arrangements in Greece , Nicolo Giraud , Eustathius 's replacement in Byron 's affections , was employed as ' <unk> and Major Domo ' , a position that almost certainly entailed payment in love and money " . D. L. MacDonald 's 1986 biography simply describes Giraud as " The great love of Byron 's Eastern tour " , and D. S. Neff 's 2002 work describes the two as part of " an amorous relationship " . Others , such Jay Losey and William Brewer in their analysis of 19th @-@ century sexuality , speculate that Byron 's relationship with Giraud was modeled on a Grecian form of pederasty , and homosexual studies scholar Louis Crompton believes that pederasty was a facet of Byron 's life and that his letters hinted towards a sexual relationship between Byron and Giraud . As Paul Douglass , in an analysis of Byron biographical studies , points out , Crompton also claims that biographers like Marchand ignored the nature of Byron 's relationship with Giraud . Douglass also mentions that Crompton 's work , Byron and Greek Love " focuses Byron 's life around a single issue , rather than attempting to create a larger view . Such studies prompt negative responses from those who feel the writer warps Byron to fit the theme , presenting a one @-@ sided account " . 
 Benita Eisler , in 2000 , argues that Giraud was one of many of Byron 's intended sexual conquests . Although , as Eisler claims , Byron was at first unable to attain " that state of total and complete satisfaction " of a sexual relationship with Giraud , he wrote to Charles Matthews declaring that he would soon conquer any of the boy 's remaining inhibitions . During Byron 's illness , Byron boasted to Hobhouse and Lady Melbourne that he continued to have sex with one such incident almost causing his death . Although it is uncertain , according to Eisler , " Whether this surfeit of erotic fulfillment involved only Nicolo as partner , he does not say . He was still fond enough of the boy , but his sexual obsession , with its attendant scorekeeping , seems to have run its course . " Nigel Leask , in 2004 , argues that Hobhouse would have disapproved of Byron 's relationship with Giraud , and Fiona MacCarthy notes in her 2002 biography that Lady Melbourne " would have understood his partner to be female " . In a survey of the various biographical opinions and disagreements about Byron 's relationships , including Giraud , written before 2004 , Douglass points out that " despite the greater certainty about his sexual ambivalence , the exact nature of those relationships remains elusive " . 
 = = = Don Leon = = = 
 George Colman , Byron 's friend , anonymously wrote a poem called Don Leon that , according to Bernard Grebanier , " depicts Byron as having wooed Giraud with gifts when they first met , and to have busied himself with developing the boy 's mind " . 
 The narrator of Don Leon praises Giraud and claims that Giraud was so beautiful that he : 
 Gave pleasing doubts of what his sex might be ; 
 And who that saw him would perplexed have been , 
 For beauty marked his gender <unk> . 
 Throughout the poem , the narrator describes how Byron ( Don Leon ) spent his time with Giraud : 
 Spent half in love and half in poetry ! 
 The muse each morn I wooed , each eve the boy , 
 And tasted sweets that never seemed to <unk> . 
 The poem ends with Giraud 's beauty conquering any fears that Byron may have about their relationship : 
 But thou , Giraud , whose beauty would unlock 
 The gates of prejudice , and bid me mock 
 The sober fears that timid minds endure , 
 Whose ardent passions women only cure , 
 <unk> this faithful tribute to thy charms , 
 Not vowed alone , but paid too in thy arms . 
 For here the wish , long cherished , long denied , 
 Within that <unk> cell was gratified . 
 G. Wilson Knight , unlike most early critics , thought the poem was worthy of response , although he says that it was from " the most indecent poet of high quality in our literature " . Grebanier believes that Colman , as " a recipient of Byron 's confidence during a crucial period of the poet 's life , and as a man who shared Byron 's hatred of pretense ... must have seen an ideal subject in presenting ruthlessly , even brutally , the basic truths about Byron 's moral dilemma , as a powerful means of blasting once more that sanctimoniousness which has always been fashionable in Britain . " Colman 's purpose was not necessarily to discuss Giraud , but to respond to those who spread rumours about Byron and criticized Byron for his failed marriage , the reason for his exile . The poem does focus on Giraud , and , as Grebanier argues , " If , the poem says , our hero 's affections were fastened upon Nicolo Giraud " then Byron 's actions are acceptable because " he was but following the custom of the country . Once he had seen a beautiful Ganymede of fifteen attending the Turkish Governor , a Grecian youth , publicly known as the Governor 's ' <unk> . ' Was it criminal to do what the Governor was doing ? " 
 Byrne Fone , a historian of homosexuality @-@ related issues , emphasizes how the poem and the fictional discussion of Giraud and Byron 's relationship reveal insights into 19th @-@ century British views on homosexuality . To Fone , the poem was written by one who knew Byron and reveals Byron 's homosexuality . Fone also argues that the 1833 publication of the poem was prompted by the arrest of William Bankes , a homosexual friend of Byron , and the execution of Henry Nicholls for homosexual activity . The opening lines of the poem mention " crippled Talleyrand " , William Beckford and William Courtenay . Fone argues that the references to Beckford and Courtenay are used both to talk about the unfair treatment of homosexual men who had committed no real crime , and to emphasise England 's hypocrisy when it comes to sex . The poem then claims that England 's treatment of homosexuals forces Don Leon to travel to Greece in order to fulfill his desires and be free of intellectual control , which is fulfilled when Don Leon is able to be with Giraud . The fictional Giraud , according to Fone , allows Don Leon to break free of the homophobia of England . The poem , as he points out , tries to convince Moore to mention Byron 's homosexual desires . Fone concludes , " It is not only the poem that is an effective attack on homophobic prejudice , but the example of the poet himself . " 
 = SMS Körös = 
 SMS Körös was the name ship of the Körös @-@ class river monitors built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . Completed in 1892 , the ship was part of the Danube Flotilla , and fought various Allied forces from Belgrade down the Danube to the Black Sea during World War I. After the war , she was transferred to the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) , and renamed Morava . She remained in service throughout the interwar period , although budget restrictions meant she was not always in full commission . 
 During the World War II German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Morava was the flagship of the 2nd Mine Barrage Division , and operated on the Tisza river . She fought off attacks by the Luftwaffe , and shot down one enemy aircraft , but was forced to withdraw to Belgrade . Due to high river levels and low bridges , navigating monitors was difficult , and she was scuttled by her crew on 11 April . Some of her crew tried to escape cross @-@ country towards the southern Adriatic coast , but most surrendered on 14 April . The remainder made their way to the Bay of Kotor , which was captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . She was later raised by the navy of the Axis puppet state the Independent State of Croatia and continued in service as Bosna until June 1944 , when she struck a mine and sank . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The name ship of the Körös @-@ class river monitors was built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy by H. Schönichen . She was laid down at Budapest on 30 March 1890 . Körös and her sister ship SMS Szamos doubled the size of Austria @-@ Hungary 's Danube Flotilla . The two monitors had an overall length of 54 m ( 177 ft 2 in ) , a beam of 9 m ( 29 ft 6 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 ft 11 in ) . Her displacement was 448 tonnes ( 441 long tons ) , and her crew consisted of 77 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered using steam generated by two Yarrow boilers driving two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , and carried 54 tonnes ( 53 long tons ) of coal . Her engines were rated at 1 @,@ 200 ihp ( 890 kW ) and she was designed to reach a top speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Körös was armed with two single gun turrets of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / <unk> fore and aft , two superfiring 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft guns protected by gun shields on the superstructure fore and aft , and two machine guns . Her armour consisted of a belt and bulkheads 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick , deck armour 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) thick , and conning tower and gun turret armour 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The armour was produced by the <unk> steel works , in Moravia . She was launched on 5 February 1892 and commissioned on 21 April of the same year . Her sister ship Szamos was completed in 1893 , and was identical except for 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) armour on her conning tower . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Commissioning and World War I = = = 
 = = = = Serbian campaign = = = = 
 At the start of World War I , Körös was based at Zemun , just upstream from Belgrade on the Danube . Her commander was Linienschiffsleutnant ( LSL ) Josef Meusburger , and she was accompanied by another three monitors and three patrol boats . Austria @-@ Hungary declared war on Serbia on 28 July 1914 , and that night the flotilla fired the first shots of the war against fortifications at the Zemun – Belgrade railway bridge over the river Sava and on the Topčider Hill , although Körös was not initially involved . The Serbs were outgunned by the monitors , and by August began to receive assistance from the Russians . This support included the supply and emplacement of naval guns and the establishment of river obstacles and mines . 
 The Austro @-@ Hungarian base at Zemun was briefly evacuated due to a Serbian counterattack in September . On 28 September , Körös , along with the monitor SMS Temes , a patrol boat and a minesweeper , broke through the minefields on the Sava near Belgrade and pushed upstream to join the fighting near Šabac . In November , French artillery support arrived in Belgrade , endangering the monitor 's anchorage . The stalemate continued until December 1914 when the Serbs briefly evacuated Belgrade in the face of an Austro @-@ Hungarian assault , although Körös did not support this action . After less than two weeks , the Austro @-@ Hungarians had to withdraw from Belgrade , and it was soon recaptured by the Serbs with Russian and French assistance . Körös continued in action against Serbia and her allies at Belgrade until December , when the base of the Danube Flotilla was withdrawn north to Petrovaradin for the winter . 
 In January 1915 , British artillery arrived in Belgrade , further bolstering its defences . On 22 April 1915 , a British picket boat that had been brought overland by rail from Salonika was used to attack the Danube Flotilla anchorage at Zemun , firing two torpedoes without success . Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in September 1915 , and the Serbian Army soon faced an overwhelming Austro @-@ Hungarian , German and Bulgarian ground invasion . On 7 October , the Austro @-@ Hungarian 3rd Army attacked Belgrade , and Körös , along with the majority of the flotilla , was heavily engaged in support of the crossings near the Belgrade Fortress and Ada Ciganlija island . During the final river crossing and support of the resulting bridgehead , the ship provided close support , during which her stack was hit and damaged . The following day , Körös assisted SMS Enns when the latter took a direct hit and began to take on water . 
 Following the capture of Belgrade , the flotilla sailed downstream to Orșova near the Hungarian – Romanian border and waited for the lower Danube to be swept for mines . It then escorted a series of munitions convoys down the Danube to Lom , from where they were transferred to the Bulgarian railway system for shipment to the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = = = Romanian campaign = = = = 
 In November 1915 , Körös and the other monitors were assembled at Rustschuk , Bulgaria . The position of Romania was uncertain ; the Central Powers were aware that the Romanians were negotiating to enter the war on the opposing side of the Entente . To protect the Danube 's 480 km ( 300 mi ) border between Romania and Bulgaria , the flotilla established a sheltered base in the Belene Canal . When the Romanians entered the war on 27 August 1916 , the monitors were again at Rustschuk , and were immediately attacked by three improvised torpedo boats operating out of the Romanian river port of Giurgiu . The torpedoes that were fired missed the monitors but struck a lighter loaded with fuel . The Second Monitor Division , consisting of Körös and three other monitors , was tasked with shelling Giurgiu . This bombardment set fire to oil storage tanks as well as the railway station and magazines , and sank several Romanian lighters . While the attack was underway , the First Monitor Division escorted supply ships back to the Belene anchorage . The Körös and her companions then destroyed two Romanian patrol boats and an improvised minelayer on their way back to Belene . This was followed by forays of the monitors both east and west of Belene , during which both Turnu Măgurele and Zimnicea were shelled . 
 In April 1918 , Körös , along with three other monitors , two patrol boats and a tug , were formed into Flottenabteilung Wulff ( Fleet Division Wulff ) under the command of Flottenkapitän ( Fleet Captain ) Olav Wulff . Flottenabteilung Wulff was sent through the mouth of the Danube and across the Black Sea to Odessa , where it spent several months supporting the Austro @-@ Hungarian troops enforcing the peace agreement with Russia . It returned to the Danube at the end of August , and was anchored at Brăila on 12 September . On 16 October , Körös and the rest of the First Monitor Division sailed from Brăila to Belene . For several weeks the Danube Flotilla was engaged in protecting Austro @-@ Hungarian troops retreating towards Budapest , fighting French and irregular Serbian forces as they withdrew ; the flotilla arrived in Belene on 6 November . 
 = = = Interwar period and World War II = = = 
 = = = = 1919 – 41 = = = = 
 Immediately after the Armistice of Villa Giusti signed by the Austro @-@ Hungarians on 3 November 1918 , Körös was crewed by sailors of the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in 1918 – 19 . Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , Körös was transferred to the KSCS along with a range of other vessels , including three other river monitors , but was officially handed over to the KSCS Navy and renamed Morava in 1920 . Her sister ship Szamos was dismantled and used as a pontoon . In 1925 – 26 , Morava was refitted , but by the following year only two of the four river monitors of the KSCS Navy were being retained in full commission at any time . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships were engaging in little gunnery training , and few exercises or manoeuvres , due to reduced budgets . 
 = = = = 1941 – 45 = = = = 
