 On 6 April 1941 , when the World War II German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began , Morava was based at Stara <unk> on the Tisza river , as the flagship of the 2nd Mine Barrage Division . This force was responsible for the Hungarian border , and came under the operational control of the 7th Infantry Division Potiska . The remainder of the 2nd Mine Barrage Division consisted of the river tug R @-@ XXI , the river transport Senta , and a few mobilised customs motorboats , based further south on the Tisza at Senta . On 7 April , Morava withdrew to Senta , where she was attacked by German aircraft . According to her commander , Poručnik bojnog broda Božidar <unk> , her crew shot down one German aircraft and captured a Luftwaffe Oberstleutnant . On 10 April , Morava was ordered to withdraw to conform with the retreat of the 2nd Army Group of the Royal Yugoslav Army from Bačka and Baranja . On the evening of 11 April , Morava anchored at the confluence of the Danube and Sava near Belgrade , along with her fellow monitors Vardar and Sava , and <unk> took command of the flotilla . The three captains conferred , and decided to scuttle their vessels due to the high water levels in the rivers and low bridges , which meant insufficient clearance for the monitors to navigate freely . The crews of the monitors were transshipped to two tugboats , but when one of the tugboats was passing under a railway bridge , demolition charges on the bridge exploded prematurely and the bridge fell onto the tugboat . Of the 110 officers and men aboard the vessel , 95 were killed . 
 After the scuttling of the monitors , around 450 officers and men from the Morava and various other riverine vessels gathered at Obrenovac , and armed only with personal weapons and some machine guns stripped from the scuttled vessels , started towards the Bay of Kotor in the southern Adriatic in two groups . The smaller of the two groups reached its objective . The larger group only made it as far as Sarajevo on 14 April before they surrendered . The remainder made their way to the Bay of Kotor , which was captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . 
 Morava was later raised and repaired by the navy of an Axis puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia , in which she served as Bosna . She served alongside her fellow monitor Sava , which had also been raised and repaired , but retained her name . Along with six captured motorboats and ten auxiliary vessels , they made up the riverine police force of the Croatian state . Bosna was part of the 2nd Patrol Group of the River Flotilla Command , headquartered at Zemun . She struck a mine near Bosanski Novi on the Una river and sank in June 1944 . The following year she was raised and broken up . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = The Turn of the Screw ( 2009 film ) = 
 The Turn of the Screw ( also known as Ghost Story : The Turn of the Screw ) is a British television film based on Henry James 's 1898 ghost story of the same name . Commissioned and produced by the BBC , it was first broadcast on 30 December 2009 , on BBC One . The novella was adapted for the screen by Sandy Welch , and the film was directed by Tim Fywell . Although generally true to the tone and story of James 's work , the film is set in the 1920s — in contrast to the original 1840s setting — and accentuates sexual elements that some theorists have identified in the novella . The film 's story is told in flashbacks during consultations between the institutionalised Ann ( Michelle Dockery ) and Dr Fisher ( Dan Stevens ) . Ann tells how she was hired by an aristocrat ( Mark Umbers ) to care for the orphans Miles ( Josef Lindsay ) and Flora ( Eva Sayer ) . She is met at the children 's home , Bly , by Mrs Grose ( Sue Johnston ) , the housekeeper . Ann soon begins to see unknown figures around the manor , and seeks an explanation . 
 Critics were divided in their reviews of The Turn of the Screw . The acting and tone of the production were generally praised , but the plot 's divergences from the original story were less well received . A particular disagreement concerned the film 's horrific elements ; some critics considered it to be genuinely scary , while others suggested that the horror was not fully effective . The original story has been much analysed owing to its ambiguity , and critics disagreed about the extent to which the film succeeded in portraying this trait . Academic analyses found the film considerably less ambiguous than the novella . The Turn of the Screw was released on DVD on 1 March 2010 in the UK and on 28 April 2015 in North America . 
 = = Production = = 
 The BBC had previously adapted several horror stories as Christmas films , with their series A Ghost Story for Christmas including adaptations of the M. R. James stories " The Stalls of Barchester Cathedral " ( filmed as The Stalls of Barchester ) , " A Warning to the Curious " , " Lost Hearts " , " The Treasure of Abbot Thomas " and " The Ash Tree " . The Turn of the Screw fits into this " mini @-@ genre " of the Christmas horror film . The BBC executive and drama commissioner Ben Stephenson , discussing The Turn of the Screw , said that " Christmas wouldn 't be Christmas without a ghost story for the adults to watch in front of the fire when the children are in bed , and they don 't get more chilling than this bold reimagining of the classic Henry James tale . " The film was commissioned by Stephenson and Jay Hunt , then controller of BBC One . It was directed by Tim Fywell , and produced by Colin Wratten ; the executive producer was Jessica Pope . 
 The film is an adaptation of Henry James 's 1898 novella The Turn of the Screw . As one of his more popular stories it had already been adapted for films and television many times , although not previously by the BBC . The adaptation was <unk> by Sandy Welch , who set the film in the early 1920s , in contrast to the novella 's 1840s setting . This allowed the introduction of the Freudian psychiatrist interviewing the main character ; this framing device is not used by James , but both the novella and the film share a first @-@ person narrator . The updated setting also allowed the First World War to account for the lack of male staff at the house . The Freudian and libidinous elements some literary theorists have seen in James 's story are particularly prevalent in the film , with Ann 's repressed sexual feelings for the Master resulting in a number of highly sexual sequences . Further , Welch added a theological element not present in James 's story ; Ann 's father is a preacher , although Ann herself is unsure of her faith . The psychiatrist , by contrast , is an atheist . When he asks Ann about her faith , she replies that she believes in the Devil . 
 The changes to the story were mostly superficial , and the adaptation generally mirrors the novella 's tone . The television critic Matthew Baylis observed that the film creates unease and horror through distortions of reality , and that The Turn of the Screw is not a " screaming @-@ banshees @-@ and @-@ horrible @-@ corpses style of ghost story " . The film utilises subtle horror , including details such as a broken doll on a window ledge , and the fact that viewers never discover certain elements of the story ( for example , it is never revealed why the character Miles has been suspended from his boarding school ) . This , for Baylis , ties to the title of the film : " it 's the writer who puts the screw in the hole and the best ones ask the audience to turn it themselves " . 
 The Turn of the Screw was filmed on location in the West Country of England , beginning in August 2009 . The scenes at Bly were filmed at Brympton d 'Evercy , a manor house near Yeovil , Somerset . Brympton was chosen because of its similarity to Bly House , as described by James , including its extensive grounds and large lake . The railway scenes were filmed at the East Somerset Railway . 
 The Turn of the Screw starred Michelle Dockery as Ann , Sue Johnston as Mrs Sarah Grose , Dan Stevens as Dr Fisher , Mark Umbers as the Master , Nicola Walker as Carla , Edward MacLiam as Peter Quint and Katie Lightfoot as Emily Jessel . Corin Redgrave , who played the professor , was the son of Michael Redgrave , who starred in The Innocents , a 1961 adaption of The Turn of the Screw . The children , Flora and Miles , were played respectively by Eva Sayer and Josef Lindsay . However , due to the sexual content of the film , the child actors did not attend the preview screenings . 
 = = = Broadcast and release = = = 
 The Turn of the Screw was first shown at 9 pm on BBC One on 30 December 2009 , as part of the BBC 's Christmas 2009 season . It has since been broadcast on other BBC channels and on Drama . In the UK , the film was released on DVD on 1 March 2010 , and distributed by Acorn Media UK . The DVD was rated " 15 " by the British Board of Film Classification for " infrequent scenes of strong sex " . The film was released on DVD for the North American market as Ghost Story : The Turn of the Screw on 28 April 2015 . The DVD was unrated and had no extra features . Foreign language versions of the film include television screenings or DVD releases of the film in German ( Schloss des <unk> ) , Finnish ( <unk> ) and Polish ( W <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film 's story is told in a series of flashbacks interspersed with discussions between Ann ( Dockery ) , a patient in a sanatorium , and Dr Fisher ( Stevens ) , a sceptical and atheistic psychiatrist . Despite the suggestion of his superior ( Redgrave ) that he focus upon soldiers who have returned from the First World War , Fisher wishes to help Ann if he can . 
 In flashbacks , Ann is hired by a wealthy and sophisticated aristocrat ( Umbers ) to act as a governess for his orphaned nephew and niece who live at Bly . He tells her that he is not to be bothered in London , and that Ann is to deal with any problems that may arise . Ann travels to Bly , where she meets the all @-@ female household staff — led by Mrs Sarah Grose ( Johnston ) , the housekeeper — and then the young Flora ( Sayer ) , one of Ann 's new pupils . Ann finds the house somewhat unnerving , and the staff standoffish and unwilling to talk . Ann subsequently receives a letter informing her that Miles ( Lindsay ) , her other pupil , has been expelled from his boarding school , but is assured by Mrs Grose that Miles is well behaved . When he arrives at Bly , Ann finds Miles to be charming , and although he does not explain what happened at school , she does not push him . Her interactions with the children are idyllic , and they sail on Bly 's lake and enjoy picnics together . Meanwhile , Ann fantasises about the Master , futilely hoping that he will visit . 
 Ann discovers that her predecessor , Emily Jessel ( Lightfoot ) , is buried in Bly 's church , and is told that Jessel killed herself . She also begins to see the figures of a young man and a young woman around Bly . Mrs Grose dismisses Ann 's stories , but one maid , Carla ( Walker ) , tells Ann of the sexually abusive former valet Peter Quint ( MacLiam ) . Mrs Grose reveals that Carla had been badly affected by the War , and is prone to flights of fancy . Later , Ann is woken at night by the figure of the woman , and follows her to find Flora standing next to an open window . The pair see Carla fall from the roof , landing near Miles , who is in the garden . Ann rushes outside , and sees the male figure on the roof . Inside again , Mrs Grose assures Ann that she must be confused . 
 Ann believes the figures to be the ghosts of Quint and Jessel , seeking to continue their passionate and violent sexual encounters through Miles and Flora . However , she is concerned to find that others apparently cannot see the ghosts . She then begins to suspect that Miles and Flora , having been groomed by and involved in the activities of Quint and Jessel , may be deliberately seeking to bring the pair back . She resolves to leave Bly , but , when saying goodbye to Miles , learns that he , too , sees the figures . Minutes after leaving , she asks to be taken back . Later , Ann panics , believing Miles and Flora to have left the house . She finds them by the lake , but they are playing roughly ; when Miles pushes Flora 's head under the water , Ann sees the pair as Quint and Jessel . She rushes to intervene , and grapples with the figure which alternates between Quint and Miles . When Ann repeatedly strikes Miles , Mrs Grose stops her , and Flora says that she no longer wishes to see Ann . After ordering the staff and Flora away from Bly , Ann waits with Miles to confront Quint . The pair are scared , but when Quint arrives Ann tells Miles to demand that Quint leave him alone . Miles ( speaking with Quint 's voice ) shouts at Ann , but eventually ( in his own voice ) tells the ghostly Quint that he wishes him to leave . Ann embraces Miles , whose body goes limp . 
 Ann is found some time later by the police , clutching Miles 's dead body , but she refuses to speak of what happened until meeting Dr Fisher . He seems to accept Ann 's story , unconvinced by his own psychosexual explanations of her visions . Fisher is dismayed to see Ann led away by the police , accused of Miles 's murder , and he sees Quint 's face on one of the officers . The film closes with a new governess arriving at Bly . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The critical response to The Turn of the Screw was mixed . The film was praised by Matt Baylis , writing in The Express , as one of the better adaptations of James 's story . The Times 's David Chater , although he did not consider the film " terrifying " or " <unk> [ d ] in evil " , found it " never less than absorbing " , suspecting this would be particularly so for viewers unfamiliar with the story . The Daily Telegraph 's Simon Horsford felt that The Turn of the Screw " might not work on all levels but it is an unsettling interpretation nonetheless " . By contrast , Tom Sutcliffe , writing in The Independent , was unimpressed with the film , considering James 's novel to have been " comprehensively vandalised " , while Richard Whittaker , writing in The Austin Chronicle , felt that the film was " a particular and peculiar misfire " from Welch . The Turn of the Screw was chosen as " pick of the day " in The Sunday Times , despite the reviewer , Victoria Segal , expressing her view that the film was " far from perfect " . But she added that the flaws could be overlooked , and although there are times " when it grinds through the gears with a clunk and clatter " , the " spirit " of James 's story is retained . 
 Several other critics praised the way that the film had kept the tone of James 's story and the subtle approach to horror . This subtlety , according to a review in the Western Morning News , hit " exactly the right note of terror " , and the film was praised as genuinely scary by some critics . Whittaker , though generally critical of the film , felt it strongest when focussed on the house , children and ghosts . Paul Whitelaw , writing in The Scotsman , commended Welch and Fywell for sustaining a horrific atmosphere , and noted that the soundtrack added to the horror . For him , even the use of horror clichés was effective , contributing to the film 's atmosphere . The Guardian 's Phil Hogan expressed a contrary opinion : while he thought The Turn of the Screw " exquisitely turned out " , he felt the film 's use of clichés limited the extent to which it was actually scary . In a review for The Leader @-@ Post , Andy Cooper praised the " creepy atmosphere " and tension , but said that the film " [ fell ] short in the chills department " and " could have done with a few jolts of terror to breathe more life into it " . 
 The divergences from the original novella 's plot were generally not well received . Tim Teeman , reviewing The Turn of the Screw for The Times , felt the 1920s setting did not contribute to the story , as it was not properly developed . He compared the film to Sarah Waters 's novel The Little Stranger , a ghost story set in the 1920s in which the social upheavals of the decade are explored . Gerard Gilbert , writing both for The Independent and The Arts Desk , felt that Ann 's relationship to the Master was " unnecessarily sexed up " , and that this element added nothing to the story , and , in fact , detracted from it . In his review of the American DVD release for the Deseret Morning News , Chris Hicks said that he could not see why the changes had been made , and that the <unk> of the sex and violence detracted from the film . Whittaker suggested that The Turn of the Screw was " oddly sexually explicit " , and that the changes were unnecessary for the plot . The biggest problem , he suggested , was the introduction of the psychiatrist ; his discussions with Ann , which could easily be removed , served to remove the mystery from the plot , in Whittaker 's eyes . Sutcliffe was critical of the <unk> of the story as a stereotypical account of how " a cocky young man of science has his certainties upturned " , and said the film took " the terrifying <unk> of the original " , turning them " into a slightly shabby ghost @-@ train ride " . 
 Critics disagreed about how successful the film was in capturing the novel 's ambiguity , which is part of the enduring appeal of James 's story . For Tim Dowling , a columnist for The Guardian , the film failed in this regard . The novella , Dowling explained , can be understood as a straightforward ghost story , but it can also be understood as a story about Ann 's madness , and there is further ambiguity concerning whether the children are being controlled by Quint and Jessel , or whether the children are controlling Ann . He suggested that " there 's probably a subtlety to all this ambiguity on the page which , when translated to the screen , just looks like having it both ways . " As a result , " the narrative was at times more evasive than ambiguous " . Whittaker felt that the film failed to appropriately present the novella 's ambiguity and implicit themes , saying that the adaptation " feels oddly obligated to fill in all those blanks , and it 's really the script 's fault " . Sutcliffe expressed a similar view ; for example , he noted that " when the governess sees Quint on the tower for the first time so do we , and the thing that really haunts us as we read the story — uncertainty — vanishes to be replaced by a much duller kind of <unk> , about when something is next going to pop out at us . " By contrast , Chater and Teeman ( both writing for The Times ) felt the ambiguity of the film was praiseworthy , with Chater asking whether the ghosts truly exist or are just a manifestation of " hysterical imagination " , and Teeman suggesting that viewers will be more likely to believe ( with Dr Fisher ) that Ann 's retelling is accurate . The Scotsman 's Whitelaw praised Welch 's ability to balance the various subtexts of the film while still delivering an effective narrative . 
 The cast of the film were praised , with Dowling considering The Turn of the Screw " a slick production with strong performances " , and Cooper saying that the film features " a great supporting cast " . Critics particularly commended the performances of Dockery and Johnston . Dowling also picked out the performances of Lindsay and Sayer as worthy of note , while Whitelaw praised MacLiam , who was able " to personify pure evil with scarcely a line of dialogue " . Segal , by contrast , felt MacLiam was badly cast , which resulted in " one of the story 's primary dark forces [ looking ] more like a member of Elbow than the very essence of evil " . 
 = = Literary analysis = = 
 James 's novella The Turn of the Screw has been much analysed in academic literature , and , given that it has been frequently reinterpreted in the arts , discussion of many of the adaptations has found a place in the academic literature on Henry James and neo @-@ Victorian culture . Considering the frame narrative of the film , Anna Viola Sborgi , a literary theorist , argues that the fact that Ann begins the film in a sanatorium conveys the impression that the character is mad , resulting in a loss of ambiguity . Consequently , the film is left less a horror story and more a psychological thriller . Sborgi argues that the film is explicitly made psychological through particular narrative and visual choices ; for example , Miles appears at the train station in a ghost @-@ like way through a cloud of steam . The fact that the film is a thriller , she argues , is further expressed through the use of a collage of images before the opening scene . However , the use of horrific imagery ( including an open grave ) in the collage " highlight [ s ] the contradiction inherent in this rendering of the novella " : while the story is presented as psychological , the viewer is nonetheless drawn into the film as a horror story . Other than the atypical frame narrative , Sborgi considers the adaptation fairly conventional with regard to both setting and costume . 
 For the literary theorist Thomas S. Hischak , The Turn of the Screw is a weak adaptation of the novella , with poor acting which can be " ascribed to the trite , anachronistic dialogue and leaden direction " . He likens the film to In a Dark Place ( 2006 ) , another film adaptation of James 's novella , which focuses upon the supposed sexual aspects of the story . For <unk> , the 2009 film presents a governess who is not successful in repressing her sexuality . Ann 's fantasies of her own sexual encounters with the Master , as well as her visions of the sexual encounters between Quint and Jessel , " are among the many obvious and clumsy aspects of this adaptation " . Like Sborgi , Hischak sees little ambiguity in the film , calling it a " misguided adaptation that likes to spell things out for the viewer " . 
 = Whale = 
 Whale is the common name for a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals . They are an informal grouping within the infraorder Cetacea , usually excluding dolphins and porpoises . Whales , dolphins and porpoises belong to the order Cetartiodactyla with even @-@ toed ungulates and their closest living relatives are the hippopotamuses , having diverged about 40 million years ago . The two parvorders of whales , baleen whales ( Mysticeti ) and toothed whales ( Odontoceti ) , are thought to have split apart around 34 million years ago . The whales comprise eight extant families : Balaenopteridae ( the rorquals ) , Balaenidae ( right whales ) , Cetotheriidae ( the pygmy right whale ) , Eschrichtiidae ( the gray whale ) , Monodontidae ( belugas and narwhals ) , Physeteridae ( the sperm whale ) , Kogiidae ( the dwarf and pygmy sperm whale ) , and <unk> ( the beaked whales ) . 
 Whales are creatures of the open ocean ; they feed , mate , give birth , suckle and raise their young at sea . So extreme is their adaptation to life underwater that they are unable to survive on land . Whales range in size from the 2 @.@ 6 metres ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) and 135 kilograms ( 298 lb ) dwarf sperm whale to the 34 metres ( 112 ft ) and 190 metric tons ( 210 short tons ) blue whale , which is the largest creature that has ever lived . The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on earth . Several species exhibit sexual dimorphism , in that the females are larger than males . Baleen whales have no teeth ; instead they have plates of baleen , a fringe @-@ like structure used to expel water while retaining the krill and plankton which they feed on . They use their throat pleats to expand the mouth to take in huge gulps of water . Balaenids have heads that can make up 40 % of their body mass to take in water . Toothed whales , on the other hand , have conical teeth designed for catching fish or squid . Baleen whales have a well developed sense of " smell " , whereas toothed whales have well @-@ developed hearing − their hearing , that is adapted for both air and water , is so well developed that some can survive even if they are blind . Some species , such as sperm whales , are well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey . 
 Whales have evolved from land @-@ living mammals . As such they must breathe air regularly , though they can remain submerged for long periods . They have blowholes ( modified nostrils ) located on top of their heads , through which air is taken in and expelled in the form of vapour . They are warm @-@ blooded , and have a layer of fat , or blubber , under the skin . With streamlined fusiform bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers , whales can travel at up to 20 knots , though they are not as flexible or agile as seals . Whales produce a great variety of vocalizations , notably the extended songs of the humpback whale . Although whales are widespread , most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres , and migrate to the equator to give birth . Species such as humpbacks and blue whales are capable of travelling thousands of miles without feeding . Males typically mate with multiple females every year , but females only mate every two to three years . Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them . Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for a relatively long period of time . 
 Once relentlessly hunted for their products , whales are now protected by international law . The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century , with a population low of 450 , and the North Pacific gray whale population is ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN . Besides whaling , they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution . The meat , blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic . Whales have been depicted in various cultures worldwide , notably by the Inuit and the coastal peoples of Vietnam and Ghana , who sometimes hold whale funerals . Whales occasionally feature in literature and film , as in the great white whale of Herman Melville 's Moby Dick . Small whales , such as belugas , are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks , but breeding success has been poor and the animals often die within a few months of capture . Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world . 
 = = Etymology and definitions = = 
 The word " whale " comes from the Old English <unk> , related to the High German wal . Related forms are the Old Norse <unk> and the Swedish / Danish <unk> . The obsolete " <unk> " has a similar derivation , indicating a time when whales were thought to be fish . Other archaic English forms include wal , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , etc . 
 The term " whale " is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises , acting as a synonym for Cetacea . Six species of dolphins have the word " whale " in their name , collectively known as blackfish : the killer whale , the melon @-@ headed whale , the pygmy killer whale , the false killer whale , and the two species of pilot whales , all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae ( oceanic dolphins ) . Each species has a different reason for it , for example , the killer whale was named " Ballena <unk> " by Spanish sailors , which translates directly to " whale assassin " or " whale killer " , but is more often translated to " killer whale " . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The whales are part of the largely terrestrial mammalian clade Laurasiatheria . Whales do not form a clade or order ; the infraorder Cetacea includes dolphins and porpoises , which are not considered whales . 
 Whales in green 
 A = <unk> 
 C = <unk> 
 W = Whippomorpha 
 Cetaceans are divided into two parvorders : the largest parvorder , Mysticeti ( baleen whales ) , is characterized by the presence of baleen , a sieve @-@ like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin , which it uses to filter plankton , among others , from the water ; Odontocetes ( toothed whales ) are characterized by bearing sharp teeth for hunting , as opposed to their counterparts ' baleen . 
 Cetaceans and artiodactyls now are classified under the order Cetartiodactyla , often still referred to as Artiodactyla , which includes both whales and hippopotamuses . The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the whale 's closest terrestrial living relatives . 
 = = = Mysticetes = = = 
 Mysticetes are also known as baleen whales . They have a pair of blowholes side @-@ by @-@ side and lack teeth , which renders them incapable of catching larger prey ; they instead have baleen plates which is a sieve @-@ like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin , which it uses to filter plankton and other food from the water ; this forces them to follow krill or plankton migrations . Some whales , such as the humpback , reside in the polar regions where they feed on a reliable source of schooling fish and krill . These animals rely on their well @-@ developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water ; they swim by moving their fore @-@ flippers and tail fin up and down . Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end , but do not form a rigid rib cage . This adaptation allows their chest to compress during deep dives as the pressure increases with depth . Mysticetes consist of four families : rorquals ( <unk> ) , cetotheriids , right whales ( <unk> ) , and gray whales ( <unk> ) . 
 The main difference between each family of mysticete is in their feeding adaptations and subsequent behaviour . Balaenopterids are the rorquals . These animals , along with the cetotheriids , rely on their throat pleats to gulp large amounts of water while feeding . The throat pleats extend from the mouth to the navel and allow the mouth to expand to a large volume for more efficient capture of the small animals they feed on . Balaenopterids consist of two genera and eight species . Balaenids are the right whales . These animals have very large heads , which can make up as much as 40 % of their body mass , and much of the head is the mouth . This allows them to take in large amounts of water into their mouths , letting them feed more effectively . <unk> have one living member : the gray whale . They are bottom feeders , mainly eating crustaceans and benthic invertebrates . They feed by turning on their sides and taking in water mixed with sediment , which is then expelled through the baleen , leaving their prey trapped inside . This is an efficient method of hunting , in which the whale has no major competitors . 
 = = = Odontocetes = = = 
 Odontocetes are known as toothed whales ; they have teeth and only one blowhole . They rely on their well @-@ developed sonar to find their way in the water . Toothed whales send out ultrasonic clicks using the melon . Sound waves travel through the water . Upon striking an object in the water , the sound waves bounce back at the whale . These vibrations are received through fatty tissues in the jaw , which is then rerouted into the ear @-@ bone and into the brain where the vibrations are interpreted . All toothed whales are opportunistic , meaning they will eat anything they can fit in their throat because they are unable to chew . These animals rely on their well @-@ developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water ; they swim by moving their fore @-@ flippers and tail fin up and down . Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end , but they do not form a rigid rib cage . This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as opposed to resisting the force of water pressure . Excluding dolphins and porpoises , odontocetes consist of four families : belugas and narwhals ( monodontids ) , sperm whales ( <unk> ) , dwarf and pygmy sperm whales ( <unk> ) , and beaked whales ( ziphiids ) . There are six species , sometimes referred to as " blackfish " , that are dolphins commonly misconceived as whales : the killer whale , the melon @-@ headed whale , the pygmy killer whale , the false killer whale , and the two species of pilot whales , all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae ( oceanic dolphins ) . 
 The differences between families of odontocetes include size , feeding adaptations and distribution . <unk> consist of two species : the beluga and the narwhal . They both reside in the frigid arctic and both have large amounts of blubber . Belugas , being white , hunt in large pods near the surface and around pack ice , their coloration acting as camouflage . Narwhals , being black , hunt in large pods in the aphotic zone , but their underbelly still remains white to remain camouflaged when something is looking directly up or down at them . They have no dorsal fin to prevent collision with pack ice . <unk> and <unk> consist of sperm whales . Sperm whales consist the largest and smallest odontocetes , and spend a large portion of their life hunting squid . P. macrocephalus spends most of its life in search of squid in the depths ; these animals do not require any degree of light at all , in fact , blind sperm whales have been caught in perfect health . The behaviour of <unk> remains largely unknown , but , due to their small lungs , they are thought to hunt in the photic zone . <unk> consist of 22 species of beaked whale . These vary from size , to coloration , to distribution , but they all share a similar hunting style . They use a suction technique , aided by a pair of grooves on the underside of their head , not unlike the throat pleats on the rorquals , to feed . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Whales are descendants of land @-@ dwelling mammals of the artiodactyl order ( even @-@ toed ungulates ) . They are related to the Indohyus , an extinct chevrotain @-@ like ungulate , from which they split approximately 48 million years ago . Primitive cetaceans , or archaeocetes , first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic 5 – 10 million years later . What defines an <unk> is the presence of anatomical features exclusive to cetaceans , alongside other primitive features not found in modern cetaceans , such as visible legs or asymmetrical teeth . Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment . Major anatomical changes included their hearing set @-@ up that channeled vibrations from the jaw to the <unk> ( Ambulocetus 49 mya ) , a streamlined body and the growth of flukes on the tail ( <unk> 43 mya ) , the migration of the nostrils toward the top of the cranium ( blowholes ) , and the modification of the forelimbs into flippers ( Basilosaurus 35 mya ) , and the shrinking and eventual disappearance of the hind limbs ( the first odontocetes and mysticetes 34 mya ) . 
 Today , the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses ; these share a semi @-@ aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls some 60 mya . Around 40 mya , a common ancestor between the two branched off into <unk> and anthracotheres ; nearly all anthracotheres became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene 2 @.@ 5 mya , eventually leaving only one surviving lineage - the hippo . 
 Whales split into two separate parvorders around 34 mya - the baleen whales ( Mysticetes ) and the toothed whales ( Odontocetes ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 Whales have torpedo shaped bodies with non @-@ flexible necks , limbs modified into flippers , non @-@ existent external ear flaps , a large tail fin , and flat heads ( with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids ) . Whale skulls have small eye orbits , long snouts ( with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids ) and eyes placed on the sides of its head . Whales range in size from the 2 @.@ 6 @-@ metre ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) and 135 @-@ kilogram ( 298 lb ) dwarf sperm whale to the 34 @-@ metre ( 112 ft ) and 190 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 210 @-@ short @-@ ton ) blue whale . Overall , they tend to dwarf other <unk> ; the blue whale is the largest creature on earth . Several species have female @-@ biased sexual dimorphism , with the females being larger than the males . One exception is with the sperm whale , which has males larger than the females . 
 Odontocetes , such as the sperm whale , possess teeth with cementum cells overlying dentine cells . Unlike human teeth , which are composed mostly of enamel on the portion of the tooth outside of the gum , whale teeth have cementum outside the gum . Only in larger whales , where the cementum is worn away on the tip of the tooth , does enamel show . Mysticetes have large whalebone , as opposed to teeth , made of keratin . Mysticetes have two blowholes , whereas Odontocetes contain only one . 
 Breathing involves expelling stale air from the blowhole , forming an upward , steamy spout , followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs ; a humpback whale 's lungs can hold about 5 @,@ 000 litres of air . Spout shapes differ among species , which facilitates identification . 
 All whales have a thick layer of blubber . In species that live near the poles , the blubber can be as thick as 11 inches . This blubber can help with buoyancy ( which is helpful for a 100 @-@ ton whale ) , protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat , and energy for fasting when migrating to the equator ; the primary usage for blubber is insulation from the harsh climate . It can constitute as much as 50 % of a whales body weight . Calves are born with only a thin layer of blubber , but some species compensate for this with thick lanugos . 
 Whales have a two- to three @-@ chambered stomach that is similar in structure to terrestrial carnivores . Mysticetes contain a proventriculus as an extension of the oesophagus ; this contains stones that grind up food . They also have fundic and pyloric chambers . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 Whales have two flippers on the front , and a tail fin . These flippers contain four digits . Although whales do not possess fully developed hind limbs , some , such as the sperm whale and bowhead whale , possess discrete rudimentary appendages , which may contain feet and digits . Whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals , which typically cruise at 5 – 15 kn , or 9 – 28 kilometres per hour ( 5 @.@ 6 – 17 @.@ 4 mph ) ; the fin whale , in comparison , can travel at speeds up to 47 kilometres per hour ( 29 mph ) and the sperm whale can reach speeds of 35 kilometres per hour ( 22 mph ) . The fusing of the neck vertebrae , while increasing stability when swimming at high speeds , decreases flexibility ; whales are unable to turn their heads . When swimming , whales rely on their tail fin propel them through the water . Flipper movement is continuous . Whales swim by moving their tail fin and lower body up and down , propelling themselves through vertical movement , while their flippers are mainly used for steering . Some species log out of the water , which may allow then to travel faster . Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers . Most species have a dorsal fin . 
 Whales are adapted for diving to great depths . In addition to their streamlined bodies , they can slow their heart rate to conserve oxygen ; blood is rerouted from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart and brain among other organs ; haemoglobin and myoglobin store oxygen in body tissue ; and they have twice the concentration of myoglobin than haemoglobin . Before going on long dives , many whales exhibit a behaviour known as sounding ; they stay close to the surface for a series of short , shallow dives while building their oxygen reserves , and then make a sounding dive . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 The whale ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment . In humans , the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air 's low impedance and the cochlear fluid 's high impedance . In whales , and other marine mammals , there is no great difference between the outer and inner environments . Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear , whales receive sound through the throat , from which it passes through a low @-@ impedance fat @-@ filled cavity to the inner ear . The whale ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air @-@ filled sinus pockets , which allow for greater directional hearing underwater . Odontocetes send out high frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon . This melon consists of fat , and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression . The melon size varies between species , the bigger the more dependent they are of it . A beaked whale for example has a small bulge sitting on top of its skull , whereas a sperm whale 's head is filled up mainly with the melon . 
 The whale eye is relatively small for its size , yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight . As well as this , the eyes of a whale are placed on the sides of its head , so their vision consists of two fields , rather than a binocular view like humans have . When belugas surface , their lens and cornea correct the nearsightedness that results from the refraction of light ; they contain both rod and cone cells , meaning they can see in both dim and bright light , but they have far more rod cells than they do cone cells . Whales do , however , lack short wavelength sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells indicating a more limited capacity for colour vision than most mammals . Most whales have slightly flattened eyeballs , enlarged pupils ( which shrink as they surface to prevent damage ) , slightly flattened corneas and a tapetum lucidum ; these adaptations allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and , therefore , a very clear image of the surrounding area . In water , a whale can see around 10 @.@ 7 metres ( 35 ft ) ahead of itself , but , of course , they have a smaller range above water . They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea . 
 The olfactory lobes are absent in toothed whales , suggesting that they have no sense of smell . Some whales , such as the bowhead whale , possess a vomeronasal organ , which does mean that they can " sniff out " krill . 
 Whales are not thought to have a good sense of taste , as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether . However , some toothed whales have preferences between different kinds of fish , indicating some sort of attachment to taste . The presence of the Jacobson 's organ indicates that whales can smell food once inside their mouth , which might be similar to the sensation of taste . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 Whale vocalization is likely to serve several purposes . Some species , such as the humpback whale , communicate using melodic sounds , known as whale song . These sounds may be extremely loud , depending on the species . Humpback whales only have been heard making clicks , while toothed whales use sonar that may generate up to 20 @,@ 000 watts of sound ( + 73 <unk> or + 43 <unk> ) and be heard for many miles . 
 Captive whales have occasionally been known to mimic human speech . Scientists have suggested this indicates a strong desire on behalf of the whales to communicate with humans , as whales have a very different vocal mechanism , so imitate human speech likely takes considerable effort . 
 Whales emit two distinct kinds of acoustic signals , which are called whistles and clicks : Clicks are quick broadband burst pulses , used for sonar , although some lower @-@ frequency broadband vocalizations may serve a non @-@ <unk> purpose such as communication ; for example , the pulsed calls of belugas . Pulses in a click train are emitted at intervals of ~ 35 – 50 milliseconds , and in general these inter @-@ click intervals are slightly greater than the round @-@ trip time of sound to the target . Whistles are narrow @-@ band frequency modulated ( FM ) signals , used for communicative purposes , such as contact calls . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Whales are known to teach , learn , cooperate , scheme , and grieve . The neocortex of many species of whale is home to elongated spindle neurons that , prior to 2007 , were known only in hominids . In humans , these cells are involved in social conduct , emotions , judgement , and theory of mind . Whale spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain that are homologous to where they are found in humans , suggesting that they perform a similar function . 
 Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal . Since most of the brain is used for maintaining bodily functions , greater ratios of brain to body mass may increase the amount of brain mass available for more complex cognitive tasks . <unk> analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the ⅔ or ¾ exponent of the body mass . Comparison of a particular animal 's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an <unk> quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence . Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on earth , averaging 8 @,@ 000 cubic centimetres ( 490 in3 ) and 7 @.@ 8 kilograms ( 17 lb ) in mature males , in comparison to the average human brain which averages 1 @,@ 450 cubic centimetres ( 88 in3 ) in mature males . The brain to body mass ratio in some odontocetes , such as belugas and narwhals , is second only to humans . 
 Small whales are known to engage in complex play behaviour , which includes such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air @-@ core vortex rings or " bubble rings " . There are two main methods of bubble ring production : rapid puffing of a burst of air into the water and allowing it to rise to the surface , forming a ring , or swimming repeatedly in a circle and then stopping to inject air into the helical vortex currents thus formed . They also appear to enjoy biting the vortex @-@ rings , so that they burst into many separate bubbles and then rise quickly to the surface . Some believe this is a means of communication . Whales are also known to produce bubble @-@ nets for the purpose of foraging . 
 Larger whales are also thought , to some degree , to engage in play . The southern right whale , for example , elevates their tail fluke above the water , remaining in the same position for a considerable amount of time . This is known as " sailing " . It appears to be a form of play and is most commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa . Humpback whales , among others , are also known to display this behaviour . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Whales are fully aquatic creatures , which means that birth and courtship behaviours are very different from terrestrial and semi @-@ aquatic creatures . Since they are unable to go onto land to calve , they deliver the baby with the fetus positioned for tail @-@ first delivery . This prevents the baby from drowning either upon or during delivery . To feed the new @-@ born , whales , being aquatic , must squirt the milk into the mouth of the calf . Being mammals , they , of course , have mammary glands used for nursing calves ; they are weaned off at about 11 months of age . This milk contains high amounts of fat which is meant to hasten the development of blubber ; it contains so much fat that it has the consistency of toothpaste . Females deliver a single calf with gestation lasting about a year , dependency until one to two years , and maturity around seven to ten years , all varying between the species . This mode of reproduction produces few offspring , but increases the survival probability of each one . Females , referred to as " cows " , carry the responsibility of childcare as males , referred to as " bulls " , play no part in raising calves . 
 Most mysticetes reside at the poles . So , to prevent the unborn calf from dying of frostbite , they migrate to calving / mating grounds . They will then stay there for a matter of months until the calf has developed enough blubber to survive the bitter temperatures of the poles . Until then , the calves will feed on the mother 's fatty milk . With the exception of the humpback whale , it is largely unknown when whales migrate . Most will travel from the Arctic or Antarctic into the tropics to mate , calve , and raise during the winter and spring ; they will migrate back to the poles in the warmer summer months so the calf can continue growing while the mother can continue eating , as they fast in the breeding grounds . One exception to this is the southern right whale , which migrates to Patagonia and western New Zealand to calve ; both are well out of the tropic zone . 
 = = = Sleep = = = 
 Unlike most animals , whales are conscious breathers . All mammals sleep , but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown . While knowledge of sleep in wild cetaceans is limited , toothed cetaceans in captivity have been recorded to sleep with one side of their brain at a time , so that they may swim , breathe consciously , and avoid both predators and social contact during their period of rest . 
 A 2008 study found that sperm whales sleep in vertical postures just under the surface in passive shallow ' drift @-@ dives ' , generally during the day , during which whales do not respond to passing vessels unless they are in contact , leading to the suggestion that whales possibly sleep during such dives . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Foraging and predation = = = 
 All whales are carnivorous and predatory . Odontocetes , as a whole , mostly feed on fish and cephalopods , and then followed by crustaceans and bivalves . All species are generalist and opportunistic feeders . Mysticetes , as a whole , mostly feed on krill and plankton , followed by crustaceans and other invertebrates . A few are specialists . Examples include the blue whale , which eats almost exclusively krill , the minke whale , which eats mainly schooling fish , the sperm whale , which specialize on squid , and the gray whale which feed on bottom @-@ dwelling invertebrates . The elaborate baleen " teeth " of filter @-@ feeding species , mysticetes , allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food by using the teeth as a sieve . Usually whales hunt solitarily , but they do sometimes hunt cooperatively in small groups . The former behaviour is typical when hunting non @-@ schooling fish , slow @-@ moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey . When large amounts of prey are available , whales such as certain mysticetes hunt cooperatively in small groups . Some cetaceans may forage with other kinds of animals , such as other species of whales or certain species of pinnipeds . 
 Large whales , such as mysticetes , are not usually subject to predation , but smaller whales , such as monodontids or ziphiids , are . These species are preyed on by the killer whale or orca . To subdue and kill whales , orcas continuously ram them with their heads ; this can sometimes kill bowhead whales , or severely injure them . Other times they corral the narwhals or belugas before striking . They are typically hunted by groups of 10 or fewer orcas , but they are seldom attacked by an individual . Calves are more commonly taken by orcas , but adults can be targeted as well . 
 These small whales are also targeted by terrestrial and <unk> predators . The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic whales and calves . Bears are known to use sit @-@ and @-@ wait tactics as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water . Whales lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups . This however means less room around the breathing hole as the ice slowly closes the gap . When out at sea , whales dive out of the reach of surface @-@ hunting orcas . Polar bear attacks on belugas and narwhals are usually successful in winter , but rarely inflict any damage in summer . 
 = = = Whale pump = = = 
 A 2010 study considered whales to be a positive influence to the productivity of ocean fisheries , in what has been termed a " whale pump . " Whales carry nutrients such as nitrogen from the depths back to the surface . This functions as an upward biological pump , reversing an earlier presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom . This nitrogen input in the Gulf of Maine is " more than the input of all rivers combined " emptying into the gulf , some 23 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 25 @,@ 000 short tons ) each year . Whales defecate at the ocean 's surface ; their excrement is important for fisheries because it is rich in iron and nitrogen . The whale faeces are liquid and instead of sinking , they stay at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it . 
 = = = Whale fall = = = 
 Upon death , whale carcasses fall to the deep ocean and provide a substantial habitat for marine life . Evidence of whale falls in present @-@ day and fossil records shows that deep sea whale falls support a rich assemblage of creatures , with a global diversity of 407 species , comparable to other neritic biodiversity hotspots , such as cold seeps and hydrothermal vents . 
 Deterioration of whale carcasses happens though a series of three stages . Initially , moving organisms such as sharks and hagfish , scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months , and as long as two years . This is followed by the colonization of bones and surrounding sediments ( which contain organic matter ) by enrichment opportunists , such as crustaceans and polychaetes , throughout a period of years . Finally , <unk> bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulphide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms , which in turn , support other organisms such as mussels , clams , limpets , and sea snails . This stage may last for decades and supports a rich assemblage of species , averaging 185 species per site . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = Whaling = = = 
 Whaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age . Ancient whalers used harpoons to spear the bigger animals from boats out at sea . People from Norway started hunting whales around 2000 B.C. , and people from Japan began hunting whales in the Pacific at least as early . Whales are typically hunted for their meat and blubber by aboriginal groups ; they used baleen for baskets or roofing , and made tools and masks out of bones . The Inuit hunted whales in the Arctic Ocean . The Basques started whaling as early as the 11th century , sailing as far as Newfoundland in the 16th century in search of right whales . 18th and 19th century whalers hunted down whales mainly for their oil , which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant , baleen or whalebone , which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops , and ambergris , which was used as a fixative for perfumes . The most successful whaling nations at this time were Holland , Japan , and the United States . 
 Commercial whaling was historically important as an industry well throughout the 17th , 18th and 19th centuries . Whaling was at that time a sizeable European industry with ships from Britain , France , Spain , Denmark , the Netherlands and Germany , sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic , sometimes in competition leading even to war . By the early 1790s , whalers , namely the Americans and Australians , mainly focused efforts in the South Pacific where they mainly hunted sperm whales and right whales , with catches of up to 39 @,@ 000 right whales by Americans alone . By 1853 , U.S. profits turned to US $ 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( UK £ <unk> ) , equivalent to US $ 348 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( UK £ <unk> ) today , the most profitable year for the American whaling industry . Commonly exploited species included North Atlantic right whales , sperm whales , which were mainly hunted by Americans , bowhead whales , which were mainly hunted by the Dutch , common minke whales , blue whales , and gray whales . The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially after 1982 when the International Whaling Commission ( IWC ) placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country , excluding aboriginal groups until 2004 . 
 Current whaling nations are Norway , Iceland , and Japan , despite their joining to the IWC , as well as the aboriginal communities of Siberia , Alaska , and northern Canada . Subsistence hunters typically use whale products for themselves and depend on them for survival . National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of hunting are seen as less destructive and wasteful . This distinction is being questioned as these aboriginal groups are using more modern weaponry and mechanized transport to hunt with , and are selling whale products in the marketplace . Some anthropologists argue that the term " subsistence " should also apply to these cash @-@ based exchanges as long as they take place within local production and consumption . In 1946 , the IWC placed a moratorium , limiting the annual whale catch . Since then , yearly profits for these " subsistence " hunters have been close to US $ 31 million ( UK £ 20m ) per year . 
 = = = Other threats = = = 
 Whales can also be threatened by humans more indirectly . They are unintentionally caught in fishing nets by commercial fisheries as bycatch and accidentally swallow fishing hooks . <unk> and Seine netting is a significant cause of mortality in whales and other marine mammals . Species commonly entangled include beaked whales . Whales are also affected by marine pollution . High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain . They have large reserves of blubber , more so for toothed whales as they are higher up the food chain than baleen whales . Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young . These pollutants can cause gastrointestinal cancers and greater vulnerability to infectious diseases . They can also be poisoned by swallowing litter , such as plastic bags . Environmentalists speculate that advanced naval sonar endangers some whales . Some scientists suggest that sonar may trigger whale beachings , and they point to signs that such whales have experienced decompression sickness . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially after 1946 when , in response to the steep decline in whale populations , the International Whaling Commission placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country ; this excluded aboriginal groups up until 2004 . As of 2015 , aboriginal communities are allowed to take 280 bowhead whales off of Alaska and two from the western coast of Greenland , 620 gray whales off of Washington state , three common minke whales off of the eastern coast of Greenland and 178 on their western coast , 10 fin whales from the west coast of Greenland , nine humpback whales from the west coast of Greenland and 20 off of St. Vincent and the Grenadines each year . Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers ; for example , Grey whales may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting , but the North Atlantic population is functionally extinct . Conversely , the North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range , which stretched across the North Atlantic , and only remains in small fragments along the coast of Canada , Greenland , and is considered functionally extinct along the European coastline . 
 The IWC has designated two whale sanctuaries : the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary , and the Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary . The Southern Ocean whale sanctuary spans 30 @,@ 560 @,@ 860 square kilometres ( 11 @,@ 799 @,@ 610 sq mi ) and envelopes Antarctica . The Indian Ocean whale sanctuary takes up all of the Indian Ocean south of 55 ° S. The IWC is a voluntary organization , with no treaty . Any nation may leave as they wish ; the IWC cannot enforce any law it makes . 
 As of 2013 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) recognized 86 cetacean species , 40 of which are considered whales . Six are considered at risk , as they are ranked Critically Endangered ( the North Atlantic right whale ) , " Endangered " ( blue whale , fin whale , North Pacific right whale , and sei whale ) , and " Vulnerable " ( sperm whale ) . Twenty @-@ one species have a " Data Deficient " ranking . Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change , particularly the time when pack ice forms and melts . 
 = = = Whale watching = = = 
 An estimated 13 million people went whale watching globally in 2008 , in all oceans except the Arctic . Rules and codes of conduct have been created to minimize harassment of the whales . Iceland , Japan and Norway have both whaling and whale watching industries . Whale watching lobbyists are concerned that the most inquisitive whales , which approach boats closely and provide much of the entertainment on whale @-@ watching trips , will be the first to be taken if whaling is resumed in the same areas . Whale watching generated US $ 2 @.@ 1 billion ( UK £ 1 @.@ 4 billion ) per annum in tourism revenue worldwide , employing around 13 @,@ 000 workers . In contrast , the whaling industry , with the moratorium in place , generates US $ 31 million ( UK £ 20 million ) per year . The size and rapid growth of the industry has led to complex and continuing debates with the whaling industry about the best use of whales as a natural resource . 
 = = = In myth , literature and art = = = 
 As marine creatures that reside in either the depths or the poles , humans knew very little about whales over the course of history ; many feared or revered them . The Nords and various arctic tribes revered the whale as they were important pieces of their lives . In Inuit creation myths , when ' Big Raven ' , a deity in human form , found a stranded whale , he was told by the Great Spirit where to find special mushrooms that would give him the strength to drag the whale back to the sea and thus , return order to the world . In an Icelandic legend , a man threw a stone at a fin whale and hit the blowhole , causing the whale to burst . The man was told not to go to sea for twenty years , but during the nineteenth year he went fishing and a whale came and killed him . 
 Whales played a major part in shaping the art forms of many coastal civilizations , such as the Norse , with some dating to the Stone Age . Petroglyphs off a cliff face in <unk> , South Korea show 300 depictions of various animals , a third of which are whales . Some show particular detail in which there are throat pleats , typical of rorquals . These petroglyphs show these people , of around 7 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 500 B.C.E. in South Korea , had a very high dependency on whales . 
 The Pacific Islanders and Australian Aborigines viewed whales as bringers of good and joy . One exception is French Polynesia , where in many parts , cetaceans are met with great brutality . 
 In Vietnam and Ghana , among other places , whales hold a sense of divinity . They are so respected in their cultures that they occasionally hold funerals for beached whales , a throwback to Vietnam 's ancient sea @-@ based Austro @-@ Asiatic culture . The god of the seas , according to Chinese folklore , was a large whale with human limbs . 
 Whales have also played a role in sacred texts such as the Bible . It mentions whales in Genesis 1 : 21 , Job 7 : 12 , and Ezekiel 32 : 2 . The " leviathan " described at length in Job 41 : 1 @-@ 34 is generally understood to refer to a whale . The " sea monsters " in Lamentations 4 : 3 have been taken by some to refer to marine mammals , in particular whales , although most modern versions use the word " jackals " instead . The story of Jonah being swallowed by a great fish is told both in the Qur 'an and in the Bible . A medieval column capital sculpture depicting this was made in the 12th century in the abbey church in <unk> , France . The Old Testament contains the Book of Jonah and in the New Testament , Jesus mentions this story in Matthew 12 : 40 . 
 In 1585 , Alessandro Farnese , 1585 , and Francois , Duke of Anjou , 1582 , were greeted on his ceremonial entry into the port city of Antwerp by floats including " Neptune and the Whale " , indicating at least the city 's dependence on the sea for its wealth . 
 Whales continue to be prevalent in modern literature . For example , Herman Melville 's Moby Dick features a " great white whale " as the main antagonist for Ahab , who eventually is killed by it . The whale is an albino sperm whale , considered by Melville to be the largest type of whale , and is partly based on the historically attested bull whale <unk> Dick . Rudyard Kipling 's Just So Stories includes the story of " How the Whale got in his Throat " . Niki Caro 's film the Whale Rider has a Māori girl ride a whale in her journey to be a suitable heir to the chieftain @-@ ship . Walt Disney 's film Pinocchio features a giant whale named Monstro as the final antagonist . Alan <unk> ' orchestra And God Created Great Whales including the recorded sounds of humpback and bowhead whales . Léo Ferré 's song " Il n 'y a plus rien " is an example of <unk> that begins and ends with recorded whale songs mixed with a symphonic orchestra and his voice . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Belugas were the first whales to be kept in captivity . Other species were too rare , too shy , or too big . The first beluga was shown at Barnum 's Museum in New York City in 1861 . For most of the 20th century , Canada was the predominant source of wild belugas . They were taken from the St. Lawrence River estuary until the late 1960s , after which they were predominantly taken from the Churchill River estuary until capture was banned in 1992 . Russia has become the largest provider since it had been banned in Canada . Belugas are caught in the Amur River delta and their eastern coast , and then are either transported domestically to aquariums or dolphinariums in Moscow , St. Petersburg , and Sochi , or exported to other countries , such as Canada . Most captive belugas are caught in the wild , since captive @-@ breeding programs are not very successful . 
 As of 2006 , 30 belugas were in Canada and 28 in the United States , and 42 deaths in captivity had been reported up to that time . A single specimen can reportedly fetch up to US $ 100 @,@ 000 ( UK £ 64 @,@ 160 ) on the market . The beluga 's popularity is due to its unique colour and its facial expressions . The latter is possible because while most cetacean " smiles " are fixed , the extra movement afforded by the beluga 's unfused cervical vertebrae allows a greater range of apparent expression . 
 Between 1960 and 1992 , the Navy carried out a program that included the study of marine mammals ' abilities with sonar , with the objective of improving the detection of underwater objects . A large number of belugas were used from 1975 on , the first being dolphins . The program also included training them to carry equipment and material to divers working underwater by holding cameras in their mouths to locate lost objects , survey ships and submarines , and underwater monitoring . A similar program was used by the Russian Navy during the Cold War , in which belugas were also trained for <unk> operations in the Arctic . 
 Aquariums have tried housing other species of whales in captivity . The success of belugas turned attention to maintaining their relative , the narwhal , in captivity . However , in repeated attempts in the 1960s and 1970s , all narwhals kept in captivity died within months . A pair of pygmy right whales were retained in an enclosed area ( with nets ) ; they were eventually released in South Africa . There was one attempt to keep a stranded Sowerby 's beaked whale calf in captivity ; the calf rammed into the tank wall , breaking its rostrum , which resulted in death . It was thought that Sowerby 's beaked whale evolved to swim fast in a straight line , and a 30 metres ( 98 ft ) was not big enough . There have been attempts to keep baleen whales in captivity . There were three attempts to keep gray whales in captivity . Gigi was a gray whale calf that died in transport . Gigi II was another gray whale calf that was captured in the Ojo de Liebre Lagoon , and was transported to SeaWorld . The 680 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) calf was a popular attraction , and behaved normally , despite being separated from his mother . A year later , the 8 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 18 @,@ 000 lb ) whale grew too big to keep in captivity and was released ; it was the first of two gray whales , the other being another gray whale calf named JJ , to successfully be kept in captivity . There were three attempts to keep minke whales in captivity in Japan . They were kept in a tidal pool with a sea @-@ gate at the Izu Mito Sea Paradise . Another , unsuccessful , attempt was made by the U.S. One stranded humpback whale calf was kept in captivity for rehabilitation , but died days later . 
 = = = <unk> whales = = = 
 Over the last few hundred years sailors and whalers have reported seeing whales they cannot identify . Giglioli 's whale is a purported species of baleen whale observed by Enrico Hillyer Giglioli . <unk> is the nickname for a whale @-@ like creature reportedly sighted in Margate , South Africa in 1924 . The high @-@ finned sperm whale , or Physeter <unk> , is a supposed variant or relative of the known sperm whale , Physeter macrocephalus , said to live in the seas around the Shetland Islands , the Southern Ocean , and Nova Scotia . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = Cobalt = 
 Cobalt is a chemical element with symbol Co and atomic number 27 . Like nickel , cobalt is found in the Earth 's crust only in chemically combined form , save for small deposits found in alloys of natural meteoric iron . The free element , produced by reductive smelting , is a hard , lustrous , silver @-@ gray metal . 
 Cobalt @-@ based blue pigments ( cobalt blue ) have been used since ancient times for jewelry and paints , and to impart a distinctive blue tint to glass , but the color was later thought by alchemists to be due to the known metal bismuth . Miners had long used the name kobold ore ( German for goblin ore ) for some of the blue @-@ pigment producing minerals ; they were so named because they were poor in known metals , and gave poisonous arsenic @-@ containing fumes upon smelting . In 1735 , such ores were found to be reducible to a new metal ( the first discovered since ancient times ) , and this was ultimately named for the kobold . 
 Today , some cobalt is produced specifically from various metallic @-@ <unk> ores , for example cobaltite ( <unk> ) , but the main source of the element is as a by @-@ product of copper and nickel mining . The copper belt in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Central African Republic and Zambia yields most of the cobalt mined worldwide . 
 Cobalt is primarily used in the preparation of magnetic , wear @-@ resistant and high @-@ strength alloys . The compounds , cobalt silicate and cobalt ( II ) aluminate ( <unk> , cobalt blue ) give a distinctive deep blue color to glass , ceramics , inks , paints and varnishes . Cobalt occurs naturally as only one stable isotope , cobalt @-@ 59 . Cobalt @-@ 60 is a commercially important radioisotope , used as a radioactive tracer and for the production of high energy gamma rays . 
 Cobalt is the active center of coenzymes called <unk> , the most common example of which is vitamin B12 . As such , it is an essential trace dietary mineral for all animals . Cobalt in inorganic form is also micronutrient for bacteria , algae and fungi . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Cobalt is a ferromagnetic metal with a specific gravity of 8 @.@ 9 . The Curie temperature is 1 @,@ 115 ° C ( 2 @,@ 039 ° F ) and the magnetic moment is 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 7 Bohr magnetons per atom . Cobalt has a relative permeability two @-@ thirds that of iron . Metallic cobalt occurs as two crystallographic structures : hcp and fcc . The ideal transition temperature between the hcp and fcc structures is 450 ° C ( 842 ° F ) , but in practice , the energy difference is so small that random intergrowth of the two is common . 
 Cobalt is a weakly reducing metal that in pure metallic form , is protected from oxidation by a passivating oxide film . It is attacked by halogens and sulfur . Heating in oxygen produces Co3O4 which loses oxygen at 900 ° C ( 1 @,@ 650 ° F ) to give the monoxide CoO . The metal reacts with fluorine ( F2 ) at 520 K to give <unk> ; with chlorine ( Cl2 ) , bromine ( Br2 ) and iodine ( I2 ) , producing equivalent binary halides . It does not react with hydrogen gas ( H2 ) or nitrogen gas ( N2 ) even when heated , but it does react with boron , carbon , phosphorus , arsenic and sulfur . At ordinary temperatures , it reacts slowly with mineral acids , and very slowly with moist , but not with dry , air . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Common oxidation states of cobalt include + 2 and + 3 , although compounds with oxidation states ranging from − 3 to + 4 are also known . A common oxidation state for simple compounds is + 2 ( cobalt ( II ) ) . These salts form the pink @-@ colored metal aquo complex [ Co ( H2O ) 6 ] 2 + in water . Addition of chloride gives the intensely blue [ <unk> 
 4 ] 2 − . 
 In a borax bead flame test , cobalt shows deep blue in both the <unk> and reducing flames . 
 = = = Oxygen and chalcogen compounds = = = 
 Several oxides of cobalt are known . Green cobalt ( II ) oxide ( CoO ) has rocksalt structure . It is readily oxidized with water and oxygen to brown cobalt ( III ) hydroxide ( Co ( OH ) 3 ) . At temperatures of 600 – 700 ° C , CoO oxidizes to the blue cobalt ( II , III ) oxide ( Co3O4 ) , which has a spinel structure . Black cobalt ( III ) oxide ( <unk> ) is also known . Cobalt oxides are antiferromagnetic at low temperature : CoO ( Néel temperature 291 K ) and Co3O4 ( Néel temperature : 40 K ) , which is analogous to magnetite ( Fe3O4 ) , with a mixture of + 2 and + 3 oxidation states . 
 The principal chalcogenides of cobalt include the black cobalt ( II ) sulfides , <unk> , which adopts a pyrite @-@ like structure , and cobalt ( III ) sulfide ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 Four dihalides of cobalt ( II ) are known : cobalt ( II ) fluoride ( <unk> , pink ) , cobalt ( II ) chloride ( <unk> , blue ) , cobalt ( II ) bromide ( <unk> , green ) , cobalt ( II ) iodide ( <unk> , blue @-@ black ) . These halides exist in anhydrous and hydrated forms . Whereas the anhydrous dichloride is blue , the hydrate is red . 
 The reduction potential for the reaction 
 <unk> + + e − → Co2 + 
 is + 1 @.@ 92 V , beyond that for chlorine to chloride , + 1 @.@ 36 V. Consequently , cobalt ( III ) and chloride would result in the cobalt ( III ) being reduced to cobalt ( II ) . Because the reduction potential for fluorine to fluoride is so high , + 2 @.@ 87 V , cobalt ( III ) fluoride is one of the few simple stable cobalt ( III ) compounds . Cobalt ( III ) fluoride , which is used in some fluorination reactions , reacts vigorously with water . 
 = = = Coordination compounds = = = 
 As for all metals , molecular compounds and polyatomic ions of cobalt are classified as coordination complexes , that is , molecules or ions that contain cobalt linked to several ligands . The principles of electronegativity and hardness – softness of a series of ligands can be used to explain the usual oxidation state of cobalt . For example , Co + 3 complexes tend to have <unk> ligands . Because phosphorus is softer than nitrogen , phosphine ligands tend to feature the softer Co2 + and Co + , an example being tris ( triphenylphosphine ) cobalt ( I ) chloride ( ( P ( C6H5 ) 3 ) <unk> ) . The more electronegative ( and harder ) oxide and fluoride can stabilize <unk> + and <unk> + derivatives , e.g. caesium <unk> ( <unk> ) and potassium <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Alfred Werner , a Nobel @-@ prize winning pioneer in coordination chemistry , worked with compounds of empirical formula [ Co ( NH3 ) 6 ] Cl3 . One of the isomers determined was cobalt ( III ) <unk> chloride . This coordination complex , a typical Werner @-@ type complex , consists of a central cobalt atom coordinated by six <unk> orthogonal ligands and three chloride <unk> . Using chelating ethylenediamine ligands in place of ammonia gives tris ( ethylenediamine ) cobalt ( III ) chloride ( [ Co ( en ) 3 ] Cl3 ) , which was one of the first coordination complexes to be resolved into optical isomers . The complex exists in the right- and left @-@ handed forms of a " three @-@ bladed propeller " . This complex was first isolated by Werner as yellow @-@ gold needle @-@ like crystals . 
 = = = Organometallic compounds = = = 
 Cobaltocene is a structural analog to ferrocene with cobalt in place of iron . Cobaltocene is much more sensitive to oxidation than ferrocene . Cobalt carbonyl ( Co2 ( CO ) 8 ) is a catalyst in carbonylation and <unk> reactions . Vitamin B12 ( see below ) is an organometallic compound found in nature and is the only vitamin that contains a metal atom . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 59Co is the only stable cobalt isotope and the only isotope to exist naturally on Earth . 22 radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being 60Co with a half @-@ life of 5 @.@ <unk> years , 57Co with a half @-@ life of 271 @.@ 8 days , 56Co with a half @-@ life of 77 @.@ 27 days , and <unk> with a half @-@ life of 70 @.@ 86 days . All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half @-@ lives that are shorter than 18 hours , and the majority of these are shorter than 1 second . This element also has 4 meta states , all of which have half @-@ lives shorter than 15 minutes . 
 The isotopes of cobalt range in atomic weight from 50 u ( <unk> ) to 73 u ( <unk> ) . The primary decay mode for isotopes with atomic mass unit values less than that of the most abundant stable isotope , 59Co , is electron capture and the primary mode of decay for those of greater than 59 atomic mass units is beta decay . The primary decay products before 59Co are element 26 ( iron ) isotopes and the primary products after are element 28 ( nickel ) isotopes . 
 = = History = = 
 Cobalt compounds have been used for centuries to impart a rich blue color to glass , glazes , and ceramics . Cobalt has been detected in Egyptian sculpture and Persian jewelry from the third millennium BC , in the ruins of Pompeii ( destroyed in 79 AD ) , and in China dating from the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 AD ) and the Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 AD ) . 
 Cobalt has been used to color glass since the Bronze Age . The excavation of the Uluburun shipwreck yielded an ingot of blue glass , cast during the 14th century BC . Blue glass items from Egypt are colored with copper , iron , or cobalt . The oldest cobalt @-@ colored glass is from the Eighteenth dynasty in Egypt ( 1550 – 1292 BC ) . The source of that cobalt is unknown . 
 The word cobalt is derived from the German <unk> , from kobold meaning " goblin " , a superstitious term used for the ore of cobalt by miners . The first attempts to smelt those ores for copper or nickel failed , yielding simply powder ( cobalt ( II ) oxide ) instead . Because the primary ores of cobalt always contain arsenic , smelting the ore oxidized the arsenic into the highly toxic and volatile arsenic oxide , adding to the notoriety of the ore . 
 Swedish chemist Georg Brandt ( 1694 – 1768 ) is credited with discovering cobalt circa 1735 , showing it to be a previously unknown element , different from bismuth and other traditional metals . Brandt called it a new " semi @-@ metal . " He showed that compounds of cobalt metal were the source of the blue color in glass , which previously had been attributed to the bismuth found with cobalt . Cobalt became the first metal to be discovered since the pre @-@ historical period , during which all the known metals ( iron , copper , silver , gold , zinc , mercury , tin , lead and bismuth ) had no recorded discoverers . 
 During the 19th century , a significant part of the world 's production of cobalt blue ( a dye made with cobalt compounds and alumina ) and smalt ( cobalt glass powdered for use for pigment purposes in ceramics and painting ) was carried out at the Norwegian <unk> . The first mines for the production of smalt in the 16th century were located in Norway , Sweden , Saxony and Hungary . With the discovery of cobalt ore in New Caledonia in 1864 , the mining of cobalt in Europe declined . With the discovery of ore deposits in Ontario , Canada in 1904 and the discovery of even larger deposits in the Katanga Province in the Congo in 1914 , the mining operations shifted again . When the Shaba conflict started in 1978 , the copper mines of Katanga Province nearly stopped production . The impact on the world cobalt economy from this conflict was smaller than expected : cobalt is a rare metal , the pigment is highly toxic , and the industry had already established effective ways for recycling cobalt materials . In some cases , industry was able to change to cobalt @-@ free alternatives . 
 In 1938 , John Livingood and Glenn T. Seaborg discovered the radioisotope cobalt @-@ 60 . This isotope was famously used at Columbia University in the 1950s to establish parity violation in radioactive beta decay . 
 After World War II , the US wanted to guaranteed the supply of cobalt ore for military uses ( as the Germans had been during ) and prospected for cobalt within the U.S. border . An adequate supply of the ore was found in Idaho near Blackbird canyon in the side of a mountain . The firm Calera Mining Company started production at the site . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 The stable form of cobalt is produced in supernovas through the r @-@ process . It comprises 0 @.@ <unk> % of the Earth 's crust and is one of the first transition metals . 
 Free cobalt ( the native metal ) is not found on Earth because of oxygen in the atmosphere and chlorine in the ocean . Oxygen and chlorine are abundant enough in the upper layers of the Earth 's crust to prevent the formation of native metal cobalt . Except as recently delivered in meteoric iron , pure cobalt in native metal form is unknown on Earth ( see below ) . Though the element is of medium abundance , natural compounds of cobalt are numerous . Small amounts of cobalt compounds are found in most rocks , soil , plants , and animals . 
 In nature , cobalt is frequently associated with nickel , and both are characteristic components of meteoric iron , though cobalt is much less abundant in iron meteorites than nickel . As with nickel , cobalt in meteoric iron alloys may have been well enough protected from oxygen and moisture to remain as the free ( but alloyed ) metal , though neither element is seen in that form in the ancient terrestrial crust . 
 Cobalt in compound form occurs as a minor component of copper and nickel minerals . It is the major metallic component in combination with sulfur and arsenic in the sulfidic cobaltite ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( ( Co , Fe ) <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) minerals . The mineral <unk> is similar to pyrite and occurs together with <unk> in the copper deposits of the Katanga Province . Upon contact with the atmosphere , weathering occurs and the sulfide minerals oxidize to form pink <unk> ( " cobalt glance " : <unk> ( AsO4 ) 2 · 8H2O ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 The main ores of cobalt are cobaltite , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( see above ) , but most cobalt is obtained by reducing the cobalt by @-@ products of nickel and copper mining and smelting . 
 In 2005 , the copper deposits in the Katanga Province ( former Shaba province ) of the Democratic Republic of the Congo were the top producer of cobalt with almost 40 % world share , reports the British Geological Survey . The political situation in the Congo influences the price of cobalt significantly . 
 The <unk> Mountain project , operated by the Central African Mining and Exploration Company in Katanga , may be the richest cobalt reserve in the world . It is estimated able to produce about one third of total global production of cobalt in 2008 . In July 2009 <unk> announced a long term agreement under which <unk> would deliver its entire annual production of cobalt in concentrate from <unk> Mountain to Zhejiang <unk> Cobalt & Nickel Materials of China . 
 Several methods exist for the separation of cobalt from copper and nickel . They depend on the concentration of cobalt and the exact composition of the used ore . One separation step involves froth flotation , in which surfactants bind to different ore components , leading to an enrichment of cobalt ores . Subsequent roasting converts the ores to the cobalt sulfate , whereas the copper and the iron are oxidized to the oxide . Leaching with water extracts the sulfate together with the <unk> . The residues are further leached with sulfuric acid , yielding a solution of copper sulfate . Cobalt can also be leached from the slag of copper smelting . 
 The products of the above @-@ mentioned processes are transformed into the cobalt oxide ( Co3O4 ) . This oxide is reduced to the metal by the aluminothermic reaction or reduction with carbon in a blast furnace . 
 Human rights activists allege that child labor is used in some African countries to mine a portion of the worldwide supply of cobalt . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The main application of cobalt is the production of high performance alloys . 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 Cobalt @-@ based superalloys consume most of the produced cobalt . The temperature stability of these alloys makes them suitable for turbine blades for gas turbines and jet aircraft engines , though nickel @-@ based single crystal alloys surpass them in performance . Cobalt @-@ based alloys are also corrosion and wear @-@ resistant , making them ( along with titanium ) useful in medical orthopedic implants that do not wear down over time . The development of wear @-@ resistant cobalt alloys started in the first decade of the 20th century with the stellite alloys , containing chromium with varying quantities of tungsten and carbon . Alloys with chromium and tungsten carbides are very hard and wear resistant . Special cobalt @-@ chromium @-@ molybdenum alloys like <unk> are used for prosthetic parts ( hip and knee replacements ) . Cobalt alloys are also used for dental prosthetics as a useful substitute for nickel , which may be allergenic . Some high speed steels also contain cobalt for increased heat and wear @-@ resistance . The special alloys of aluminium , nickel , cobalt and iron , known as Alnico , and of samarium and cobalt ( samarium @-@ cobalt magnet ) are used in permanent magnets . It is also alloyed with 95 % platinum for jewelry , yielding an alloy suitable for fine casting and is also slightly magnetic . 
 = = = Batteries = = = 
 Lithium cobalt oxide ( <unk> ) is widely used in lithium ion battery cathodes . The material is composed of cobalt oxide layers in which the lithium is intercalated . During discharge , the lithium released as lithium ion . Nickel @-@ cadmium ( <unk> ) and nickel metal hydride ( <unk> ) batteries also include cobalt to improve the oxidation of nickel in the battery . 
 = = = Catalysts = = = 
 Several cobalt compounds are used in chemical reactions as oxidation catalysts . Cobalt acetate is used for the conversion of xylene to <unk> acid , the precursor to the bulk polymer polyethylene terephthalate . Typical catalysts are the cobalt carboxylates ( known as cobalt soaps ) . They are also used in paints , varnishes , and inks as " drying agents " through the oxidation of drying oils . The same carboxylates are used to improve the adhesion between steel and rubber in steel @-@ belted radial tires . 
 Cobalt @-@ based catalysts are used in reactions involving carbon monoxide . Steam reforming , useful in hydrogen production , uses cobalt oxide @-@ base catalysts . Cobalt is also a catalyst in the Fischer – Tropsch process for the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide into liquid fuels . <unk> of alkenes often uses cobalt <unk> as a catalyst , although it is often replaced by more efficient <unk> and rhodium @-@ based catalysts , e.g. the Cativa process . 
 The hydrodesulfurization of petroleum uses a catalyst derived from cobalt and molybdenum . This process helps to clean petroleum of sulfur impurities that interfere with the refining of liquid fuels . 
 = = = Pigments and coloring = = = 
 Before the 19th century , cobalt was predominantly used as a pigment . Since the Middle Ages , it has been used in the production of smalt , a blue colored glass . <unk> is produced by melting a mixture of the roasted mineral <unk> , quartz and potassium carbonate , yielding a dark blue silicate glass which is finely ground after the production . <unk> was widely used for the coloration of glass and as pigment for paintings . In 1780 , Sven Rinman discovered cobalt green , and in 1802 Louis Jacques Thénard discovered cobalt blue . Cobalt pigments such as cobalt blue ( cobalt aluminate ) , cerulean blue ( cobalt ( II ) <unk> ) , various hues of cobalt green ( a mixture of cobalt ( II ) oxide and zinc oxide ) , and cobalt violet ( cobalt phosphate ) are used as artist 's pigments because of their superior chromatic stability . <unk> ( cobalt yellow ) is now largely replaced by more <unk> yellow pigments . 
 = = = Radioisotopes = = = 
 Cobalt @-@ 60 ( Co @-@ 60 or 60Co ) is useful as a gamma ray source because it can be produced in predictable quantity and high activity by bombarding cobalt with neutrons . It produces two gamma rays with energies of 1 @.@ 17 and 1 @.@ 33 MeV . 
 It is used in external beam radiotherapy , sterilization of medical supplies and medical waste , radiation treatment of foods for sterilization ( cold pasteurization ) , industrial radiography ( e.g. weld integrity radiographs ) , density measurements ( e.g. concrete density measurements ) , and tank fill height switches . The metal has the unfortunate property of producing a fine dust , causing problems with radiation protection . Cobalt from radiotherapy machines has been a serious hazard when not discarded properly , and one of the worst radiation contamination accidents in North America occurred in 1984 , when a discarded radiotherapy unit containing cobalt @-@ 60 was mistakenly disassembled in a junkyard in Juarez , Mexico . 
 Cobalt @-@ 60 has a radioactive half @-@ life of 5 @.@ 27 years . The loss of potency requires periodic replacement of the source in radiotherapy and is one reason why cobalt machines have been largely replaced by linear accelerators in modern radiation therapy . 
 Cobalt @-@ 57 ( Co @-@ 57 or 57Co ) is a cobalt radioisotope most often used in medical tests , as a <unk> for vitamin B12 uptake , and for the Schilling test . Cobalt @-@ 57 is used as a source in Mössbauer spectroscopy and is one of several possible sources in X @-@ ray fluorescence devices . 
 Nuclear weapon designs could intentionally incorporate 59Co , some of which would be activated in a nuclear explosion to produce 60Co . The 60Co , dispersed as nuclear fallout , creates what is sometimes called a cobalt bomb . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Cobalt is used in electroplating for its attractive appearance , hardness , resistance to oxidation ; it is used as a base primer coat for porcelain enamels . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Cobalt is essential to the metabolism of all animals . It is a key constituent of cobalamin , also known as vitamin B12 , the primary biological reservoir of cobalt as an ultratrace element . Bacteria in the guts of ruminant animals convert cobalt salts into vitamin B12 , a compound which can only be produced by bacteria or archaea . The minimum presence of cobalt in soils therefore markedly improves the health of grazing animals , and an uptake of 0 @.@ 20 mg / kg a day is recommended because they have no other source of vitamin B12 . 
 In the early 20th century during the development for farming of the North Island Volcanic Plateau of New Zealand , cattle suffered from what was termed " bush sickness " . It was discovered that the volcanic soils lacked the cobalt salts essential for the cattle food chain . The ailment was cured by adding small amounts of cobalt to fertilizers in the form of <unk> ( at the time derived from Canadian sources ) . 
 The " coast disease " of sheep in the Ninety Mile Desert of the Southeast of South Australia in the 1930s was found to originate in nutritional deficiencies of the trace elements , cobalt and copper . The cobalt deficiency was overcome by the development of " cobalt bullets " , dense pellets of cobalt oxide mixed with clay given orally for lodging in the animal 's rumen . 
 Non @-@ ruminant herbivores produce vitamin B12 from bacteria in their colons which again make the vitamin from simple cobalt salts . However , the vitamin cannot be absorbed from the colon and non @-@ ruminants must ingest feces to obtain the nutrient . Other non @-@ ruminants that do not follow these habits must ingest the vitamin from other animal products , and cannot benefit from ingesting simple cobalt salts . 
 Proteins based on cobalamin use corrin to hold the cobalt . Coenzyme B12 features a reactive C @-@ Co bond that participates in the reactions . In humans , B12 has two types of alkyl ligand : methyl and adenosyl . <unk> promotes methyl ( <unk> ) group transfers . The adenosyl version of B12 catalyzes rearrangements in which a hydrogen atom is directly transferred between two adjacent atoms with concomitant exchange of the second substituent , X , which may be a carbon atom with substituents , an oxygen atom of an alcohol , or an amine . <unk> coenzyme A <unk> ( <unk> ) converts <unk> @-@ CoA to Su @-@ CoA , an important step in the extraction of energy from proteins and fats . 
 Although far less common than other <unk> ( e.g. those of zinc and iron ) , <unk> are known aside from B12 . These proteins include methionine <unk> 2 , an enzyme that occurs in humans and other mammals that does not use the corrin ring of B12 , but binds cobalt directly . Another non @-@ corrin cobalt enzyme is nitrile <unk> , an enzyme in bacteria that metabolize nitriles . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Cobalt is an essential element for life in minute amounts . The LD50 value for soluble cobalt salts has been estimated to be between 150 and 500 mg / kg . Thus , for a 100 kg person the LD50 for a single dose would be about 20 grams . In the US , the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has designated a permissible exposure limit ( PEL ) in the workplace as a time @-@ weighted average ( TWA ) of 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 05 mg / m3 , time @-@ weighted average . The IDLH ( immediately dangerous to life and health ) value is 20 mg / m3 . 
 However , chronic cobalt ingestion has caused serious health problems at doses far less than the lethal dose . In 1966 , the addition of cobalt compounds to stabilize beer foam in Canada led to a peculiar form of toxin @-@ induced cardiomyopathy , which came to be known as beer drinker 's cardiomyopathy . 
 After nickel and chromium , cobalt is a major cause of contact dermatitis . 
 Cobalt can be effectively absorbed by charred pigs bones ; however this process is inhibited by copper and zinc ; which have greater affinities to bone char . 
 = Museum of Socialist Art , Sofia = 
 The Museum of Socialist Art ( Bulgarian : <unk> на <unk> <unk> , <unk> na <unk> <unk> ) in Sofia , is a museum of art which covers the history of the communist regime in Bulgaria . It was established on 19 September 2011 amidst a controversy over the name , which was initially proposed as " Museum of Totalitarian Art " . The museum 's collection of large and small statues , busts , and paintings represents the period from 1944 to 1989 , from the time of introduction of communism to Bulgaria to the end of the totalitarian regime . The museum spread over an area of 7 @,@ 500 square metres ( 81 @,@ 000 sq ft ) in the Sofia suburb known as " Red Star is in three parts - a park with sculpture installations drawn from the communist period , an exhibition hall with paintings and easel representations , and a media or video hall in which films and newsreels related to the communist period are screened . 
 = = History = = 
 Many projects were mooted since the 1990s for establishing museums of communism in Sofia , Dimitrovgrad , and <unk> , but none came to fruition . During the same period , many monuments of the Soviet regime were destroyed or dismantled . During the summer of 2011 attempts to create exhibits on the role of the communist regime in Bulgaria were made by a group of artists who painted " pop icons " on the Soviet army memorial in Sofia in June 2011 . At that point , the government decided to establish museums in Bulgaria and also to restore dismantled monuments . The establishment of the Museum of Contemporary Art , the Museum of Ancient Sofia , and the National Museum Complex ( renamed as " the Bulgarian Louvre " ) came to be established in Sofia as a result of that decision . At the same time it was decided by Ministry of Culture to create the Museum of Socialist Art in Sofia to enhance the city 's cultural ambiance and its position as a major tourist attraction , in conformity with similarly themed museums that had been established in many cities of Eastern Europe . It was also considered and accepted by the ministry that the museum would be a subsidiary of the National Gallery of Art . <unk> <unk> , the Minister of Culture , himself a sculptor , took the initiative to see through the project of creating the museum for exhibiting the artistic heritage of the communist regime . The Government of Bulgaria fully supported the initiative and provided funds to the extent of 1 @.@ 5 million euros to establish the museum , hoping that the revenue from the sale of entry tickets would recover this cost in a period of 2 years . The remnants of the socialist regime were found from basement of very town in Bulgaria for installation at the museum before it formally opened on 19 September 2011 . 
 Amidst controversy , the museum 's name , originally planned to be " Museum of Totalitarian Art " , was changed to " Museum of Socialist Art " . The new museum was formally inaugurated on 19 September 2011 . 
 At the inauguration , which was held in the presence of Prime Minister <unk> Borisov , Mayor of Sofia <unk> <unk> , and many ministers , the Finance Minister Simeon <unk> stated : " We are closing one page of the Bulgarian history and communism is going where it belongs – in the museum ... Bulgaria has already shaken it off and is moving forward " . The date of the inauguration also marked the formal occupation of Bulgaria by communists in 1944 . As journalist Georgi <unk> noted : " Bulgaria must have a museum of communism that will tell new generations the story of a period that should never again become reality " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The museum , a branch of the national art gallery , has a display of socialist regime of 45 years ( 1944 @-@ 89 ) period of art symbols and other artifacts and archives with statues in the park . The museum covers an area of 7 @,@ 500 square metres ( 81 @,@ 000 sq ft ) in the Sofia suburb known as " Red Star " . It consists of three parts : a park in which 77 statues or sculptures drawn from the communist period , including a statue of Vladimir Lenin , have been erected ; an exhibition hall with 60 paintings and 25 easel paintings representations ; and a media or video hall in which propaganda films and newsreels related to the communist period are screened . There is also a souvenir kiosk where communist period memorabilia are sold . The museum 's collection covers the period from 1944 to 1989 , from the introduction of communism to Bulgaria to the end of the totalitarian regime . At the entrance of the museum stands a large " five @-@ pointed star " which had earlier adorned the Party House in Sofia from 1954 to 1984 . The statue park , which is said to be the " most representative part of the museum " , features statues , busts , and figures of popular communist leaders and activists , of poets , sculptures of Red army soldiers , agricultural and industrial workers , and so forth . 
 Within the museum hall there are sculptures of communist leaders Todor Zhivkov , Vladimir Lenin , and Joseph Stalin . Some of the exhibits with artistic expression are attributed to many well @-@ known sculptors of the communist regime . Paintings made by artists during the communist regime are also on display , including depictions of the entry of the Soviet Army in 1944 , the creation of communist party branches , portraits , and landscapes . Most of the exhibits on display are of " trials of the partisan and resistance movement during World War II " , the creation of the socialistic pattern of society , and people 's contented life . Some of the paintings depict " Herculean @-@ sized laborers " . Many oil paintings extol the presumed theme of " eternal friendship " between Bulgaria and the Soviet Union . In the museum 's restaurant also there are portraits of Karl Marx , Lenin , Engles and Stalin which are evocative of incongruity . 
 In 2012 , an exhibition on " The Cultural Opening of Bulgaria to the World " , which was the creation of Lyudmila daughter of Todor Zhivkov who ruled in 1953 , and which brought into focus " a golden age of socialist culture " was also exhibited at this museum . 
 = The Don ( Nas song ) = 
 " The Don " is a song by American rapper Nas . Released as the second single from his tenth studio album , Life Is Good ( 2012 ) , it is produced by record producers Da Internz , Heavy D and Salaam Remi , who all helped write the song along with Nas , although Heavy D died before the song could be finished . Built around a sample of " Dance in New York " by reggae singer Super Cat , a former collaborator of Nas , " The Don " is backed by a boom bap , reggae @-@ tinged production with additional drum and piano sounds . Lyrically , Nas attempts to reaffirm his status as a " street poet " , addressing the hardships of poverty within disadvantaged societies and the realities of weapon and drug problems . 
 " The Don " was released to digital retailers on April 3 , 2012 . Although the song was not commercially successful , charting only in the lower regions of the UK Singles Chart , it received acclaim from music critics , many of whom praised Nas ' rapping style and lyrics , especially the realistic persona he conveyed . Some also pronounced themselves impressed with Nas ' motivation at such a point in his long career . A music video for " The Don " , directed by Aristotle Torres , was premiered on April 27 , 2012 , which attempts to present several aspects of Nas ' lifestyle , including performing at concerts , as well as his experiences in New York City , his place of residence . 
 = = Background = = 
 " The Don " was produced by Da Internz , Heavy D and Salaam Remi – the latter a regular collaborator with Nas on many of his previous songs , including the singles " I Can " and " Made You Look " . Heavy D originally presented the song " Dance in New York " , by reggae singer Super Cat to Remi in the belief that Remi could create a " crazy " production if he could choose an appropriate part of the song to sample and edit . Nas , who had worked with Super Cat earlier in his career , claimed that Super Cat actually mentioned him in " Dance in New York " on his first listening of the song . Remi began to try and edit the song , and put together the bassline that would eventually be used on " The Don " , but could not work with the sample that he had been given extensively : after learning the identity of the original producer of " Dance in New York " , Jah Thomas , he paid Thomas in return for use of the song 's multitrack . 
 Remi continued to work on the production whilst also putting together material for the posthumous Amy Winehouse album Lioness : Hidden Treasures ( 2011 ) in London : whilst there , he learnt of Heavy D 's recent death , encouraging him to complete the production for " The Don " . After Nas received the song , he requested that production duo Da Internz work on " The Don " and edit it further before it would be rapped over . In an interview with XXL , Da Internz called it " an honour that you wouldn 't believe " to have worked on the song once they knew of Heavy D 's involvement in its conception , as they had wished to work with him before he died : they also praised Nas ' attitude in the recording studio , describing " his bars [ and ] his approach " as " just special " . Following the song 's completion , radio disc jockey Funkmaster Flex premiered " The Don " on the New York City radio station Hot 97 on March 15 , 2012 ; Def Jam Recordings later released it to digital retailers on April 3 , 2012 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " The Don " was written by Nasir Jones , Dwight Myers , Salaam Gibbs , Marcos Palacios and Ernest Clark , and produced by Myers under his production name Heavy D , Gibbs under his production name Salaam Remi , and Palacios and Clark under their production name Da Internz . Gibbs also provided additional bass sounds in the song 's production . The song was recorded by Gleyder Disla at Instrument Zoo Studios and by Brian Summer at Conway Recording Studios – recording studios in Miami , Florida and Hollywood , California respectively . Reggae artists Super Cat and Jah Thomas are credited as writers on " The Don " , as a sample of the song " Dance in New York " , which the duo wrote together , is interpolated in " The Don " . Audio mixing was carried out by Jaycen Joshua at Larrabee Studios in Hollywood , California , with additional vocals being provided by Red Alert . " The Don " was mastered by Chris Gehringer at Sterling Sound , New York City . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " The Don " is a hip hop song of three minutes and two seconds in length . It begins with the first use of a sample of " Dance in New York " by Super Cat , used as a means of explaining the importance of music to poorer communities . Following this , Nas ' lyrics are backed by an " airy " , boom bap @-@ orientated production , composed by producers Da Internz , Heavy D and Salaam Remi , containing influences of reggae , whilst also featuring a prominent " bass thud " , staccato drum and piano break – similar in style to much of the production featured on Nas ' debut album , Illmatic ( 1994 ) . Other parts of " Dance in New York " are blended into the song 's production throughout . A reviewer for DJBooth felt that the production shared an old @-@ fashioned aesthetic with Nas ' previous single , " Nasty " , noting that " The Don " " shares its predecessor ’ s grimy , old @-@ school informed yet forward @-@ looking feel " . Ken Capobianco shared similar sentiments about the song 's style , observing that it " evoke [ s ] the sound and feel of New York ’ s ' 90s hip @-@ hop heyday " . Henry Adaso of About.com noted Nas ' lyrics as consistent with his persona of a " street poet " , writing that " there are gun threats , car boasts , thoughts of rooftop sex , <unk> to New York rap pioneers , and references to real drug rings " . According to Rolling Stone writer Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson , Nas " deftly " addresses his earlier life by describing " a concise portrait of the artist as a young man " . Heavy D , who died before the song was fully completed , is also mentioned by Nas in the song 's lyrics , where he notes that Heavy D was the one who came up with the production and the ideas behind it before he showed it to Remi . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Don " received universal acclaim from music critics , with Nas 's lyrics drawing particular praise . Rico Barrino of Artistdirect praised Nas 's rapping as being able to impress in different contexts , calling his lyrics " both catchy and commanding " and noted his " precise , potent lyrical poetry honed by 20 years in the game " . Writing for MTV News , Rob Markman called the production " a sonic departure " from Nas ' previous work , but complimented his lyrics as " vintage " and pointed out the consistency of the lyrical quality throughout the song . In his review of " The Don " for About.com , Henry Adaso described the song as " the type of lyrical exercise Nas only throws down once or twice per album " , and that songs such as " The Don " gave a case for Nas ' inclusion " as one of hip @-@ hop 's all @-@ time greats " , also picking up on his " assured " boasts and the " quiet confidence " enveloped in his tone . Adaso also expressed a positive response towards the song 's production , expressing his surprise that having three different producers working on the song had not led to a " case of too many cooks in the kitchen " , writing that " instead , we get a cohesive , hard @-@ hitting , face @-@ melting , reggae @-@ tinged beat " . A reviewer of the song for DJBooth wrote of Nas ' performance as " at turns wistful , threatening and braggadocious " , and praised the production 's " compulsively head @-@ <unk> groove " . In their review of Life Is Good , Sputnikmusic recommended " The Don " to first @-@ time listeners of Nas , stating to be an exhibition of Nas ' " incredible lyrical structures " and " how rapidly this guy can punch out the syllables " . They also noted it as a " change of pace " from the more downtempo material on Life Is Good . In his review of Life Is Good for Prefix Magazine , Charlie Kaplan called " The Don " the album 's " clear highlight " and felt it a fitting tribute to Heavy D 's life and work , writing that it " raises a glass to the recently departed overweight lover with a vivid tour of New York rap 's classic soundscapes " . For the chart week dated July 28 , 2012 , " The Don " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 196 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 A music video for " The Don " was filmed in New York City , and directed by Aristotle Torres . On April 18 , 2012 , a 30 @-@ second promotional clip of the video was released online , which contained shots of skyscrapers and Nas being escorted out of a crowd of party @-@ goers into a white Rolls @-@ Royce . Graphics then appear , announcing the forthcoming release of the full video . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with a shot of a yacht out on water , which then segues to an image of the Statue of Liberty : the words " Nas " and " The Don " have been superimposed in mid @-@ air on the left and right @-@ hand sides of the statue respectively . After quickly moving between various images of New York City , Nas is shown sitting at a table at an open air restaurant with a female , at which point he raps the opening lyrics of the song . Again , the video moves rapidly between images , this time addressing Nas ' lifestyle , with shots of sunglasses , jackets and shirts all featured . Shortly following this , Nas is escorted into a white Rolls Royce , wearing a white suit . He is then shown standing in a ring of fire set up on the ground , whilst continuing to recite lyrics from the song . 
 The video then continues to alternate between three different settings : Nas ' journey in the Rolls Royce , during which he is driven around New York ; him standing in the ring of fire , performing lyrics from the song ; and him sitting in a club , surrounded by several women , also performing lyrics from the song . Black @-@ and @-@ white shots are then shown of Nas performing at a concert , with many fans shown supporting him . Finally , the video ends with several aerial shots of New York City , and an image of the letter " N " burned into the ground . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Nas first performed " The Don " live on March 18 , 2012 , as part of a set specially organised by video service Vevo at the music festival South by Southwest . At the 2012 ESPY Awards , Nas performed " The Don " as part of a medley of songs from Life Is Good , including " Nasty " and " Summer on Smash " , the latter which he performed with rapper and producer Swizz Beatz . On July 17 , 2012 , as part of an appearance on the satirical television program The Colbert Report , Nas performed both " The Don " and the single " Daughters " , a song which also appears on Life Is Good . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " The Don " – 3 : 02 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits for " The Don " are adapted from the liner notes of Life Is Good . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Instrument Zoo Studios in Miami , Florida , and Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Nas – songwriting , vocals 
 Da Internz – songwriting , production 
 Heavy D – songwriting , production 
 Salaam Remi – songwriting , production , bass 
 Marcos Palacios – songwriting 
 Ernest Clark – songwriting 
 Super Cat – songwriting 
 Jah Thomas – songwriting 
 Gleyder Disla – recording 
 Brian Summer – recording 
 Jaycen Joshua – mixing 
 Red Alert – additional vocals 
 Chris Gehringer – mastering 
 Samples 
 Contains elements of " Dance in New York " , performed by Super Cat and written by William Maragh and Nkrumah Thomas . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Astoria Riverfront Trolley = 
 The Astoria Riverfront Trolley is a 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) heritage streetcar line that operates in Astoria , Oregon , United States , using former freight railroad tracks along or near the south bank of the Columbia River , with no overhead line . The service began operating in 1999 , using a 1913 @-@ built streetcar from San Antonio , Texas . As of 2012 , the service was reported as carrying 35 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 passengers per year and has been called a " symbol " and " icon " of Astoria . The line 's operation is seasonal , normally during spring break and from May through September . 
 Volunteers from the non @-@ profit Astoria Riverfront Trolley Association ( ARTA ) operate the service and maintain the streetcar and tracks , but the city of Astoria has provided some funds for certain purchases , including a new carbarn in 2001 and a contribution to the cost of purchasing the streetcar . The car was on loan from San Antonio for the first seven years , but was purchased by ARTA in August 2005 . By 2004 , the Trolley had become " one of Astoria 's most popular features " and " a main attraction in the city of Astoria " . 
 = = Pre @-@ opening history = = 
 The idea of creating a heritage streetcar system in Astoria , as part of efforts to redevelop and revitalize the riverfront area , had first been raised in 1980 , long after the closure of the city 's streetcar @-@ transit system , which operated from 1892 to 1924 . An attempt by city officials to acquire a trolley car in 1986 was dropped in the face of high insurance costs . 
 When Burlington Northern abandoned its freight railroad line from Portland to Astoria in 1996 , the city of Astoria purchased about 6 miles ( 10 km ) of BN right @-@ of @-@ way and track in and around downtown Astoria for possible future use , an action known as " <unk> " . The remaining 92 @-@ mile ( 148 km ) section of the Portland – Astoria line was sold by BN to the Portland and Western Railroad in 1997 and kept intact . After Astoria officials learned that a genuine vintage streetcar already in Oregon was not in use and was available for possible lease , they approached its owners and negotiated a five @-@ year lease . The car was ex @-@ San Antonio Public Service Company No. 300 and was owned by the San Antonio Museum of Art , but had been in Oregon since 1990 and had been used on the Willamette Shore Trolley line , in Portland , from 1990 through 1994 . In November 1998 , Astoria mayor Willis Van Dusen signed the five @-@ year lease , which specified a rent of just $ 1 per year , and car 300 was moved to Astoria the following month . Since 1995 , it had been stored in a closed museum near Gales Creek , Oregon , known as the Trolley Park ( and formally as the Oregon Electric Railway Museum until that museum moved in 1996 ) . Although the car had been in regular use until fewer than four years earlier , it had been stored outdoors since that time and was now in need of extensive restoration work . 
 After raising $ 40 @,@ 000 in donations , volunteers refurbished car 300 and repainted it from the yellow paint scheme it had worn in Portland ( inherited from San Antonio ) to a new red @-@ and @-@ green livery , with " Astoria Riverfront Trolley " lettered along the side , above the windows . To avoid the expense of installing trolley wire and associated support poles and electrical substations , the electric motors of the trolley are powered by a diesel generator mounted on a trailer that the car pulls when westbound and pushes when eastbound , the same arrangement that car 300 had used when running on the Willamette Shore Trolley . 
 = = Route and service = = 
 Service was inaugurated on June 8 , 1999 , on a 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) route from Portway Street to 36th Street . The principal boarding location was at the Columbia River Maritime Museum ( at 17th Street and approximately the middle of the route ) , and initially there were no other set stops . Several designated stops were added later , and some of these include a bench and small shelter . Passengers are still permitted to flag @-@ down the trolley in between the posted stops . 
 The route runs parallel to the Columbia River 's bank , and the river is visible most of the way . In a few places , the tracks are carried on low trestles over the water . The line passes through the NRHP @-@ listed Downtown Historic District , and its westernmost section passes under the Astoria – Megler Bridge . To the east of the Maritime Museum , at 20th Street , it passes a former Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway depot built in 1924 . The fare has always been $ 1 , with an all @-@ day pass available for $ 2 . Around 2006 , operation was extended east from 36th Street to 39th Street , making the line about 3 miles ( 5 km ) long . 
 During the first few years , the line operated from March or April through December , daily in summer months and otherwise Fridays through Sundays . Since about 2005 , it has typically run daily from May through September , and sometimes also during spring break . Hours of operation are noon to 7 p.m. daily , Memorial Day to Labor Day , with more limited dates and hours in late spring and early fall . A round trip takes about 50 minutes . The car makes a trip approximately once an hour in each direction , but there is no exact schedule . Volunteers from the trolley association operate the car , with a two @-@ person crew consisting of a motorman and a conductor . Boarding takes place at the rear door , where the conductor assists people in boarding , collects fares and identifies sights along the route while talking about the city 's history . 
 The trolley line has been credited by local officials with being instrumental in bringing about redevelopment of the downtown waterfront area , among them the chairman of the Port of Astoria Commission , the executive director of the chamber of commerce and the chairman of the Clatsop County Commission . Mayor Willis Van Dusen , another of the trolley 's supporters , was quoted in a 2004 Daily <unk> article as saying that the trolley " has become almost a logo for the city , second only to the Astoria Column . " 
 = = Facilities and acquisitions = = 
 Benches and shelters were installed at several stops along the line in 2000 and 2001 . In 2002 , a new carbarn was built on Industry Street , at the line 's west end , where the trolley car is stored and maintained . The 4 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 370 m2 ) building is owned by the city of Astoria . In 2004 , the Sunset Empire Transportation District opened a new bus transit center near the trolley line , at Ninth Avenue and Marine Drive . 
 In 2005 , the San Antonio Museum of Art ( SAMA ) , which had previously been unwilling to sell car 300 , agreed to allow the Astoria Riverfront Trolley Association ( ARTA ) to buy it . The price was $ 50 @,@ 000 , and it was paid for almost entirely with donations , but with the city of Astoria contributing $ 5 @,@ 000 . The purchase was completed in early 2006 . 
 In 2010 , the car was fitted with a GPS tracking device , and the Astoria @-@ Warrenton Chamber of Commerce makes location information available to the public on its website . The data is updated online every two minutes while the trolley is running . 
 = = Car 300 history = = 
 ARTA 's only streetcar is No. 300 , nicknamed " Old 300 " and built in 1913 by the American Car Company for the streetcar system in San Antonio , Texas . It served San Antonio until the abandonment of streetcar service there in 1933 and was acquired at that time by the San Antonio Museum Association , former parent of the San Antonio Museum of Art . In 1981 , SAMA opened in a former Lone Star Brewery building located along the tracks of the Texas Transportation Company . As an additional attraction for museum visitors , car 300 was restored to operating condition , and in October 1982 it began providing public rides along a short section of track behind the art museum . This heritage trolley service was discontinued at the end of 1985 due to budget cuts , and the trolley car , by then already nicknamed " Old Number 300 " , went back into storage . 
 No. 300 was brought to Oregon in June 1990 by Gales Creek Enterprises ( GCE ) , the then @-@ new operator of the Willamette Shore Trolley line in Portland . GCE was leasing the car from the San Antonio Museum Association . Car 300 was the main streetcar on the WST line through the 1994 season , but in 1995 the city of Lake Oswego decided to give the operating contract for the WST instead to the Oregon Electric Railway Historical Society , and that group substituted its own historic streetcars to provide WST service . GCE moved car 300 to storage at the Oregon Electric Railway Museum , located near Glenwood ( and Gales Creek ) at that time . Meanwhile , the San Antonio Museum Association was dissolved in 1994 , and the San Antonio Museum of Art became car 300 's owner . 
 In 1998 , Astoria officials learned of the car 's availability and secured a five @-@ year lease agreement with SAMA . The car was brought to Astoria in December 1998 to be restored , and it inaugurated the Astoria Riverfront Trolley service in June 1999 . In 2003 , the lease agreement was extended for another five years , but in 2005 this was superseded by an outright purchase , after SAMA agreed to sell the car to the Astoria Riverfront Trolley Association . 
 = Powderfinger = 
 Powderfinger were an Australian rock band formed in Brisbane in 1989 . From 1992 until their break @-@ up in 2010 the line @-@ up consisted of vocalist Bernard Fanning , guitarists Darren Middleton and Ian Haug , bass guitarist John Collins and drummer Jon Coghill . The group 's third studio album Internationalist , peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart in September 1998 . They followed with four more number @-@ one studio albums in a row , Odyssey Number Five ( September 2000 ) , Vulture Street ( July 2003 ) , Dream Days at the Hotel Existence ( June 2007 ) and Golden Rule ( November 2009 ) . Their Top Ten hit singles are " My Happiness " ( 2000 ) , " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " ( 2003 ) and " Lost and Running " ( 2007 ) . Powderfinger earned a total of eighteen ARIA Awards making them the second most awarded band behind Silverchair . Ten Powderfinger albums and DVDs were certified multiple @-@ platinum status , with Odyssey Number Five – their most successful album – achieving eight times platinum certification for shipment of over 560 @,@ 000 units . 
 After the release of their first DVD , These Days : Live in Concert ( September 2004 ) , and a compilation album , Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 – 2000 ( November 2004 ) , the group announced a hiatus in 2005 . The June 2007 announcement of a two @-@ month @-@ long nationwide tour with Silverchair , Across the Great Divide Tour , followed the release of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . Powderfinger were involved in philanthropic causes . In 2005 , they performed at a WaveAid concert in Sydney , to help raise funds for areas affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . Another performance at the Sydney Opera House in October 2007 raised funds for breast cancer victims and their families . One aim of their Across the Great Divide Tour was to promote the efforts of Reconciliation Australia , and awareness of the gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non @-@ Indigenous children . In April 2010 Powderfinger announced that they would be breaking up after their Sunsets Farewell Tour , declaring it would be their last ever as they had musically said everything they wanted to say . On 13 November 2010 , they played their last concert , signifying their disbandment . In November the following year , Dino Scatena , a rock music journalist , and the band , published a biography , Footprints : the inside story of Australia 's best loved band . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early releases ( 1989 – 93 ) = = = 
 Powderfinger were formed in 1989 by Steven Bishop ( ex @-@ The Eternal ) on drums , John Collins ( The Eternal ) on bass guitar and Ian Haug ( The <unk> , The Fossils ) on guitar and vocals . The Eternal , The <unk> and The Fossils were other Brisbane @-@ based outfits . All three members of Powderfinger were students at Brisbane Grammar School – a private school in Spring Hill – and they started as a cover band playing pub rock classics by The Rolling Stones , The Doors , Led Zeppelin , Steppenwolf , Rodriguez and Neil Young . The band 's name is from Young 's song of the same name . Despite their popularity in Brisbane , when playing a heavy metal gig in Newcastle in 1990 , Powderfinger were booed off stage . 
 After completing secondary education , Collins and Haug attended University of Queensland , where the latter met Bernard Fanning in an Economics class – and learned that Fanning had similar interests in music and he could sing . Fanning took over the role of lead vocals from Haug and also provided guitar and harmonica . Late in 1990 , Jon Coghill – another university student with Fanning and Haug – replaced Bishop on drums , which was described as a " mutual leaving " . Bishop later worked in London @-@ based bands before returning to Brisbane where he was a member of <unk> and then The Haymakers . Powderfinger 's final line @-@ up change was in 1992 with the addition of Darren Middleton ( The Pirates ) on guitar , keyboards and backing vocals . Powderfinger initially performed cover versions of other artists ' songs , but gradually developed by writing and performing their own material . 
 In August 1992 , the group self @-@ funded a seven track self @-@ titled extended play , also known as the Blue EP , on their own Finger label and distributed by MDS . It was produced by Leroy Bath and Ian Taylor , recorded at Broken Toys Studios , Brisbane . The EP has an early version of " Save Your Skin " , co @-@ written by Coghill , Collins , Haug , Middleton and Fanning ; it was later expanded and released in July 1994 as a single from their debut album , Parables for Wooden Ears . Their second EP , Transfusion , was issued in September 1993 , it was distributed by Polydor Records . At that time , Simon McKenzie of Time Off noted they were " hoping the major label will put a bit of weight behind the disc , but it 's not as though they 've signed a record deal or anything " . McKenzie felt the EP showed they were " wanting to get heavier and louder for a long time , but is it also a reaction against the sixties tags they 've been stuck with ? " . The five tracks include " Reap What You Sow " , which reached the No. 1 spot on the ARIA Alternative Singles Chart , replacing Nirvana 's " Heart @-@ Shaped Box " . The group recorded their first music video , for " Reap What You Sow " , which was directed by David Barker , who subsequently directed their next seven videos . After the EP 's success the group were signed by Polydor . 
 = = = Early albums ( 1994 – 98 ) = = = 
 In January 1994 Powderfinger performed on the Big Day Out Tour ( see 1994 line @-@ up ) . On 18 July that year they released their debut studio album , Parables for Wooden Ears under Polydor . According to Australian rock music historian , Ian McFarlane , it " featured complex , meticulously crafted rock but was somewhat ponderous and sombre , which did little to fulfil the promise displayed on Transfusion " . The album was produced by Tony Cohen ( Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds , The Cruel Sea ) , which Fanning later described as the band 's " dark dark days " , received limited radio coverage . Supporting the album 's release , the band toured heavily appearing at the Livid and Homebake music festivals . Powderfinger supported United States visitors Pantera on that group 's Driven Downunder Tour ' 94 . Another Australian support act on the tour was Newcastle @-@ formed band , Silverchair . Three singles were released from Powderfinger 's debut album – " Tail " , " Grave Concern " and " Save Your Skin " – but none appeared on the ARIA Singles Chart Top 50 . Following the album 's release , and lukewarm reception , in April 1995 the band recorded at Melbourne 's Metropolis Studio with Lachlan " Magoo " Goold ( Regurgitator ) and in July released a five @-@ track EP , Mr Kneebone . 
 The band 's second studio album , Double Allergic , was issued on 2 September 1996 , which peaked at No. 4 on the ARIA Albums Chart and was certified triple platinum by ARIA for shipment of 210 @,@ 000 units by 2007 . It was co @-@ produced by Tim Whitten and the group . McFarlane felt this album was " more self @-@ assured and textured [ it ] consolidated the band 's position at the forefront of the alternative rock scene , alongside the likes of You Am I , Spiderbait , silverchair , Regurgitator and Tumbleweed . [ The album ] was full of accessible , spirited rock " . Australian rock music journalist , Ed Nimmervoll , noted " [ it ] revealed a significant shift towards accessible rock songs rooted in melodic grooves . Powderfinger 's reason to be is to create songs strong enough for the band and audience to play and hear months or years down the line " . Four singles were released from the album – " Pick You Up " , " D.A.F. " , " Living Type " and " Take Me In " . " Take Me In " was released as a video single featuring several other music videos by the group . FasterLouder , a music review web site , recalled that " when Double Allergic was released in 1996 , it showed the band were here for the long haul to become arguably one of the best of the decade " . In 1997 the album was issued in Canada and the group toured North America to promote it . 
 = = = Critical acclaim and chart success ( 1998 – 2003 ) = = = 
 On 7 September 1998 , Powderfinger released their third studio album , Internationalist , which peaked at No. 1 and spent 101 weeks in the Top 50 of the ARIA Albums Chart , it was produced by Nick DiDia ( Rage Against the Machine , Pearl Jam ) . Allmusic 's Jonathan Lewis had mixed feelings about the album , he was enchanted by its lead single , " The Day You Come " , however " the rest of the album didn 't measure up " except for " some fine tracks " in " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " and " Already Gone " . Nevertheless , by 2007 the album had shipped over 350 @,@ 000 copies and was certified five times platinum domestically , and had reached European audiences . Internationalist was the first Powderfinger album to win any ARIA Music Awards . At the 1999 ceremony it won " Album of the Year " , " Best Rock Album " and " Best Cover Art " ( by Kevin Wilkins ) ; and " The Day You Come " won " Single of the Year " . " Passenger " , another single from Internationalist , was nominated for three additional categories in the following year . The band was both praised and criticised for their political views on Internationalist . In a November 1998 interview with Benedict Watts of Juice Magazine , Haug said that political messages in " The Day You Come " were not something they were just preaching about , but rather were something they saw as a responsibility . 
 Powderfinger 's fourth studio album , Odyssey Number Five , was released on 4 September 2000 , which also peaked at No. 1 . Entertainment Weekly 's Marc Weingarten provided a positive review and found the group " prove that there 's still terrain left to be explored [ in ] guitar rock ... melancholy is the default mode ... [ they ] can be as prim as Travis or as mock @-@ grandiose as Oasis " . However Allmusic 's Dean Carlson was more negative seeing the album as " little more than a slightly off @-@ base perspective into the world of mid @-@ 90s American grunge " . Odyssey Number Five is Powderfinger 's most commercially successful album , shipping 560 @,@ 000 copies and certified eight times platinum by 2004 . It also appeared on the New Zealand Albums Chart at No. 15 . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2001 the group won " Album of the Year " , " Highest Selling Album " , " Best Rock Album " , " Best Cover Art " ( by Wilkins ) and " Best Group " . 
 Two of Odyssey Number Five 's tracks featured on film soundtracks : " These Days " was written for Two Hands ( 1999 ) and " My Kind of Scene " on Mission : Impossible II ( 2000 ) . Singles from the album are " My Kind of Scene " , " My Happiness " , " Like a Dog " , and the double A @-@ side , " The Metre " / " Waiting for the Sun " . " My Happiness " which peaked at No. 4 in Australia and No. 7 in New Zealand is the group 's highest charting single in both countries . At the ARIA Awards ceremony " My Happiness " won " Single of the Year " , and other songs were nominated in various categories . Their tracks were voted for , by national radio station Triple J 's listeners , on annual Hottest 100 lists : " These Days " , " Already Gone " , " Good @-@ Day Ray " , and " Passenger " were ranked in 1999 , and " My Happiness " and " My Kind of Scene " in 2000 . In 2009 , " These Days " was voted at No. 21 and " My Happiness " at No. 27 in the Hottest 100 of all time , placing them as second and fourth highest Australian tracks after the Hilltop Hoods ' " The Nosebleed Section " and Hunters & Collectors ' " Throw Your Arms Around Me " , respectively . 
 = = = Rock resurgence ( 2003 – 05 ) = = = 
 Powderfinger 's Vulture Street was released on 4 July 2003 , and became their third album to peak at No. 1 in Australia , while in New Zealand it reached No. 17 . Recorded in January and February 2003 , it was named for the location of the band 's first recording room in West End , Brisbane . The Sydney Morning Herald 's music critic , Bernard Zuel approved of " a rawer , louder , but by no means unrefined , album " with " a real energy here that has some connections to early Powderfinger , but bears the mark of a superior intellect " , he felt it had Haug and Middleton " dominating in a way they had not since their 1994 debut " album . Simon Evans of musicOMH described the group as having " opted for a visceral live feel , adding a real punch to songs " . Middleton described the band 's aim was to " get a sound in the songs that was reminiscent of things we grew up loving , which was Bowie , Zeppelin , Kiss ... that sort of thing ; all based in the 70s . We wanted to sonically have that as well , so it 's a very old @-@ school @-@ sounding record . It 's all the old amps , we used old guitars and recorded to tape , of course . It 's fairly organic in that sense " . Vulture Street won four ARIA Awards in 2003 : " Album of the Year " , " Best Group " , " Best Rock Album " and " Best Cover Art " ( by Steven <unk> , Revolution Design ) . Singles issued from the album are : " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , " Since You 've Been Gone " , " Love Your Way " , and " Sunsets " . Tracks were also nominated for awards in 2003 and 2004 . 
 In September 2004 the group issued their first live album , These Days : Live in Concert , initially as a CD and followed in October with a two @-@ disc DVD . One single , " Stumblin ' " , which had appeared on Vulture Street , was issued as a live version . In late October they released a compilation album , Fingerprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 1994 – 2000 , which included many of their singles from the first four albums as well as non @-@ singles : " Thrilloilogy " and " Belter " , and a re @-@ release of " These Days " . " These Days " , although never officially released as a single , was ranked at No. 1 on the Triple J Hottest 100 poll of 1999 . The album also included two new songs : " Bless My Soul " and " Process This " , although only " Bless My Soul " was released as a single . Following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami , Powderfinger appeared at the WaveAid fund raising concert in January 2005 in Sydney , to raise funds for aid organisations working in the disaster affected areas . Fanning , as a member of The Wrights , sang lead vocals on " Evie , part 2 " at the concert . The Wrights released a studio version in March as a single with some of the proceeds going to tsunami relief efforts . 
 = = = Era of side projects ( 2005 – 07 ) = = = 
 After the WaveAid concert , from early 2005 , Powderfinger had a period of hiatus . During the separation , most band members pursued other musical projects ; on the personal front : Haug and Middleton each had children , and Fanning met his future wife . Middleton 's side project , Drag , had issued an EP , Gas Food Lodging , in 2002 . <unk> Reviews found the EP was " full of well @-@ written jangly pop , and has some rather nice ballads " . Their debut album , The Way Out , was recorded in March 2005 and released on 10 July , which was " a tad disappointing [ compared with the EP ] ... mostly mid @-@ tempo pop @-@ rock songs , mixed with some slower , pretty ballads . Everything 's tastefully arranged , and there 's always nice melodies and harmonies " . Collins and Haug formed The Predators with Powderfinger 's former drummer , Steven Bishop , now on drums and lead vocals . The group released a six @-@ track EP , Pick Up the Pace , in July 2006 and undertook a short tour around Australia . 
 In October 2005 Fanning issued his debut solo album , Tea & Sympathy , which reached No. 1 in Australia and No. 11 in New Zealand . At the ARIA Music Awards of 2006 , Fanning won in four categories including " Album of the Year " for Tea & Sympathy and " Best Video " for its lead single , " Wish You Well " . " Wish You Well " was ranked at No. 1 on the Triple J Hottest 100 poll in 2005 . At the end of 2006 , Fanning toured in support of the album 's release in the United Kingdom and North America ; at its conclusion Powderfinger resumed from their hiatus . Fanning compared his solo work to Powderfinger recordings " when a problem came up in the studio , especially guitar @-@ wise , I 've always had Darren and Ian to call on . They could usually come up with something good . But I played all the guitar on it , and my abilities are fairly limited " and that " Powderfinger is my real job and I 'm looking forward to doing it again " . 
 = = = Return from hiatus ( 2007 – 09 ) = = = 
 Powderfinger started recording their sixth studio album , Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , in January 2007 , which was released on 2 June . Debuting at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart – their fourth to do so consecutively – it broke the Australian digital sales record with over 3000 copies sold online . Generally reviewers did not rate it as highly as its predecessor , Vulture Street , with Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun HiT describing it as " No radical reinvention , no huge change in direction ... In a word : consistent " . Zuel described it as " Powderfinger 's first dull album " but the band as " the biggest rock band in the country . " " Lost and Running " , their first single for three years , had been issued in May , and reached No. 5 . A second single , " I Don 't Remember " , appeared in August . A song from the album , " Black Tears " , was amended following concerns that it could prejudice a trial over the 2004 Palm Island death in custody case . Fanning stated that an alternative version would be on the album as a result of the concerns . On 18 August that year , Powderfinger performed a concert in Karratha , as part of Triple J 's AWOL Series . The band was supported by The <unk> and <unk> N Plutonic , and various local acts . While in Karratha , Fanning and Coghill visited <unk> <unk> , a local school in Roebourne that encourages children to stay in school . 
 In June 2007 Powderfinger and Silverchair announced the nine @-@ week Across the Great Divide Tour to promote reconciliation with Indigenous Australians . From August to October that year the two groups toured all state capital cities , fourteen Australian regional centres , and included four performances in New Zealand . They performed 34 concerts in 26 towns across Australia , with an estimated total of 220 @,@ 000 people in attendance . On 1 December a triple @-@ DVD set was released with the same title as the tour with the Melbourne performances for both bands and backstage footage from the tour . The schedule consisted of three main parts , beginning with a supporting artist performing one set , followed by Silverchair and then Powderfinger playing the final set . The two bands united on @-@ stage during only three performances throughout the tour , including Daniel Johns ( Silverchair ) and Fanning sharing lead vocals on a cover version of The Who 's " Substitute " at a Sydney and two Melbourne shows . 
 Dream Days at the Hotel Existence was the recipient of the ARIA Award for " Best Cover Art " in 2007 . It was also nominated for " Album of the Year " , " Best Rock Album " and " Best Group " , while " Lost and Running " received nominations for " Single of the Year " and " Best Video " . Powderfinger failed to win any of these awards with tour mates Silverchair 's Young Modern and " Straight Lines obtaining all five . On 28 October at the ceremony , Powderfinger performed " Lost and Running " . The third single from Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , " Nobody Sees " was released in December 2007 . On 27 September 2008 , Powderfinger performed " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " and AC / DC 's " Long Way to the Top " at the AFL Grand Final . Their song " Drifting Further Away " featured on Grey 's Anatomy 's fifth season in episode 13 , " Stairway to Heaven " , which aired on 21 January 2009 . 
 = = = Golden Rule and disbandment ( 2009 – 10 ) = = = 
 From mid @-@ June 2009 Powderfinger worked with DiDia producing their seventh studio album , Golden Rule , which was issued on 13 November . The album peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA albums chart – becoming their fifth studio album in a row to do so . The album 's lead single , " All of the Dreamers " , was released in September . " Burn Your Name " , the second single followed in December . That same month the band performed at the 2009 Homebake festival – after a 10 @-@ year absence . In late January they toured on the 2010 Big Day Out . The third single from the album , " Sail the <unk> Stretch " , appeared in April . 
 Also in April 2010 , Powderfinger announced that after 21 years , the group would disband following their Sunsets Farewell Tour in September and October that year : 
 With the completion of our last album , Golden Rule , we feel that we have said all that we want to say as a musical group . We firmly believe that it is our most complete and satisfying album and can 't think of a better way to farewell our fans than with music that we all believe in and also with , hopefully , our best tour to date . 
 Coghill told Australian Times that the final tour is " going to be great fun , but it 's also going to be sad " . He confirmed that he had no plans to start a new band or for a solo project . Instead he intended to finish his degree , " [ o ] nce I 'm done with that , I might put the feelers out and see what 's happening . I don 't think I 'd be doing anything solo , but I might look to join other bands , just to have a chance to keep playing . I 'm just not keen to be off touring the world anymore " . Powderfinger played their final show at the River Stage in Brisbane on 13 November 2010 in front of 10 @,@ 000 fans ; the last song they performed was " These Days " . On 25 January 2011 the band issued a previously unreleased track , " I 'm on Your Side " , as a fund raiser for the Premier 's Flood Appeal as a result of major flooding in Queensland from December the previous year into January . The song was available via the band 's website with all proceeds going towards the cause . On 8 November 2011 , the group released a second compilation album , Footprints : The Best of Powderfinger , 2001 @-@ 2011 , containing two new tracks . There was also a 2 @-@ disc release , Fingerprints & Footprints – The Ultimate Collection , combining both Fingerprints and Footprints in one set . Also in November , Dino Scatena and the band , published a biography , Footprints : the inside story of Australia 's best loved band . Scatena , a rock music journalist , had started writing the book in the previous October during the Sunsets Farewell Tour . 
 = = = Afterwards = = = 
 Former Powderfinger member , Fanning worked on his second solo album Departures during late 2012 in Los Angeles with Joe Chiccarelli producing . It was released in June the following year and peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart . Middleton had relocated to Melbourne and worked with Red Door Sounds ' Paul <unk> – producer of Children Collide 's album , Monument ( April 2012 ) . In December that year Middleton revealed that " I ’ m halfway through a new record " . Middleton 's album , Translations , was released independently in November 2013 . Around the same time Coghill was working as a journalist on the Gold Coast , while Collins was " developing business projects in Queensland " . 
 In January 2013 Haug produced the second album , Sins of a Li 'l Later Kiss , by Brisbane @-@ based folk duo Cole and Van Dijk . He then joined The Church , replacing Marty Willson @-@ Piper , and featured on their 2014 album Further / Deeper . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Powderfinger 's musical style includes hard rock and alternative music and , according to McFarlane , " the band made its mark with an earthy , blues @-@ based sound that combined soaring , 1970s @-@ influenced riff @-@ rock with 1990s studio technology . With the added textures of folk , country and a soulful groove , the band was able to head in any direction " . Nimmervoll acclaimed them as " one of Australia 's most popular radio @-@ friendly rock bands " which " produced music the rest of Australia embraced " . McFarlane was partially disappointed with their debut 1994 album Parables for Wooden Ears compared to their earlier EP Transfusion . Their 1996 album , Double Allergic , was " more self @-@ assured and textured " and " consolidated the band 's position at the forefront of the alternative rock scene " . It " revealed a significant shift towards accessible rock songs rooted in melodic grooves " according to Nimmervoll . 
 In a November 2007 interview with Paul Cashmere of Undercover website , Middleton stated that a couple of songs they had initially written for Vulture Street " were just too Odyssey Number Five based " , and that the first track , " Rockin ' Rocks " , was " probably the start of where we were heading " with the album " . Cashmere stated that the album was " the toughest [ he has ] heard Powderfinger sound " . Zuel reviewed two of Powderfinger 's more recent albums , he described Vulture Street as " a rawer , louder " album in comparison to Odyssey Number Five ; it highlighted Fanning 's " talent as a lyricist " and stated that it featured guitarists Haug and Middleton " dominating in a way they haven 't since their 1994 debut " . Zuel stated that there is a " real energy here that has some connections to early Powderfinger , " and described " On My Mind " as having " AC / DC <unk> " , and " Love Your Way " as " acoustic tumbling into weaving Zeppelin lines . " In his review of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , Zuel described it as " [ having ] high @-@ gloss and muscular framework , " and stated that that was what " American radio considers serious rock . " 
 Compared with the relatively lean , agile sound they 've perfected up to now , this is Powderfinger as the footballer who in the off @-@ season spends his time in the gym and emerges buff and beefy . The problem is he has bulk but has traded in his nimbleness . 
 Clayton Bolger of Allmusic stated in his review of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence that Powderfinger " largely revisit the sound of their Internationalist album , leaving behind much of the glam and swagger of 2003 's Vulture Street " . He commented on Fanning 's " commanding and distinctive vocals " , the " twin @-@ guitar attack " of Middleton and Haug , Collins ' " innovative basslines " , and the " powerhouse drum work " of Coghill . Nimmervoll described Golden Rule as " Powderfinger back to its essence . They ’ d experimented with the sound , tried different things with the songwriting process and recorded in America with different producers . [ It ] was recorded at home , the band reunited with American Nick DiDia , who had previously worked with the band during the “ classic ” era , producing Internationalist , Odyssey Number 5 and Vulture Street . They also wrote the songs as a team , with Bernard responsible for the bulk of the lyrics . The album was recorded in the same spirit , as close to the live sound as a studio album could be " . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Powderfinger were active in supporting causes or opposing actions taken in charitable , philanthropic , disaster , and political circumstances . In 1996 , when Crowded House decided to break up , they organised a farewell concert as a charity event for the Sydney Children 's Hospital , on 24 November . They approached Powderfinger and fellow Australian acts Custard and You Am I to also appear on the steps of the Sydney Opera House . The charity event , which was recorded and later released as a live album titled Farewell to the World , was claimed to have the largest Australian live concert audience , with estimates of between 100 @,@ 000 and 250 @,@ 000 people . In the wake of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami , Powderfinger performed at the WaveAid fund @-@ raising concert in Sydney in January 2005 . The disaster killed more than 225 @,@ 000 people from 11 countries in the area . The total profit from the funds raised from ticket sales and donations was A $ 2 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 The song " Black Tears " from the album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence originally had the lyric " An island watchhouse bed , a black man 's lying dead " , which sparked fears that it might prejudice the trial of the former Senior Sergeant Chris Hurley over the 2004 Palm Island death in custody case . The band claimed that the song 's lyrics primarily dealt with the climbing of Uluru by tourists despite requests from the Indigenous people of the area to respect their sacred sites and not climb . The original version of the song was retracted from the album , and replaced with an alternative version with the criticised material removed . The legal team for Hurley , who was charged with manslaughter over the death of Mulrunji in 2004 , had referred the song to the Attorney @-@ General of Queensland , Kerry Shine , in their attempt at altering the track . One of Hurley 's lawyers , Glen <unk> , stated that " the content and proposed timing of the song 's release raises some serious concerns regarding Mr Hurley 's trial " . Powderfinger 's band manager , Paul Piticco , stated that Fanning had confirmed that a line in the song was related to the case . However , he added that the lyric in question could refer to " a watchhouse in The Bahamas or something " . 
 In June 2007 , Powderfinger and Silverchair announced their combined Across the Great Divide Tour , which promoted Reconciliation Australia , a foundation helping to improve the welfare of the Indigenous people of Australia , and to " show [ that ] both bands are behind the idea of reconciliation " . Reconciliation Australia increased the awareness of the 17 @-@ year difference in life expectancy between the Indigenous and non @-@ Indigenous children of Australia . In October that year , during Breast Cancer Awareness Month , Powderfinger performed another concert on the steps of the Sydney Opera House . This concert was for invitees only – breast cancer patients , survivors and their families were eligible to attend . Powderfinger performed alongside Silverchair , Missy Higgins , and other artists to an audience of 700 . The concert was filmed and later broadcast as a MAX Session on Foxtel channel MAX on 3 November . 
 For the Sunsets Farewell Tour in September 2010 , the band promoted another indigenous cause , the <unk> organisation . The organisation provides indigenous children with opportunities to get a proper education . In January 2011 , following the Queensland flood disaster , [ <unk> ] reported that Powderfinger would not reform for a benefit concert but instead donated a never before released track , " I 'm on Your Side " , to help raise money for the victims . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Throughout their recording career Powderfinger consisted of five members : Bernard <unk> vocalist , guitarist , keyboardist and harmonicist and contributed lyrics ; John Collins was their bass guitarist ; Ian Haug was their first lead vocalist but mostly provided backing vocals and guitar ; Darren Middleton was their co @-@ lead guitarist , keyboardist , backing vocalist and sometime lead vocalist ; Jon Coghill was their drummer and percussionist . The lineup remained stable from 1992 to their disbandment in November 2010 . Steven Bishop had been the group 's original drummer , but had left to focus on his studies . The band refers to one another by nicknames , including Collins as JC and Coghill as <unk> . 
 Powderfinger have collaborated with some artists , they had pianist Benmont Tench play on Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . For touring or session work auxiliary musicians used include Alex <unk> on percussion , Duane Billings on percussion , and Lachlan Doley on keyboards . For their second album , Double Allergic , the group enlisted Tim Whitten as producer . The group approached American expatriate Nick DiDia as their producer for Internationalist , and recorded with him at Sing Sing Studios in Melbourne . DiDia also produced the following two albums . In 2007 Rob Schnapf , producer for Beck , was asked to produce Dream Days at the Hotel Existence in Los Angeles . DiDia returned for Golden Rule . Powderfinger 's first music video , for the song " Reap What You Sow " in 1993 , was directed by David Barker , an award @-@ winning director . Film companies who directed other videos of the group include Fifty Fifty Films , and Head Pictures . 
 = = Discography = = 
 1994 : Parables for Wooden Ears 
 1996 : Double Allergic 
 1998 : Internationalist 
 2000 : Odyssey Number Five 
 2003 : Vulture Street 
 2007 : Dream Days at the Hotel Existence 
 2009 : Golden Rule 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Powderfinger was highly successful in the Australian recording industry , being a recipient of the industry 's flagship awards , the ARIA Music Awards , 18 times from 47 nominations – second highest band behind Silverchair 's 21 wins from 49 nominations . Powderfinger 's most successful year was 2001 they won six awards from eight nominations for Odyssey Number Five and its related singles . " These Days " and " My Happiness " were ranked at No. 1 on the Triple J Hottest 100 lists in 1999 and 2000 respectively , and 21 other Powderfinger tracks have ranked on lists in other years . 
 = Operation Ke = 
 Operation Ke ( ケ号作戦 ) was the largely successful withdrawal of Japanese forces from Guadalcanal at the conclusion of the Guadalcanal Campaign of World War II . The operation took place between 14 January and 7 February 1943 , and involved both army and navy forces under the overall direction of the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters ( IGH ) . Commanders of the operation included Isoroku Yamamoto and Hitoshi Imamura . 
 The Japanese decided to withdraw and concede Guadalcanal to Allied forces for several reasons . All attempts by the Japanese army to recapture Henderson Field , the airfield on Guadalcanal in use by Allied aircraft , had been repulsed with heavy losses . Japanese ground forces on the island were beginning to die in large numbers from starvation and lack of adequate medical care . Japanese naval forces in the area were also suffering heavy losses attempting to reinforce and resupply the ground forces on the island . These losses , plus the projected resources needed for more attempts to recapture Guadalcanal , were affecting strategic security and operations in other areas of the Japanese Empire . The decision to withdraw was endorsed by Emperor Hirohito on 31 December 1942 . 
 The operation began on 14 January with the delivery of a battalion of infantry troops to Guadalcanal to act as rearguard for the evacuation . Around the same time , Japanese army and navy air forces began an air superiority campaign around the Solomon Islands and New Guinea . During the air campaign , a US cruiser was sunk in the Battle of Rennell Island . Two days later , Japanese aircraft sank a US destroyer near Guadalcanal . The actual withdrawal was carried out on the nights of 1 , 4 , and 7 February by destroyers . Apart from some air and PT boat attacks on the evacuating destroyers , Allied forces did not actively attempt to impede the withdrawal because Allied commanders believed the operation was actually a reinforcement operation , not an evacuation . 
 In total , the Japanese evacuated 10 @,@ 652 men from Guadalcanal at a cost of one destroyer sunk and three damaged . On 9 February , Allied forces realized that the Japanese were gone and declared Guadalcanal secure , ending the six @-@ month campaign for control of the island . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Guadalcanal Campaign = = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily United States ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the US and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of capturing or neutralizing the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal campaign . 
 Taking the Japanese by surprise , by nightfall on 8 August the Allied troops ( mainly United States Marine Corps ) secured Tulagi and nearby small islands as well as the Japanese airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . The Allies later renamed it " Henderson Field " . Allied aircraft operating out of Henderson were called the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied code name for Guadalcanal . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters ( IGH ) assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's ( IJA ) 17th Army , a corps @-@ sized command headquartered at Rabaul under the command of Lieutenant General Harukichi Hyakutake , the task of retaking Guadalcanal . Because of the threat by CAF aircraft , the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) was unable to use large , slow transport ships to deliver troops and supplies to the island . Instead , warships based at Rabaul and the Shortland Islands were used to carry forces to Guadalcanal . The Japanese warships , mainly light cruisers and destroyers from the Eighth Fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa , were usually able to make the round trip down " The Slot " to Guadalcanal and back in a single night , thereby minimizing their exposure to CAF air attack . These high speed warship runs to Guadalcanal occurred throughout the campaign and were later called the " Tokyo Express " by Allied forces and " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . 
 Using forces delivered to Guadalcanal in this manner , the Japanese army tried three times to retake Henderson Field , but was defeated each time . After the third failure , an attempt by the IJN to deliver the rest of the IJA 38th Infantry Division and its heavy equipment failed during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal from 12 – 15 November . Because of this failure , the Japanese cancelled their next planned attempt to recapture Henderson Field . 
 In mid @-@ November , Allied forces attacked the Japanese at Buna @-@ Gona in New Guinea . Japanese Combined Fleet naval leaders , headquartered at Truk and under the overall command of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , felt Allied advances in New Guinea posed a greater threat to the security of the Japanese Empire than an Allied military presence in the southern Solomons . Therefore , Combined Fleet naval staff officers began to prepare plans for abandoning Guadalcanal and shifting priorities and resources to operations around New Guinea . At this time , the navy did not inform the army of their intentions in this regard . 
 As December began , the Japanese experienced considerable difficulty in keeping their troops on Guadalcanal resupplied because of Allied air and naval attacks on the Japanese supply chain of ships and bases . The few supplies delivered to the island were not enough to sustain Japanese troops , who by 7 December were losing about 50 men each day from malnutrition , disease , and Allied ground or air attacks . The Japanese had delivered almost 30 @,@ 000 army troops to Guadalcanal since the campaign began , but by December only about 20 @,@ 000 of that number were still alive , and only about 12 @,@ 000 remained more or less fit for combat duty , with the rest incapacitated by battle wounds , disease , or malnutrition . 
 The IJN continued to suffer losses and damage to its ships in attempting to keep the Japanese on Guadalcanal resupplied . One destroyer was sunk by American warships at the Battle of Tassafaronga on 30 November . Another destroyer plus a submarine were sunk and two destroyers damaged by American PT boat and CAF air attacks during subsequent resupply missions from 3 – 12 December . Compounding the navy 's frustration , very few of the supplies carried on these missions actually reached Japanese army forces on the island . Combined Fleet leaders began telling their army counterparts the losses and damage to warships engaged in the resupply effort threatened future strategic plans for protecting the Japanese Empire . 
 = = = Decision to withdraw = = = 
 Throughout November , Japan 's top military leaders at the IGH in Tokyo continued to openly support further efforts to retake Guadalcanal from Allied forces . At the same time , however , lower @-@ ranking staff officers began to discreetly discuss abandoning the island . <unk> Hattori and Masanobu Tsuji , each of whom had recently visited Guadalcanal , told their colleagues on the staff that any further attempt to retake the island was a lost cause . <unk> <unk> reported that the attrition of IJA troop @-@ strength on Guadalcanal was so unexpectedly severe that future operations would be untenable . On 11 December , two staff officers , IJN Commander Yuji Yamamoto and IJA Major Takahiko Hayashi returned to Tokyo from Rabaul and confirmed Hattori 's , Tsuji 's , and <unk> 's reports . They further reported that most of the IJN and IJA officers at Rabaul appeared to support abandoning Guadalcanal . Around this time , Japan 's War Ministry informed the IGH that there was an insufficient amount of shipping to support both the effort to retake Guadalcanal and transport strategic resources to maintain Japan 's economy and military forces . 
 On 19 December , a delegation of IGH staff officers , led by IJA Colonel <unk> Sanada , chief of the IGH 's operations section , arrived at Rabaul for discussions about future plans concerning New Guinea and Guadalcanal . Hitoshi Imamura , commander of the 8th Area Army in charge of IJA operations in New Guinea and the Solomons , did not directly recommend a withdrawal from Guadalcanal but openly and clearly described the current difficulties involved with any further attempts to retake the island . Imamura also stated that any decision to withdraw should include plans to evacuate as many of the soldiers from Guadalcanal as possible . 
 Sanada returned to Tokyo on 25 December and recommended to the IGH that Guadalcanal be abandoned immediately and all priority given to the campaign in New Guinea . The IGH 's top leaders agreed with Sanada 's recommendation on 26 December and ordered their staffs to begin drafting plans for the withdrawal from Guadalcanal and establishment of a new defense line in the central Solomons . 
 On 28 December , General Hajime Sugiyama and Admiral Osami Nagano personally informed Emperor Hirohito of the decision to withdraw from Guadalcanal . On 31 December , the Emperor formally endorsed the decision . 
 = = = Plan and forces = = = 
 On 3 January , IGH informed the 8th Area Army and the Combined Fleet of the decision to withdraw from Guadalcanal . By 9 January , the Combined Fleet and 8th Area Army staffs together completed the plan , officially called Operation Ke after a mora in Japanese Kana vocabulary , to execute the evacuation . 
 The plan called for a battalion of army infantry to land by destroyer on Guadalcanal around 14 January to act as a rear guard during the evacuation . The 17th Army was to begin withdrawing to the western end of the island about 25 or 26 January . An air superiority campaign around the southern Solomons would begin on 28 January . The 17th Army would be picked up in three lifts by destroyers the first week of February with a target completion date of 10 February . At the same time , Japanese air and naval assets would conduct conspicuous maneuvers and minor attacks around New Guinea and the Marshall Islands along with deceptive radio traffic to try to confuse the Allies as to their intentions . 
 Yamamoto detailed aircraft carriers Junyō and Zuiho , battleships Kongō and Haruna — with four heavy cruisers and a destroyer as the screening force — under Nobutake Kondō to provide distant cover for Ke around Ontong Java in the northern Solomons . The evacuation runs were to be carried out by Mikawa 's 8th Fleet , consisting of heavy cruisers Chōkai and Kumano , light cruiser Sendai , and 21 destroyers . Mikawa 's destroyers were charged with conducting the actual evacuation . Yamamoto expected that at least half of Mikawa 's destroyers would be sunk during the operation . 
 Supporting the air superiority portion of the operation were the IJN 's 11th Air Fleet and the IJA 's 6th Air Division , based at Rabaul with 212 and 100 aircraft , respectively . 64 aircraft from carrier Zuikaku 's air group were also temporarily assigned to Rabaul . An additional 60 floatplanes from the IJN 's " R " Area Air Force , based at Rabaul , Bougainville , and the Shortland Islands , brought the total number of Japanese aircraft involved in the operation to 436 . The combined Japanese warship and naval air units in the area formed the Southeast Area Fleet , commanded by Jinichi Kusaka at Rabaul . 
 Opposing the Japanese and under the command of United States Navy Admiral William Halsey , Jr . , commander of Allied forces in the South Pacific , were fleet carriers USS Enterprise and Saratoga , six escort carriers , three fast battleships , four old battleships , 13 cruisers , and 45 destroyers . In the air , the 13th Air Force numbered 92 fighters and bombers under United States Army Brigadier General Nathan F. Twining and the CAF on Guadalcanal counted 81 aircraft under US Marine Brigadier General Francis P. Mulcahy . Rear Admiral Aubrey Fitch was overall commander of Aircraft South Pacific . The air units of the fleet and escort carriers added another 339 aircraft . In addition , 30 heavy bombers were stationed in New Guinea with sufficient range to conduct missions over the Solomon Islands . In total , the Allies possessed around 539 aircraft available to oppose the Ke operation . 
 By the first week of January , disease , starvation , and battle had reduced Hyakutake 's command to about 14 @,@ 000 troops , with many of them too sick and malnourished to fight . The 17th Army possessed three operable field cannon and a severe shortage of artillery shells . In contrast , the Allied commander on the island , US Army Major General Alexander Patch , fielded a combined force of US Army and US Marines , designated the XIV Corps , totaling 50 @,@ 666 men . At Patch 's disposal were 167 artillery weapons , including 75 mm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) , 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) , and 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) howitzers , and plentiful stocks of shells . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 On 1 January , the Japanese military changed their radio communication codes , making it more difficult for Allied intelligence , which had heretofore partially broken Japanese radio ciphers , to divine Japanese intentions and movement . As January progressed , Allied reconnaissance and radio traffic analysis noted the buildup of ships and aircraft at Truk , Rabaul , and the Shortland Islands . Allied analysts determined that the increased radio traffic in the Marshalls was a deception meant to divert attention from an operation about to take place in either New Guinea or the Solomons . Allied intelligence personnel , however , misinterpreted the nature of the operation . On 26 January , the Allied Pacific Command 's intelligence section informed Allied forces in the Pacific that the Japanese were preparing for a new offensive , called Ke , in either the Solomons or New Guinea . 
 On 14 January , an Express mission of nine destroyers delivered the Yano Battalion , designated as the rear guard for the Ke evacuation , to Guadalcanal . The battalion , commanded by Major Keiji Yano , consisted of 750 infantry and a battery of mountain guns crewed by another 100 men . Accompanying the battalion was Lieutenant Colonel <unk> Imoto , representing the 8th Area Army , who was to deliver the evacuation order and plan to Hyakutake . The 17th Army had not yet been informed of the decision to withdraw . CAF and 13th Air Force air attacks on the nine destroyers during their return trip damaged destroyers Arashi and Tanikaze and destroyed eight Japanese fighters escorting the convoy . Five American aircraft were shot down . 
 Late on 15 January , Imoto reached 17th Army 's headquarters at Kokumbona and informed Hyakutake and his staff of the decision to withdraw from the island . Grudgingly accepting the order on the 16th , the 17th Army staff communicated the Ke evacuation plan to their forces on the 18th . The plan directed the 38th Division , which was currently defending against an American offensive on ridges and hills in the interior of the island , to disengage and withdraw towards Cape Esperance on the western end of Guadalcanal beginning on the 20th . The 38th 's retirement would be covered by the 2nd Infantry Division , in place on Guadalcanal since October 1942 , and the Yano Battalion , both of which would then follow the 38th westward . Any troops unable to move were encouraged to kill themselves to " uphold the honor of the Imperial Army " . 
 = = = Withdrawal westward = = = 
 Patch initiated a new offensive just as the 38th Division began to withdraw from the inland ridges and hills that it had occupied . On 20 January , the 25th Infantry Division , under Major General J. Lawton Collins , attacked several hills , designated Hills 87 , 88 , and 89 by the Americans , that formed a ridge that dominated Kokumbona . Encountering much lighter resistance than anticipated , the Americans seized the three hills by the morning of 22 January . Shifting forces to exploit the unexpected breakthrough , Collins quickly continued the advance and captured the next two hills , 90 and 91 , by nightfall , placing the Americans in position to isolate and capture Kokumbona and trap the Japanese 2nd Division . 
 Reacting quickly to the situation , the Japanese hurriedly evacuated Kokumbona and ordered the 2nd Division to retire westward immediately . The Americans captured Kokumbona on 23 January . Although some Japanese units were trapped between the American forces and destroyed , most of the 2nd Division 's survivors escaped . 
 Still fearing a renewed and reinforced Japanese offensive , Patch committed the equivalent of only one regiment at a time to attack the Japanese forces west of Kokumbona , keeping the rest near Lunga Point to protect the airfield . The terrain west of Kokumbona favored the Japanese efforts to delay the Americans as the rest of the 17th Army continued its withdrawal towards Cape Esperance . The American advance was hemmed into a corridor only 300 – 600 yd ( 270 – 550 m ) wide between the ocean and the thick , inland jungle and steep coral ridges . The ridges , running perpendicular to the coast , paralleled numerous streams and creeks that crossed the corridor with " washboard regularity . " 
 On 26 January , a combined U.S. Army and Marine unit called the Composite Army @-@ Marine ( CAM ) Division advancing westward encountered the Yano Battalion at the <unk> River . Yano 's troops temporarily halted the CAM 's advance and then slowly withdrew westward over the next three days . On 29 January , the Yano retreated across the <unk> River , where soldiers from the 2nd Division had constructed another defensive position . 
 The Japanese defenses at the <unk> held up the American advance for almost three days . On 1 February , with help from a shore bombardment by the destroyers USS Wilson and Anderson , the Americans successfully crossed the river but did not immediately press the advance westward . 
 = = = Air campaign = = = 
 The Ke air superiority campaign began in mid @-@ January with nightly harassment attacks on Henderson Field by 3 @-@ 10 aircraft , causing little damage . On 20 January , a lone Kawanishi <unk> bombed Espiritu Santo . On 25 January , the IJN sent 58 Zero fighters on a daylight raid to Guadalcanal . In response , the CAF sent aloft eight Wildcat and six P @-@ 38 fighters , which shot down four Zeros without loss . 
 A second large raid was conducted on 27 January by nine Kawasaki Ki @-@ 48 " Lily " light bombers escorted by 74 Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 " Oscar " fighters from the IJA 's 6th Air Division from Rabaul . Twelve Wildcats , six P @-@ 38s , and 10 P @-@ 40s from Henderson met the raid over Guadalcanal . In the resulting action , the Japanese lost six fighters while the CAF lost one Wildcat , four P @-@ 40s , and two P @-@ 38s . The " Lily " s dropped their bombs on American positions around the Matanikau River , causing little damage . 
 = = = Battle of Rennell Island = = = 
 Believing that the Japanese were beginning a major offensive in the southern Solomons aimed at Henderson Field , Halsey responded by sending , beginning on 29 January , a resupply convoy to Guadalcanal supported by most of his warship forces , separated into five task forces . These five task forces included two fleet carriers , two escort carriers , three battleships , 12 cruisers , and 25 destroyers 
 Screening the approach of the transport convoy was Task Force 18 ( TF 18 ) , under Rear Admiral Robert C. Giffen , with three heavy and three light cruisers , two escort carriers , and eight destroyers . A fleet carrier task force , centered on carrier USS Enterprise , steamed about 250 mi ( 220 nmi ; 400 km ) behind TF 18 . 
 In addition to protecting the supply convoy , TF 18 was charged with rendezvousing with a force of four U.S. destroyers , stationed at Tulagi , at 21 : 00 on 29 January in order to conduct a sweep up " The Slot " north of Guadalcanal the next day to screen the unloading of the transports at Guadalcanal . However , the escort carriers were too slow to allow Giffen 's force to make the scheduled rendezvous , so Giffen left the carriers behind with two destroyers at 14 : 00 on 29 January and pushed on ahead . 
 Giffen 's force was being tracked by Japanese submarines , who reported on Giffen 's location and movement to their naval headquarters units . Around mid @-@ afternoon , based on the submarine 's reports , 16 Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " from the 705 Air Group and 16 Mitsubishi G3M " Nell " bombers from the 701 Air Group took off from Rabaul carrying torpedoes to attack Giffen 's force , now located between Rennell Island and Guadalcanal . 
 The torpedo bombers attacked Giffen 's ships in two waves between 19 : 00 and 20 : 00 . Two torpedoes hit the heavy cruiser USS Chicago , causing heavy damage and bringing her to a dead stop . Three of the Japanese aircraft were shot down by anti @-@ aircraft fire from Giffen 's ships . In response , Halsey sent a tug to take Chicago under tow and ordered Giffen 's task force to return to base the next day . Six destroyers were left behind to escort Chicago and the tugboat . 
 At 16 : 00 on 30 January , a flight of 11 Mitsubishi torpedo bombers from the 751 Air Group , based at Kavieng and staging through Buka , attacked the force towing Chicago . Fighter aircraft from Enterprise shot down eight of them , but most of the Japanese aircraft were able to release their torpedoes before crashing . One torpedo hit the destroyer USS La Vallette , causing heavy damage . Four more torpedoes hit Chicago , sinking her . 
 The transport convoy reached Guadalcanal and successfully unloaded its cargo on 30 – 31 January . The rest of Halsey 's warships took station in the Coral Sea south of the Solomons to wait for the approach of any Japanese warship forces supporting what the Allies believed to be an imminent offensive . The departure of TF 18 from the Guadalcanal area removed a significant potential threat to the Ke operation . 
 At 18 : 30 on 29 January , two corvettes from the Royal New Zealand Navy , Moa and Kiwi , intercepted the Japanese submarine I @-@ 1 , which was attempting a supply run , off of Kamimbo on Guadalcanal . The two corvettes rammed and sank I @-@ 1 after a 90 @-@ minute battle ( 09 ° 13 ′ S 159 ° 40 ′ E ) . 
 = = = First evacuation run = = = 
 Leaving his cruisers at Kavieng , Mikawa gathered all 21 of his destroyers at the Japanese naval base in the Shortlands on 31 January to begin the evacuation runs . Rear Admiral Shintaro Hashimoto was placed in charge of this group of destroyers , titled the Reinforcement Unit . The " R " Area Air Force 's 60 floatplanes were tasked with scouting for the Reinforcement Unit and helping defend against Allied PT boat attacks during the nighttime evacuation runs . Allied B @-@ 17 bombers attacked the Shortlands anchorage on the morning of 1 February , causing no damage and losing four aircraft to Japanese fighters . This same day , the IJA 's 6th Air Division raided Henderson Field with 23 " Oscar " s and six " Lily " s but caused no damage and suffered the loss of one fighter . 
 Believing that the Japanese might be retreating to the south coast of Guadalcanal , on the morning of 1 February Patch landed a reinforced battalion of army and Marine troops , about 1 @,@ 500 men under the command of Colonel Alexander George , at <unk> on Guadalcanal 's south coast . The U.S. troops were delivered to the landing location by a naval transport force of six landing craft tanks and one transport destroyer ( USS Stringham ) , escorted by four other destroyers ( the same destroyers that were to have joined TF 18 three days earlier ) . A Japanese reconnaissance aircraft spotted the naval landing force . Believing that the force posed a threat to that night 's scheduled evacuation run , an airstrike of 13 Aichi D3A2 " Val " dive bombers escorted by 40 Zeros departed Buin , Bougainville to attack the ships . 
 Mistaking the Japanese strike aircraft as friendly , the U.S. destroyers withheld fire until the " Val " s began their attack . Beginning at 14 : 53 , destroyer USS De Haven was rapidly hit by three bombs and sank almost immediately 2 mi ( 1 @.@ 7 nmi ; 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Savo Island with the loss of 167 of her crew , including her captain . Destroyer USS Nicholas was damaged by several near @-@ misses . Five " Val " s and three Zeros were lost to anti @-@ aircraft fire and CAF fighters . The CAF lost three Wildcats in the engagement . 
 Hashimoto departed the Shortlands at 11 : 30 on 1 February with 20 destroyers for the first evacuation run . Eleven destroyers were designated as transports screened by the other nine . The destroyers were attacked in the late afternoon near <unk> by 92 CAF aircraft in two waves . The Allied fliers scored a near miss on Makinami , Hashimoto 's flagship , heavily damaging it . Four CAF aircraft were shot down . Hashimoto transferred to Shirayuki and detached <unk> to tow Makinami back to base . 
 Eleven U.S. PT boats awaited Hashimoto 's destroyers between Guadalcanal and Savo Island . Beginning at 22 : 45 , Hashimoto 's warships and the PT boats engaged in a series of running battles over the next three hours . Hashimoto 's destroyers , with help from " R " Area aircraft , sank three of the PT boats . 
 In the meantime , the transport destroyers arrived off of two pick @-@ up locations at Cape Esperance and Kamimbo at 22 : 40 and 24 : 00 respectively . Japanese naval personnel ferried the waiting troops out to the destroyers in barges and landing craft . Rear Admiral <unk> Koyanagi , second @-@ in @-@ command of the Reinforcement Unit , described the evacuees : " They wore only the remains of clothes that were so soiled their physical deterioration was extreme . Probably they were happy but they showed no expression . Their digestive organs were so completely destroyed , we couldn 't give them good food , only porridge . " Another officer added that , " Their buttocks were so emaciated that their anuses were completely exposed , and on the destroyers that picked them up they suffered from constant and uncontrolled diarrhea . " 
 After embarking 4 @,@ 935 soldiers , mainly from the 38th Division , the transport destroyers ceased loading at 01 : 58 and prepared to depart for the return trip to the Shortlands . About this time , Makigumo , one of the screening destroyers , was suddenly wracked by a large explosion , caused by either a PT boat torpedo or a naval mine . Informed that Makigumo was immobilized , Hashimoto ordered her abandoned and scuttled ( 09 ° 15 ′ S 159 ° 47 ′ E ) . During the return trip , the Reinforcement Unit was attacked by CAF aircraft at 08 : 00 , but sustained no damage and arrived at the Shortlands without further incident at 12 : 00 on 2 February . 
 = = = Second and third evacuation runs = = = 
 On 4 February , Patch ordered the 161st Infantry Regiment to replace the 147th at the front and resume the advance westward . The Yano battalion retreated to new positions at the <unk> River and troops were sent to block the advance of George 's force along the south coast . Meanwhile , Halsey 's carrier and battleship task forces remained just beyond Japanese air attack range about 300 mi ( 260 nmi ; 480 km ) south of Guadalcanal . 
 Kondo sent two of his force 's destroyers , Asagumo and Samidare , to the Shortlands to replace the two destroyers lost in the first evacuation run . Hashimoto led the second evacuation mission with 20 destroyers south toward Guadalcanal at 11 : 30 on 4 February . The CAF attacked Hashimoto in two waves beginning at 15 : 50 with a total of 74 aircraft . Bomb near @-@ misses heavily damaged Maikaze , and Hashimoto detached <unk> to tow her back to Shortland . The CAF lost 11 aircraft in the attack while the Japanese lost one Zero . 
 The U.S. PT boats did not sortie to attack Hashimoto 's force this night and the loading went uneventfully . The Reinforcement Force embarked Hyakutake , his staff , and 3 @,@ 921 men , mainly from the 2nd Division , and reached Bougainville without incident by 12 : 50 on 5 February . A CAF airstrike launched that morning failed to locate Hashimoto 's force . 
 Believing that the Japanese operations on 1 and 4 February had been reinforcement , not evacuation missions , the American forces on Guadalcanal proceeded slowly and cautiously , advancing only about 900 yd ( 820 m ) each day . George 's force halted on 6 February after advancing to Titi on the south coast . On the north coast , the 161st finally began their attack westward at 10 : 00 on 6 February and reached the <unk> River the same day . At the same time , the Japanese were withdrawing their remaining 2 @,@ 000 troops to Kamimbo . 
 On 7 February , the 161st crossed the <unk> and reached Bunina , about 9 mi ( 7 @.@ 8 nmi ; 14 km ) from Cape Esperance . George 's force , now commanded by George F. Ferry , advanced from Titi to <unk> and dug in for the night about 2 @,@ 000 yd ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) north of the village . 
 Aware of the presence of Halsey 's carriers and other large warships near Guadalcanal , the Japanese considered canceling the third evacuation run , but decided to go ahead as planned . Kondo 's force closed to within 550 mi ( 480 nmi ; 890 km ) of Guadalcanal from the north to be ready in case Halsey 's warships attempted to intervene . Hashimoto departed the Shortlands with 18 destroyers midday of 7 February , this time taking a course south of the Solomons instead of down the Slot . A CAF strike force of 36 aircraft attacked Hashimoto at 17 : 55 , heavily damaging Isokaze with a bomb near miss . Isokaze retired escorted by Kawakaze . The Allies and the Japanese each lost one aircraft in the attack . 
 Arriving off Kamimbo , Hashimoto 's force loaded 1 @,@ 972 soldiers by 00 : 03 on 8 February , unhindered by the U.S. Navy . For an additional 90 minutes , destroyer crewmen rowed their boats along the shore calling out again and again to make sure no one was left behind . At 01 : 32 , the Reinforcement Group left Guadalcanal in its wake and reached Bougainville without incident at 10 : 00 , completing the operation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At dawn on 8 February , the U.S. Army forces on both coasts resumed their advances , encountering only a few sick and dying Japanese soldiers . Patch now realized that the Tokyo Express runs over the last week were evacuation , not reinforcement missions . At 16 : 50 on 9 February , the two American forces met on the west coast at the village of <unk> . Patch sent a message to Halsey stating , " Total and complete defeat of Japanese forces on Guadalcanal effected 16 : 25 today ... the Tokyo Express no longer has a terminus on Guadalcanal . " 
 The Japanese had successfully evacuated a total of 10 @,@ 652 men from Guadalcanal , about all that remained of the 36 @,@ 000 total troops sent to the island during the campaign . Six hundred of the evacuees succumbed to their injuries or illnesses before they could receive sufficient medical care . Three thousand more required lengthy hospitalization or recuperation . After receiving word of the completion of the operation , Yamamoto commended all the units involved and ordered Kondo to return to Truk with his warships . The 2nd and 38th Divisions were shipped to Rabaul and partially reconstituted with replacements . The 2nd Division was relocated to the Philippines in March 1943 while the 38th was assigned to defend Rabaul and New Ireland . The 8th Area Army and Southeast Area Fleet reoriented their forces to defend the central Solomons at Kolombangara and New Georgia and prepared to send the reinforcements , mainly consisting of the 51st Infantry Division , originally detailed for Guadalcanal to New Guinea . The 17th Army was rebuilt around the 6th Infantry Division and headquartered on Bougainville . A few Japanese stragglers remained on Guadalcanal , many of whom were subsequently killed or captured by Allied patrols . The last known Japanese holdout surrendered in October 1947 . 
 In hindsight , historians have faulted the Americans , especially Patch and Halsey , for not taking advantage of their ground , aerial , and naval superiority to prevent the successful Japanese evacuation of most of their surviving forces from Guadalcanal . Said Chester Nimitz , commander of Allied forces in the Pacific , of the success of Operation Ke , " Until the last moment it appeared that the Japanese were attempting a major reinforcement effort . Only the skill in keeping their plans disguised and bold celerity in carrying them out enabled the Japanese to withdraw the remnants of the Guadalcanal garrison . Not until all organized forces had been evacuated on 8 February did we realize the purpose of their air and naval dispositions . " 
 Nevertheless , the successful campaign to recapture Guadalcanal from the Japanese was an important strategic victory for the U.S. and its allies . Building on their success at Guadalcanal and elsewhere , the Allies continued their campaign against Japan , ultimately culminating in Japan 's defeat and the end of World War II . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Brown , David ( 1990 ) . Warship Losses of World War Two . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 55750 @-@ 914 @-@ X. 
 Crenshaw , Russell Sydnor ( 1998 ) . South Pacific Destroyer : The Battle for the Solomons from Savo Island to Vella Gulf . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 55750 @-@ 136 @-@ X. 
 D <unk> , <unk> ( 1965 ) . Death of a Navy : Japanese Naval Action in World War II . Devin @-@ Adair Pub . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Dull , Paul S. ( 1978 ) . A Battle History of the Imperial Japanese Navy , 1941 @-@ 1945 . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 87021 @-@ 097 @-@ 1 . 
 Frank , Richard B. ( 1990 ) . Guadalcanal : The Definitive Account of the Landmark Battle . New York : Penguin Group . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Griffith , Samuel B. ( 1963 ) . The Battle for Guadalcanal . Champaign , Illinois , USA : University of Illinois Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ 06891 @-@ 2 . 
 Hayashi , Saburo ( 1959 ) . <unk> : The Japanese Army in the Pacific War . Marine Corps Association . ASIN <unk> . 
 Jersey , Stanley Coleman ( 2008 ) . Hell 's Islands : The Untold Story of Guadalcanal . College Station , Texas : Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 616 @-@ 5 . 
 Letourneau , Roger ; Letourneau , Dennis ( 2012 ) . Operation Ke : The Cactus Air Force and the Japanese Withdrawal from Guadalcanal . Annapolis , MD : Naval Institute Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 446 @-@ 5 . 
 Morison , Samuel Eliot ( 1958 ) . The Struggle for Guadalcanal , August 1942 – February 1943 , vol . 5 of History of United States Naval Operations in World War II . Boston : Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ 58305 @-@ 7 . 
 Rottman , Gordon L. ( 2005 ) . Japanese Army in World War II : The South Pacific and New Guinea , 1942 @-@ 43 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford and New York : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 870 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Osamu ( 2001 ) . Mitsubishi Type 1 " <unk> " ' Betty ' Units of World War 2 . New York : Osprey . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 082 @-@ 7 . 
 Toland , John ( 2003 ) [ First published in 1970 ] . The Rising Sun : The Decline and Fall of the Japanese Empire , 1936 @-@ 1945 . New York : The Modern Library . ISBN 0 @-@ 8129 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Hough , Frank O. ; Ludwig , Verle E. ; Shaw , Henry I. , Jr . " Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal " . History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Miller , John Jr . ( 1995 ) [ 1949 ] . Guadalcanal : The First Offensive . United States Army in World War II . United States Army Center of Military History . CMH Pub 5 @-@ 3 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 Parshall , Jon ; Bob Hackett ; Sander <unk> ; Allyn <unk> . " Imperial Japanese Navy Page ( <unk> ) " . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 06 @-@ 14 . 
 Shaw , Henry I. ( 1992 ) . " First Offensive : The Marine Campaign For Guadalcanal " . Marines in World War II Commemorative Series . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 25 . 
 Zimmerman , John L. ( 1949 ) . " The Guadalcanal Campaign " . Marines in World War II Historical Monograph . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 = Sharpe , Paley and Austin = 
 For lists of works by the practice in its various phases see Lists of works by Sharpe , Paley and Austin 
 Sharpe , Paley and Austin are the surnames of architects who practised in Lancaster , Lancashire , England , between 1835 and 1946 , working either alone or in partnership . The full names of the principals in their practice , which went under various names during its life , are Edmund Sharpe ( 1809 – 77 ) ; Edward Graham Paley ( 1823 – 97 ) , who practised as E. G. Paley ; Hubert James Austin ( 1841 – 1915 ) ; Henry Anderson Paley ( 1859 – 1946 ) , son of Edward , usually known as Harry Paley ; and , for a very brief period , Geoffrey Langshaw Austin ( 1884 – 1971 ) , son of Hubert . The firm 's commissions were mainly for buildings in Lancashire and what is now Cumbria , but also in Yorkshire , Cheshire , the West Midlands , North Wales , and Hertfordshire . 
 The practice specialised in work on churches ; the design of new churches , restoring older churches , and making additions or alterations . They also designed country houses , and made alterations to existing houses . Almost all their churches were designed in Gothic Revival style , except for some of Sharpe 's earliest churches and a few designed later by the practice . Within the Gothic Revival style , the practice initially used Early English and , particularly , Decorated features . E. G. Paley introduced Perpendicular elements , and Perpendicular became the dominant style used by the practice following the arrival of Hubert Austin , to such a degree that the firm became regarded as the regional leader in the use of that style . 
 The practice used a greater variety of styles when working on country houses , including Elizabethan and Jacobean elements as well as Gothic . Other features were incorporated towards the end of the 19th century similar to those in works produced by the Aesthetic and the Arts and Crafts Movements . Not all the firm 's work was on a large scale ; as the major architectural practice in North West England they also undertook work on schools , vicarages , hospitals , factories , hotels , shops , railway stations , and war memorials . 
 = = History and works = = 
 During the life of the practice its title varied according to the names of the architects who ran it , either individually or in partnership . The history of the practice , and the works produced during each stage , are described under the titles used by the practice . As there are two periods when the practice worked under the title Austin and Paley , the relevant dates have been added to these headings . 
 = = = Edmund Sharpe = = = 
 Edmund Sharpe established an architectural practice in his mother 's house in Penny Street , Lancaster , in late 1835 . He had received no formal training in architecture , gaining his knowledge from studying and drawing buildings during a tour of Germany and France between 1832 and 1835 . In 1838 he moved his office to Sun Street , and that year Edward Paley , then aged 15 , joined him as a pupil . The following year Sharpe moved his office again , this time to St Leonard 's Gate . 
 Sharpe 's earliest commissions were for churches , the first being St Mark , Witton ( 1836 – 38 ) , quickly followed by St Saviour 's Church , <unk> ( 1836 – 37 ) . He then designed two small chapels , Holy Trinity , Howgill , and St John , Cowgill ( both 1837 – 38 ) , in what is now Cumbria . Larger and grander churches followed , including Christ Church , Walmsley ( 1839 – 40 ) , and his largest church , Holy Trinity , Blackburn ( 1837 – 48 ) . The latter was a Commissioners ' church , so @-@ called because it was partly financed by a grant from the Church Building Commissioners . In all , Sharpe designed six Commissioner 's churches , including St George , Stalybridge ( 1838 – 40 ) . In the early 1840s Sharpe gained a commission from the trustees of the Weaver Navigation to build three ( or four ) churches along its route for their employees . By 1842 he was designing his 31st church , including a long hoped for commission from the 13th Earl of Derby to design St Mary , Knowsley ( 1843 – 44 ) . 
 Sharpe was persuaded by his future brother @-@ in @-@ law John Fletcher , owner of Ladyshore Colliery , to experiment with the use of terracotta in the structure of his churches ; not just for decoration , as had been done before , but for the whole structure of the church , other than the foundations and rubble infill . The churches resulting from this project were St Stephen and All Martyrs , Lever Bridge ( 1842 – 44 ) , and Holy Trinity , Rusholme ( 1845 – 46 ) . These were nicknamed by Sharpe himself as " the pot churches " . 
 In addition to Edward Paley , Sharpe took on other pupils , some of whom later established their own architectural practices . One of these was Thomas Austin ( 1822 – 67 ) , who joined Sharpe in 1841 and left in 1852 to set up his practice in Newcastle upon Tyne . Another pupil was John Douglas ( 1830 – 1911 ) , who created a successful practice in Chester . 
 Sharpe 's architectural works were not limited to churches , nor was his practice confined to architecture . His most important architectural work in the domestic field was his remodelling of Capernwray Hall ( 1844 – 48 ) , and in Knutsford he designed a house for the governor of the gaol ( 1844 ) . In 1838 he was appointed as architect to what was then called the County Lunatic Asylum ( later Lancaster Moor Hospital ) . Here , in addition to carrying out minor repairs , he added a chapel and six additional wings for the residents . Other duties in this post included work on Lancaster Castle and the Judges Lodgings . Sharpe 's other business interests were in the field of engineering . By 1837 he had been appointed <unk> for the South Lonsdale Hundred , in which role he cared for the roads and bridges in north Lancashire , including building at least two new bridges . He had also become involved with the development of railways in the region , initially by designing bridges and a viaduct for the Lancaster and Preston Junction Railway ( now part of the West Coast Main Line ) . He was also becoming involved in the civic life of Lancaster , having been elected as a councillor in 1841 . 
 = = = Sharpe and Paley = = = 
 Sharpe appointed Paley as his partner in 1845 , and then took an increasing interest in activities outside the practice . By 1847 Paley was responsible for most of the work in the practice , certainly carrying out independent commissions from at least 1849 . In 1851 , the year of Paley 's marriage to Sharpe 's youngest sister , Frances , Sharpe formally withdrew from the practice , although it continued to be known as Sharpe and Paley until 1856 . Being the only major architect practising in the area between Preston and Carlisle , Paley took on commissions of all sizes and types but , like Sharpe , his major designs were for churches . Between 1851 and 1867 he designed or rebuilt about 36 new churches , almost all of them for the Church of England , with a small number for Congregationalists and Roman Catholics . Among his earlier churches were St Patrick , Preston Patrick ( 1852 – 53 ) , St Anne , Thwaites ( 1853 – 54 ) , and Christ Church , Bacup ( 1854 ) . 
 The first secular work undertaken during this period was the remodelling of Hornby Castle between 1847 and 1852 , including its " expansive " symmetrical frontage . The next commission was the conversion of a manor house close to the ruins of Furness Abbey into the Furness Abbey Hotel starting in 1847 . Other secular commissions around this time were for two vicarages and for the North Western Hotel in Morecambe ( 1847 ) , and for work at Giggleswick School ( 1850 – 51 ) . Paley also carried out work at Rossall School , including the chapel ( 1861 – 62 ) , and the east range ( 1867 ) . He designed new schools , including the Royal Grammar School in Lancaster ( 1851 – 52 ) , and eight village schools . Paley 's main domestic works were the rebuilding of Wennington Hall ( 1855 – 56 ) , and a smaller house , The Ridding . Other varies commissions included the restoration of a music hall in Settle ( 1853 ) , and cemetery buildings in Lancaster and <unk> ( 1855 and 1856 ) . 
 The rapid growth of the town of Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , the construction of the Furness Railway following the discovery of deposits of iron ore in the Furness peninsular , and the development of industries using iron as a raw material resulted in many commissions for the practice . The population of Barrow doubled between 1851 and 1861 , and doubled again in the next decade . The major figure in the development of the town and the railway was James Ramsden ( 1822 – 96 ) , who eventually became managing director of the railway , the Barrow Haematite Steel Company , and the Barrow Shipbuilding Company . The largest deposits of iron ore had been discovered in about 1850 by Henry Schneider in land owned by William Cavendish , who was at that time the 2nd Earl of Burlington , and who also played a part in the industry . All three men commissioned the practice to design a variety of buildings . In addition Paley designed a country house , Abbot 's Wood ( 1857 – 59 ) for Ramsden , a large and complex building with Gothic and Tudor features . 
 = = = E. G. Paley = = = 
 Paley continued to work from the offices in St Leonard 's Gate after Sharpe 's resignation , but in 1860 he moved to offices in Castle Hill , where the practice remained throughout the rest of its existence . During the 1850s he designed St Peter , Lancaster , a Roman Catholic church that later became Lancaster Cathedral ( 1857 – 59 ) . This is regarded by Brandwood et al. as his " masterwork as an independent church architect " . Hartwell et al. agree , calling this church , with its northwest steeple 240 feet ( 73 m ) high , his chef d 'oeuvre . During the 1860s , Paley began to design churches with bare brick interior walls , rather than plastered walls , the earliest being St Peter , Quernmore ( 1860 ) . Although the High Victorian style was becoming popular elsewhere , it played little part in Paley 's designs , other than more elaborate decorative features , such as the embellishment of the principal rafters at Quernmore . He never used the more blatant features of the style , such as polychromy . During this decade , before the arrival of Austin , he designed churches for the industrial towns of Lancashire , one of the largest being St James , Poolstock ( 1863 – 66 ) . The rebuilding of St Peter 's Church , Bolton ( 1867 – 71 ) with its northwest tower rising to 180 feet ( 55 m ) , is considered by Brandwood et al. to be " Paley 's other great independent church project " . Hartwell et al. refer to it as a " formidable new church " . 
 Secular commissions during this period included the restoration of the medieval tower at Dalton Castle ( 1859 ) , and buildings for the Lancaster Carriage and Wagon Works ( 1864 – 65 ) . The largest building designed by Paley , and indeed by the practice , was the Royal Albert Asylum ( later renamed the Royal Albert Hospital ) in Lancaster ( 1868 – 73 ) ; it was in Gothic Revival style , and had an E @-@ shaped plan . It has a central French @-@ type tower , with a steeply pitched pyramidal roof flanked by pinnacles . Paley designed stations for the Furness Railway , starting with the Strand Station in Barrow ( 1863 ) ; he probably also designed the station at Grange @-@ over @-@ Sands ( 1866 ) . Overlooking the latter town he designed the Grange Hotel ( 1866 ) . 
 = = = Paley and Austin = = = 
 On 28 January 1867 Hubert Austin joined Paley in the practice as a partner . He was the half @-@ brother of Thomas Austin , who had been a pupil of Sharpe . Hubert Austin had worked for three years in the office of George Gilbert Scott , and before he joined the Lancaster practice had designed Christ Church , Ashford , Kent ( 1855 – 56 ) . Following his arrival , the work of the practice continued much as before , with both ecclesiastical and secular commissions . 
 = = = = Ecclesiastical works = = = = 
 Two early large churches in industrial areas in Lancashire were built in 1869 – 71 : St Chad , Kirkby , and St John the Evangelist , Cheetham . Pollard describes St Chad as one of the partnership 's " most powerful churches " , Brandwood et al. consider that St John the Evangelist is the practice 's " most important church in Manchester . These were followed by the rebuilding , other than the tower , of St Mary , Leigh ( 1871 – 73 ) , in which the Perpendicular style , generally unfashionable at the time , was used throughout . Similarly the body of All Saints ' Church , <unk> ( 1870 – 72 ) was rebuilt in Perpendicular style . Meanwhile the practice was designing new churches or rebuilding old churches for villages in the countryside . Some of these were small , others larger and more impressive , such as St Peter , <unk> ( 1873 – 74 ) and St Peter , Scorton ( 1878 – 79 ) . In 1872 – 73 the partners built their only new church in Wales , St Mary , Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed . This was followed by an estate church , St John the Evangelist ( 1882 – 84 ) at Walton , south of Warrington , and by the rebuilding of the old parish church of St Mary ( 1884 – 85 ) at Dalton @-@ in @-@ Furness . 
 They also designed about 23 urban churches of varying sizes and styles . Most were in the industrial towns of Lancashire , except for St John the Evangelist , Greenock ( 1877 – 78 ) in Scotland , a mission chapel in Scarborough , North Yorkshire ( 1885 ) , and St Barnabas ( 1884 – 85 ) in the railway town of Crewe , Cheshire . Notable among the Lancashire urban churches are St Matthew and St James , Mossley Hill , Liverpool ( 1870 – 75 ) , described by Pollard as " one of the best Victorian churches in Liverpool , St Michael and All Angels , Howe Bridge , Atherton ( 1875 – 77 ) , considered by Pollard to be one of Paley and Austin 's " most stimulating churches " , and St John the Baptist , also in Atherton ( 1878 – 79 ) , of which Pollard says " The whole is monumental , one of Paley and Austin 's best " , with a tower that is " magnificently mighty " . In Astley Bridge , Bolton , they built two churches , which are described by Hartwell et al. as being " remarkable " ; these were All Souls ( 1878 – 81 ) , which is now redundant , and St Saviour ( 1882 – 85 ) , which was demolished in 1975 . St James , Daisy Hill , Westhoughton ( 1879 – 81 ) is considered by Hartwell et al. as " a masterly performance for relatively little cash " , and St Peter , Westleigh Leigh ( 1879 – 81 ) is described by Pollard as one of Paley and Austin 's " most radical and thrilling churches " . Meanwhile , in rapidly growing Barrow , they had built four smaller churches to a common design , each dedicated to one of the Four Evangelists . In 1884 the partnership submitted plans for a new Anglican cathedral in Liverpool . Their plan was placed in the top twelve , but failed to make the next round of the competition . In the event the project was abandoned in 1888 , the cathedral being built later and on a different site . 
 = = = = Secular works = = = = 
 Meanwhile , the town of Barrow was continuing to grow , and this resulted in many commissions for the practice . In order to deal with this they opened a sub @-@ office in the town , run by John Harrison ( 1837 – 96 ) , which continued to exist until the late 1880s . The first major commission in the town was to design a flax and jute mill for James Ramsden ( 1870 – 72 ) . Other secular buildings included banks , cemetery buildings ( including a large gateway ) , ten large tenement blocks , schools , villas , meeting halls , and the School of Art . For the Furness Railway they designed stations , goods sheds , workers ' cottages and , probably , the circular water tower at <unk> . The partners were also involved with work at large country houses . The most important commission was to build a new wing at Holker Hall in 1871 – 75 to replace a wing severely damaged by fire ; this was the largest project undertaken by the partners . The next major country house commission was the restoration of Hoghton Tower ( 1876 – 78 ) for Sir Henry de Hoghton . Other work on country houses included building Sedgwick House ( 1868 – 69 ) , adding an extension to Leighton Hall ( 1870 ) , making extensions to Walton Hall ( 1870 ) , <unk> Hall ( 1872 ) , Capernwray Hall ( 1875 – 76 ) , and Whittington Hall ( 1887 ) . New houses included Oak Lea for Henry Schneider ( 1874 , since demolished ) , <unk> Hall ( 1874 ) , and <unk> House ( 1880 – 82 ) . Their last major work on a country house was the remodelling of Thurland Castle ( 1879 – 85 ) following severe damage by fire . The practice continued to design new schools , and in the 1870s they began to design new buildings for Sedbergh School , creating an association with the school that was to produce commissions throughout the remaining life of the practice . 
 = = = Paley , Austin and Paley = = = 
 In 1886 Edward Paley 's son , Henry ( who was and is usually known as Harry ) , became a partner in the practice , which continued to work much as before , with ecclesiastical and secular commissions . New churches were built in villages and towns , and older churches were restored or altered . The first new country church resulting from the partnership was the Church of the Good Shepherd , Tatham ( 1888 – 89 ) . Brandwood et al. describe the 1890s as " something of a golden decade for the firm 's country churches " . The first of these was St Bartholomew , Barbon ( 1892 – 93 ) , mainly Perpendicular in style , but with some rounded arches , followed by St Peter , Field Broughton ( 1892 – 94 ) , also in Perpendicular style . Smaller churches were St Mary , Borwick ( 1894 – 96 ) ( Perpendicular again ) , and a mission church seating 150 at Sunderland Point ( 1894 ) . The 1890s was also a prolific period for new town churches but , before the start of that decade , the firm had designed St Mary , Ince @-@ in @-@ Makerfield ( 1887 , demolished 1974 ) , St John , Birkdale ( 1899 – 90 ) , and St John , <unk> , in Rawtenstall ( 1899 – 90 , now redundant ) . Major town churches of the first half of the 1890s include St John , <unk> ( 1890 – 92 ) , and Christ Church , Waterloo ( near Liverpool ) ( 1891 – 99 ) . During this time the partnership produced their only church in the south of England , All Saints , Hertford ( 1893 – 95 ) . Brandwood et al. say that it is a " Perpendicular building entirely characteristic of the firm " but , being built in Runcorn sandstone from Cheshire , Pevsner considered that it was " completely alien in Herts " . This period also saw the finest church design to be executed by the practice , St George , <unk> in Stockport ( 1892 – 97 ) , which is considered to be the solely the work of Austin . Brandwood et al. describe it as " the largest , grandest and most expensive church the practice ever built and is the masterwork of Hubert Austin " . Hartwell et al. say it is " a church on a splendid scale " . Another ecclesiastical project was the chapel at the Royal Albert Asylum ( 1886 – 80 ) . 
 During this time much less work was carried out in the secular sphere . There were no new substantial country houses designed during this time , the largest being the " rather plain , four @-@ square " <unk> House . The only major public buildings were the Storey Institute ( 1887 – 91 ) in Lancaster , and the Lancaster Royal Infirmary ( 1893 – 96 ) . Work was carried out on school buildings , including extensions at Lancaster Royal Grammar School and Christ Church School , Lancaster ( both 1887 ) , and a new building for the Keswick School of Industrial Art ( 1893 – 94 ) . Commercial buildings included shops for the Lancaster and Skerton Cooperative Society , including a large store in the middle of Lancaster . 
 = = = Austin and Paley = = = 
 = = = = 1895 – 1914 = = = = 
 Edward Paley died on 23 January 1895 at the age of 71 , and the remaining partners continued the practice under the title Austin and Paley . It is not clear how much Edward Paley had been contributing to the work of the practice in his later years ; it is likely that by then Austin had been " the chief creative force " . The church commissions continued much as before , particularly with new churches , and also with church restorations . New country churches included St Mark , <unk> ( 1897 – 98 ) , St Luke , <unk> ( 1898 – 1900 ) , and St John , <unk> ( 1897 – 1900 ) , the last of which incorporated Romanesque features . After 1900 the practice designed All Saints , <unk> ( 1905 – 06 ) , St John , <unk> ( 1906 – 07 ) , and St Mark , <unk> ( 1909 – 10 ) . There were many new town churches , including St Barnabas , Morecambe ( 1898 – 1900 ) , St John the Divine , <unk> ( 1898 – 1901 ) ( also in Morecambe ) , St Anne , Hindsford ( 1898 – 1901 now redundant ) , and St Thomas , St Anne 's @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Sea ( 1899 – 1900 ) . These were followed in the 20th century by new churches including St Michael , Middleton ( 1901 – 02 ) , St Mary , Walney ( 1907 – 08 ) , St Andrew , <unk> , Harrogate ( 1909 – 10 ) , and St Margaret , Halliwell , Bolton ( 1911 – 13 ) . Brandwood et al. describe two further buildings as the partnership 's " last two major urban churches " . The first of these is St Michael and All Angels , Ashton @-@ on @-@ Ribble , Preston ( 1906 – 08 ) . The other , described as the partners ' " last great masterpiece " is St Mary , Widnes ( 1908 – 10 ) . Further ecclesiastical works were the chapels built for Sedbergh School ( 1895 – 97 ) and for St Bees ' School ( 1906 ) . 
 Although church work dominated the work of the practice there were also some secular commissions . There was no work on country houses during this period , nor were there any commissions for public buildings , other than an expansion of the Storey Institute ( 1906 – 08 ) . The last public building designed by the partnership was Hornby Village Institute ( 1914 ) . In the commercial field the firm designed workshops and a showroom for William Atkinson , which were among the earliest motor garages and showrooms in the provinces . The practice continued to carry out work for the Lancaster and Skerton Cooperative Society , designing numerous shops in the local area . The partners also carried out work on schools , in particular for Sedbergh School . They designed an extension to Leeds Grammar School ( 1904 – 05 ) , Llandovery College , North Wales ( 1901 – 03 ) , Shrewsbury School ( 1913 – 14 ) , and extra buildings for St Bees School , Rossall School , and the Clergy Daughters ' School at Casterton ( 1896 ) . 
 = = = = Austin , Paley and Austin = = = = 
 Hubert Austin 's eldest son , Bernard Tate ( 1873 – 1955 ) , studied architecture in the firm , but had a disagreement with his father and left in 1902 to work as an architect for Lever Brothers . Austin 's youngest son , Geoffrey Langshaw ( 1884 – 1971 ) , also worked with the practice from 1907 , and was made a junior partner in January 1914 , when the practice became known as Austin , Paley and Austin . However the partnership was short @-@ lived as Geoffrey enlisted to serve in the King 's Own Royal Lancaster Regiment in February 1915 . He saw active service in the First World War , leaving the army in 1919 , but did not return to the practice , nor did he continue with an architectural career . 
 = = = = 1915 – 44 = = = = 
 Hubert Austin died on 22 March 1915 leaving Harry Paley as the sole principal , but the practice continued to be known as Austin and Paley . Helped by assistants and clerks Paley continued to work until the 1940s , but without appointing another partner . He continued to work on churches , repairing and restoring older churches , and designing new ones . His new churches include All Saints , <unk> ( 1925 – 26 ) , St Stephen on @-@ the @-@ Cliffs , Blackpool ( 1925 – 27 ) , St Hilda , <unk> ( 1926 – 27 ) , St Luke , Orrell ( 1927 – 28 and 1938 ) , St Stephen , <unk> ( 1928 – 30 and 1937 – 38 ) , St Barbara , <unk> , Coventry ( 1930 – 31 ) , St Thomas , Blackpool ( 1930 – 32 ) , and his last church , St John , Abram ( 1935 – 37 ) . A major source of commissions following the First World War was the design of war memorials and monuments . Two of Paley 's war memorials are considered to be sufficiently notable to have been designated as Grade II listed buildings . They are both in villages in Cumbria , Beetham and Great Salkeld , both in sandstone in the form of a Celtic cross , and were constructed in or about 1919 . Work continued to be carried out at Sedbergh , Giggleswick , and Leeds Grammar Schools , and on the Royal Lancaster Infirmary . The practice continued to be active until the 1940s . It is uncertain when Harry Paley retired , and it is possible that some work was carried out by his assistants after his retirement . The practice had certainly closed by 1945 , when the offices were sold to Lancaster Corporation and the records of the firm were destroyed . Harry Paley died on 19 April 1946 . 
 = = Architectural styles = = 
 Sharpe 's first three churches were in Romanesque style , as according to Sharpe " no style can be worked so cheap as Romanesque " . He then started to include Gothic features , which often did not accurately reflect the features to be found in medieval churches , being an approximation rather than an accurate ( or " correct " ) representation . Influenced by A. W. N. Pugin ( 1812 – 52 ) and the Cambridge Camden Society ( later named the Ecclesiological Society ) , of which Sharpe was a member , he introduced more " correct " Gothic features into his designs , which he continued to use throughout the rest of his career . In 1844 he was praised by the society for his design of the new steeple at St Michael , Kirkham ( 1843 – 44 ) , which was described as being " beautiful and correct " . 
 Almost all of Paley 's designs were in Gothic Revival style , mainly reflecting features of the 13th and early 14th centuries , with open roofs , benches for the congregation , stalls for the choir , the pulpit to the side of the entrance to the chancel , steps leading up to the chancel , and no side chapels . Most of the designs were largely in the Decorated style , although Paley did occasionally introduce 15th @-@ century Perpendicular features , for example in his rebuilding of St Patrick , Preston Patrick ( 1852 – 53 ) . During the 1850s Paley introduced what was to become one of his favourite features , the traceried oculus window , in Christ Church , Bacup ( 1854 ) and St James , Wrightington ( 1857 ) . 
 During the Paley and Austin partnership , the architectural styles used by the practice changed and developed . In church architecture , Paley had already started to introduce Perpendicular features in some of his designs , and this trend was to continue and increase after the arrival of Austin . Throughout their partnership , the designs for churches were mainly in Gothic Revival style . After the arrival of Austin , there was much greater use of Perpendicular features . Brandwood et al. see the practice as national pioneers in this trend , saying " the firm can be seen as a true pioneer in the rehabilitation of Perpendicular architecture after its ecclesiological exile for a quarter of a century " . Early examples of what the authors consider to be part of what they call " the Perpendicular revival in the North " are the rebuilding of the bodies of St Mary , Leigh , ( 1871 – 73 ) and All Saints , <unk> ( 1870 – 72 ) . The Perpendicular " would become the stock @-@ in @-@ trade style for some of the most admired buildings as the years rolled on " . However they did continue to use features from the Early English and Decorated styles , sometimes together in the same church , as in New St Leonard , <unk> . Away from the Gothic Revival style , Norman or Norman transitional features were occasionally used , as in St Mary , Betws @-@ y @-@ Coed ( 1872 – 73 ) , and St Peter , <unk> ( 1873 – 74 ) . 
 Brandwood et al identify two other , potentially incompatible , stylistic changes in the firm 's designs during this period . The first is what they describe as " a greater muscularity ... at times accompanied by continental overtones " . Examples are in the restoration of the tower of St Peter , <unk> , ( 1868 – 70 ) and in the new church of St Mary , Walton , Cumbria ( 1869 – 70 ) . The other stylistic factor was the use of " gentler , less ornate " motifs taken from the Aesthetic Movement , or motifs that could " pass muster as proto @-@ Arts & Crafts work " . Features " verging on Art Nouveau " are present in window tracery in All Saints , St Helens , and on the gate @-@ piers outside St George , <unk> . What became a " favourite feature " for Austin and Paley were carved inscriptions , usually black , sometimes in Latin and sometimes in English ; examples can be in St John , <unk> , and Christ Church , Waterloo ( both in Merseyside ) . 
 In their secular commissions the practice used a variety of styles . Their new wing at Holker Hall was in Elizabethan style , as were the additions to <unk> Hall . <unk> Hall has Jacobean detailing , while other country houses , such as Sedgwick House , incorporate Gothic features . Thurland Castle has features of both Elizabethan and late Gothic styles . Motifs taken from the Aesthetic Movement can be found in both the exterior and the interior of their new wing at Holker Hall , and from the Arts and Crafts Movement in the interior of Thurland Castle . 
 = = Patrons = = 
 Sharpe 's earliest commissions were promoted by his older cousin Revd J. W. Whitaker , vicar of Blackburn . Whittaker had connections with major figures in the Church of England and members of the aristocracy . Sharpe 's work came to the notice of the Bishop of Chester , Rt Rev John Bird Sumner , whose diocese at that time included Lancashire as well as Cheshire . He was a member of the Church Building Commission , and it is likely that he played a part in Sharpe 's involvement in designing Commissioners ' Churches . Family connections led to an association with the Greenall family , brewers in Warrington , which possibly led to the commission for the series of churches along the Weaver Navigation . Sharpe had hoped to gain commissions from the Earl of Derby , but was successful only in his design for St Mary , Knowsley . The relationship the practice developed with the major entrepreneurs in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , James Ramsden , and Henry Schneider , resulted in the many commissions for buildings in the town and for the Furness Railway . 
 = = Practice organisation and personalities = = 
 As the office records have been destroyed there is no detailed account of how the office was run , or how the partners related to each other in business matters . Sharpe was a man of many interests and talents . In addition to him being an entrepreneur , establishing a practice that lasted for more than 100 years , he was a railway engineer and developer , a public figure who pioneered sanitary reform in Lancaster . He was also an accomplished sportsman and musician . Edward Paley also took an active part in the civil life of Lancaster , while Hubert Austin had a more retiring personality , concentrating more on his work in the practice and with his family . By the time Harry Paley came to run the practice alone there was less work available . As he was relatively comfortable financially , he was also able to take part in the life of the town and in his sporting interests . 
 All the principals were Anglicans , and most of the church commissions came from the Church of England . Sharpe , in particular , had low church sympathies , and most of the commissions throughout the life of the practice were for the churches of low church or middle @-@ of the @-@ road patrons . This was consistent with the state of Anglicanism generally in Lancashire , possibly a reaction against the strong presence of Catholicism in the county . Henry Austin was a keen churchman , and was a churchwarden for many years . Nevertheless , the practice did design churches and other buildings for Catholics , Congregationalists and Presbyterians . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 The firm was a " provincial architectural practice " in the strict use of the term ; sited as it was in a town some distance from any major city . Its output was almost entirely located in North West England , particularly in Lancashire and in the southern part of what is now Cumbria . Nevertheless , the practice did achieve national recognition , especially in the later part of the 19th century , and in particular for its churches . A contemporary opinion of the practice was given by the German architect and critic Hermann Muthesius who was present in England between 1896 and 1904 . He commented on English architecture and architects , and in his book Die <unk> <unk> Baukunst in England ( 1901 ) he placed the works of Austin and Paley on a par with Bodley and Garner , James Brooks , J. D. Sedding , Norman Shaw , and George Gilbert Scott , junior . He was particularly impressed by St Peter , Lancaster , and by the village churches designed by the practice . Writing in 1969 the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner said " this Lancaster dynasty of architects did more work in the county , and for a time more outstanding work , than any other " . Referring to the late Victorian churches designed by the practice , Pevsner stated that they were " of the highest European standard of their years " . Of the partners , Pevsner had highest regard for Hubert Austin , whom he called a " genius " , saying that it was he " it seems , who was responsible for the firm 's masterpieces " . The title of the introduction to the book by Brandwood et al. entitled The Architecture of Sharpe , Paley and Austin is " A practice like no other " . 
 = Trevor Pinnock = 
 Trevor David Pinnock CBE ( born 16 December 1946 ) is an English harpsichordist and conductor . 
 He is best known for his association with the period @-@ performance orchestra The English Concert which he helped found and directed from the keyboard for over 30 years in baroque and early classical music . He is a former artistic director of Canada 's National Arts Centre Orchestra and founded The Classical Band in New York . 
 Since his resignation from The English Concert in 2003 , Pinnock has continued his career as a conductor , appearing with major orchestras and opera companies around the world . He has also performed and recorded as a harpsichordist in solo and chamber music and conducted and otherwise trained student groups at conservatoires . Trevor Pinnock won a Gramophone Award for his recording of Bach 's Brandenburg Concertos with the European Brandenburg Ensemble , an occasional orchestra formed to mark his 60th birthday . 
 = = Biography and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Trevor Pinnock was born in Canterbury , where his grandfather had run a Salvation Army band . His father was Kenneth Alfred Thomas Pinnock , a publisher , and his mother , Joyce Edith , née Muggleton , was an amateur singer . In Canterbury , the Pinnock family lived near the pianist Ronald Smith , from whose sister Pinnock had piano lessons . He became a chorister at Canterbury Cathedral when he was seven , attending the choir school from 1956 to 1961 and subsequently Simon Langton Grammar School for Boys . After receiving instruction in piano and organ , he served as a church organist ; by the time he was 15 , he began to play the harpsichord . At age 19 , he won a Foundation Scholarship to the Royal College of Music to study organ and he also studied harpsichord , winning prizes for performance on both instruments . His teachers were Ralph Downes and Millicent Silver . A strong early influence was Gustav Leonhardt , though he did not study with him . 
 = = = Instrumentalist = = = 
 As a harpsichordist , Pinnock toured Europe with the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields . While a student at the RCM , he was told by the registrar , John Stainer , that it would be impossible to make a living as a harpsichordist . He made his London debut at the Royal Festival Hall in 1966 with the <unk> Harpsichord Trio , which he co @-@ founded with Stephen Preston , flute , and Anthony <unk> , cello . At this stage , they were playing baroque music on modern instruments . His solo harpsichord debut was in 1968 at the Purcell Room in London . 
 To maximise his possibilities for work early on in his career , he included in his repertoire not only the regular baroque repertoire , but also modern harpsichord concertos including Roberto Gerhard 's concerto for harpsichord , percussion and strings , Manuel de Falla 's concerto for harpsichord , Frank Martin 's Petite symphonie concertante for harp , harpsichord , piano and double string orchestra and Francis Poulenc 's Concert <unk> . Pinnock and Maxim <unk> toured together in 2000 , with <unk> taking up the baroque violin for the first time and Pinnock taking up the modern grand piano . These concerts consisted of a first half of harpsichord and baroque violin , followed by a second half of piano and modern violin . 
 = = = The English Concert = = = 
 In November 1972 the <unk> Trio expanded to become The English Concert , an orchestra specialising in performances of baroque and early classical music on period instruments . The orchestra initially started with seven members but soon grew in size . The decision to move to period performance was taken for a number of reasons : 
 What I really had in mind was a journey of discovery into the unknown . Although I felt there were excellent interpretations of baroque music performed on modern instruments , I sensed that we 'd come to the end of the road – and yet I knew that there were still discoveries to be made . I was thinking about the interesting experiments made by Nikolaus Harnoncourt and Gustav Leonhardt , although I knew we 'd have to experiment in our own way . It was a huge challenge ; playing period instruments wasn 't as easy as it is today , and finding out their secrets was a difficult process . Nowadays an extraordinarily high technical level has been achieved and the upcoming generations don 't have any of the problems we pioneers faced . We cleared the way . 
 Pinnock was at the forefront of the period performance movement and the revitalisation of the baroque repertoire ; the reaction of Leonard Bernstein to his performances is typical : " In my opinion , the work of the conductor Trevor Pinnock in this area is particularly exciting – his performances of Bach and Handel make me jump out of my seat ! " 
 The English Concert 's London debut was at the English Bach Festival in 1973 . In 1975 , Pinnock played the harpsichord in the first ever performance of Rameau 's last opera , Les <unk> , under John Eliot Gardiner . He toured North America with The English Concert for the first time in 1983 ; he had earlier spent two periods as Artist in Residence at Washington University , St. Louis . His debut at The Proms was in 1980 ; he later directed Handel 's oratorio Solomon in 1986 and many other large @-@ scale works with his orchestra . They toured worldwide and made numerous recordings , Pinnock directing " with a characteristic energy and enthusiasm which are readily communicated to audiences . " The Choir of the English Concert was at first an ad @-@ hoc group of singers assembled as needed , originally in 1983 for the first 20th century performance of Rameau 's <unk> et <unk> ; it became an established choir for a period from the mid @-@ 1990s at the time they were performing Bach 's Mass in B minor . This allowed the ensemble to regularly perform baroque operas , oratorios and other vocal works ; a series of Bach 's major choral works followed . 
 He directed The English Concert , usually from the harpsichord or chamber organ , for over 30 years , deciding , with the other orchestra members , to hand it over to violinist Andrew <unk> in 2003 . He explained the decision as follows : 
 There are other things I want to develop – or rather come back to . Having done The English Concert for 18 – 20 weeks per year , and guest conducting the rest of the time , I 'd sacrificed playing the harpsichord rather more than I wanted to . I had to make a decision to move forward : there were certain solo projects I wanted to do , and I wanted to make the decision now rather than wait until after I am 60 and it 's too late to do half of them . [ ... ] There 's a wealth of keyboard repertoire I want to revisit . I especially want to go back to the rich English repertoire such as Tomkins , Byrd , Bull and Gibbons . 
 = = = Other conducting projects = = = 
 In 1989 Pinnock founded The Classical Band in New York , signing an 18 @-@ disc recording contract with Deutsche Grammophon before the ensemble 's first rehearsal . He led the group in performances of the classical repertoire from Haydn to Mendelssohn on period instruments , including playing as fortepiano soloist . After a disappointing series of concerts , he resigned in 1990 and was succeeded by Bruno Weil . 
 From 1991 – 1996 he was artistic director and principal conductor of the National Arts Centre Orchestra in Ottawa , a group he had first directed in 1985 . He subsequently served as its artistic advisor during the 1996 – 1997 and 1997 – 1998 seasons , including a tour of the USA with the performance and recording of Beethoven 's 1st and 5th piano concertos with Grigory Sokolov as soloist . He has made occasional return visits to the orchestra since relinquishing his formal position with them . 
 = = = = Guest conducting = = = = 
 He has appeared frequently as a guest conductor with many of the world 's leading orchestras , including the Boston , Birmingham , San Francisco and Detroit symphony orchestras , the Saint Paul , Los Angeles and Mito chamber orchestras , the Freiburger <unk> , Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra , Mozarteum Orchestra of Salzburg , Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra , Austro @-@ Hungarian Haydn Orchestra , the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and London Philharmonic Orchestra and at the Tanglewood , Mostly Mozart and Salzburg festivals . He is a regular guest conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra and Deutsche <unk> 
 He made his Metropolitan Opera debut in 1988 conducting Handel 's opera Giulio Cesare , the same year he made his debut at the Salzburg Festival with Handel 's Messiah . He conducted Opera Australia and Michael Chance in Handel 's Rinaldo at the Sydney Opera House in 2005 . He also played William Babell 's virtuoso harpsichord transcriptions with some of the arias ( which Babell claimed were of Handel 's actual improvisations ) . 
 = = = Recent years = = = 
 Since resigning his position with The English Concert , Pinnock has divided his time between performing as a harpsichordist and conducting both <unk> and period @-@ instrument orchestras . He has also taken an interest in educational projects . 
 In 2004 he commissioned modern harpsichord music by English composer John Webb , whose Surge ( 2004 ) " is built up over an implacable rhythmic repeat @-@ figure . Though neither is explicitly tonal , each skilfully avoids the merely percussive effect that the harpsichord 's complex overtones can all too easily impart to more densely dissonant music . " He has also played the same composer 's Ebb ( 2000 ) , which " comprises a spasmodic discourse against a manic background of descending scale patterns like a kind of out @-@ of @-@ kilter change @-@ ringing " . 
 He toured Europe and the Far East in 2007 with the European Brandenburg Ensemble , a baroque orchestra , formed to mark his 60th birthday by recording Bach 's Brandenburg Concertos and performing popular baroque music . Its recording of the concertos won the Gramophone Award for Baroque Instrumental in 2008 . The band was not a permanent orchestra , but planned to reconvene in 2011 when Bach 's St John Passion was to be the focus of their work . 
 Pinnock 's educational work takes place both in the United Kingdom and elsewhere . It includes being principal guest conductor of the Royal Academy of Music 's Concert Orchestra , taking masterclasses or workshops at other British universities , and conducting the orchestras of such establishments as Mozarteum University of Salzburg and The Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts . 
 = = Degrees and honours = = 
 <unk> Hons ( organ ) 1965 , <unk> 1996 ; <unk> 1988 . Honorary doctorates : University of Ottawa ( D. University ) in 1993 , University of Kent ( DMus ) in 1995 , University of Sheffield ( DMus ) in 2005 . He was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours in 1992 and an Officier of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 1998 . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Each original release is listed . Years are those of recording . 
 = = = Solo harpsichord = = = 
 = = = = By composer = = = = 
 J. S. Bach : toccatas 910 & 912 , prelude and fugue in A minor BWV 894 , fantasia in C minor BWV 906 , Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue BWV 903 ( 1978 ) 
 J. S. Bach : toccatas 911 , 913 – 916 ( 1977 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Partitas for harpsichord BWV 825 – 830 ( 1985 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Partitas for harpsichord BWV 825 – 830 , Hänssler Classics ( 1998 – 1999 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Goldberg Variations BWV 988 ( 1980 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Italian Concerto BWV 971 , concerto after Vivaldi ( op.3 no.9 ) BWV 972 and French Overture BWV 831 ( 1979 ) 
 J. S. Bach : French suite no.5 BWV 816 , English suite no.3 BWV 808 , chromatic fantasia and fugue BWV 903 and preludes and fugues BWV 846 , 876 , 881 from The Well @-@ Tempered Clavier ( 1992 ) 
 Handel : harpsichord suites and chaconne HWV 434 , 441 , 436 , 438 , 435 
 Rameau : Complete harpsichord works , CRD records 
 Rameau : Les Cyclopes ( Suites in A minor and E minor ) , Avie records ( 2005 ) 
 Scarlatti : Sonatas Kk . 46 , 87 , 95 , 99 , 124 , 201 , <unk> , 490 , 491 , 492 , 513 , 520 , 521 ; CRD <unk> ( 1997 ; 1981 as LP ) 
 Scarlatti : Sonatas Kk . 460 , 461 , 478 , 479 , 502 , 516 , 517 , 518 , 519 , 529 , 544 , 545 , 546 , 547 ( 1986 ) 
 Gibbons : The Woods So Wild ( Vanguard <unk> ) 
 = = = = Collections = = = = 
 16th Century English Keyboard Music , CRD ( 1976 ) 
 A Choice Collection of Lessons and Ayres ( 17th and 18th Century English Keyboard Music ) , CRD 
 at the Victoria and Albert Museum , CRD ( 1974 ) 
 The Harmonious Blacksmith : Favourite Harpsichord Works ( 1983 ) 
 Suites by Purcell and Handel and Sonatas by Haydn , Wigmore Hall Live ( 2009 ) 
 = = = Harpsichord concertos = = = 
 J. S. Bach : harpsichord concertos BWV 1052 – 1058 , concertos for 2 , 3 and 4 harpsichords 1060 – 1065 ( Kenneth Gilbert , Lars Ulrik Mortensen and Nicholas Kraemer , harpsichords 2 – 4 ) ( 1979 – 1981 ) 
 J. S. Bach : concerto for harpsichord , violin and flute BWV 1044 ( on the recording 3 concerti ) ( 1984 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Brandenburg concerto no.5 BWV 1050 ( on his two recordings of the Brandenburg concertos ) ( 1982 and 2006 ) 
 Sons of Bach harpsichord concertos : C. P. E. Bach : <unk> , <unk> ; J. C. Bach / Mozart : concerto in D major ; CRD ( 1974 ) 
 Arne : Harpsichord concerto no.5 in G minor ( on A Grand Concert of Musick ) ( 1979 ) 
 Haydn : Concerto for Harpsichord and Orchestra Hob . XVIII : 11 ( on Haydn : concertos and Pachelbel : Canon and Gigue ) ( 1985 ) 
 Leigh : Concertino for Harpsichord and String Orchestra with Nicholas Braithwaite conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra ; he also plays in Leigh 's Midsummer Night 's Dream suite ; Lyrita records ( 1980 ) 
 Poulenc : Concert champêtre with Seiji Ozawa conducting the Boston Symphony Orchestra ( live recording ) , Deutsche Grammophon ( 1991 ) 
 = = = Chamber music = = = 
 J. C. Bach : 3 <unk> , Sextet ( also playing fortepiano and square piano ) with members of The English Concert ( 1988 ) 
 J. S. Bach : sonatas for flute and harpsichord BWV 1030 – 1032 with Stephen Preston ( baroque flute ) and sonatas for flute and continuo BWV 1033 – 1035 with the addition of Jordi <unk> ( viola da gamba ) , CRD 
 J. S. Bach : sonatas for flute and harpsichord BWV 1020 , 1030 – 1032 with Jean @-@ Pierre Rampal ( modern flute ) and sonatas for flute and continuo BWV 1033 – 1035 with the addition of Roland <unk> ( cello ) , CBS Records ( 1985 ) 
 J. S. Bach : sonatas for flute BWV 1020 , 1030 , 1032 and sonata for flute and harpsichord BWV 1031 with Emmanuel <unk> , sonatas for flute BWV 1033 – 1035 with the addition of Jonathan Manson ( cello ) ; sonata for two flutes BWV 1039 with the further addition of Silvia <unk> ( flute ) , EMI Classics ( 2008 ) 
 J. S. Bach : sonatas for violin and harpsichord BWV 1014 – 1019 with Rachel <unk> ( violin ) and BWV <unk> and the sonatas for violin and continuo BWV 1021 , 1023 with the addition of Jonathan Manson ( viola da gamba ) , Channel Classics ( 2000 ) 
 J. S. Bach : sonatas for viola da gamba and harpsichord BWV 1027 – 1029 , <unk> ( an early version of the flute sonata ) with Jonathan Manson , Avie ( 2006 ) 
 Corelli : Trio Sonatas with members of The English Concert ( 1987 ) 
 Handel : Trio Sonatas with members of The English Concert ( 1985 ) 
 Rameau : Pièces de <unk> en Concerts with Rachel <unk> and Jonathan Manson , Channel Classics ( 2002 ) 
 Soler : Six Concertos for Two Keyboard Instruments ( playing harpsichord and fortepiano ) with Kenneth Gilbert ( 1979 ) 
 Wesley : Duet for Organ in C major with Simon Preston on his recording Early English Keyboard Music ( 1986 ) 
 The <unk> Delight and other seventeenth @-@ century English music for viol and keyboard ( virginal and chamber organ ) with Jordi <unk> , Argo Records ( 1978 ) 
 The Flute King : Music from the court of Frederick the Great . Featuring Emmanuel <unk> on flute . One disc of flute concertos and one of flute sonatas ; Trevor Pinnock directs the <unk> Potsdam orchestra and plays harpsichord continuo . Jonathan Manson plays cello continuo . EMI Classics ( 2011 ) . 
 = = = Orchestral works with The English Concert = = = 
 Trevor Pinnock generally directs while playing harpsichord continuo . Recordings on Archiv Produktion unless otherwise indicated . 
 = = = = By composer = = = = 
 C. P. E. Bach : 6 symphonies for strings , <unk> ( 1979 ) 
 C. P. E. Bach : flute concertos <unk> and <unk> ( Stephen Preston , flute ) ( 1980 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Brandenburg concertos ( 1982 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Orchestral Suites nos . 1 & 3 ( 1978 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Orchestral Suite no . 2 and concerto for harpsichord , violin and flute BWV 1044 ( Simon Standage , violin ; Stephen Preston , flute ) ( 1978 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Orchestral Suite no . 4 and Brandenburg concerto no . 5 ( 1979 ) 
 J. S. Bach : Orchestral Suites ( Lisa <unk> , flute ) and cantata sinfonias BWV 110 , 174 , 249 , 42 , 52 ( 1993 ) 
 J. S. Bach : single and double violin concertos ( Simon Standage , Elizabeth Wilcock , violins ) ( 1983 ) 
 J. S. Bach : 3 concerti : concerto for oboe d 'amore BWV 1055 , concerto for oboe and violin BWV 1060 and concerto for harpsichord , violin and flute BWV 1044 ( 1984 ) 
 Boyce : 8 Symphonies , <unk> ( 1986 ) 
 Corelli : 12 concerti grossi <unk> ( 1988 ) 
 <unk> : Concertos and Orchestral Suite ( 1995 ) 
 Handel : 6 concerti grossi op.3 ( 1984 ) 
 Handel : 12 concerti grossi <unk> ( 1985 ) 
 Handel : Water Music ( 1983 ) 
 Handel : Music for the Royal Fireworks and concerti a due <unk> <unk> and 3 ( no.1 is on Christmas Concertos ) ( 1985 ) 
 Handel : Music for the Royal Fireworks ( original version of 1749 ) , concertos , occasional suite ( 1995 ) 
 Handel : Concerto grosso Alexander 's Feast HWV 318 , sonata à <unk> HWV 288 , concertos for oboe HWV 287 , 301 , <unk> ( Simon Standage , violin ; David <unk> , oboe ) ( 1984 ) 
 Handel : Overtures from Samson , il pastor fido , Agrippina , Alceste , Saul and Teseo ( 1986 ) 
 Handel : Organ concertos <unk> , <unk> and HWV 295 , 296 , 304 ( Simon Preston , organ ) ( 1984 ) 
 Handel : Coronation Anthems ( with Simon Preston conducting the choir of Westminster Abbey ) ( 1982 ) 
 Handel : Dettingen Te Deum , Dettingen Anthem ( with Simon Preston conducting the choir of Westminster Abbey ) ( 1984 ) 
 Handel : Ode for St. Cecilia 's Day ( Felicity Lott , soprano ; Anthony Rolfe Johnson , tenor ) ( 1985 ) 
 Handel : Italian cantatas : <unk> venti HWV 242 ; Cecilia , <unk> un <unk> HWV 89 ( Jennifer Smith , soprano ; John Elwes , tenor ) 
 Handel : Messiah ( Arleen Auger , soprano ; Anne Sofie von Otter , contralto ; Michael Chance , countertenor ; Howard Crook , tenor ; John Tomlinson , bass ) ( 1988 ) 
 Handel : Belshazzar ( 1990 ) 
 Handel : Acis and Galatea in Mozart 's arrangement <unk> ( 1991 ) 
 Handel : <unk> ( 2001 ) ; CD : Avie records ( live recording , London ) , DVD : <unk> Musik ( live recording , Halle ) 
 Haydn : concertos for oboe , trumpet and harpsichord ( <unk> : 11 ) ( Paul Goodwin , oboe ; Mark Bennett , trumpet ; Trevor Pinnock , harpsichord ) ( 1985 ) 
 Haydn : violin concertos ; Salomon : Romance for violin ( Simon Standage , violin ) ( 1989 ) 
 Haydn : Stabat mater ( 1990 ) 
 Haydn : missa in <unk> ( Nelson mass ) , te <unk> ( 1987 ) 
 Haydn : missa sancti Nicolai , <unk> ( 1993 ) 
 Haydn : symphonies le <unk> , le midi , le soir , ( nos . 6 , 7 , 8 ) ( 1987 ) 
 Haydn : Sturm und Drang symphonies ( nos . 26 , 35 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 58 , 59 , 65 ) ( 1989 – 1991 ) 
 Mozart : complete symphonies ( 1992 – 1995 ) 
 Mozart : <unk> " Coronation Mass " , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> de <unk> ( 1994 ) 
 Purcell : Dido and Aeneas ( 1991 ) 
 Purcell : Timon of Athens and Dioclesian ( 1995 ) 
 Purcell : King Arthur ( 1991 ) 
 Purcell : Odes : Come , ye sons of art , away ; Ode for St. Cecilia 's Day ; Of old , when heroes thought it base ( the Yorkshire feast song ) ( 1989 ) 
 Purcell : choral works with the choir of Christ Church , Oxford , conducted by Simon Preston 
 Telemann : 3 Orchestral Suites for 3 oboes and bassoon TWV 55 : C6 and B10 , for 2 hunting horns TWV 55 : <unk> ( 1993 ) 
 Telemann : Suites , Concerto in D Major for 3 oboes & bassoon TWV 55 : g4 and D1 , for 3 trumpets TWV 54 : D4 ( 1994 ) 
 Vivaldi : 12 concertos il <unk> dell <unk> e dell <unk> <unk> ( Simon Standage , violin ) ; flute concerto RV 429 , cello concerto RV 424 ; CRD records ( 1978 ) 
 Vivaldi : le quattro <unk> ( Simon Standage , violin ) ( 1982 ) 
 Vivaldi : 12 concertos for 1 @,@ 2 and 4 violins l <unk> <unk> op.3 ( Simon Standage , Micaela <unk> , Elizabeth Wilcock , Miles Golding , violins ) ( 1987 ) 
 Vivaldi : 12 concertos for violin la <unk> <unk> ( Simon Standage , violin ) ( 1990 ) 
 Vivaldi : 7 concerti for woodwind and strings ( 1995 ) 
 Vivaldi : Concerto alla rustica ( 1986 ) 
 Vivaldi : concerti l <unk> ( 1987 ) 
 Vivaldi : 6 concerti for flute <unk> ( Lisa <unk> , flute ) ( 1988 ) 
 Vivaldi : Gloria ; A. Scarlatti : dixit dominus ( 1988 ) 
 Vivaldi : <unk> mater , salve regina , nisi dominus ( Michael Chance , countertenor ) ; sinfonia for strings RV 169 ( 1995 ) 
 = = = = Collections = = = = 
 Christmas Concertos ( 1988 ) 
 Pachelbel : Canon and Gigue ( 1990 ) 
 A Grand Concert of Musick : English Baroque Concertos ( 1979 ) 
 Christmas in Rome : Vivaldi : Gloria ; Corelli : Christmas Concerto ; A. Scarlatti : O di <unk> <unk> <unk> ( on video and CD ) ( 1992 ) 
 Opera Arias by Mozart , Haydn and Gluck ( Anne @-@ Sofie von Otter , mezzo @-@ soprano ) ( 1995 ) 
 Oboe Concertos : C. P. E. Bach , <unk> ; Lebrun , no.1 ; Mozart , <unk> ( Paul Goodwin , oboe ) ( 1990 ) 
 = = = Conducting = = = 
 Exquisite Fires : Music of Linda Bouchard with the National Arts Centre Orchestra ; Marquis Classics ( 1998 ) 
 Renée Fleming : Sacred Songs in Concert from Mainz Cathedral with the Deutsche <unk> Bremen and the <unk> <unk> ; Decca records ( 2005 ) ( on DVD only ) 
 J. S. Bach : The Brandenburg Concertos with the European Brandenburg Ensemble , ( 2007 ) , Avie 
 = Lê Văn Duyệt = 
 Lê Văn Duyệt ( 1763 or 1764 – 3 July 1832 ) was a Vietnamese general who helped Nguyễn Ánh — the future Emperor Gia Long — put down the Tây Sơn rebellion , unify Vietnam and establish the Nguyễn Dynasty . After the Nguyễn came to power in 1802 , Duyệt became a high @-@ ranking mandarin , serving under the first two Nguyễn emperors Gia Long and Minh Mạng . 
 Born into a family of peasants near Tiền Giang , Duyệt joined Prince Nguyễn Ánh in fighting the Tây Sơn rebellion . Because of Duyệt 's military ability , he quickly rose through the ranks of the Nguyễn army and became a marshal when the Tây Sơn @-@ Nguyễn war ended . After the foundation of the Nguyễn Dynasty , Duyệt served as a high @-@ ranking mandarin and , later , viceroy of the southern part of Vietnam . 
 His governance greatly stabilized and helped develop the southern third of Vietnam , turning it into a wealthy and peaceful region . In addition , Duyệt opposed Emperor Minh Mạng 's ascension and defended Christian missionaries and converts from the emperor 's isolationist and Confucian policies . These attitudes brought Duyệt into conflict with Minh Mạng and led to the posthumous desecration of Duyệt 's tomb , which provoked his adopted son Lê Văn Khôi to revolt against the court . Later , Emperor Thiệu Trị , the successor of Minh Mạng , rehabilitated Duyệt and restored his tomb . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lê Văn Duyệt was born in either 1763 or 1764 in Định Tường ( present day Tiền Giang ) , a regional town in the Mekong Delta , in the far south of Vietnam . His parents were ordinary peasants whose ancestors came from Quảng Ngãi Province in central Vietnam during the southwards expansion of the Nguyễn Lords . Duyệt was born in a poor family , and he tended buffaloes during his childhood . Attracted by the possibilities of the " New South " , the family then moved to Gia Định . 
 = = General of Nguyễn Ánh = = 
 In 1780 , Duyệt became a eunuch of the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Prince Nguyễn Ánh , the nephew of the slain Nguyễn Lord and the most senior member of the family who survived the revolt by the three Tây Sơn brothers , who seized southern Vietnam from the Nguyễn in 1777 . As a result , Nguyễn Ánh and a few loyalists fled into the dense jungles of the Mekong Delta in the far south . Later , Nguyễn Ánh made Duyệt a Cai <unk> ( " Commander " ) of his bodyguards . From 1777 onwards , the military balance between the Tây Sơn and the Nguyễn fluctuated , as the enemies counterattacked each other frequently . 
 In 1782 , the Tây Sơn attacked Gia Định ( later known as Saigon and now Ho Chi Minh City ) again and forced Nguyễn Ánh to flee to the island of Phú Quốc under Duyệt 's escort . It was one of many times when Gia Định changed hands . In 1787 , Duyệt began organizing and commanding his own unit , and individually recruited his own enlisted men . In 1788 , the tide began to turn in favour of the Nguyễn , after Pigneau de <unk> , a French Catholic priest who befriended Nguyễn Ánh in the hope that the young prince would gain power and give special privileges to his religion , recruited French military officers to fight for the Nguyễn . In 1788 , the Nguyễn recaptured Gia Định and never relinquished it again . From then on , Nguyễn Ánh transformed the city into a fortress and his powerbase and began consolidating his hold on the surrounding area , before attacking the Tây Sơn with a view to eliminating them . 
 In 1789 , Nguyễn Ánh made Duyệt a general . From this point on , Duyệt accompanied his master on many military campaigns against the Tây Sơn . Continuous warfare then ensued , mostly centred near Nha Trang and Qui Nhơn on the south central coast , where the Nguyễn besieged the Tây Sơn 's strongholds . In 1801 , Duyệt engineered a naval victory in Thị <unk> , which was a turning point of the war and heralded the complete collapse of the Tây Sơn . In the same year , a close colleague , Tong Viet Phuc was killed in battle by the Tây Sơn , leading Duyệt to fly into " an almost insane rage " and start killing every enemy soldier he came across , leading Nguyễn Ánh to rebuke him . Shortly thereafter , Nguyễn Ánh exploited the absence of most of the Tây Sơn 's army , which was attempting to recapture Quy Nhon , to lead his army in an attack on Phú Xuân , the capital of the Tây Sơn . However , the Nguyễn encountered heavy resistance from Tây Sơn forces around the Tu Dung sea gate , the entrance into the citadel of Phú Xuân . Seeing that the Nguyễn forces could not breach the defense by frontal attacks , Nguyễn Ánh ordered Duyet to lead a naval division to attack the Tây Sơn defense complex from the rear . Lê Văn Duyệt and his deputy Le Chat then defeated the Tây Sơn army and forced their commander , Prince Consort Nguyen Van Tri , to flee . This paved a way for the Nguyễn to assault the citadel of Phú Xuân . 
 In 1802 , Nguyễn Ánh , who had declared himself Emperor Gia Long after capturing Phú Xuân ( Huế ) , appointed Duyệt to the position of Khâm Sai <unk> Tả Quân Dinh Bình Tây <unk> Quân ( " Marshal of King 's Left Division , Tây Sơn Pacification General " ) and ordered him to attack Tây Sơn @-@ controlled northern Vietnam . In October 1802 , Duyệt captured the north , and then renamed it from Bắc Hà ( " Northern River " ) to Bắc Thành ( " Northern Citadel " ) thus marking ultimate victory of the Nguyễn against the Tây Sơn . 
 Duyệt 's strategy , along with the French military tactics and technology recruited by Pigneau , played an important role in Nguyễn Ánh 's success and the foundation of the Nguyễn Dynasty . 
 = = Mandarin of the Nguyễn Dynasty = = 
 From 1802 to 1812 , Duyệt served as a high @-@ ranking general in the new imperial capital Huế in Annam ( central Vietnam ) . In 1812 , Emperor Gia Long appointed Duyệt as the viceroy of Gia Định . At this time , the viceroy of Gia Định held jurisdiction not only over Cochinchina ( southern Vietnam ) but also over Cambodia . 
 The post of viceroy had significant powers ; although no precise description of the head of Gia Định 's responsibilities survives to this day , the rights of his northern counterpart included the power " ... to decide lawsuits ; and to appoint and dismiss officials at his own will . It is enough only to report to the court after acting at his own discretion . " Gia Long trusted Duyệt and his fellow southerners ; all of the viceroy 's <unk> deputies were locally bred men , whereas many of those who ran the north were not . This allowed Duyệt and his entourage to develop a strong support base with the grassroots population and gave them more gravitas with which to rule . He also tried to expand the support base for the Nguyễn in the south by appointing newly arrived Chinese refugees who had fled their homeland after the fall of the Ming Dynasty as well as former rebels and bandits , to administrative posts if they were qualified , and encouraging their integration into and participation in society . Under the system of the time , military governors such as Duyệt moved to different posts with individual units that they had commanded for years , so he could count on their fidelity . 
 In 1812 , a Siamese @-@ supported young brother of Ang Chan , the King of Cambodia , rose up and seized the throne , which forced the incumbent to flee to Gia Định . In 1813 , Duyệt , with the approval of Gia Long , entered Cambodia with an army of 10 @,@ 000 troops and forced the Siamese army to retreat . He reinstated Ang Chan and built two citadels , Nam Vang and La Liem on Cambodian territory in order to maintain Vietnamese jurisdiction over the nation , which was formally made a protectorate , adding to his prestige . In addition , Duyet 's domestic governance was effective and stabilized the south , which prompted the people to give him the sobriquet <unk> <unk> Đồng Nai ( " White Tiger of Đồng Nai " ) . As Gia Long 's most trusted mandarin , Duyệt often acted as a conduit between the emperor and the European merchants and government delegates who visited Vietnam . In the early 1820s , Duyet dispatched a delegation to seek out British officials in an attempt to buy arms , but the party got lost in storms and were arrested after washing up in Burma . Duyet remained an advocate of hawkish foreign policy after the protectorate over Cambodia was entrenched , advocating an alliance with Burma against Siam , and expressing confidence that Vietnam could defeat Siam and dominate Southeast Asia . 
 In 1815 , Emperor Gia Long summoned him back in order to suppress widespread rebellions in central Vietnam . In 1819 , Duyệt was in Nghệ An and Thanh Hóa in northern Vietnam putting down revolts for Gia Long . During this time , he joined forces with a former rebel leader from a highlands minority group in Cao Bằng . This man became Duyệt 's adopted son under the name Lê Văn Khôi and his men also rallied to the court . Khoi was then propelled directly into a high @-@ ranking post in Gia Định . During the final four years of Gia Long 's reign , Duyệt ascended to the highest rank in the court , and he and Pham Dang Hung , another southerner , were the only people present as the emperor died . Gia Long decreed that Duyệt take command of five royal regiments . 
 After pacifying central Vietnam , Duyệt was reappointed to be the viceroy of southern Vietnam and Cambodia in 1820 by Emperor Minh Mạng , Gia Long 's successor . The emperor further enhanced Duyệt 's powers by allowing him the power to oversee all foreign trade coming into his area , and collect taxes in Cambodia and on imports and exports at his discretion . This gave Duyệt control over the vast economic resources in the fertile agricultural and lumber @-@ rich region and most importantly , land development . The southern area had only been populated by ethnic Vietnamese in recent centuries and immigration , clearing and development of land was rapid . 
 At the beginning of his second period as viceroy , Duyệt suppressed a revolt of the local Khmer people and enlisted ten thousand new taxpayers , thereby generating a large new revenue source for the court . He supervised the renovation of the Vĩnh <unk> Canal , an important waterway in southern Vietnam . Moreover , Duyệt was successful in suppressing unrest and criminal activity , and increasing foreign trade in southern Vietnam and Cambodia . Duyệt 's works greatly stabilized and developed southern Vietnam , turning it into a wealthy and peaceful region . As recognition for Duyệt 's service , Minh Mạng rewarded Duyệt with a belt made of jade — a prestigious gift in the Confucian system usually given to an emperor as a tribute , or by a monarch to an official to honour a great service — and betrothed a princess to Duyệt 's adopted son as a wife . 
 Duyệt was also involved in internal palace machinations . He became involved in a bitter rivalry with General Nguyen Van Thanh , the viceroy of northern Vietnam and commander of the Center Division ; Thanh was another of Gia Long 's leading generals . Duyệt was assisted in this dispute by Nguyen Huu Nghi , who had been a former confidant of Thanh before defecting . Later , another soldier who had served Thanh was caught mingling in Duyệt 's military camp and was captured . Duyệt claimed that the man confessed to being sent by Thanh to assassinate him . 
 On an other hand , Duyệt was the mandarin who charged former Crown Prince Cảnh 's wife for having an incestuous relationship with her eldest son and then executed her by drowning in 1824 . Duyệt 's action effectively ended the claim to Vietnam 's throne by Prince Cảnh 's descendants . According to one report however , Minh Mạng had already been informed from another quarter of the affair . Choi Byung <unk> , a Korean historian , described this event as a " most dramatic event illustrating Lê Văn Duyệt 's loyalty to Minh Mạng " . 
 = = Conflict with Minh Mạng = = 
 There was a lot of tension between Duyet and Minh Mạng . Although Gia Long had enlisted European support to claim the throne and allowed missionaries to function in Vietnam in gratitude to Pigneau , he ran a classical Confucian administration . He also expressed dismay at the Catholic condemnation of the traditional ancestral worship , a basic tenet of Vietnamese culture ; Crown Prince Cảnh had been converted by Pigneau and subsequently refused to bow down to his ancestors , instead desecrating a shrine with feces . 
 As Crown Prince Cảnh had died of smallpox during the war against the Tây Sơn , it was assumed that Cảnh 's son would succeed Gia Long , but in 1816 Nguyễn Phúc <unk> , the son of Gia Long 's second wife , was appointed instead . Gia Long chose him for his strong character and his deeply conservative aversion to Westerners , whereas Cảnh 's lineage had converted to Catholicism and had shunned Confucian traditions such as ancestor worship . Gia Long told his son to treat the Europeans — especially the French — respectfully , but not to grant them any position of preponderance . 
 Minh Mạng disliked Duyệt because he was one of many high @-@ ranking mandarins who opposed Gia Long 's succession plan . Duyệt and many of his southern associates tended to be favourable to Christianity , and supported the installation of Nguyễn Phúc Cảnh 's descendants . As a result , Duyệt was held in high regard by the Catholic community . Historian Mark McLeod said that " As the head of a region enjoying substantial autonomy , Lê Văn Duyệt had good reason to prefer that the empire be ruled after Gia @-@ long 's death by an immature or malleable monarch . " According to McLeod , as Duyệt was not from a scholar @-@ gentry background and lacked a classical Confucian education , he did not place a great emphasis on tradition and was more concerned with military needs , and that as a result , he would be more interested in maintaining strong relations with Europeans so that he could acquire weapons from them , rather than worrying about the social implications of Westernization . There was also speculation that Gia Long was worried that Cảnh 's 18 @-@ year @-@ old heir was too young and could have been manipulated , and that he would forget his Eastern roots , whereas the more mature Minh Mạng — aged 26 — would not . Gia Long was aware of the fact that Catholic clergy were opposed to the installation of Minh Mạng . 
 Minh Mạng began to place restrictions on Catholicism . He enacted " edicts of interdiction of the Catholic religion " and condemned Christianity as a " heterodox doctrine " . He saw the Catholics as a possible source of division , especially as the missionaries were arriving in Vietnam in ever @-@ increasing numbers . 
 Because of the role of Westerners in the war between the Nguyễn and the Tây Sơn , and Pigneau 's role in recruiting European assistance , Duyệt protected Vietnamese Catholic converts and Westerners from Minh Mạng 's <unk> and Confucian policies by disobeying the emperor 's orders . In defense of the Christians , Duyệt wrote to Ming Mạng , " We still have between our teeth the rice which the missionaries gave us when we were starving . " This came in response to an imperial edict that ordered missionaries to leave their areas of operation and move to the imperial city , ostensibly because the palace needed translators , but in reality to stop the Catholics from proselytizing . Whereas the government officials in central and northern Vietnam complied , Duyệt disobeyed the order and Minh Mạng was forced to bide his time . In the meantime , southern Christians were still publicly identifying themselves as such and <unk> their beliefs without facing any obstacles from local officials . Choi said that " From the point of view of Minh Mạng and his men , the land of Gia Định was thoroughly sheltered by Lê Văn Duyệt 's prestige . " 
 Duyệt 's policy towards criminals and former rebels also courted conflict with Minh Mạng . In the early @-@ 19th century , the nascent years of the Nguyễn Dynasty were plagued by incessant revolts , particularly in northern and central Vietnam . This resulted in a large number of rebels being captured along with common criminals and bandits . Such people were usually internally exiled to the opposite part of the country , so a large number ended up in southern Vietnam . These included many former rebels who were spared the death penalty after being defeated by Duyệt in northern and central Vietnam during his pacification campaigns in the late 1810s , and had sworn loyalty towards the general personally . These men were sent south with their wives and children to remove them from potentially rebellious areas and to punish them , but another objective was to start military colonies to help develop southern Vietnam , which had only recently been acquired by ethnic Vietnamese . The convicts were given equipment to work on the land and some were later pardoned . Duyệt and Gia Long had employed surrendered Tây Sơn officers in positions of authority , and this policy had continued due a shortage of manpower until Minh Mạng came to power . Duyệt wanted to continue this policy and wrote to Minh Mạng for permission , but was rejected . The emperor replied that such a policy was " like releasing a monkey to climb up a tree " . For Minh Mạng , the placement of former convicts and rebels in positions of power was contrary to the Confucian system of order and debauched the prestige of the state , whereas Duyet was only concerned with practicality . 
 During the 1820s , Duyệt 's continued cultivated of relations with the immigrant Chinese community that had settled in southern Vietnam in large numbers brought him into conflict with Minh Mạng . The general had adopted a Chinese immigrant merchant as his son and gave him favours , including appointing him to position of the body that regulated trade . The Japanese historian <unk> concluded that Duyệt and his entourage were given financial rewards and gifts from the Chinese merchants in return for favourable treatment by government officials . It was also pointed out that another of Duyet 's men was himself a businessman who had a Chinese agent . At the time , southern Vietnam was producing rice in plentiful quantities but export was banned by Minh Mạng , but prices in Vietnam , which were lower than those overseas , kept rising by 50 – 100 % in various parts of the country in five years . In the meantime , the opium supply kept on increasing . It was thought that Chinese merchants , whom Duyệt patronised , were illegally exporting rice at higher prices , and then bringing back opium during return journeys along with incoming immigrants . For his part , the general disagreed with the prevailing view held by the emperor , and said that people of both races were engaging in illegal trading , as well as blaming the incoming immigrants ' personal addictions rather than the Chinese merchants for bringing in opium . The historian Nola Cooke said that Duyet 's viewpoint was more plausible and speculated that the emperor 's stance was borne more out of a fear of the consequences of a disproportionate Chinese influence on the country than the reality of illegal trading . Duyệt wanted to further give tax concessions to newly arrived Chinese immigrants that were deemed to be impoverished to encourage immigration and speed up development of the region , something that the emperor was sceptical of , on the reasoning that it was difficult to genuinely determine who was in need and that the concession system was therefore open to <unk> . Nevertheless , Duyệt disobeyed Minh Mạng and tax concessions were granted . Because of their involvement in the illegal exportation of rice and importation of opium , Minh Mạng tried to ban the Chinese from engaging in sea trade in 1827 , but this was easily circumvented by the merchants , who exploited their contacts with Duyệt and used fraudulent registrations , often under the name of Vietnamese wives . It was not until Duyệt died that Minh Mạng was able to crack down on fraudulent sea trade . 
 For a time , Duyệt 's attitude and stature in the south forced Minh Mạng to moderate his policies and allow the preaching of Christian missionaries . However , it also increased the tension between the pair and Minh Mạng was anxious to curtail the autonomy that his father had granted to Duyệt and the southerners . The emperor began to slowly wind back their military powers , in an attempt to wear down Duyệt 's power base by gradually removing the general 's close aides . 
 In 1821 , Minh Mạng sent two of his aides from central Vietnam to serve as education officials in the south . One of the objectives was that they would oversee the imperial examination process and education system , which would allow them to determine who would serve in the government as mandarins and therefore fill the southern ranks with men acceptable to the court . However , their attempts were either blocked or circumvented by Duyệt 's incumbent officials and they returned to the capital two years later in failure . In 1823 , one of Duyệt 's closest subordinates Tran Nhat Vinh , was indicted by one of Minh Mạng 's officials from Huế , who charged him with trading rice on the black market and operating a brothel . Duyệt put a stop to the legal proceedings and angrily tried to turn the tables , calling on the emperor to execute the accusing official . This ended in a stalemate , but a few years later , Vinh was transferred to northern Vietnam and later imprisoned while Duyet was unable to do anything about the matter in the south ; Vinh 's position was taken by one of the emperor 's men . In 1826 , Duyệt resisted the removal of a regional official by the palace , leading the emperor to criticise him in a proclamation declaring that court appointments came under the purview of Huế . The following year , Duyệt executed convicted criminals without informing the capital , leading the emperor to criticise him again , saying that " the ultimate authority to decide questions of life and death belongs to the court . " 
 In 1829 , Duyet suffered another blow when Nguyen Van <unk> , an ally whom he appointed to run Cambodia for him died . The general nominated another subordinate to replace his colleague Nguyen Van Xuan , but Minh Mạng overruled him and instead appointed one of his mandarins Bui Minh Duc to the post . Although the emperor formally asked Duc to cooperate with Duyet , Minh Mạng then appointed Duc to the post of Minister of the Board of War , putting him above the general in the chain of command , effectively making Duyet irrelevant with regards to the running of the protectorate . In 1831 , just before Duyet 's death , Minh Mạng began to dismantle his military infrastructure and sending his component units to other parts of Vietnam , and sent a loyalist General Nguyen Van Khue to Gia Định , allowing him to dilute the viceroy 's power . In addition , no government reports could be officially approved and sent to the capital until it was countersigned by civil officials sent south by the emperor . These moves against southern autonomy gradually increased the resentment and regionalist sentiments among the local population . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Lê Văn Duyệt had a wife named Đỗ Thị <unk> . Apart from Lê Văn Khôi , Duyệt had another adopted son named Lê Văn Yen who had married princess Ngoc <unk> , a daughter of Gia Long . 
 Duyệt was typically described as a stern , hot @-@ tempered but fair man , which made him both feared and respected by people . Many lower @-@ level bureaucrats and military officers were loath to speak to him directly , as were some higher officials . Some later accounts have portrayed his strict ways in a more negative light . According to the later imperial official Phan Thuc <unk> , Duyệt sometimes fatally beat dogs and beheaded senior local officials for no reason . Duyệt was also regarded as an eccentric ; he raised 30 members of the Montagnard hill tribes to act as servants , and kept exactly 100 chickens and 100 dogs at his home . Whenever he returned to his official residence after an assignment , he ordered a tiger and 50 dogs to march after him . In 1825 , Michel @-@ Duc <unk> , the nephew of Gia Long 's French military mandarin Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> , visited Gia Định on a government mission and said that Duyệt " has great talent both in battle and administration . People fear him , but he is heartily loved by people here because he is fair . " 
 He was also famous for his love of cockfighting , <unk> <unk> ( Vietnamese classical opera ) and court dancing , all of which were popular with the common Vietnamese southerner . He reportedly gave a long speech praising cockfighting , in a joking manner , to Emperor Gia Long and sometimes beat the drum himself in order to encourage the actors and actresses of the <unk> <unk> troupes when they were performing for him . He was also known for his patronage of goddess spirits that were popularly venerated by local southerners in folk religions . In addition , Duyệt was the instructor of three <unk> formalities , a code of ceremonial conduct and customs that were copies of royal rituals . 
 George Finlayson , a representative of the British government who visited Gia Định in 1822 , described Duyệt as a man who liked to dress plainly , almost in a manner similar to his peasant constituents . Finlayson said that Duyệt " has an intelligent look , and may be esteemed to possess considerable activity both of mind and body : his face is round and soft , his features flabby and wrinkled ; he has no beard , and bears considerable resemblance to an old woman : his voice , too , is shrill and feminine . " 
 Duyệt 's informal manner caused him difficulties during Minh Mạng 's administration , as the second emperor 's government was more oriented towards classical Confucianism than that of his father . The younger mandarins regarded Duyệt and his southern entourage as uncultured , and the older military officials felt more uncomfortable in the court as time went by . Gia Long was also seen a direct and frank man in his dealings , while Minh Mạng was seen as being vague in expressing his thoughts to his bureaucrats . This was attributed to Gia Long 's dependence on military officers during the war years , which required him to be blunt and assertive , whereas Minh Mạng grew up dealing with court scholars after the establishment of the Nguyễn Dynasty , and was regarded as a quiet and studious monarch . After a visit to the capital in 1824 , Duyệt found the imperial court to be an uncomfortable surrounding and confided in a colleague : 
 The court recruits civil officials and wants to make a proper ruling system with them . Both of us have rise in the world from a military background . We only know straight expression and quick action , thus violating manners or official rules , sometimes . We are originally different from them . We had better give up our positions ... to avoid possible mistakes . 
 Duyệt and fellow southern general Le Chat then resigned their positions , but the emperor rejected their offers . Duyệt wanted a post in the capital , but was not given one , in part of suspicions among the court that the general could launch a palace coup , not unlike many insurrections in Vietnam 's past . Duyệt was sent back to southern Vietnam , far from the royal seat . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On 3 July 1832 , Duyệt died in the Citadel of Saigon at the age of 68 . He was buried at Bình Hòa , Gia Định ( present day Ho Chi Minh City ) . His tomb was called <unk> Ông Bà <unk> ( " Tomb of the Marshal in Ba Chieu " ) by the local people . 
 Duyệt 's death opened the way for Minh Mạng to apply his policies in the south , as the viceroy 's subordinates lacked the influence to defy the court . The emperor also tried to reduce Duyệt 's followers ’ political power by abolishing the post of viceroy and putting the south under his direct rule , thus making Duyệt the last holder of the post . Soon after Duyệt 's death , Minh Mạng 's new appointees arrived and took over the local administration . The new officials then launched an investigation and reported that Duyệt and his aides had engaged in corrupt and abusive practices . 
 As a result , Bach Xuan Nguyen , who led the investigation , ordered the posthumous humiliation of Duyệt . This resulted in the desecration of his tomb , the execution of sixteen relatives , and the arrests of his colleagues . Minh Mạng 's attitude led Duyet 's adopted son Khoi to break out of prison and start a revolt against the emperor on 10 May 1833 . 
 After suppressing the revolt , which was supported by a Siamese invasion , lasted three years and briefly took control of the south , the emperor had Duyệt 's tomb desecrated and had a stele with the inscription " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Lê Văn Duyệt <unk> <unk> nước " ( " Here lies the eunuch Lê Văn Duyệt who resisted the law " ) placed over the ruins . The tomb remained in disrepair until the reign of next emperor , Thiệu Trị , who rehabilitated Duyệt and restored his tomb . Then , Emperor Tự Đức turned the tomb into a national monument . 
 After the establishment of the colony of Cochinchina , Duyệt was continuously venerated despite French policies of dismantling the Vietnamese imperial system and its ritual customs . Duyệt 's yearly celebrations were attended by politicians of Cochinchina . This was allowed to continue despite a legend in southern Vietnam that Duyệt had appeared in the dreams of Nguyen Trung <unk> , a fisherman who famously led a peasant army against French colonization , and advised him on how to fight foreigners . In 1937 , thanks to donations from a number of colonial government officials and members of the business elite , Duyệt 's tomb was renovated and extended . Under South Vietnamese rule , Duyệt was considered a great national hero and his image appeared on banknotes , while prominent streets were named after him . In contrast , Duyệt was held in low regard by the current Vietnamese Communist Party government because of his role in the expansion of French influence in Vietnam , in line with the communist designation of the Nguyễn Dynasty as " feudal " and " reactionary " . After the fall of Saigon in 1975 , Duyệt 's tomb became dilapidated because of the lack of state maintenance and streets named in his honour were renamed . This attitude remained unchanged until 2008 , when the current government had Duyệt 's tomb renovated and allowed a play portraying his life to be performed publicly . 
 Nevertheless , Duyệt is widely regarded by southern Vietnamese people as the most important local hero . Choi described Duyệt 's popularity as follows : " No matter whether they are indigenous Vietnamese or Chinese settlers , Buddhists or Christians , residents of Saigon have long paid enthusiastic tribute to one favorite southern , local hero — Lê Văn Duyệt — whose gorgeous shrine is located on Dinh Tien Hoang Street in Binh Thanh District . You will not able to find any other place in Huế or Hanoi where the residents , regardless of ethnic or religious backgrounds , regard their own local hero with such reverence " . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Lê Văn Duyệt , along with Nguyen Van Truong , Nguyen Van Nhon , Nguyen Huynh Duc and Truong Tan Buu ( all of them were Nguyễn Ánh 's generals ) was called <unk> <unk> tướng ( " Five Tiger Generals " ) in Vietnamese folk culture . Moreover , people usually regard Duyệt as Đức Tả Quân ( " His Honorable Left Division 's Marshal " ) , following the office of Tả Quân ( " Marshal of Nguyễn Dynasty Army 's Left Division " ) which Duyệt was the holder for a time . Lê Văn Duyệt High School in Saigon was named after him . 
 = Schenecker double homicide = 
 The Schenecker double homicide occurred on January 27 , 2011 ; Calyx and Beau Schenecker were found dead by police at their home in Tampa , Florida . Their mother , Julie Powers Schenecker , was arrested on suspicion of their murder after an alleged confession . 
 On January 29 , Schenecker was admitted to Tampa General Hospital , but was released the next day . She was charged with two counts of first degree murder and indicted by grand jury on February 9 . Seven days later she entered a plea of not guilty , with her legal team indicating they would pursue a defense on the grounds of insanity . Parker Schenecker divorced his wife in May 2011 and subsequently filed a civil lawsuit for wrongful deaths , following dispute over distribution of the family 's assets . 
 Julie Schenecker 's criminal trial began on April 28 , 2014 . She was found guilty of first @-@ degree murder and was sentenced to two concurrent life terms in prison on May 15 , 2014 . 
 = = Schenecker family = = 
 Julie Powers Schenecker ( born January 13 , 1961 in Muscatine , Iowa ) lived in Tampa , Florida with her husband , U.S. Army Colonel Parker Schenecker , and their two children . The couple met in Germany during the 1980s , where Julie Powers was working as a Russian linguist . 
 At the time of Calyx and Beau 's deaths , Parker Schenecker was overseas . Their daughter , Calyx , was 16 and son , Beau , was 13 at the time of their deaths . According to the New York Daily News , the children were described as " cheerful and seemingly happy . " 
