 = = = Previous investigation = = = 
 Police visited the Schenecker home November 6 , 2010 , to investigate an allegation of child abuse made by Calyx . No charges were filed against Schenecker but , according to the police report , Schenecker acknowledged that she had hit her daughter . Calyx told a counselor in her once @-@ a @-@ week therapy appointment that her mother had hit her in the face when they were heading home from cross @-@ country practice November 2 , 2010 , according to the police report . Investigators that visited the home said there were no visible injuries on Calyx when the report was filed four days later . Calyx had told investigators that Schenecker had " hit her with an open hand on her face for approximately 30 seconds " , according to the report . 
 = = Murder = = 
 On January 28 , 2011 , police visited the property after receiving a call from Schenecker 's mother , who expressed concern at not being able to reach her daughter . Officers found Beau Schenecker in a sport utility vehicle in the garage and Calyx Schenecker in her bedroom ; both had been shot with a .38 revolver and covered with blankets . Julie Schenecker was found unconscious on the rear porch covered in blood . 
 Police stated that Schenecker admitted to killing her children because they " talked back and were mouthy " . A police statement said , " She described the crimes in detail . " A note was allegedly found in the house describing a plan to murder her children and commit suicide . According to the arrest affidavit , Beau was shot twice in the head on January 27 while being driven by his mother from soccer practice . Schenecker then drove home and killed Calyx in her room as she was doing her homework on her computer . The revolver had been purchased five days before the killings . Calyx was found on her bed covered by a blanket . 
 = = = Criminal trial = = = 
 Police arrested Julie Schenecker at the scene , later that day she was admitted to hospital for a " pre @-@ existing medical condition " . She was released the next day and taken to Hillsborough County Jail , where she was held without bail . On February 9 , 2011 , Schenecker was indicted by a grand jury for first degree murder . Her arraignment was set for February 16 , where she entered a plea of not guilty , with her defense team indicating they would pursue an insanity defense . Prosecutors initially said they would seek the death penalty for Schenecker . , but later declined to do so . In August 2012 , lawyers on both sides said they needed a year to review computer files found on the computer in the Schenecker home before trial . In December 2012 , at a hearing a trial date was set for October 7 , 2013 for Julie Schenecker . In August 2013 , Hillsborough Circuit Judge Emmett Lamar Battles granted a defense motion requesting more time to review evidence and depose expert witnesses . The trial was delayed until April 28 , 2014 . 
 Julie Schenecker was found guilty of first @-@ degree murder and was sentenced to two concurrent ( to be served at the same time ) life terms in prison on May 15 , 2014 . 
 = = = Civil lawsuit = = = 
 The <unk> divorced in May 2011 . Following dispute over the distribution of their assets , particularly to limit the money available for use in Julie Schenecker 's legal defense , Parker Schenecker filed a wrongful death lawsuit against his wife . 
 = Crash Bandicoot ( video game ) = 
 Crash Bandicoot is a platform video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation . It was originally released for the PlayStation on August 31 , 1996 , and was included in the Sony Greatest Hits line @-@ up . In 2007 , it was re @-@ released as a downloadable game on the PlayStation Network , and its remastered version is scheduled to be released for the PlayStation 4 in 2017 . 
 Crash Bandicoot is the first installment in the Crash Bandicoot series , chronicling the creation of the title character at the hands of the series antagonist Doctor Neo Cortex and his henchman Doctor Nitrus Brio . The game 's story follows Crash 's effort to stop Brio and Cortex 's plans for world domination , and to save his girlfriend Tawna , a female bandicoot also evolved by Brio and Cortex . 
 Crash Bandicoot received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised the game 's graphics and unique visual style , but noted the game 's lack of innovation as a platform game . The game would later go on to become one of the best @-@ selling PlayStation video games . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls Crash Bandicoot , who must traverse several levels in sequence in order to progress . The player is given a certain amount of lives , which are lost when Crash is attacked by an enemy , or falls into water or a pit . If all lives are lost at any point in the game , the " Game Over " screen will appear , at which point the player may continue from the last time they saved their progress . 
 Crash 's primary abilities are jumping and spinning . Most enemies may be defeated by jumping on them or spinning into them . An enemy that is attacked by Crash 's spin attack can be launched into another enemy that is on @-@ screen at the same time . These same techniques can be used to open the numerous boxes found in each stage . Most boxes in the game contain Wumpa Fruit , which give the player an extra life if 100 of them are collected . Another item found inside crates is the Witch Doctor 's Mask , which shields Crash from one enemy attack . Collecting three of these masks in a row grants Crash temporary invulnerability from all minor dangers . Arrow boxes ( marked with arrows pointing up ) propel Crash further than his ordinary jump can , while TNT boxes explode after a three @-@ second fuse when jumped on . Boxes with an exclamation mark ( ! ) on them cause previously intangible objects in the area to solidify . Check Point boxes allow Crash to return to the point where the first Check Point box has been opened upon losing a life . If more than one Check Point box has been opened in a stage , Crash returns to the last Check Point box that has been opened . 
 Special tokens can also be found inside boxes . These tokens may feature the likenesses of Tawna , Doctor Neo Cortex or Doctor Nitrus Brio . When three tokens have been collected in one stage , the on @-@ screen action freezes and Crash is immediately teleported to a " Bonus Round " . In the Bonus Round , the player must break open a large number of boxes to earn Wumpa Fruit and special items such as keys to hidden areas . If Crash falls off the screen in the Bonus Round , he is transported back to the level he came from rather than losing a life . He is also transported back to the level if the Bonus Round has been successfully traversed . 
 If the player can complete an entire level without losing a life after breaking open a Check Point box , a special " Stage Clear " screen appears in which the player is informed of how well they 've done and if any special items have been earned . They are also shown how many boxes ( if any ) have been missed in the level . If a life has been lost during the stage , the player is simply returned to the world map . If the player manages to both complete a level without losing a life after breaking open a Check Point box and break open all of the boxes in that level , they are awarded a gem . Gems allow the player to enter new areas in previously completed levels that were not accessible before . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The playable protagonist character is Crash Bandicoot , a bandicoot who has been mutated by an invention called the Evolvo @-@ Ray . The main antagonist is Doctor Neo Cortex , a mad scientist who was often ridiculed by the scientific community for his outlandish theories and is now motivated to prove his tormentors wrong by creating a mutated army of animals to conquer the world . Cortex 's henchman is Doctor Nitrus Brio , the insecure creator of the Evolvo @-@ Ray . Crash 's love interest is Tawna , a female bandicoot about to undergo experimentation by the doctors . Helping Crash in his journey is an ancient witch doctor spirit by the name of Aku Aku , who has scattered masks of himself throughout the islands to grant Crash special invincibility powers . 
 The boss characters of the game include Papu Papu , an obese and short @-@ tempered chief of the native village ; Ripper Roo , a demented kangaroo with razor @-@ sharp toenails ; Koala Kong , a muscular but unintelligent koala ; and Pinstripe Potoroo , Doctor Cortex 's tommy gun @-@ wielding bodyguard . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game is set on the Wumpa Islands , a group of three fictional Australian islands owned by Doctor Neo Cortex . Levels are typically set in tribesmen 's villages , fortresses or beaches . Some levels on the second island also take place in temple ruins , bridges high above the mountains , and a volcanic mine . Levels on the third island feature much more industrial settings , including a large power plant and a castle . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 With the aid of his assistant Doctor Nitrus Brio , Doctor Neo Cortex creates the Evolvo @-@ Ray , which he uses to mutate the various animals living on the islands into beasts with superhuman strength . They experiment on a peaceful bandicoot named Crash , who Cortex intends to be the military leader of his growing army of animal soldiers . Despite warnings from Brio , Cortex subjects Crash to the untested Cortex Vortex in an attempt to put him under his control . The experiment proves to be a failure as the Vortex rejects Crash . After Crash escapes Cortex 's castle by leaping out a window and falling into to the ocean below , Cortex prepares a female bandicoot named Tawna for experimentation . 
 Having grown attached to Tawna during their time in captivity , Crash resolves to rescue her and defeat Cortex . From the beach of N. Sanity Island , Crash makes his way through the nearby jungle and scales the wall of a giant wooden fortress , which is inhabited by the native tribe . Crash then enters the hut of tribe leader Papu Papu and is forced to defeat him in self @-@ defense after inadvertently waking him from his nap . Riding on the back of a wild hog , Crash escapes the pursuing villagers and climbs over the opposite fortress wall . 
 From there , Crash crosses to the second of Cortex 's islands . Wumpa Island , hosting a large tree , has been long abandoned and there is nothing more than a jungle , a lizard @-@ infested city , dilapidated bridges high in the mountains , and the ruins of an ancient temple . However , having discovered that Crash was making his way across the islands , Cortex dispatches the deranged Ripper Roo on the island in a temple at the start of a creek . Crash manages to cross the river and , after avoiding contact with his razor @-@ sharp toenails , knocks Ripper Roo out cold beside a waterfall , and successfully makes his way through the city and the temples . Crash also defeats another of Cortex 's mutants , Koala Kong , in a volcanic cave mine before finally crossing to the Cortex Island . Crash then navigates the Cortex Power station , a huge power plant that provides Cortex 's castle with energy while polluting the nearby area . When he reaches the factory core , Crash battles and defeats the CEO of Cortex Power , Pinstripe Potoroo , damaging the power plant . 
 Unable to enter Cortex 's castle after getting there via bridge , Crash climbs the tower walls , and enters the castle through the window he had previously escaped from . After making his way through the dark hallways and the Castle 's many machines , Crash is confronted by Brio inside his laboratory . Brio uses chemicals to mutate himself into a monster . While Crash is successful in defeating Brio , the castle laboratory catches chemical fire during the struggle . Crash escapes to Cortex 's airship , where he confronts Cortex himself as the castle burns . Cortex attacks him with a plasma gun , but Crash deflects his own projectiles against him and sends Cortex falling out of the air . United with Tawna , they escape the burning castle on Cortex 's airship . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Before presenting Way of the Warrior to Mark Cerny of Universal Interactive Studios , Naughty Dog was signed on to the company for three additional games . In August 1994 , Jason Rubin and Andy Gavin began their move from Boston , Massachusetts to Los Angeles , California . Before leaving , Gavin and Rubin hired Dave Baggett , their first employee and a friend of Gavin 's from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ; Baggett would not start working full @-@ time until January 1995 . During the trip , Gavin and Rubin studied arcade games intensely and noticed that racing , fighting and shooting games had begun making a transition into full 3D rendering . Sensing opportunity , they turned to their favorite video game genre , the character @-@ based action @-@ platform game , and asked themselves what a three @-@ dimensional version of such a game would be like . Because the player would be forced to constantly look at the character 's rear , the hypothetical game was jokingly called " Sonic 's Ass Game " . The basic technology for the game and the Crash Bandicoot series as a whole was created somewhere near Gary , Indiana . The rough game theory was designed near Colorado . Soon afterward , Gavin and Rubin threw out their previous game design for Al O. Saurus and <unk> , a side @-@ scrolling video game based on time travel and scientists genetically merged with dinosaurs . 
 In August 1994 , Naughty Dog moved into the Universal Interactive Studios backlot and met with Mark Cerny . The group unanimously liked the " Sonic 's Ass Game " idea and debated on what video game system the game would be for . Deciding that the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer , Atari Jaguar , Sega 32X , and Sega Saturn were unsatisfactory options due to poor sales and " clunky " development units , the team chose to develop the game for Sony 's PlayStation due to the console 's " sexy " nature and the company 's lack of an existing competing mascot character . After signing a developer agreement with Sony , Naughty Dog paid $ 35 @,@ 000 for a PlayStation development unit and received the unit in September 1994 . A development budget of $ 1 @.@ 7 million was set for the game . 
 = = = Character and art design = = = 
 Before the development of Crash Bandicoot , Naughty Dog wanted to do what Sega and Warner Bros. did while designing their respective characters , Sonic the Hedgehog and the Tasmanian Devil , and incorporate an animal that was " cute , real , and no one really knew about " . The team purchased a field guide on Tasmanian mammals and selected the wombat , potoroo , and bandicoot as options . Gavin and Rubin went with " Willie the Wombat " as a temporary name for the starring character of the game . The name was never meant to be final due both to the name sounding " too dorky " and to the existence of a non @-@ video game property of the same name . The character was effectively a bandicoot by October 1994 , but was still referred to as " Willie the Wombat " as a final name had not been formulated yet . It was decided that the main character would be mute because past voices for video game characters were considered to be " lame , negative , and distracted from identification with them . " The villain of the game was created while Gavin , Rubin , Baggett , and Cerny were eating " mediocre Italian " near the Universal studios . Gavin idealized an " evil genius villain with a big head " who was " all about his attitude and his minions " . Rubin , having become fond of the animated television series Pinky and the Brain , imagined a " more malevolent Brain " with minions resembling the weasel characters in Who Framed Roger Rabbit . After Gavin performed a " silly villain voice " depicting the attitude in mind for the character , the villain 's name , Doctor Neo Cortex , was instantly formulated . 
 To aid in the visual aspect of production , David <unk> recruited Joe Pearson of Epoch Ink , who in turn recommended that Charles Zembillas of American Exitus be brought on board as well . Pearson and Zembillas would meet with Naughty Dog weekly to create the characters and environments of the game . Because the main character was Tasmanian , it was decided that the game would take place on a mysterious island where every possible type of environment could be found , with the added reasoning that an evil genius like Doctor Neo Cortex would require an island stronghold . On creating the levels for the game , Pearson first sketched each environment , designing and creating additional individual elements later . Pearson aimed for an organic , overgrown look to the game and worked to completely avoid straight lines and 90 @-@ degree corners . In January 1995 , Rubin became concerned about the programmer @-@ to @-@ artist ratio and hired Bob Rafei and Taylor Kurosaki as additional artists . A Naughty Dog artist sketched every single background object in the game before it was modeled . Naughty Dog 's artists were tasked with making the best use of textures and reducing the amount of geometry . Dark and light elements were juxtaposed to create visual interest and separate geometry . The artists would squint when sketching , texturing , and playing the levels to make sure they could be played by light value alone . They ensured to use color correctly by choosing mutually accentuating colors as the theme for the " Lost City " and " Sunset Vista " levels . The interior of Cortex 's castle was designed to reflect the inside of his mind . 
 = = = Graphics = = = 
 The PlayStation had a 512 x 240 video mode and used up video memory that would normally be used for textures , but was effective in rendering shaded ( if <unk> ) polygons . Rubin pointed out that since the polygons on the characters were just a few pixels in size , shaded characters would look better than textured ones . Thus , polygons were emphasized over textures ; this was advantageous in that it allowed the programmers more polygons to work with and allowed them to work around the PlayStation 's lack of texture correction or polygon clipping . To give the game more of a resemblance to an animated cartoon , vertex animation was implemented rather than the standard skeletal animation with " one @-@ joint " weighting ; this allowed the programmers to use the more sophisticated three @-@ to @-@ four @-@ joint weighting available in PowerAnimator . Because the PlayStation was unable to match this at runtime , the location of every vertex was stored in every frame at 30 frames a second . Gavin , Baggett , and Cerny attempted to invent assembly language vertex compressors for this manner of animation ; Cerny 's version was the most successful and the most complicated . 
 To obtain the graphic details seen in the game , Rubin , Gavin , and Baggett researched visibility calculation in video games that followed Doom and concluded that extensive pre @-@ calculation of visibility would allow the game to render a larger number of polygons . Following experimentation in free @-@ roaming camera control , the team settled with a branching rail camera that would follow along next to , behind , or in front of the character , generally looking at him , moving on a " track " through the world . Because only 800 polygons could be visible on the screen at a time , parts of the game 's landscape would be hidden from view using trees , cliffs , walls , and twists and turns in the environment . Because the production used an entirely Silicon Graphics and <unk> @-@ based tool pipeline , the programmers used $ 100 @,@ 000 Silicon Graphics workstations instead of the $ 3 @,@ 000 personal computers that were the standard at the time . Gavin created an algorithmic texture packer that would deal with the fact that the 512 x 240 video mode left too little texture memory . Meanwhile , Baggett created bidirectional 10x compressors that would reduce the 128 @-@ megabyte levels down to 12 megabytes and allow them to be compatible with the PlayStation 's 2 @-@ megabyte random access memory . The levels proved to be so large that the first test level created could not be loaded into Alias PowerAnimator and had to be cut up into 16 chunks . Each chunk took about 10 minutes to load even on a 256 @-@ megabyte machine . To remedy the situation , Baggett created the <unk> , a level design tool where component parts of a level were entered into a text file , with a series of Adobe Photoshop layers indicating how the parts were combined . To code the characters and gameplay of the game , Andy Gavin and Dave Baggett created the programming language " Game @-@ Oriented Object LISP " ( <unk> ) using LISP syntax . 
 = = = Level design = = = 
 The first two test levels created for the game did not ship in the final version for being too open and featuring too many polygons . During the summer of 1995 , the team focused on creating levels that were functional as well as fun and used the Cortex factory levels to experiment on this goal ; the mechanical setting allowed the team to forego the complex and organic forest designs and distill the two @-@ axis gameplay in an attempt to make it fun . Their first two successful levels ( " Heavy Machinery " and " Generator Room " ) utilized 2.5D gameplay and featured basic techniques previously used in Donkey Kong Country , such as steam vents , drop platforms , bouncy pads , heated pipes and enemy characters that would move back and forth , all of which would be arranged in progressively more difficult combinations as the level went on . " Willie " ' s jumping , spinning and <unk> <unk> were refined in these two levels . The level " Cortex Power " incorporates the original " Sonic 's ass " point of view ( behind the character and over his shoulder ) featured in the two test levels . After working on those three levels , the first successful jungle @-@ themed level ( later titled " Jungle Rollers " ) was created from pieces of the failed first test level arranged into a corridor between trees . From that point forward , two to three levels would be created for each level theme featured , with the first level featuring an <unk> set of challenges and later levels adding new obstacles ( such as dropping and moving platforms in the second jungle @-@ themed level ) to increase the difficulty . 
 While playing the game during development , Rubin realized that there were many empty areas in the game due to the PlayStation 's inability to process numerous on @-@ screen enemy characters at the same time . Additionally , test players were solving the game 's puzzles too fast . In an attempt to remedy this , the " Wumpa Fruit " pickup was created ( the fruits themselves were rendered in 3D into a series of textures ) , but was not exciting enough on its own . On a Saturday in January 1996 , Gavin coded the " crates " while Rubin modeled a few basic crates and an exploding TNT crate and drew quick textures . The first few crates were placed in the game six hours later , and many more would be placed during the following days . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In September 1995 , Andy Gavin and Taylor Kurosaki took footage from the game and spent two days editing it into a two @-@ minute " preview tape " , which would be deliberately leaked to a friend at Sony Computer Entertainment so that the company may view it . Due to management issues at Sony , it wouldn 't be until March 1996 that Sony would agree to publish the game , which went into the alpha stage in April 1996 . While preparing for the game 's demonstration at the Electronic Entertainment Expo , the team decided to finally rename the title character " Crash Bandicoot " ( the particular name being credited to Dave Baggett and Taylor Kurosaki ) , with his surname being based on his canonical species and his first name stemming from the visceral reaction to the character 's destruction of boxes ( " Dash " , " Smash " , and " Bash " were other potential names ) . The marketing director of Universal Interactive Studios insisted that the game and character be named " <unk> / Wez / <unk> the Wombat " or " Ozzie the <unk> " . The name Crash Bandicoot prevailed after Naughty Dog threatened to leave the production . The same director also objected to the character of Crash 's love interest Tawna on " basic sexist principles " . 
 The music of Crash Bandicoot was a last @-@ minute aspect added to the game before its showing at the Electronic Entertainment Expo . The producer of Universal Interactive proposed that rather than conventional music , an " urban chaotic symphony " would be created by Andy Gavin causing random sound effects ( such as bird vocalizations , vehicle horns , grunts , and flatulence ) to be randomly selected and combined . When this proposal was rejected , David <unk> introduced the team to the music production company Mutato Muzika and its founder Mark Mothersbaugh . Following this introduction , Mothersbaugh selected Josh Mancell to compose the music for the game based on his previous work on Johnny Mnemonic : The Interactive Movie . Mothersbaugh advised Mancell throughout the soundtrack 's demo stages , after which all composition duties of Crash Bandicoot and Naughty Dog 's subsequent six titles were delegated to Mancell . Mouse on Mars , A Guy Called Gerald , Aphex Twin and Juan Atkins served as influences on Mancell 's " simple but kind of off @-@ kilter " melodies . Dave Baggett served as the soundtrack 's producer . The sound effects were created by Mike Gollom , Ron Horwitz and Kevin Spears of Universal Sound Studios . The voices in the game were provided by Brendan O 'Brien . 
 In a continuing attempt by Universal Interactive to take credit for Crash Bandicoot , Naughty Dog was told that it was not " allowed " to go to the first Electronic Entertainment Expo . In addition , there were leaked copies of the temporary box cover and press materials for the Electronic Entertainment Expo , upon which the Naughty Dog logo , in violation of the contract between Naughty Dog and Universal Interactive , was omitted . In response , Jason Rubin drafted and printed 1 @,@ 000 copies of a document entitled " Naughty Dog , creator and developer of Crash Bandicoot " to hand out in front of the Crash Bandicoot display at the Electronic Entertainment Expo . Beforehand , Rubin passed out the flyers " for review " to Universal Interactive , angering its president . Crash Bandicoot was first shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo on May 1996 and was met with enthusiastic reactions . 
 = = = Japanese distribution = = = 
 In preparation for presenting Crash Bandicoot to Sony 's Japanese division , Gavin spent a month studying anime and manga , reading English @-@ language books on the subject , watching Japanese films and observing competitive characters in video games . Upon Naughty Dog 's first meeting with the executives of Sony Computer Entertainment Japan , the executives handed Naughty Dog a document that compared Crash with Mario and Nights into Dreams .... Although Crash was rated favorably in the graphics department , the main character and the game 's non @-@ Japanese " heritage " were seen as weak points . The renderings of the character made specifically for the meeting also proved unimpressive . During a break following the initial meeting , Gavin approached Charlotte Francis , the artist responsible for the renderings , and gave her fifteen minutes to adjust Crash 's facial structures . Sony Japan bought Crash for Japanese distribution after being shown the modified printout . Pop @-@ up text instructions given by Aku Aku were added for the Japanese version of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash Bandicoot received generally favorable reviews from critics , with much of the positive comments going to the graphics . Dave Halverson of GameFan referred to the visuals as " the best graphics that exist in a game " and the design and animations of the title character as " 100 % perfection " . John Scalzo of Gaming Target described the environments as " colorful and detailed " and mentioned the snowy bridge and temple levels as his favorites . However , he noted that the boss characters appeared to be noticeably polygonal compared to the other characters due to their large size . Nevertheless , he added that this flaw was excusable because of the game 's age and that the game 's graphics were near perfect otherwise . A reviewer for Game Revolution singled out the scaling technology for praise and declared it to be " the new standard for Playstation action games the same way SGI did for 16 @-@ bitters after Donkey Kong Country . " Additionally , he described the texture @-@ mapping precision as " awesome " , the shading as " almost too well done " ( the reviewer claimed it made the game more difficult by making the pits appear to be shadows and vice versa ) , the polygon movements as " very smooth and fluid " , the " quirky mannerisms " of the title character as " always refreshing " and the backgrounds as " breathtakingly beautiful ( especially the waterfall stages ) " . However , the reviewer said that the ability to adjust the camera angle even slightly " would have been a definite plus ( at times the ground itself is at 75 degree angle while Crash constantly moves at 90 degrees , putting a slight strain on the eyes ) . " A reviewer for IGN noted that " gorgeous backgrounds and silky smooth animation make this one of the best @-@ looking titles available for the PlayStation . 
 The gameplay received mixed responses . Both John Scalzo and the Game Revolution reviewer compared the gameplay to Donkey Kong Country , with Scalzo describing the game as having a " familiar , yet unique " quality that he attributed to Naughty Dog 's design , while the Game Revolution reviewer concluded that the game " fails to achieve anything really new or revolutionary " as a platform game . The IGN reviewer said that the game " isn 't a revolution in platform game design . It 's pretty much your standard platform game " . However , he noted the game 's " surprisingly deep " depth of field and use of different perspectives as exceptions to the platforming formula . Jim Sterling of <unk> stated that the game has aged poorly since its initial release and cited the lack of DualShock <unk> , a poor camera as well as substandard jumping and spinning controls . 
 As of November 2003 , Crash Bandicoot has sold over 6 @.@ 8 million units worldwide , making it one of the best selling PlayStation video games of all time . The game 's success lead to its inclusion for the Sony Greatest Hits . Crash Bandicoot was the first non @-@ Japanese game to receive a " Gold Prize " in Japan for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 units . The game spent nearly two years on the NPD TRSTS top 20 PlayStation sales charts before finally dropping off on September 1998 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Crash Bandicoot was followed by two direct sequels , Crash Bandicoot 2 : Cortex Strikes Back and Crash Bandicoot : Warped , as well as a kart racing game , Crash Team Racing , all for the PlayStation and all developed by Naughty Dog , with Crash Team Racing the final Crash Bandicoot game developed by the company before moving onto the Jak and Daxter series . After Crash Team Racing , Eurocom developed the final Crash Bandicoot game for the PlayStation , the party game Crash Bash . 
 = Bound ( 1996 film ) = 
 Bound is a 1996 American neo @-@ noir crime thriller film written and directed by The Wachowskis in their feature film directorial debut . Violet ( Jennifer Tilly ) , who longs to escape her relationship with her mafioso boyfriend Caesar ( Joe Pantoliano ) , enters into a clandestine affair with alluring ex @-@ con Corky ( Gina Gershon ) , and the two women hatch a scheme to steal $ 2 million of mafia money . 
 Bound was the first film directed by the Wachowskis , and they took inspiration from Billy Wilder to tell a noir story filled with sex and violence . Financed by Dino De Laurentiis , the film was made on a tight budget with the help of frugal crew members including cinematographer Bill Pope . The directors initially struggled to cast the lesbian characters of Violet and Corky before securing Tilly and Gershon . To choreograph the sex scenes , the directors employed " sex educator " Susie Bright , who also made a cameo appearance in the film . 
 Bound received positive reviews from film critics who praised the humor and style of the directors as well as the realistic portrayal of a lesbian relationship in a mainstream film . Detractors of the film criticized the excessive violence and superficiality of the plot . The film won several festival awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Corky ( Gina Gershon ) , an ex @-@ con who has just finished a five @-@ year jail sentence , arrives at an apartment building to start work as a painter and plumber . On her way up to the apartment , she encounters the couple who live next @-@ door , Violet ( Jennifer Tilly ) and Caesar ( Joe Pantoliano ) . After Caesar has gone out , Violet flirts with Corky and asks her to help retrieve an earring that has fallen down her sink . After Corky extracts the earring , Violet admits she lost it on purpose in order to get closer to Corky , and starts to seduce her . They are interrupted by the arrival of Caesar and Corky goes back to work . When she leaves for the day , Violet follows her to her truck . They go to Corky 's apartment and have sex . The next morning , Violet tells Corky that Caesar is a money launderer for the Mafia and they have been together for five years . 
 Later , Violet overhears Caesar and his Mafia associates beating and torturing Shelly ( Barry Kivel ) , a man who has been skimming money from the business . Upset by the violence and cruelty , Violet seeks solace from Corky . She tells Corky that she wants to make a new life for herself , but that she needs her help . Knowing that Caesar will find the nearly $ 2 million Shelly took and count it in their apartment , the two women hatch a scheme to steal the money . Corky , already wary of Violet 's intentions , is unsure whether to trust her . 
 Shelly is shot and killed by Johnnie ( Christopher Meloni ) , the son of Mafia boss Gino <unk> ( Richard C. Sarafian ) , and Caesar returns to the apartment with a bag of bloody money . Angry at Johnnie for killing Shelly in a fit of rage and splattering blood everywhere , Caesar proceeds to wash , iron and hang the money to dry . 
 Violet explains to Corky that Caesar and Johnnie hate each other , and that Gino and Johnnie will be coming to pick up the money from Caesar . The plan is as follows : When Caesar has finished counting the money , Violet will get him a drink to relax him before he showers . Corky will be next @-@ door , waiting until she hears Caesar turn on the shower . When he does , Violet will drop the bottle of Scotch that is for Gino and tell Caesar that she is going to buy more . As she leaves the apartment , she will let Corky in , who will steal the money from a briefcase and leave . Violet will then return with the Scotch and tell Caesar that she just saw Johnnie leaving , but that Gino was not with him . Suspicious , Caesar will check the briefcase , find the money gone , and assume Johnnie has taken it . Corky and Violet think Caesar will be forced to skip town because Gino will assume he has been robbed by Caesar , not his son . 
 Everything goes as planned until Caesar finds the money gone . He realizes that if he runs , Gino will think he took the money . He decides he has to get the money back from Johnnie . Panicking , Violet threatens to leave . Caesar pulls out his gun and forces her to stay , thinking that maybe she and Johnnie have stolen the money and framed him . 
 Corky waits next @-@ door with the money while Gino and Johnnie arrive . After watching Johnnie flirt with Violet and taunt him , Caesar pulls out a gun and tells Gino that his son stole the money . In an angry panic , he kills both Gino and Johnnie , and Gino 's bodyguard Roy . He tells Violet that they have to find the money , dispose of the bodies , and pretend Gino and Johnnie never arrived , lest their Mafia pals find the money or men missing . Unable to find the money at Johnnie 's apartment , Caesar telephones Mickey ( John P. Ryan ) , a Mafia friend , telling him that Gino has yet to arrive . 
 After discovering Corky and Violet stole the money , Caesar ties them up , gags them , threatens to torture them , and demands to know where it is . When Mickey arrives to see what is going on , Caesar , panicked , makes a deal with Violet to help him stall . As he prepares to kill Mickey , Violet calls the landline from Johnnie 's cell phone and quickly convinces Caesar to pretend that he 's on the phone with Gino , who 's calling from a hospital to explain that he and Johnnie were in a car accident . Mickey is convinced and leaves for the hospital . Corky tells Caesar where she has hidden the money , and he goes next @-@ door to find it . Violet escapes and makes a phone call to Mickey , telling him that Caesar stole the money and forced her to keep quiet . In the meantime , Corky tries to stop Caesar from taking the money , but he beats her to the ground . Just as he is about to kill her , Violet arrives and pulls a gun on Caesar , telling him that Mickey is on his way and that he should run while he can . Caesar tells Violet that he knows she will not shoot him , to which she replies , " Caesar , you don 't know shit " , before killing him . 
 Later , Mickey , who believes Violet 's story , tells her that he will find Caesar , and that there is no need to involve the police . Mickey wants Violet to be his girlfriend , but she tells him that she needs a clean break — which she makes by driving off hand @-@ in @-@ hand with Corky . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Film producer Joel Silver has said that after working as scriptwriters on Assassins , the Wachowskis made Bound as an " audition piece " to prove that they knew what to do on a movie set . Conversely , Lana Wachowski has said Joel " made that up . " The Wachowskis themselves claim they " decided simply to focus on making their own directorial debut . " They had the idea to write a story about how one might see a woman on the street and make assumptions about her sexuality , but how those assumptions might be wrong . They wanted to play with stereotypes and make an entertaining film that contained sex and violence , because those are the kinds of films that they like to watch . Seeing film noir as a genre within which they could tell a contained story and twist conventions , they described Billy Wilder as a big influence . 
 When executives at some studios read the script , they told the Wachowskis that if they changed the character of Corky to that of a man , they would be interested . The siblings declined , saying " that movie 's been made a million times , so we 're really not interested in it . " Dino De Laurentiis , the executive producer on Assassins , offered to finance Bound and his company produced it , giving them " free rein " with regard to the story . The film 's budget was $ 6 million . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The Wachowskis struggled to cast the roles of Violet and Corky , seemingly because of the lesbian content of the film . Few actresses were interested . The part of Violet was expected to go to Linda Hamilton , and Jennifer Tilly read for the part of Corky . She loved the role and was looking forward to playing a character very different from previous parts in her career . When the part of Violet became available , and Gina Gershon came in to read for Corky , Tilly agreed that Gershon would make a better Corky . She realized that she identified with the character of Violet , a woman " underestimated by all the men around her " who has to " play the game " . She describes it as the best role she had ever had . Gina Gershon suggested Joe Pantoliano to the Wachowskis for the part of Caesar . His first lead role in a film , he describes it as his favorite . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Bound was shot in thirty @-@ eight days in Santa Monica , California . The Wachowskis ' original director of photography resigned on the grounds that he could not do the film with the limited budget he had available , nor did he know anyone he believed could . Subsequently cinematographer Bill Pope was hired , who knew " a bunch of cheap guys " . Pope became heavily involved in creating the visual noir style of the film . He and the Wachowskis drew from their love of comics and were influenced by Frank Miller 's neo @-@ noir Sin City series in particular . Pope 's sound counterpart was sound director Dane Davis . One of his ideas was to give Corky a cat @-@ like quality by making a " swishing " sound every time she walks past the camera in the scene where she and Violet plan the theft . 
 The Wachowskis asked Joe Pantoliano to watch John Huston 's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre and to focus on Humphrey Bogart 's character in order to prepare the paranoia of Caesar . Gershon 's influences for her role were James Dean , Marlon Brando and Clint Eastwood . Both Gershon and Tilly were nervous about filming the sex scenes and prepared by drinking tequila . 
 Very little improvisation took place during the filming due to the directors ' extensive planning and clear vision for the film . Not everything went as expected , however , as the physical exchanges in the script caused some injuries . Barry Kivel , whose character Shelly was violently beaten in Caesar 's bathroom , received a head injury from his head being banged against the toilet . In the scenes between Corky and Caesar near the end of the film , Gina Gershon hit her hand so hard when she knocked a gun from Joe Pantoliano 's hand that she required stitches . 
 = = = Sex scenes = = = 
 The sex scenes were choreographed by feminist writer and sex educator Susie Bright . The Wachowskis were fans of Bright and sent her a copy of the script with a letter asking her to be an extra in the film . When she read the script she loved it , particularly as it was about women enjoying having sex and not apologizing for it . Disappointed that they never described exactly what was happening in the sex scenes , she asked if she could be a sex consultant for the film and they agreed . The main sex scene set in Corky 's apartment was filmed in one long shot . The Wachowskis believed that this would look more realistic than several shots edited together . Although it should have been a closed set , there were actually many people present , moving the walls of the set in order to allow full movement of the camera around the actors . 
 Bright appeared as Jesse , the woman Corky tries to talk to in the bar . Comedian Margaret Smith played Jesse 's girlfriend and the extras in the bar scene were Bright 's friends — " real life San Francisco dykes " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Wachowskis describe several themes present in Bound . They say that the film is about " the boxes people make of their lives " , that it is not only gay people who " live in closets " . They wanted to define all of Bound 's characters by the " sort of trap that they were making out of their lives " . Violet is trapped in her life with Caesar , and in the first scene , Corky is literally inside Violet 's closet , bound and gagged by Caesar . This scene is echoed later in the film when Violet says " I had this image of you inside of me ... " This theme of being trapped is exacerbated by the claustrophobic feeling created by the fact that most of the film takes place in Corky 's apartment , Violet and <unk> 's apartment , or the apartment next door where Corky is working . 
 Susie Bright described some of the specifically lesbian themes of the film . One is the concept of the hand as a sex organ , highlighted by lingering camera shots of Corky and Violet 's hands . Another is the repeated use of water as a symbolic motif to represent women , present for example when Corky is retrieving Violet 's earring from the sink . Bright describes it as a movie that is " wet " ( feminine ) as opposed to " hard " ( masculine ) . She says the scene where Corky and Violet have their first conversation is full of " lesbian signs " . She highlights the fact that Violet , away from Caesar , is wearing jeans and able to be less overtly feminine . Jennifer Tilly says that whenever Violet is talking to men , her voice becomes high @-@ pitched and " girly " — making her seem vulnerable and ensuring she is taken care of . Joe Pantoliano agrees , saying that the result is that " everyone in the film wants to be with Violet " . When she is with Corky , Violet can drop the act and talk at a more natural pitch . According to Bright , the more subtle lesbian themes of the film were noticed and appreciated at the LGBT film festival screenings . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Rating = = = 
 Bound was rated by the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) as R for " strong sexuality , violence and language . " To achieve that rating , the directors had to cut part of the first sex scene between Corky and Violet . The MPAA were most concerned with the images of what Lana Wachowski called " hand @-@ sex " . It was rated R in Australia , R18 in New Zealand and 18 in the United Kingdom . In Canada it was rated as R in Manitoba and Ontario , 18 in Nova Scotia and 16 + in Quebec . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The film premiered on August 31 , 1996 , at the Venice Film Festival and in September went on to play at the Toronto International Film Festival . It opened in U.S. theaters on October 4 , 1996 distributed by Gramercy Pictures , showing in 261 theaters . It closed after three weeks . It opened in the United Kingdom on February 28 , 1997 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Bound grossed $ 3 @,@ 802 @,@ 260 in the United States . In its opening weekend , showing at 261 theaters , it earned $ 900 @,@ 902 , which was 23 @.@ 7 % of its total gross . According to Box Office Mojo , it ranked at 161 for all films released in the United States in 1996 , and at 74 for R @-@ rated films released that year . As of July 2012 , its all @-@ time ranking for LGBT @-@ related films is 59 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gave it a " fresh " rating of 92 % based on 37 reviews , while Metacritic gave it a score of 61 / 100 based on 19 reviews . The Wachowskis ' direction was praised , being described as clever , sophisticated and stylish . Roger Ebert said that their skillful film making showed virtuosity and confidence . Marjorie Baumgarten writing for The Austin Chronicle called it an impressive debut saying that the Wachowskis have " style to burn " . James Kendrick called it a darkly comical and stunning film , saying it signalled the arrival of the Wachowskis on the film scene . Detractors of the film included Todd McCarthy for Variety , who said that the directors had no sense of humor and lacked depth , that the film was pretentious , superficial and heavy @-@ handed . 
 On the release of Bound , the Wachowskis were compared by many to the Coen Brothers . Rita Kempley for The Washington Post went so far as to call them " Coen Brothers clones " . In particular , similarities were drawn between Bound and the Coen Brothers ' first film , 1984 neo @-@ noir Blood Simple . Bryant Frazer for Deep Focus called it an " obvious precursor " . Critics noted resemblances to the films of Quentin Tarantino and Alfred Hitchcock . 
 Janet Maslin for The New York Times said that the grisly violence in Bound would likely limit its audience and Ebert said that its shocking violence would offend some audiences . Some critics said that the violent behavior of the characters had no moral justification . Rita Kempley for The Washington Post called it " well @-@ nigh unwatchable cruelty for its own sake " . McCarthy , who called the central relationship between the two women unbelievable and unsympathetic , said " just because Violet and Corky fall for each other doesn 't mean they somehow fall into a privileged state of grace in which vile behavior can be forgiven . " Other critics were less concerned , calling the violence " comically excessive " and " Tarantino @-@ like " . 
 Bound was praised for being perhaps the first mainstream film to have a lesbian relationship at its heart without homosexuality being central to the plot . Despite the presence of " unapologetically gay " lead character Corky , it is not commonly considered a " lesbian movie " . Emanuel Levy said that this is a weakness , that mainstream films with broadening storylines " do not necessarily represent a positive development in the making of gay and lesbian films " and that Bound has " little , if anything , to do with lesbian cinema " . Jonathan Rosenbaum for the Chicago Reader called it a " welcome change " to have a lesbian couple as the main characters in a mainstream film . Sarah Warn for AfterEllen.com called Corky " the closest thing to a realistic and sympathetic butch lesbian we 've seen in a mainstream movie " . Barry Walters for the San Francisco Chronicle praised the film for showing gay characters that have an active sex life . The sex scenes , described as explicit and steamy , were admired for being tasteful , discreet and realistic . Warn called them " some of the best lesbian sex scenes to date in a mainstream movie " . 
 The three lead actors were complimented for their performances . Ebert said that Gershon and Tilly were electric together , and Frazer said that he would have liked to have seen more of their love story . Some critics , however , described their onscreen relationship as unbelievable and unsympathetic . Gershon was seen to have made a comeback after her role in the less well received 1995 film Showgirls . Tilly 's performance was compared to her Academy Award @-@ nominated part in Bullets Over Broadway . Pantoliano was described as " a lot of fun " and having the " trickiest scenes in the movie " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Bound won the Grand Jury Award — Honorable Mention at the 1996 L.A. <unk> , and in the same year won an Honorable Mention at the Stockholm International Film Festival . At the 1997 Fantasporto festival in Portugal , the Wachowskis were awarded the International Fantasy Film Award for best film , and Jennifer Tilly picked up the award for best actress . Bound won the 1997 GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding ( wide @-@ release ) Film . The film was nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Bound was released on Region 1 DVD on November 12 , 1997 by Republic Pictures . It featured the original theatrical trailer and an audio commentary by the directors and stars . It was released on Region 2 DVD on August 25 , 2003 , by Pathé featuring original theatrical trailers , audio commentary by the directors and stars , cast and crew biographies and a production featurette . Its Region 4 DVD release , distributed by Reel and featuring an audio commentary , came on August 14 , 2006 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The score , composed by Don Davis , was given a promotional release on November 25 , 1997 by Super Tracks Music Group , but has never been released commercially . Having her character Corky play a jaw harp was Gina Gershon 's idea . The directors ' budget for songs was small ; they had wanted to use " The Girl from Ipanema " and Frank Sinatra songs , but could not afford to . The four songs used in the film were not included on the score release . 
 " I Never Loved a Man ( The Way I Love You ) " ( Ronny Shannon ) performed by Aretha Franklin 
 " Hallelujah I Love Her So " ( Ray Charles ) performed by Ray Charles 
 " Hopeless Faith " performed by The Hail Marys 
 " She 's a Lady " ( Paul Anka ) performed by Tom Jones 
 = Chicago Theatre = 
 The Chicago Theatre , originally known as the Balaban and Katz Chicago Theatre , is a landmark theater located on North State Street in the Loop area of Chicago , Illinois , in the United States . Built in 1921 , the Chicago Theatre was the flagship for the Balaban and Katz ( B & K ) group of theaters run by A. J. Balaban , his brother Barney Balaban and partner Sam Katz . Along with the other B & K theaters , from 1925 to 1945 the Chicago Theatre was a dominant movie theater enterprise . Currently , Madison Square Garden , Inc. owns and operates the Chicago Theatre as a performing arts venue for stage plays , magic shows , comedy , speeches , and popular music concerts . 
 The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places June 6 , 1979 , and was listed as a Chicago Landmark January 28 , 1983 . The distinctive Chicago Theatre marquee , " an unofficial emblem of the city " , appears frequently in film , television , artwork , and photography . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Grand opening , growth , and decline = = = 
 Abe and Barney Balaban , together with Sam and Morris Katz — founders of the Balaban and Katz theater chain , built the Chicago Theatre in 1921 as one of a large chain of opulent motion picture houses . The theater would become the flagship for 28 theaters in the city and over 100 others in the Midwestern United States that B & K operated in conjunction with the Paramount Publix chain . Cornelius W. Rapp and George L. Rapp were primary architects and the final construction cost was $ 4 million ( $ 53 @.@ 1 million in 2016 dollars ) . The Rapp brothers also designed many other B & K properties in Chicago , including the Oriental and Uptown Theatres . Preceded by the now @-@ demolished Tivoli Theatre of Chicago and Capitol Theatre of New York City , the Chicago Theatre was the " ... largest , most costly and grandest of the super deluxe movie palaces " built up to that date and thus now the oldest surviving grand movie palace . The Chicago Theatre was among the earliest theaters in the nation to be built in Rapp and Rapp 's signature Neo @-@ Baroque French @-@ revival style . It is the oldest surviving example of this style in Chicago . 
 The original 1921 interior decoration of the auditorium included fourteen large romantic French @-@ themed murals surrounding the proscenium by Chicago artist Louis Grell ( 1887 @-@ 1960 ) , a common feature that Rapp and Rapp architects included in their movie palace designs . 
 When it opened October 26 , 1921 , the 3 @,@ 880 seat theater was promoted as the " Wonder Theatre of the World " . Capacity crowds packed the theater during its opening week for the First National Pictures feature The Sign on the Door starring Norma Talmadge . Other attractions included a 50 @-@ piece orchestra , famed organist Jesse Crawford at the 26 @-@ rank Wurlitzer theatre organ — " Oh , yes , it was mighty , " recalled Orson Welles — and a live stage show . Poet Carl Sandburg , reporting for the Chicago Tribune , wrote that mounted police were required for crowd control . The theater 's strategy of enticing movie patrons with a plush environment and top notch service ( including the pioneering use of air conditioning ) was emulated nationwide . 
 During its first 40 years of operation , the Chicago Theatre presented premiere films and live entertainment . Throughout its existence , many of the top performers and stars of their day made live appearances at the theater . One of its biggest draws was live jazz , which Balaban and Katz promoted as early as September 1922 in a special event they called " Syncopation Week " . This proved so successful that jazz bands became a mainstay of the Chicago Theatre 's programming through the 1920s and into the 1930s . In preparation for the 1933 World 's Fair in Chicago , the Chicago Theatre was redecorated . Part of the World 's Fair renovation included another commission by Balaban & Katz for Grell to repaint the architecturally enclosed fourteen murals . This time Grell chose Greek / Roman deities as the theme for the large oil on canvas murals which are on public exhibit today in the theatre auditorium . The building has been associated with popular culture occasions . For example , Ronald Reagan announced his engagement to Jane Wyman at the theater . Another modernization occurred in the 1950s when management discontinued stage shows . 
 During the economic and social changes of the 1970s , business at the theatre slowed for owner Plitt Theatres , affecting ongoing viability . In 1984 , the Chicago Theatre Preservation Group purchased the theater and adjoining Page Brothers Building for $ 11 @.@ 5 million ( $ 26 @.@ 2 million today ) . The group attempted to maintain the venue as a picture theater but was unable to remain <unk> and the facility closed September 19 , 1985 . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The Chicago Theatre Preservation Group commenced renovation of the buildings which were completed in 1986 at a cost of $ 9 million ( $ 19 @.@ 4 million ) , with $ 4 @.@ 3 million ( $ 9 @.@ 3 million ) spent on the Theatre . The renovation by architects Daniel P. Coffey & Associates , Ltd. and interior design consultants A.T. <unk> & Co. restored the Chicago Theatre to a 1930s appearance and a seating capacity of 3 @,@ 600 . The theatre reopened September 10 , 1986 , with a performance by Frank Sinatra marking the culmination of a four @-@ year historic preservation effort championed by the Landmarks Preservation Council of Illinois , The gala reopening was also symbolic because Sinatra had performed at the theater in the 1950s . The restoration of the adjoining Page Building , itself a Chicago and National Register landmark , provided office space to support the theatre . The theater , like its neighbor the Joffrey Tower , is an important component of the North Loop / Theatre District revitalization plan . Theatre district revitalization plans go back as far as Mayor Jane Byrne 's 1981 plan . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 On April 1 , 2004 , <unk> Chicago , LLC purchased the building for $ 3 million . The Balaban and Katz trademark is now the property of the Balaban and Katz Historical Foundation . New York 's Madison Square Garden Entertainment announced October 11 , 2007 , that it would buy the theater . 
 Prior to 2008 , the theater hosted the annual opening film of the Chicago International Film Festival until the festivities moved to the nearby Harris Theater . Mayor Richard M. Daley declared July 12 , 2005 " Roger Ebert Day in Chicago " and dedicated a plaque under the marquee in his honor . The theater is featured in the book , The Chicago Movie Palaces of Balaban and Katz , by David Balaban , grandson of the original owner . 
 As of 2011 , as permitted under the terms of sale dictated by the city , the vertical CHICAGO sign had a logotype for Chase Bank added to indicate sponsorship . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The structure is seven stories tall and fills nearly one half of a city block . The 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) wide by six @-@ story tall triumphal arch motif of the State Street façade has been journalistically compared to the l 'Arc de Triomphe in Paris . The central arch @-@ headed window adapts the familiar motif of Borromini 's false @-@ perspective window reveals of the top floor of Palazzo Barberini , Rome . The coat of arms of the Balaban and Katz chain — two horses holding ribbons of 35 mm film in their mouths outlined by a border of film reels — is set inside a circular Tiffany stained glass window inside the arch . The exterior of the building is covered in off @-@ white architectural terracotta supplied by the Northwestern Terra Cotta Company with Neo @-@ Baroque stucco designs by the McNulty Brothers . 
 The interior shows French Baroque influence from the Second French Empire . The grand lobby , five stories high and surrounded by gallery promenades at the mezzanine and balcony levels , is influence by the Royal Chapel at Versailles . The grand staircase is patterned from the grand stair of the Paris Opera House and ascends to the various balcony levels . Marshall Field and Company supplied interior decorations including drapes and furniture . The crystal chandeliers and bronze light fixtures fitted with Steuben glass shades were designed and built by Victor Pearlman and Co . 
 The stage dimensions exceed 60 feet ( 18 m ) in width and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in depth . The orchestra pit is approximately 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below stage level , 54 feet ( 16 m ) wide at the stage lip , with a depth of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) at center . An adjustable pit filler can be used for performances requiring other levels . 
 At the time of the building 's 1978 application for the National Register of Historic Places designation , the venue 's marquee had been replaced twice . The original marquee was basic and facilitated two lines of text for announcements . The 1922 – 23 marquee had ornate " flashing pinwheels , swirls and garlands of colored lights " . It also included " milk glass letter attraction boards , and CHICAGO in large letters on three sides " . The 1949 replacement was similar to the second marquee , but its attraction boards were larger and the oversized CHICAGO lettering only appeared on the front . Until Balaban and Katz ' 1969 sale to the American Broadcasting Company , their name was on the <unk> . The entire marquee was replaced in 1994 , but retains the look of its predecessor . In 2004 , the original marquee was donated to the Smithsonian Institution . The marquee is featured in numerous movies and TV shows set in Chicago , and its neon font was used in the title of the 2002 film Chicago . 
 = = Organ = = 
 The theatre is also known for its grand Wurlitzer pipe organ . At the time it was installed it was known as “ The Mighty Wurlitzer ” and could imitate the instruments of an orchestra . Jesse Crawford , a noted Theatre Organ performer , is attributed as the person who " was responsible for the design and choice of sounds " . The organ came from Wurlitzer 's North Tonawanda Barrel Organ Factory in July 1921 with " four manuals and 26 ranks of pipes @-@ Opus 434 " . The American Theatre Organ Society restored the organ in 1970 , which had expanded the organ from 26 to 29 ranks by that time . It is one of the oldest Mighty <unk> still in existence . 
 = Love You To = 
 " Love You To " is a song by the English rock group the Beatles from their 1966 album Revolver . The song was written and sung by George Harrison and features Indian instrumentation such as sitar and tabla . Following Harrison 's introduction of the sitar on " Norwegian Wood " in 1965 , it was the first Beatles song to fully reflect the influence of Indian classical music . The recording was made with minimal participation from Harrison 's bandmates ; instead , he created the track with tabla player Anil Bhagwat and other Indian musicians from the Asian Music Circle in London . 
 The composition adheres to the pitches of the Indian equivalent of Dorian mode and emulates the khyal vocal tradition of Hindustani classical music . For musical inspiration , Harrison drew from the work of master sitarist Ravi Shankar , who became his sitar tutor shortly after the recording was completed . In its lyrical themes , " Love You To " is partly a love song to Harrison 's wife , Pattie Boyd , while also incorporating philosophical concepts inspired by his experimentation with the hallucinogenic drug LSD . In the context of its release , the song served as one of the first examples of the Beatles expressing an ideology aligned with that of the emerging counterculture . 
 " Love You To " has been hailed by musicologists and critics as groundbreaking in its presentation of a non @-@ Western musical form to rock audiences , particularly with regard to authenticity and avoidance of parody . Author Jonathan Gould describes the song 's slow sitar introduction as " one of the most brazenly exotic acts of stylistic experimentation ever heard on a popular LP " . Ronnie Montrose , Bongwater , Jim James and <unk> are among the artists who have covered " Love You To " . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 Having added sitar accompaniment to the Beatles ' " Norwegian Wood ( This Bird Has Flown ) " in October 1965 , George Harrison wrote " Love You To " as a way to showcase the instrument . He said that the composition was also designed to feature the tabla , a pair of Indian hand drums , for the first time . Music critic Richie Unterberger describes the song as the Beatles ' " first all @-@ out excursion " in raga rock , a genre that author Nicholas Schaffner says was " launched " by Harrison 's use of sitar on " Norwegian Wood " . 
 Harrison wrote the song in early 1966 while the Beatles were enjoying an unusually long period free of professional commitments , due to their inability to find a suitable film project . He used the available time to further explore his interest in Indian classical music and the sitar , which , journalist Maureen Cleave noted in a contemporary article , " has given new meaning to [ his ] life " . Harrison 's activities included receiving sitar tuition from an Indian musician at the Asian Music Circle ( AMC ) in north London , where he also attended music recitals , and seeing Indian sitarist Ravi Shankar perform at the Royal Festival Hall . As reflected in " Love You To " , Harrison continued to immerse himself in recordings by Shankar , who , when the pair met at the AMC 's headquarters in June 1966 , would agree to take Harrison as his student . 
 Typically of his songs over this period , Harrison was unable to commit to naming the new composition . At the start of the sessions for the Beatles ' Revolver album , Geoff Emerick , the band 's recording engineer , gave the song the working title of " Granny Smith " , after the variety of apple . The song was partly inspired by Harrison 's experimentation with the hallucinogenic drug LSD , which he credited as a catalyst for increased awareness and his interest in Eastern philosophical concepts . Author Ian MacDonald views the subject matter as " part philosophical " and " part love @-@ song " to Pattie Boyd , the English model whom Harrison married in January 1966 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Musical form = = = 
 " Love You To " is in the key of C and adheres to the pitches of Kafi thaat , the Indian equivalent of Dorian mode . The composition emulates the khyal vocal tradition of Hindustani ( or North Indian ) classical music . Structurally , it comprises an opening alap ; a gat section , which serves as the main portion of the song ; and a short drut ( fast ) gat to close the piece . 
 The alap consists of sitar played in free tempo , during which the song 's melody is previewed in the style of an Indian raga . Described by Harrison biographer Simon Leng as " essentially an adaptation of a blues lick " , the seven @-@ note motif that closes the alap serves as a recurring motif during the ensuing gat . The change of metre following the alap marks the first such example in the Beatles ' work ; it would shortly be repeated in John Lennon 's composition " She Said , She Said " , which Harrison helped complete by joining together three separate pieces that Lennon had written . 
 The gat is set in madhya <unk> ( medium tempo ) and features a driving rock rhythm accentuated by heavy tambura drone . This portion of the composition consists of eight @-@ bar " A " sections and twelve @-@ bar " B " sections , structured in an A @-@ B @-@ A @-@ B pattern . The alap 's lack of a distinct time signature is contrasted with a temporal reference in the lyrics to the opening verse : " Each day just goes so fast / I turn around , it 's past " . Throughout , the vocal line avoids the melodic embellishment typical of khyal , apart from the use of melisma over the last line in each of the A sections . In keeping with the minimal harmonic movement of Indian music , the composition 's only deviation from its I chord of C is a series of implied ♭ VII chord changes , which occur in the B sections . 
 During the mid @-@ song instrumental passage , the melody line of the sitar incorporates aspects of the alap , raising the melody previewed there by an octave . The song then returns to verses sung over the A and B sections , culminating in the line " I 'll make love to you , if you want me to . " The arrival of the drut gat follows Hindustani convention by ending the composition at an accelerated tempo , although the brevity of this segment marks a departure from the same tradition . 
 = = = Lyrical interpretation = = = 
 As with all of the songs written by Harrison or Lennon and recorded by the Beatles in 1966 , the lyrics to " Love You To " marked a departure from the standard love @-@ song themes that had defined the group 's previous work . Harrison presents a worldview that variously reflects cynicism , sardonic humour and a degree of detachment with regard to personal relationships . According to music critic John Harris , the lines " There 's people standing round / Who 'll screw you in the ground / They 'll fill you in with all the sins you 'll see " serve as one of the first examples of the Beatles ' ideology aligning with that of the emerging 1960s counterculture , by highlighting the division between traditional mores and an LSD @-@ inspired perspective . Authors Russell <unk> and Jim LeBlanc recognise this and other statements in " Love You To " as part of the Beatles ' espousal of anti @-@ materialism from 1966 onwards , a message that , inspired by the LSD experience , suggested a " psychedelic vision of society " . 
 Among other commentators discussing the lyrical themes , Mark Hertsgaard writes that Harrison 's " response to the fleetingness of time was to affirm and celebrate life : ' make love all day long / make love singing songs ' " , while Robert Rodriguez describes " Love You To " as " a somewhat oblique expression of love directed toward his bride , along with larger concerns regarding mortality and purpose " . In Ian Inglis ' estimation , the lyrics " remind us that in a world of material dissatisfaction and moral disharmony , there is always the solace of sexual pleasure " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " Love You To " was the third track the Beatles recorded for Revolver , after " Tomorrow Never Knows " and " Got to Get You Into My Life " . Rodriguez comments that " Love You To " " [ made ] explicit the Indian influence implicit throughout the entire album " , as songs such as " Tomorrow Never Knows " and " Got to Get You Into My Life " , together with the non @-@ album single tracks " Paperback Writer " and " Rain " , all incorporate drone sounds or otherwise display the limited harmonic movement that typifies the genre . 
 The basic track for " Love You To " was taped in London at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios on 11 April 1966 . According to Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn , Harrison initially sang and played acoustic guitar , accompanied by Paul McCartney on backing vocals . By the end of the first session that day , three takes of the song had been made , with Harrison introducing his sitar on the last of these takes . Work resumed at 8 pm , with the participation of some Indian musicians that Harrison had sourced through Patricia Angadi , the co @-@ founder of the Asian Music Circle . These outside contributors included tabla player Anil Bhagwat and uncredited musicians on tambura and sitar . 
 According to Inglis , " Love You To " is " defined " by the interplay between sitar and tabla . Bhagwat later recalled of his involvement : " George told me what he wanted and I tuned the tabla with him . He suggested I play something in the Ravi Shankar style , 16 @-@ beats , though he agreed that I should improvise . Indian music is all improvisation . " 
 With take 6 selected as the best performance , a reduction mix was carried out on 13 April , freeing up space for more overdubs on the four @-@ track tape . Harrison added another vocal part onto what was now referred to as take 7 , and Ringo Starr played tambourine . McCartney contributed a high harmony vocal over the words " They 'll fill you in with all their sins , you 'll see " , but this part was omitted from the final mix . Harrison also overdubbed fuzz @-@ tone electric guitar , controlling the output via a volume pedal . Producer Tony Visconti has marvelled at the guitar sounds the Beatles introduced on Revolver , particularly Harrison 's part on " Love You To " , which he says " sounds like a chainsaw cutting down a tree in Vermont " . 
 Credit for the main sitar part on " Love You To " has traditionally been the subject of debate among commentators . While MacDonald says that , rather than Harrison , it was the sitarist from the AMC who played this part , Rodriguez writes that " others point to [ Harrison 's ] single @-@ minded diligence in mastering the instrument , as well as his study through private lessons , proximity to accomplished musicians , and close listening to pertinent records . " In his official history of the Beatles ' recording career , The Complete Beatles Recording Sessions , Lewisohn states : " George played the sitar but an outside musician , Anil Bhagwat , was recruited to play the tabla . " Musicologist Walter Everett also identifies Harrison as the main sitar player on the recording , as does Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West . Leng comments that , as on " Norwegian Wood " , Harrison " is still playing the sitar like a guitar player [ on the recording ] , using blues and rock ' n ' roll bends rather than the intensely intricate Indian equivalents " . 
 Final mixing for the song took place on 21 June as the Beatles rushed to complete Revolver before beginning the first leg of their 1966 world tour . Harrison discussed " Love You To " with Shankar when the two musicians met that month , at a social event hosted by the Angadi family . Although he was unaware of the band 's popularity and had yet to hear " Norwegian Wood " , Shankar was impressed with Harrison 's humility as the guitarist downplayed his sitar recordings with the Beatles as merely " experiments " . Soon after this meeting , Shankar gave Harrison his first sitar lesson at Kinfauns , his and Boyd 's home in Surrey , and later , with tablist Alla Rakha , performed a private recital there for Harrison , Lennon and Starr . 
 = = Release = = 
 Revolver was released on 5 August 1966 , with " Love You To " sequenced as the fourth track . By that point , the Beatles ' association with Indian music had been further established when , at Harrison 's suggestion , the band stopped over in Delhi on the return flight from their Far East tour . During the highly publicised visit , all four members of the group bought musical instruments from <unk> Ram & Sons in Connaught Place . Bhagwat 's name appeared on the LP 's back cover , one of the few times that an outside musician received an official credit on a Beatles album . 
 Among commentators recalling the song 's release , Barry Miles describes " Love You To " as having " sounded astonishing next to the electrifying pop of the Revolver album " . Hertsgaard writes : " what caught most people 's interest was the exotic rhythm track . The opening descent of shimmering <unk> notes beckoned even those who resisted Indian music , while the lyrics melded the mysticism of the East ... with the pragmatism of the West , and the hedonism of youth culture . " 
 In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Schaffner wrote that , next to the dominant Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership , Harrison 's three compositions on Revolver – " Love You To " , " Taxman " and " I Want to Tell You " – " offered ample indication that there were now three prolific songwriting Beatles " . Schaffner also commented that , through his championing of the sitar and Shankar 's music , Harrison came to be seen as " the maharaja of raga @-@ rock " , as other Western musicians began adopting Indian musical stylings . In the Beatles ' 1968 animated film Yellow Submarine , a brief portion of the song is used to introduce Harrison 's character , as a guru @-@ like figure , standing on a hill . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a joint album review with Peter Jones for Record Mirror , Richard Green enthused about the song , saying : " Starts like a classical Indian recital ... This is great . So different . Play it again ! Best [ track ] so far . " Allen Evans of the NME lauded Harrison 's sitar playing as " stunning " and " tremendous " before concluding : " Fascinating mixture of minor melody with Indian accompaniment . One of the most striking tracks . " In his role as guest reviewer for Disc and Music Echo , Ray Davies of the Kinks also admired the performance and suggested that Harrison " must have quite a big influence on the group now " . 
 Writing in the recently launched Crawdaddy ! , Paul Williams " heaped praise " on " Love You To " , according to Rodriguez , while critic Lester Bangs termed it " the first injection of ersatz Eastern wisdom into rock " . The majority of contemporary US reviews were lukewarm towards Revolver , however , in reaction to the publication of Lennon 's statement that the Beatles had become more popular than Christ . An exception was New York critic Richard Goldstein , who praised the album as " a revolutionary record " , and later wrote that the song 's lyrics " exploded with a passionate sutra quality " . While bemoaning the initial lack of recognition for Revolver , KRLA Beat 's reviewer said that Harrison had " created a new extension of the music form which he introduced in Rubber Soul " , and described " Love You To " as " Well done and musically valid . Also musically unrecognized . " 
 = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = 
 Writing in the journal Asian Music , ethnomusicologist David Reck has cited " Love You To " as being revolutionary in Western culture , adding : " One cannot emphasise how absolutely unprecedented this piece is in the history of popular music . For the first time an Asian music was not parodied utilising familiar stereotypes and misconceptions , but rather transferred in toto into a new environment with sympathy and rare understanding . " Reck views it as the first in " a series of finely crafted Indian @-@ based songs " by Harrison that would extend through his solo career , and while admiring the range of authentic Hindustani musical elements in the composition , he concludes : " All of this in a three @-@ minute song ! " Peter Lavezzoli describes " Love You To " as " the first conscious attempt in pop to emulate a non @-@ Western form of music in structure and instrumentation " . Lavezzoli says of the sitar part : " [ Harrison 's ] playing throughout the song is an astonishing improvement over ' Norwegian Wood ' . In fact , ' Love You To ' remains the most accomplished performance on sitar by any rock musician . " 
 Reviewing Harrison 's musical career in a 2002 issue of Goldmine magazine , Dave Thompson wrote that the song " opened creative doors through which Harrison 's bandmates may not – and [ George ] Martin certainly would not – have ever dreamed of passing " . Rolling Stone contributor Greg Kot pairs " Love You To " with " Taxman " as two " major contributions " that saw Harrison " [ come ] into his own as a songwriter " on Revolver . Kot describes " Love You To " as " a boldly experimental track that Harrison records … as he makes the first full @-@ scale incorporation of Eastern instruments on a Beatles album " . Writing on his music website Elsewhere , Graham Reid views the track as a " classic " due to its standing as " arguably the first [ song ] in Western pop … which owes nothing to pop music traditions . It is an Indian song in its structure and execution . " 
 AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine considers " Love You To " to be Harrison 's " first and best foray into Indian music " , while Bruce Eder , also writing for AllMusic , views it as " exquisite " . In his song review for the same website , Richie Unterberger is unimpressed with the track ; while acknowledging that " Love You To " was " Undoubtedly ... another indication of the group 's rapidly broadening barriers " , he cites a lead vocal that " drone [ s ] on in a rather lugubrious way " , Harrison 's slightly " disheveled " sitar playing , and lyrics that constitute " a rather muddled mix of free love advocacy , meditations on the transience of life on Earth , and chip @-@ on @-@ the @-@ shoulder wariness of people out to exploit him " . Although he finds the melody " sourly repetitious " , Ian MacDonald writes that the track is " distinguished by the authenticity of its Hindustani classical instrumentation and techniques " , and admires Harrison 's understanding of the genre . In a 2009 review for Paste magazine , Mark Kemp described Revolver as the album on which the Beatles " completed their transformation from the mop tops of three years earlier into bold , groundbreaking experimental rockers " , and added : " Harrison 's ' Love You To ' is pure Indian raga – sitar and tablas punctuated by the occasional luminous guitar riff jolting through the song 's paranoid , drug @-@ fueled lyrics like a blinding ray of sun into a dark forest . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The <unk> , an offshoot of the Feelies , covered " Love You To " on their 1984 EP The Explorers Hold . A version by Ronnie Montrose , titled " Love to You " and including a rare vocal performance by the guitarist , appeared on his album Territory in 1986 . The song was covered by experimental rock band Bongwater in 1988 on their debut album Double Bummer . 
 My Morning Jacket singer Jim James performed " Love You To " on a banjo for his 2009 EP Tribute To , a collection of Harrison songs that James recorded shortly after the former Beatle 's death in November 2001 . In 2011 , Solid Gold covered the song on the Minnesota Beatle Project , Vol . 3 compilation . The following year , <unk> recorded it for Yellow Submarine Resurfaces , a multi @-@ artist compilation issued by Mojo magazine . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Kenneth Womack and Ian MacDonald : 
 George Harrison – lead and backing vocals , acoustic guitar , sitar , rhythm guitar , fuzz @-@ tone lead guitar 
 Paul McCartney – backing vocal 
 Ringo Starr – tambourine 
 Anil Bhagwat – tabla 
 Unnamed musicians from the Asian Music Circle – sitar , tambura 
 = SpaceChem = 
 SpaceChem is an indie puzzle game developed by Zachtronics Industries , based on principles of automation and chemical bonding . In the game , the player is tasked to produce one or more specific chemical molecules via an assembly line by programming two remote manipulators ( called " waldos " in the game ) that interact with atoms and molecules through a visual programming language . SpaceChem was the developer 's first foray into a commercial title after a number of free Flash @-@ based browser games that feature similar puzzle @-@ based assembly problems . 
 The game was initially released for Microsoft Windows at the start of 2011 via Zachtronics ' own website . Though it was initially rejected for sale on the Steam platform , Valve later offered to sell the game after it received high praise from game journalists ; further attention came from the game 's release alongside one of the Humble Indie Bundles . The game has since been ported to other computing platforms and mobile devices . Reviewers found the game 's open @-@ ended problem @-@ solving nature as a highlight of the title . SpaceChem was incorporated into some academic institutions for teaching concepts related to both chemistry and programming . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In SpaceChem , the player takes the role of a SpaceChem Reactor Engineer whose task is to create circuits through which atoms and molecules flow with the aid of waldos to produce particular batches of chemical shipments for each level . 
 The primary game mode of SpaceChem depicts the internal workings of a Reactor , mapped out to a 10 × 8 regular grid . Each reactor has up to two input and up to two output quadrants , and supports two waldos , red and blue , manipulated through command icons placed on the grid . The player adds commands from an array to direct each waldo independently through the grid . The commands direct the movement of the waldo , to pick up , rotate , and drop atoms and molecules , and to trigger reactor events such as chemical bond formation . The two waldos can also be synchronized , forcing one to wait for the other to reach a synchronization command . The reactors may support specific nodes , set by the player , that act where atomic bonds can be made or broken , where atoms can undergo fission or fusion , or where logic decisions based on atom type can be made . As such , the player is challenged to create a visual program to accept the given inputs , disassemble and reassemble them as necessary , and deliver them to the target output areas to match the required product . The product molecule does not need to match orientation or specific layout of the molecules as long as the molecule is topologically equivalent with respect to atoms , bonds , and bond types ; however , in larger puzzles , these factors will influence the inputs to downstream reactors . While the two waldos can cross over each other without harm , collision of atoms with one another or with the walls of the reactor is not allowed ; such collisions stop the program and force the player to re @-@ evaluate their solution . Similarly , if a waldo delivers the wrong product , the player will need to check their program . The player successfully completes each puzzle by constructing a program capable of repeatedly generating the required output , meeting a certain quota . 
 In larger puzzles , the player can also guide the formation of chemicals through multiple reactors , which they place out on a larger rectangular grid representing the planet 's surface . From here , the output from one reactor will become the input for another reactor ; the player is often free to determine what intermediate products to produce to send to the next reactor . The player must not only program the individual reactors , often limited in functionality such as one that can only break bonds but not form them , but plan out the location and order of reactors to make the final product . 
 The game 's puzzles are divided into groups set on different planets . Players generally must complete each puzzle in order to progress to the next one , but the game includes optional harder puzzles . Final boss levels , called out as defense levels , complete each planet ; here , the player must efficiently create chemicals and deliver them in a timely manner , once the reactor systems have been started , to trigger defense systems to ward off attacking enemies before they destroy a control structure . 
 Upon completion of each puzzle , the player 's performance is compared on a leaderboard based on the number of instructions placed in their reactors , the number of cycles it took to meet the quota , and the number of reactors required to meet the solution . The player also has an option to upload videos of their solution to YouTube . The player , once having cleared a puzzle , can return to previous puzzles to try to improve their solution by reducing the number of instructions , cycles taken , or reactors used . SpaceChem supports downloadable content created by the developers themselves , and user @-@ submitted puzzles through its ResearchNet service . A later addition included an open @-@ ended sandbox mode where players could simply explore the game 's capabilities . 
 = = Development = = 
 Prior to SpaceChem , Zach Barth , the designer behind Zachtronics Industries , had created several Flash @-@ based browser games with automation puzzles , including The Codex of Alchemical Engineering where the player had to place and program manipulator arms to construct atoms and molecules following the rules of alchemy . Barth had wanted to expand the ideas in Codex to include more realistic aspects of chemistry , such as more complex molecules , but did not pursue the idea immediately afterwards . About a year after completing Codex , Barth was inspired by the disused chemical plant at Gas Works Park in Seattle , giving him the idea to incorporate pipelines into the basic mechanics of molecule @-@ building from Codex . 
 SpaceChem took about a year with a team of seven people from around the globe to create : Barth was responsible for design and production , Collin Arnold and Keith Holman handled the programming , Ryan Sumo created the visuals , Evan Le Ny the music , Ken Bowen the sound and Hillary Field created the game 's narrative . The development costs were around $ 4 @,@ 000 , with the team working on the game during their spare time on weekends . Barth considered this a risk @-@ cutting measure ; if the game did not succeed , the team still had their full @-@ time jobs they could continue . The team used the C # language built on the Mono framework for the game which would allow for easy porting to other platforms beyond Microsoft Windows . Initially , they had considered using Microsoft XNA for ease of porting to the Xbox 360 , but later opted to consider other release platforms , requiring them to switch to the more portable Mono framework . 
 In designing puzzles , Barth wanted to keep puzzles open @-@ ended , allowing the player to come to a solution without funneling them in a specific direction . The team designed puzzles based on general chemistry concepts without envisioning the specific solution that the player would take . They brainstormed a number of puzzles and then eliminated those with similar solutions , and arranged the others into a reasonable learning curve for the game . Despite this , Barth reflected that the tutorials provided to explain the game 's mechanics had mixed responses , from some players who took up the concept easily to others that remained baffled as to the puzzle 's goal even when instructions were set out step by step . In some cases , Barth discovered that players made assumptions on limitations of the game from these tutorials such as the idea that the red and blue waldos must remain in the separate halves of the screen . Based on the feedback that players had made on sites that hosted his previous Flash @-@ based games , Barth designed the global @-@ based <unk> to allow players to check their solution without feeling overwhelmed by the top players as would be normally listed on a leaderboard . He also devised the means of sharing solutions through YouTube videos due to similar comments and discussions on the previous games . 
 Barth had envisioned the game as his first commercial project , and based on feedback from Codex and other games , wanted to include a storyline along with the puzzles . The story missions included " defense " puzzles that typically were considered very hard to solve ; Barth recognized after release that players would stall out at these puzzles and not attempt to complete the game , with only 2 % of the players tracked having reached the final puzzle . Barth would have likely placed the harder puzzles at the end or as part of the ResearchNet add @-@ on . He also tried too much to incorporate a theme based on scientific research , popularized at the time by the success of Portal . He instead found potential players were scared off by the chemistry aspect even though the game had little connection to real chemistry ; a colleague had once suggested to Barth that if the game was named <unk> and modeled around alchemy , the game would have sold twice as many copies . 
 SpaceChem was released on January 1 , 2011 via digital download from the Zachtronics website for Microsoft Windows , Mac OS X , and Linux computers . They had initially sought to get approval from Valve Corporation to sell the game through Steam , but Valve refused them , and thus opted for sale from their own website . Shortly after its release , the game received several positive reviews including one from Quintin Smith of the gaming website Rock Paper Shotgun . Zachtronics was contacted two days later by Valve Software with an interest to add it to Steam . The game was subsequently made available on Steam by March 4 , 2011 , and later on GamersGate on March 17 , 2011 . The inclusion of the game on Steam was considered by Barth to be the largest boost to sales of the game , outweighing any other distribution method they had . 
 = = = Post @-@ release support = = = 
 SpaceChem received a free update in late April 2011 , which added several new features to the game as well as new puzzles . The patch included support for the ResearchNet puzzle creation and sharing system , and for the Steam @-@ enabled version , support for achievements and leaderboards specific for Steam friends . The update for the Steam version also included a small set of puzzles tied in with Team Fortress 2 , which upon completion would reward the player with a decorative item they could use within Team Fortress 2 . The game was included in the Humble Frozen Synapse Bundle charitable sale in early October 2011 . 
 SpaceChem was ported to the iPad in October 2011 , using touch controls instead of mouse and keyboard to manipulate the visual program . An Android port was released in July 2012 . Both mobile platforms include most of the full game excluding the defense puzzles . The sandbox mode was added at the request of a player who was trying to explore SpaceChem computational abilities . Alongside the sandbox mode , <unk> offered a contest for the most interesting sandbox creation . This same user was able to demonstrate a <unk> interpreter within SpaceChem , claiming that the visual programming language was Turing complete . Barth has mentioned the possibility of a sequel in an interview with <unk> . 
 Zachtronics Industries has encouraged the game to be used as a learning tool for programming and chemistry concepts , and offers discounts for schools , though briefly offered the game free @-@ of @-@ charge for educational institutions for a few months after the release of the sandbox mode addition . According to The Independent Games Developers Association , schools in the United Kingdom have started using SpaceChem to teach students fundamental programming concepts . The success of SpaceChem led to several companies contacting Zachtronics to develop educational titles ; the company spent about two years working with Amplify to develop three " edutainment " games for their platform before they returned to work on more direct entertainment titles , but used the opportunity to improve on their in @-@ game teaching mechanics . 
 On September 30 , 2012 , SpaceChem was the featured game on <unk> , a site which features indie games with a pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want model with a portion of the proceeds going to charity . Zachtronics Industries chose the Against Malaria Foundation as the charity to which 10 % of the proceeds were donated . 
 On October 25 , 2015 , Zachtronics announced they have dropped all support for SpaceChem on the iOS and OS X platform . The reason they gave was due to the complexity of the Mono package for future support . 
 = = Reception = = 
 SpaceChem was generally well received by critics , with an aggregate Metacritic score of 84 out of 100 from its Microsoft Windows release . Quintin Smith of Rock , Paper , Shotgun said " I think we might have just received one of the year 's best indie games in the first week of 2011 " . Gamasutra 's Margaret Robertson praised SpaceChem 's gameplay , contrasting it with other open @-@ ended activities as it offers the opportunity for the player to be as creative as they want to be within the minimal ruleset required of each puzzle . Robertson also found the game to be thrilling , having each puzzle initially appear " so astonishingly dispiriting " to what she had previously learned , but through trial and error coming to a solution that works and giving her the feeling of having " made a creative statement " in her solution . Eurogamer 's John Teti praised the means through which the game introduced new mechanics without excessive reliance on tutorials ; he commented that " the problems become more daunting " through the addition of new elements and commands , the game " is always more accessible than it looks " . Edge said " The triumph of SpaceChem is that overcoming these situations is more a case of inventing a solution than discovering one . " 
 Team Fortress creator Robin Walker recommended " SpaceChem " on Steam , calling it " Pretty much the greatest game ever made " . Gamasutra named SpaceChem the best indie game of 2011 . Though total sales of the game are unknown , at least 230 @,@ 000 copies were purchases as part of the game 's inclusion in the Humble Indie Bundle . Barth stated that with sales of SpaceChem , he was able to quit his job at Microsoft and run his development company full @-@ time . Ryan Sumo , the freelance artist for the game , gained recognition in the industry and went on to help develop the art for Prison Architect . 
 = Randy Orton = 
 Randal Keith " Randy " Orton ( born April 1 , 1980 ) is an American professional wrestler and actor who is signed with WWE with the SmackDown brand . He is a 12 @-@ time world champion , having held the WWE Championship / WWE World Heavyweight Championship eight times and the World Heavyweight Championship four times , and was the final holder of the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 Orton is a third @-@ generation professional wrestler ; his grandfather Bob Orton , Sr. , his father " Cowboy " Bob Orton , and his uncle Barry Orton all competed in the professional wrestling business . Before being promoted to the main World Wrestling Federation ( WWF , now WWE ) roster , Orton trained in and wrestled for Mid @-@ Missouri Wrestling Association @-@ Southern Illinois Conference Wrestling for a month . He was then sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , where he held the OVW Hardcore Championship twice . 
 Orton became a member of the stable Evolution shortly after his WWE debut , which quickly led to a Intercontinental Championship reign , his first title with the company . He also acquired the moniker " The Legend Killer " during a storyline where he began disrespecting and then physically attacking WWE Hall of Famers and wrestling veterans . At age 24 , he became the youngest person ever to hold the World Heavyweight Championship . With this win , he departed from Evolution and a feud with his former stablemates began . In 2006 , Orton joined forces with Edge in a tag team known as Rated @-@ RKO . Together , they held the World Tag Team Championship . 
 After Rated @-@ RKO disbanded in mid @-@ 2007 , Orton gained two WWE Championship reigns in one night , and at 27 , he became the youngest two @-@ time WWE Champion . He formed the group The Legacy with Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase in 2008 . It disbanded in 2010 and Orton returned to singles competition . From 2013 to 2015 , Orton was aligned with The Authority , who named him the " face of the WWE " . Overall , he has won 14 total championships in WWE . He is also the winner of the 2009 Royal Rumble match and has headlined many pay @-@ per @-@ view events for the organization , including WrestleManias XXV and XXX . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Orton was born in Knoxville , Tennessee , the son of Bob Orton , Jr. and his wife Elaine . He is the grandson of Bob Orton , Sr. and the nephew of wrestler @-@ turned @-@ musician Barry Orton . He has two younger siblings named Nate and Rebecca . Knowing the hardships of life as a professional wrestler , Orton 's parents tried to convince him to stay away from the business , and his father warned him that life in the ring meant a life on the road and away from family . Orton attended Hazelwood Central High School , where he was an amateur wrestler . 
 = = Military career = = 
 After graduating from high school in 1998 , Orton enlisted with the United States Marine Corps . At the base , he received a bad conduct discharge a year later after deserting on two separate occasions and disobeying an order from a commanding officer . Under the Uniform Code of Military Justice , Private First Class Orton was tried and convicted under a special court @-@ martial , subsequently spending 38 days in a military prison . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Training ( 2000 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Orton made his wrestling debut in 2000 at the Mid @-@ Missouri Wrestling Association @-@ Southern Illinois Conference Wrestling ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) in St. Louis , Missouri , an offshoot of the historic St. Louis Wrestling Club headed by Sam <unk> . There , he was trained by both the promotion and his father , Bob Orton Jr .. He wrestled for the promotion for one month , where he performed with wrestlers such as Ace Strange and Mark Bland . Orton also refereed a few matches with World Organized Wrestling , a promotion where his uncle Barry Orton worked . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 In 2001 , Orton signed a deal with the then World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) and was sent to its developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) in Louisville , Kentucky , where he continued his training . During his time in OVW , Orton wrestled the likes of Rico Constantino and The Prototype and teamed with Bobby Eaton during a tag team title tournament . He won the OVW Hardcore Championship on two separate occasions by defeating Mr. Black on February 14 , 2001 , and Flash Flanagan on May 5 , 2001 . On several occasions he faced Rico Constantino on combined WWFE / OVW events , and also lost to The Prototype ( John Cena ) in a tag match on July 28 in Jacksonville , IN . He also began appearing on several WWFE house shows that were unaffiliated with OVW , the first being on May 1 , 2001 when he faced Billy Gunn . After taking the mic and promising to beat Gunn , Orton was defeated . That fall he began appearing regularly on WWFE house shows and dark matches , facing Chuck Palumbo , Steven Richards , and Shawn Stasiak , but mostly wrestling in tag team matches . 
 = = = = Evolution ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 One of Orton 's first official WWF appearances was March 16 , 2002 at WrestleMania X8 's Fan <unk> , where he was defeated by Tommy Dreamer . Orton 's first televised WWF match was against Hardcore Holly on SmackDown ! on April 25 , 2002 . Soon after , Orton became a fan favorite and was placed in a series of matches with Holly . In September 2002 , Orton was drafted to the Raw brand , where he defeated Stevie Richards in his debut on the show . Within weeks of his debut on the Raw brand , Orton suffered a shoulder injury , leaving him sidelined for months . While recovering , Orton still appeared on Raw in his own Randy News Network segment , a weekly vignette featuring him talking about his condition . The show interrupted other segments of Raw programming , which caused Orton to slowly transition himself into a narcissistic and self @-@ centered villain . 
 After his injury healed , Orton joined the Evolution stable , which consisted of Ric Flair , Triple H , and relative newcomer , Dave Batista . The group was pushed on Raw from 2003 to 2004 , with the height of their dominance occurring after Armageddon in 2003 when all of the men 's titles on Raw were held by the members of Evolution . In 2003 , Orton spent much of his time helping Triple H overcome challenges for the World Heavyweight Championship . Orton joined Triple H in a six @-@ man Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship at SummerSlam , involved primarily to secure Triple H 's title defense , and was eliminated by Goldberg , but the stable managed to fulfill its purpose and Triple H went on to eliminate Goldberg and thus retain his title . 
 Afterwards , Orton proclaimed himself " The Legend Killer " , a young upstart who was so talented that he touted himself as the future of professional wrestling . He embarked on numerous storyline feuds with " legendary " wrestlers and gained infamy for his blatant disrespect of many older , well @-@ respected names in wrestling history . With the help of his stablemate and mentor Ric Flair , he defeated Shawn Michaels at Unforgiven in the first of many high @-@ profile matches billed as " Legend versus Legend Killer . " Orton then spat in the face of Harley Race on the April 26 , 2004 Raw . During this time , Orton began using the move that would become his signature finisher , the RKO , a jumping cutter named after his initials . Orton soon defeated Rob Van Dam for the Intercontinental Championship at Armageddon on December 14 , 2003 . With this win , Orton started the longest Intercontinental Championship reign in seven years , holding the title for seven months . Orton continued to establish himself as a " Legend Killer " throughout 2004 , challenging the semi @-@ retired wrestler Mick Foley . Famed for his hardcore matches and ability to handle excruciating pain , Foley offered Orton a hardcore " Legend versus Legend Killer " match for his Intercontinental Championship . At Backlash , in a bloody match involving thumbtacks and barbed wire , Orton defeated Foley . Two months later at Bad Blood , he retained the Intercontinental Championship against Shelton Benjamin . In July , at Vengeance , Edge defeated Orton to win the Intercontinental Championship , ending Orton 's seven @-@ month title reign . After losing the Intercontinental Championship , Orton became the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship after winning a 20 @-@ man battle royal on July 26 . 
 At SummerSlam , Orton defeated Chris Benoit for the championship . Orton became the youngest person ever to hold the title in WWE history at the age of 24 . Benoit congratulated Orton after the match , shaking his hand for showing the ability to " be a man " . The following night , after Orton successfully defended the championship against Benoit in a rematch , Evolution threw Orton a mock celebration , only to reveal that they were not pleased with his new victory . While Batista had Orton propped on his shoulders in elation , Triple H gave him a pleased thumbs up and then abruptly changed it to a thumbs @-@ down , which was followed by Batista 's dropping Orton to the mat . Ric Flair and Batista attacked Orton in the ring as Triple H revealed his jealousy for Orton 's title . He ordered Orton to hand over the championship , but he refused , spitting in Triple H 's face and hitting him with the title belt . Orton 's break @-@ up with Evolution began a new storyline for him as a fan favorite when he continued to feud with his former stablemates . A month later , Orton lost his championship to Triple H at Unforgiven . Seeking revenge , Orton lashed out at Evolution members , catching them by surprise during a show by giving them a large cake as a make @-@ up gift , which he came out of to beat and humiliate the group . At Taboo Tuesday , Orton defeated Ric Flair in a Steel Cage match . After this , Orton experienced another push , becoming General Manager of the Raw brand for a week following a match stipulation at Survivor Series where he picked up the win for his team by last pinning Triple H in a 4 @-@ on @-@ 4 Survivor Series match . He continued to feud with Triple H , using his authority to place his opponents at severe disadvantages during title defenses . Orton was granted another chance at the championship in January 2005 , but lost a six @-@ man championship Elimination Chamber match to Triple H at New Year 's Revolution . On the January 10 Raw , Orton defeated Batista to earn a match against Triple H at the Royal Rumble for the World Heavyweight title . At the Royal Rumble , Triple H defeated Orton to retain the World title . 
 = = = = The Legend Killer ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 Orton began an on @-@ screen relationship with Stacy Keibler and briefly feuded with Christian in February 2005 . On the February 28 Raw , Superstar Billy Graham made an appearance , in which he advised Orton to " go where no wrestler [ had ] gone before " . 
 Orton then produced a copy of SmackDown ! magazine , which featured The Undertaker on the cover . Heeding Graham 's advice , Orton claimed he would set himself apart from all other wrestlers by ending The Undertaker 's undefeated streak at WrestleMania . Throughout March 2005 , Orton taunted The Undertaker , claiming he was unafraid of him . On the March 21 Raw , Orton turned into a villain once more after he delivered an RKO to his unsuspecting on @-@ screen girlfriend , Stacy Keibler , knocking her unconscious . During Orton 's promos , he ran for cover whenever signs of The Undertaker 's appearance ( lightning , darkness , or smoke ) occurred . When legendary wrestler Jake Roberts advised Orton not to underestimate The Undertaker , Orton performed an RKO on Roberts as well . In the weeks leading up to WrestleMania , Orton became more defiant and unafraid of The Undertaker , taunting and assaulting him in the ring following distractions from his father , " Cowboy " Bob Orton . At WrestleMania 21 , however , the heavily hyped match was unsuccessful for Orton , as he lost despite his father 's interference . 
 The following night on Raw , Orton faced Batista , who had become World Heavyweight Champion . Orton stated on @-@ screen that his match with The Undertaker had aggravated a shoulder injury . While sidelined , Orton appeared on Raw and claimed that he was ineligible for the WWE Draft Lottery due to his injury . He was informed by WWE Chairman Vince McMahon that he was indeed a candidate for the draft , leaving a possibility of a return to SmackDown ! . Orton returned to WWE programming for the SmackDown ! brand on June 16 , announcing that he was the second pick in the 2005 draft lottery . He rekindled his feud with The Undertaker , defeating him at SummerSlam following a distraction from his father . Two months later , Orton and his father Bob Orton defeated The Undertaker in a Handicap Casket match , after the match Randy Orton and his father Bob locked the Undertaker in the casket and , in a move similar to Kane at the 1998 Royal Rumble , chopped holes in the top of the casket with an axe , poured gasoline over the casket and set it ablaze , kayfabe killing The Undertaker . The following month , Orton was a participant in the annual elimination match of Team SmackDown against Team Raw at Survivor Series . In the match , Orton was the last remaining wrestler in the match for the third straight year . , as he pinned Shawn Michaels to get the victory for Team SmackDown . At the event , The Undertaker returned by emerging from a flaming casket and attacking the SmackDown superstars who had come to the ring to celebrate Team SmackDown 's victory . On the SmackDown ! after Survivor Series , The Undertaker interfered in a match between Rey Mysterio & the Big Show after Kane interfered . Randy Orton RKO 'd the Undertaker , he then struck the Undertaker with a tire iron and set him on the back of the lowrider Mysterio had driven to the ring , he then reversed the lowrider into the SmackDown set , causing an explosion . The feud was finally settled with a Hell in a Cell match at Armageddon , where The Undertaker offered to retire if he lost . On December 16 , The Undertaker entered the ring to deliver a promo while one of his druids appeared to be standing in the ring . The Undertaker sustained an RKO from Orton in a surprise attack . The druid revealed himself to be Orton 's father , who gave Orton The Undertaker 's urn , which , according to the storyline , allowed whomever held it to control The Undertaker . The Undertaker , however , beat both Ortons in a Hell in a Cell match , ending their nine @-@ month @-@ long feud . 
 Following Armageddon , Orton entered the 2006 Royal Rumble match as the thirtieth and final wrestler , but he was eliminated by Rey Mysterio . Mysterio won the match and a title shot , and Orton urged him to put the title shot at stake in a match at No Way Out . In the weeks preceding No Way Out , Orton made controversial remarks about Eddie Guerrero , Mysterio 's friend who had died a few months previously , in an attempt to gain villain heat . Many fans felt the comments were highly distasteful so soon after Guerrero 's death in November 2005 . Orton won at No Way Out , earning Mysterio 's title shot for the World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania 22 . General Manager Theodore Long re @-@ added Mysterio to the WrestleMania 22 title match , however , making it a Triple Threat match between Orton , Mysterio , and then @-@ champion , Kurt Angle . On April 2 , at WrestleMania 22 , Orton was pinned by Mysterio , making Mysterio the World Heavyweight Champion and ending their on @-@ screen rivalry . 
 On April 4 , 2006 , Orton was suspended for sixty days for " unprofessional conduct . " In an interview , Orton stated , " my conduct was unbecoming of a champion , which is what I will be again when I return " . To cover for the suspension , a scripted injury was devised , where Kurt Angle broke Orton 's ankle during a grudge match . Orton returned from his suspension in June to the Raw brand , where he entered a rivalry with Angle , culminating in matches at One Night Stand and Vengeance before engaging in a storyline feud with Hulk Hogan . Orton began cutting promos insulting the aging Hogan and flirted with Hogan 's then @-@ eighteen @-@ year @-@ old daughter Brooke . At SummerSlam , the two met in a " Legend vs. Legend Killer " match , which Hogan won . 
 After the newly reformed D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) cost Edge the WWE Championship numerous times , Edge approached Orton and asked him to join forces to defeat the team . Orton , whose championship reign had been ended by Triple H in 2004 , agreed , forming the tag team Rated @-@ RKO . The two became the first to defeat DX since their reunion and quickly dominated the Raw brand 's tag team division to become tag team champions . As part of the angle , Rated @-@ RKO attacked Ric Flair with steel chairs to enrage DX on November 27 . At New Year 's Revolution , Rated @-@ RKO faced DX in a title defense , but the match was declared a no @-@ contest when Triple H suffered a legitimate injury during the match . With Triple H out of action , Rated @-@ RKO continued their on @-@ screen rivalry with remaining DX member Shawn Michaels . Michaels teamed with John Cena to defeat Rated @-@ RKO for the tag team championship on January 29 . After losing the tag team titles , both Edge and Orton focused on the WWE Championship , causing friction in the group . They would lose a triple threat match against Shawn Michaels to earn a title match at WrestleMania 23 . They both competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match at the same event , but the match was won by Mr. Kennedy . Finally , they faced off in a fatal four way for the title against Cena and Michaels at Backlash , however Cena retained the title . Their alliance was effectively ended once Edge was drafted to Smackdown . Orton then continued his " Legend Killer " persona , attacking Shawn Michaels . Using frequent attacks to the head , including an elevated DDT and a running punt to the face , Orton defeated Michaels at Judgment Day . When the kayfabe wounded and concussed Michaels collapsed in the ring , the referee was forced to stop the match and award Orton the victory . Orton continued his attacks when he engaged himself in feuds with Rob Van Dam , Ric Flair , Dusty Rhodes , and Sgt. Slaughter . During this time the commentators noted how Orton slithers around and stalks his victims like a snake ; this led to " The Viper " becoming a nickname for Orton . 
 = = = = WWE Champion ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On the July 23 Raw , Orton was named number one contender for John Cena 's WWE Championship . Three times before their scheduled bout at SummerSlam , Orton assaulted Cena with the RKO . Orton lost the title match when Cena pinned him after an FU . The next night on Raw , Orton demanded a rematch , but Raw General Manager William Regal denied him . He then appealed to Mr. McMahon , who offered him the shot if he " proved himself " . That night , Orton interfered in Cena 's match , assaulting him before kicking his father , who was at ringside , in the head . McMahon granted Orton his rematch at Unforgiven , which he won by disqualification when Cena refused to stop punching him in the corner . Cena retained the championship because titles cannot change hands by disqualification . After the match , Cena 's father , who was again at ringside , kicked Orton in the head . The next night on Raw , Orton defeated Cena 's father by DQ , then hit him with an RKO , while Cena was handcuffed to the ropes . Before No Mercy , Cena won a match on RAW , but with an injury . Randy Orton then hit Cena with the RKO , gaining a new nickname , The Viper . Orton then threw him outside the ring , and giving him an RKO on the announcer 's table . 
 At the beginning of No Mercy , Mr. McMahon awarded Orton the WWE Championship after Cena vacated it due to injury the previous week , cutting their feud short . Orton lost the title to Triple H in the opening match . In the main event , Orton defeated Triple H in a Last Man Standing match to regain the title . Orton then restarted his feud with Shawn Michaels , who returned on the October 8 Raw and <unk> him . Michaels was chosen by fan voting over Jeff Hardy and Mr. Kennedy to meet Orton in a title match at Cyber Sunday . Orton was disqualified when he low blowed Michaels , but retained the title . Orton won a rematch at Survivor Series after hitting Michaels with the RKO . Per stipulation , if Michaels had used Sweet Chin Music , he 'd have lost and never had another chance at the title , and if Orton was disqualified , he would have lost the title . Orton then feuded with Jeff Hardy , and defeated him in a title match at the Royal Rumble . He then restarted his feud with John Cena , who had returned from injury to win the 2008 Royal Rumble match . Instead of taking his title shot at WrestleMania XXIV , as Rumble winners typically do , Cena took it at No Way Out and defeated Orton , who intentionally got himself disqualified to retain the title . At WrestleMania , Orton retained the WWE Championship in a Triple Threat match over Cena and Triple H , by pinning Cena after Triple H Pedigreed him . 
 The next month , at Backlash , Orton lost the title to Triple H in a Fatal Four @-@ Way Elimination match , also including Cena and John " Bradshaw " Layfield . After failing to win it back at Judgment Day , Orton faced Triple H for it in a Last Man Standing match at One Night Stand , which he lost when Triple H countered an RKO by throwing him over the top rope , breaking his clavicle . During this time , he gained a new entrance theme , " Voices " , performed by the band Rev Theory . 
 Shortly before he was to return from his injury , Orton was reinjured in a motorcycle accident . He returned to Raw on September 1 , criticizing all the champions , including World Tag Team Champions Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase , who he berated and slapped for letting Cryme Tyme steal their belts . This inspired them to try to gain Orton 's respect . They achieved this at Unforgiven when , with new stablemate Manu , they assaulted World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk , forcing him to vacate his title before his scheduled defense that night . Orton returned to the ring on the November 3 Raw , losing to Punk by disqualification when DiBiase interfered . In retaliation , Orton punted DiBiase in the head . On the December 1 Raw , Orton proposed that he , Rhodes and Manu form an alliance . The stable , called The Legacy , debuted the next week , defeating Batista and Triple H , Orton 's former Evolution stablemates , in a three @-@ on @-@ two handicap match . 
 Orton began feuding with the McMahon family on the January 19 , 2009 episode of Raw when he confronted both Mr. McMahon and Stephanie , claiming that he was worth more than her , and that she had become " worthless " . This infuriated Mr. McMahon , who demanded that Orton apologize , or he 'd terminate him on the spot . As Mr. McMahon was about to fire him , Orton attacked him and viciously punted him in the head , leading to him being carried out of the arena on a stretcher . On January 25 , Orton won the Royal Rumble match , last eliminating Triple H. The next night on Raw , Orton claimed that he suffered from IED , and that he was not responsible for his actions towards Mr. McMahon , claiming that he suffered a " loss of control " because of the disorder . He also claimed that WWE knew of the condition , but did nothing , and threatened to sue WWE for that reason , and also , if Stephanie were to fire him , threatened a second lawsuit for breach of contract , due to the fact that he was legally entitled to compete at WrestleMania because he won the Royal Rumble . Though Stephanie teased firing Orton , she changed her mind and said she had " bigger plans " , leading to Shane McMahon returning to Raw and viciously attacking Orton . This led to Orton facing Shane in a No Holds Barred match at No Way Out , which he won . The next night on Raw , Orton faced Shane again in an unsanctioned match , which ended in a no @-@ contest when he punted Shane in the head , thus rendering him unable to continue the match . Stephanie then ran down to the ring to tend to her brother , but Orton hit her with an RKO . This drew Triple H into the feud , who claimed that Orton " crossed the line " when he attacked Stephanie , his real @-@ life wife . Later , Orton claimed that everything he had done was part of a plan to get revenge on Triple H after he kicked him out of Evolution ; according to Orton , Triple H " ruined his life " , so Orton was going to do the same and take everything that Triple H cared about away from him . He challenged Triple H for the WWE title at WrestleMania XXV , which he was unsuccessful . He won it the next month at Backlash by pinning Triple H in a special six @-@ man tag match between The Legacy and Triple H , Batista and Shane McMahon . At Extreme Rules , he lost the title to Batista in a Steel Cage match . The following night on Raw , Orton and Legacy attacked Batista and broke his arm , forcing him to vacate the title . 
 On the June 15 Raw , Orton regained the title in a Fatal Four Way match , over Triple H , John Cena and Big Show . He lost the title to John Cena in an " I Quit " match at Breaking Point . He then regained it from Cena in a Hell in a Cell match at Hell in a Cell . At Bragging Rights , Orton re @-@ lost the title to Cena in a one @-@ hour Iron Man match . 
 On the January 11 , 2010 Raw , Orton won a Triple Threat match , with help from Rhodes and DiBiase , for the right to challenge Sheamus at the Royal Rumble for the WWE Championship . Orton lost by disqualification when Rhodes interfered . After the match , Orton attacked Rhodes and DiBiase . On the February 15 Raw , Orton was again disqualified in a rematch when The Legacy interfered . Orton and DiBiase both competed in the WWE Championship Elimination Chamber match at Elimination Chamber . DiBiase eliminated Orton after hitting him with a pipe Rhodes gave him . The next night on Raw , during a six @-@ man tag match , Orton attacked them in retaliation . At WrestleMania XXVI , Orton , now a face for the first time since 2005 , defeated Rhodes and DiBiase in a Triple Threat match . 
 After The Legacy disbanded , Orton unsuccessfully challenged Jack Swagger for the World Heavyweight Championship at Extreme Rules in April . During a number one contender 's match for the WWE Championship on RAW , Orton was speared by Edge , costing him the match and setting up a bout at Over the Limit , Orton separated his right shoulder during the match , which ended in a double countout . At Fatal 4 @-@ Way in June , Orton lost a fatal four @-@ way WWE Championship match , also involving champion Cena and Edge , to Sheamus . On the July 19 Raw , he won a number one contender 's match over Edge and Chris Jericho , earning a match against Sheamus at SummerSlam . Sheamus was disqualified for bringing a steel chair into the ring , giving Orton the win , but not the title . Immediately afterward , Orton hit Sheamus with the chair and an RKO . 
 Orton defeated John Cena , Chris Jericho , Wade Barrett , Edge and Sheamus in a Six @-@ Pack Challenge Elimination Match to become WWE Champion for the sixth time at Night of Champions . After defending the title against Sheamus at Hell in a Cell , Orton feuded with Wade Barrett , who was blackmailing Cena to help him capture the title . Orton defeated Barrett again at Bragging Rights and Survivor Series After one final match on the November 22 episode of Raw , The Miz immediately cashed in his Money in the Bank briefcase and quickly beat Orton for the title . Orton lost to The Miz in a title tables match at TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs and again in a standard match at the Royal Rumble in January 2011 , after The New Nexus interfered , starting a feud between Orton and CM Punk . 
 The next month at Elimination Chamber , Orton lost the a WWE Championship number @-@ one @-@ contender Elimination Chamber match to Cena . Over the next three weeks , Orton punted and injured all members of The New Nexus , Michael McGillicutty , David Otunga and Mason Ryan . At WrestleMania XXVII , Orton pinned Punk after the RKO . On the April 11 Raw , McGillicutty , Otunga and Ryan returned and cost Orton a number one contender 's match for the WWE Championship . Two weeks later , in the 2011 WWE Draft , Orton was drafted to SmackDown and beat Punk in a Last Man Standing Match at Extreme Rules , ending his feud with The New Nexus . 
 = = = = World Heavyweight Championship pursuits ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 On the May 6 episode of SmackDown , Orton received a title opportunity against World Heavyweight Champion , Christian . Orton was successful in defeating Christian to win his second World Heavyweight Championship . At Over the Limit and Capitol Punishment , Orton successfully defended his championship against Christian . In July at Money in the Bank , Orton met Christian in a match where , if Orton got himself disqualified , or the referee made a " bad call " , Christian would win the title . Christian spat in Orton 's face , causing him to lose control of his temper , kick Christian in the groin and get disqualified . A month later , at SummerSlam event , Orton regained the title when he defeated Christian in a No Holds Barred match . Orton ended his feud with Christian when he retained the World Championship in a Steel Cage Match on the August 30 SmackDown . Orton then began a feud with Mark Henry after Henry became the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship . Over the next few weeks , Henry regularly attacked Orton . At Night of Champions , Orton lost the World Heavyweight title Henry , and failed to regain it two weeks later at Hell in a Cell . On the October 14 episode of SmackDown , Orton received another title shot against Henry after winning a 41 @-@ man battle royal , he was successful in winning the match by disqualification but failed to win the title after interference from rival Cody Rhodes . He then defeated Rhodes at Vengeance , and on the November 4 SmackDown in a Street Fight . 
 Orton reignited his feud with Wade Barrett after both were named captain for a traditional 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 Survivor Series elimination match . On the November 11 SmackDown , Orton lost a match to Barrett . On the November 14 Raw , Orton won a rematch by disqualification . His team was defeated at Survivor Series with Barrett and Cody Rhodes being the sole survivors . Barrett then began attacking and distracting Orton during matches . At Tables , Ladders , & Chairs , Orton defeated Barrett in a tables match hitting the RKO mid @-@ air with Barrett landing through the table . Barrett and Orton continued their feud on the December 23 SmackDown , where they brawled backstage and Orton hit Barrett with an RKO onto a car . This led to a Falls Count Anywhere match on December 30 Smackdown , in which Barrett pushed Orton down a flight of stairs , resulting in a herniated disc , which sidelined Orton for four weeks . On the January 27 , 2012 episode of SmackDown , he returned to the ring and attacked Barrett . On the February 3 episode of SmackDown , Orton defeated Barrett in a No Disqualification match to end the feud . 
 On the February 13 episode of Raw SuperShow , Orton suffered a concussion after World Heavyweight Champion Daniel Bryan smashed Orton over the head with the title belt . Due to the injury , Orton was taken out of his elimination chamber match at Elimination Chamber and was replaced by Santino Marella . Orton returned on the March 2 SmackDown , losing to Bryan by count @-@ out , following interference from Kane , who then attacked Orton after the match . In retaliation , Orton hit Kane with an RKO on the March 5 episode of Raw Supershow , after the latter defeated R @-@ Truth . On the next SmackDown , Orton hit Kane with another RKO before his match . They later brawled as the show ended . At WrestleMania XXVIII , Orton was defeated by Kane in a singles match . Orton defeated Kane on the next SmackDown in a No Disqualification match and at Extreme Rules in a Falls Count Anywhere match to end the feud . 
 On April 30 Raw , Orton was part of a Beat the Clock challenge to determine the number one contender for the WWE Championship match at Over the Limit ; he defeated Jack Swagger in 4 : 16 to beat The Miz 's time by two seconds . Orton 's time was later beaten by Daniel Bryan , thus earning him the title match . On the following Raw SuperShow , Orton was brogue kicked by tag team partner Sheamus during their match against Chris Jericho and Alberto Del Rio , costing them the match . After the match , Orton RKO 'd Sheamus and then he , Jericho , and Del Rio demanded a match for Sheamus ' World Heavyweight Championship at Over the Limit , which they were granted . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Orton failed in his World title pursuit after Sheamus pinned Jericho to retain the title . 
 On May 30 , WWE announced that they had suspended Orton for 60 days due to his second violation of the company 's Talent Wellness Program . Orton returned on the July 30 Raw , defeating Heath Slater . Orton began feuding with Mr. Money in the Bank Dolph Ziggler , after hitting him with the RKO when trying to cash his contract on a vulnerable Sheamus on the August 24 SmackDown . The following week on SmackDown , the two faced off in a match that was won by Orton . Three days later on Raw , Orton was defeated by Ziggler in a rematch , after Ziggler pinned him while holding his tights . Orton and Ziggler faced each other again at Night of Champions where Orton won . On the September 28 SmackDown , Orton was scheduled to face Big Show in a number one contenders match for the World Heavyweight Championship . However , a pre @-@ match assault from Alberto Del Rio cost Orton the match and started a feud . Orton returned to SmackDown two weeks later , attacking Del Rio and his ring announcer Ricardo Rodriguez . The rivalry built to a singles match on October 28 at Hell in a Cell , where Orton emerged victorious . On the following episode of Main Event , Orton teamed with Rey Mysterio and Sin Cara to face Del Rio and the Prime Time Players ( Darren Young and Titus O 'Neil ) in six @-@ man tag team bout that ended with Orton pinning Del Rio for the win . On the November 6 SmackDown , Orton defeated Del Rio again in a Falls Count Anywhere match , after hitting the RKO onto the ring steps . The two were then on opposing teams for the traditional five @-@ on @-@ five elimination tag match on November 18 at Survivor Series . Del Rio 's team , led by Dolph Ziggler , ended up defeating Orton 's team , led by Mick Foley . The following night on Raw , Orton defeated Del Rio once again in a Two Out of Three Falls match to end the feud . 
 = = = = Feud with The Shield ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On the December 3 Raw , Orton began a feud with The Shield , after he was attacked by them following a victory over Brad Maddox . On the December 14 SmackDown , Orton was once again assaulted backstage by The Shield . This was used to write him off television due to a shoulder injury . Orton returned on the New Year ’ s Eve Raw , helping Ryback and Sheamus fend off The Shield . On the January 4 SmackDown , Orton announced his entry in the 2013 Royal Rumble match . On the January 11 SmackDown and the January 16 Main Event , Orton was again attacked by The Shield during his matches with Antonio Cesaro . On the February 1 SmackDown , Orton defeated longtime rival Wade Barrett to earn a spot in the Elimination Chamber match . On February 17 at Elimination Chamber , Orton eliminated Mark Henry and Chris Jericho before being the last man eliminated by Jack Swagger . In late February , Orton aligned himself with Sheamus to feud with the Shield . Over the next weeks , Orton and Sheamus saved each other from attacks by The Shield and Big Show . On the March 15 SmackDown , Orton and Sheamus were then allowed to pick a third partner to face the Shield in a six @-@ man tag team match at Wrestlemania 29 an chose Ryback . Three days later on Raw , however , Ryback was booked in another match for the event , leaving the spot open . Later that night , Big Show saved the two from an attack by The Shield and was immediately recruited as their partner . On April 7 at WrestleMania 29 , Orton , Sheamus and Show were defeated by The Shield , after which , both men were knocked out by Show . The following night on Raw , Orton and Sheamus faced off in a match to earn a match with Big Show , however , the match ended in a no contest after Show interfered . Orton and Sheamus then teamed up to defeat Show in two handicap matches , first on the April 12 SmackDown via cont @-@ out , and second on the April 15 Raw via pinfall . On the April 19 SmackDown , Orton and Sheamus were defeated by Big Show and Mark Henry in a tag team match . The feud between Big Show and Orton led to an Extreme Rules match at Extreme Rules , which Orton won . After Extreme Rules , Orton began pairing with Daniel Bryan despite their poor relationship to face a common enemy in the Shield . On the June 14 SmackDown , Orton teamed with Bryan and Kane to end the Shield 's unpinned and unsubmitted streak in televised six @-@ man tag matches . Three days later at Payback , Orton and Bryan 's poor teamwork resulted in an unsuccessful challenge for Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins ' WWE Tag Team Championships . The following night on Raw , Orton and Bryan faced off in a No Disqualification match , that Orton won via referee stoppage after Bryan suffered a legitimate nerve injury . Four days later on SmackDown , Orton was defeated by Bryan in a singles match via count @-@ out . Orton and Bryan faced each other for the third time on the next Raw , but their match ended in a no @-@ contest after both men were counted out . Later that night , Orton was defeated by Bryan in a Street Fight Match after he was forced to submit to the Yes ! Lock with a <unk> stick applied to the move . 
 = = = = The Authority ( 2013 – 2014 ) = = = = 
 On July 14 at Money in the Bank , Orton defeated Christian , CM Punk , Daniel Bryan , Rob Van Dam , and Sheamus to win the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match , thus earning him an opportunity to challenge for the WWE Championship at a time of his choosing within the next year . 
 On August 18 at SummerSlam , Orton turned heel for the first time since 2010 after he cashed in his Money in the Bank contract on Daniel Bryan , who had just won the WWE Championship and had been subsequently attacked by special guest referee Triple H , who also counted the pinfall to give Orton his seventh WWE title . The following night on Raw , Orton was endorsed as the " face of the company " by Vince McMahon and the newly formed Authority ( Triple H and Stephanie McMahon ) . On September 15 at Night of Champions , Orton lost WWE Championship back to Bryan , however , Triple H stripped Bryan of the title the next night on Raw , due to a fast count by referee Scott Armstrong , but refused to give the championship back to Orton . Orton and Bryan faced off for the vacant title on October 6 at Battleground , but the match ended in a no contest after Big Show interfered and knocked out both men . Orton once again challenged Bryan for the vacant championship at Hell in a Cell , where he was successful in regaining the WWE Championship after the special guest referee Shawn Michaels superkicked Bryan for attacking Triple H. 
 On November 24 at Survivor Series , after successfully defending the title against Big Show , Orton was confronted by World Heavyweight Champion and long @-@ time rival John Cena . The following night on Raw , Cena suggested that there should only be " one champion " in WWE , so Triple H stated there would be a unification match at the TLC pay @-@ per @-@ view . On December 15 , Orton defeated Cena at TLC to unify both titles , and becoming the first WWE World Heavyweight Champion as well as officially being recognized as the final World Heavyweight Champion . Orton made his first successful title defense as WWE World Heavyweight Champion on January 26 , 2014 , at the Royal Rumble , defeating Cena in a rematch after interference by The Wyatt Family . On February 23 at Elimination Chamber , Orton defeated Cesaro , Christian , Daniel Bryan , John Cena , and Sheamus to retain his WWE World Heavyweight Championship and secure his position in the title bout at WrestleMania XXX against Royal Rumble winner Batista . On April 6 at Wrestlemania XXX , the main event was changed to a triple threat match after Bryan defeated Triple H , and won the match after submitting Batista to end Orton 's reign at 161 days . 
 The following night on Raw , Orton and Batista were each denied a rematch for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship and instead were forced by The Authority to team together to face WWE Tag Team Champions The Usos for the title , despite their issues with one another . The title match ended in a double count @-@ out after the two united and delivered a beat @-@ down to the champions . Later that night , Batista and Orton , along with Kane , attacked Bryan before he was set to defend his title against Triple H. Before Triple H could defeat Bryan , The Shield interrupted by spearing Triple H and taking out Batista , Orton and Kane , causing Bryan to retain his title via disqualification . On the April 14 episode of Raw , Batista , Triple H and Randy Orton came down to the ring to attack The Shield after their 11 @-@ on @-@ 3 handicap match , using the name and the theme of Evolution . At Extreme Rules and Payback , Evolution lost to The Shield . On the June 9 episode of Raw , The Authority automatically granted Orton a spot in the 2014 Money in the Bank ladder match for the vacant WWE World Heavyweight Championship , but he couldn 't regain the title . On the July 21 episode of Raw , Roman Reigns attacked Orton , which cost him another shot at the title , causing Orton to retaliate the following week by viciously attacking Reigns and challenging him to a match at SummerSlam . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Orton was defeated after Reigns kicked out of an RKO , and delivered a spear shortly afterwards , to pick up the victory . At the Night of Champions pay @-@ per @-@ view , Orton defeated Chris Jericho in a singles match when he executed an RKO . 
 On the October 20 episode of Raw , Orton asked The Authority to face the loser of John Cena and Dean Ambrose 's No Holds Barred Contract on a Pole match . That match was won by Ambrose , setting up a Hell in a Cell match between Orton and Cena . On the Raw before the event , Triple H announced that the winner would face Brock Lesnar for a future WWE World Championship match . Later in the night in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap street fight which pitted Orton , Kane , and Seth Rollins against Cena and Ambrose , Orton picked up the win but was immediately Curb <unk> by Rollins . On October 26 at Hell in a Cell , Orton lost the match after Cena pinned him after sending Orton into a table with an AA from the top turnbuckle . The following night on Raw , Orton RKO 'd Rollins thus defying The Authority for not controlling Rollins the previous week beginning a face turn in the process for the first time since 2013 . On the November 3 Raw , after increasing frustration , Orton attacked Rollins during his Intercontinental Championship against Dolph Ziggler , causing Rollins to win by disqualification , and demanded a match with Rollins to settle their dispute , which Triple H granted in order to keep Orton on their side . Rollins got the win with a backside pin , and Orton completed his face turn by attacking The Authority before being Curb <unk> by Rollins . He was then carried on a stretcher after he sustained a scripted injury so he could start filming The Condemned 2 : Desert Prey . 
 = = = = Various feuds and injuries ( 2015 – present ) = = = = 
 On February 22 at Fastlane , after The Authority ( Big Show , Seth Rollins , and Kane ) defeated Erick Rowan , Ryback , and Dolph Ziggler , Orton returned and saved Rowan , Ryback , and Ziggler from a post @-@ match beatdown . He later gave an RKO to Jamie Noble and Joey Mercury ( J & J Security ) and Kane . The next night on Raw , The Authority tried to convince Orton to come back to the " family " , but Orton did not give an answer straight away until he saw them backstage . During a tag team match later that night , Orton became frustrated and upset after Rollins tagged himself into the match . After the match , Orton made his way towards Rollins in the ring , but was briefly interrupted by Jamie Noble who got an RKO for his troubles . Then Orton , much to Rollins ' surprise , picked him up and only patted him on the shoulder , leaving his alignment at the time in question . On the March 9 edition of Raw , Orton would verbally insult various members of The Authority , only to pass it off as a joke . During a 2 @-@ on @-@ 1 handicap match in which he teamed with Seth Rollins against Roman Reigns , he would abandon Rollins , allowing Reigns to get the victory . Following this , Orton would proceed to viciously beat Rollins , eventually hitting an RKO on the announce table . On the March 16 episode of Raw , a match between the two was made official for WrestleMania 31 on the condition that Orton would meet Rollins later on that same night in the ring . The bout never took place as every member of The Authority made their way to the ring to attack Orton . Their attempt to avenge Rollins was thwarted by Sting , who aided Orton in holding them off . Orton defeated Rollins at the event . After the loss , Rollins cashed in his Money in the Bank contract to win the WWE World Heavyweight Championship in the main event . 
 With Rollins as the new champion , Orton defeated Roman Reigns and Ryback in a triple threat match on the April 6 episode of Raw to become the number one contender to face Rollins at Extreme Rules , but he failed to win the title from Rollins in a steel cage match that saw par the stipulation his RKO banned and Kane as the gatekeeper . At Payback , Orton failed to win the WWE World Heavyweight Championship when he was defeated by Rollins in a fatal four @-@ way match that also included Dean Ambrose and Reigns . At Money in the Bank , Orton failed to win the WWE World Heavyweight Championship contract ladder match , which was won by Sheamus . Following this , Orton began feuding with Sheamus after both men attacked each other and faced off in various tag @-@ team matches ; Orton defeated Sheamus at Battleground , but lost to Sheamus at SummerSlam . In early September 2015 , Orton started a feud with The Wyatt Family . On the September 7 episode of Raw , Orton defeated Sheamus in a singles match . After the match , The Wyatt Family attacked Orton , leaving him out of action . On the September 21 episode of Raw , Orton returned to save Dean Ambrose and Roman Reigns from The Wyatt Family , starting an alliance between Ambrose , Reigns , and Orton . On the next Raw , Orton teamed up with Ambrose to take on The New Day in a losing effort . Before the next Raw , Orton was taken out of the Hell in a Cell match after sustaining a legitimate shoulder injury , putting him out of action for the following months . 
 = = = = Return from injury ( 2016 @-@ present ) = = = = 
 Orton is scheduled to return to in @-@ ring competition at SummerSlam to face the also @-@ returning Brock Lesnar . 
 After a more than 9 @-@ month absence from WWE programming , a promo was shown on the July 18th episode of Raw announcing that Orton will make his return at WWE Battleground . On July 19 , at the 2016 WWE Draft , Orton was drafted to SmackDown . On July 24 at Battleground , Orton returned during Chris Jericho 's Highlight Reel , and proceeded to hit Jericho with the RKO . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 2004 , Orton appeared on the talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! to promote Taboo Tuesday . In March 2007 , he appeared alongside Edge , John Cena , and Bobby Lashley on the game show Deal or No Deal . 
 A former Marine himself , Orton was cast in the lead role of the action film The Marine 2 ( 2009 ) , but after injuring his collarbone , he was replaced by Ted DiBiase . He had a supporting role as the father of a high school bully in the comedy @-@ drama film That 's What I Am ( 2011 ) . He was set to star in the action film The Marine 3 : Homefront , but was replaced by fellow wrestler The Miz due to Orton 's past as a Marine . 
 He later starred in the action film 12 Rounds 2 : Reloaded ( 2013 ) . 
 In October 2014 , Orton became a popular figure on Vine , when a trend began of clips of a superimposed Orton performing his signature RKO move on internet " fail " victims . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Orton resides in St. Charles , Missouri . 
 In November 2005 , Orton announced his engagement to his girlfriend Samantha <unk> . They married on September 21 , 2007 . Their first child , Alanna Marie Orton , was born on July 12 , 2008 . Orton has a tattoo of his daughter 's name on his left forearm , with her birthday initialled beneath in Roman numerals . Orton and <unk> divorced in June 2013 , having separated in late 2012 . In July 2015 , Orton announced his engagement to Kimberly Kessler , and they were married on November 14 , 2015 . In May 2016 , Orton 's wife announced on Twitter that the two were expecting their first child together . 
 Orton has <unk> shoulders . He had a United States Marine Corps tattoo on his left arm , but covered it up after receiving a bad conduct discharge when he went AWOL twice . He was sent home after serving 38 days in a military prison at Camp Pendleton . 
 On March 19 , 2007 , Sports Illustrated posted an article on its website as part of its continuing series investigating a steroid and HGH ring used by a number of professional athletes in several sports . That article mentioned several current and former WWE wrestlers , including Orton who was alleged to have obtained <unk> citrate , anastrozole , and the steroids stanozolol , nandrolone , <unk> , and testosterone . WWE has since made a statement on this situation , claiming that the allegations preceded the Talent Wellness program WWE launched in February 2006 . 
 Upon being medically cleared to wrestle after breaking his collarbone in a last man standing match at One Night Stand against Triple H , Orton re @-@ injured his collarbone in a motorcycle accident . On July 30 , 2013 , he was attacked by a spectator in Cape Town during a WWE tour of South Africa . WWE stated that the attack was not part of the planned events . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Full nelson slam – OVW 
 O @-@ Zone ( Overdrive ) – 2002 – 2003 
 RKO ( Jumping cutter , sometimes used at an elevated position or as a sudden counter to a midair opponent , with theatrics ) – 2003 – present 
 Running punt kick to an opponent 's head – used to cause storyline concussions ; 2007 – present 
 Signature moves 
 Corner clothesline 
 Diving crossbody 
 Dropkick 
 Elevated DDT , most often performed on a wrestler hanging from the middle rope 
 European uppercut 
 Garvin Stomp – adopted from Ron Garvin 
 Gutwrench elevated neckbreaker 
 Inverted headlock backbreaker 
 Leaping knee drop 
 Lou Thesz press followed by mounted punches 
 Multiple suplex variations 
 Belly @-@ to @-@ back , sometimes onto the barricade 
 Exploder 
 Side belly @-@ to @-@ belly 
 Slingshot 
 Super – adopted from his father 
 Olympic slam 
 Pedigree ( Double underhook facebuster ) – 2015 , parodied from Triple H 
 Snap scoop powerslam 
 Swinging neckbreaker 
 With Batista 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Powerbomb ( Batista ) into a jumping neckbreaker ( Orton ) combination 
 With Edge 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Con @-@ chair @-@ to 
 Double RKO ( Double jumping cutter ) 
 Double team signature moves 
 Double dropkick 
 Managers 
 Ric Flair 
 Bob Orton 
 Lita 
 Stacy Keibler 
 Stephanie McMahon 
 Nicknames 
 " The Legend Killer " 
 " The Viper " 
 " The Apex Predator " 
 " Mr. Money in the Bank " 
 " The Face of the WWE " 
 Entrance themes 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 " Blasting " by Jim Johnston ( April 25 , 2002 – February 3 , 2003 ) 
 " Evolve " by Jim Johnston ( February 10 , 2003 – June 16 , 2003 ) 
 " Line in the Sand " by Motörhead ( July 14 , 2003 – August 23 , 2004 , April 14 , 2014 – June 2 , 2014 ; used while a part of Evolution ) 
 " Burn in My Light " by Mercy Drive ( August 30 , 2004 – May 5 , 2008 ) 
 " This Fire Burns " by Killswitch Engage ( March 3 , 2006 ; used for one week and eventually became the theme for CM Punk ) 
 " Voices " by Rev Theory ( May 12 , 2008 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 OVW Hardcore Championship ( 2 times , last ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Feud of the Year ( 2009 ) vs. Triple H 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2007 , 2009 ) 
 Most Improved Wrestler of the Year ( 2004 ) 
 Most Popular Wrestler of the Year ( 2010 ) 
 Rookie of the Year ( 2001 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2009 , 2010 ) 
 PWI ranked him No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2008 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 4 times ) 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Edge 
 Royal Rumble ( 2009 ) 
 WWE Championship / WWE World Heavyweight Championship ( 8 times ) 
 WWE Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Money in the Bank ( 2013 – WWE Championship contract ) 
 Slammy Award ( 1 time ) 
 <unk> of the Year ( 2014 ) – # <unk> 
 Seventeenth Triple Crown Champion 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Most Improved ( 2004 ) 
 Most Overrated ( 2013 ) 
 = Linezolid = 
 Linezolid is an antibiotic used for the treatment of serious infections caused by Gram @-@ positive bacteria that are resistant to other antibiotics . Linezolid is active against most Gram @-@ positive bacteria that cause disease , including streptococci , vancomycin @-@ resistant enterococci ( VRE ) , and methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) . The main uses are infections of the skin and pneumonia although it may be use for a variety of other infections . 
 When administered for short periods , linezolid is a relatively safe antibiotic . It can be used in people of all ages and in people with liver disease or poor kidney function . Common adverse effects of short @-@ term use include headache , diarrhea , and nausea . Long @-@ term use , however , has been associated with serious adverse effects such as bone marrow suppression and low platelet counts , particularly when used for more than two weeks . If used for longer periods still , it may cause sometimes irreversible chemotherapy @-@ induced peripheral neuropathy and optic nerve damage , and lactic acidosis ( a buildup of lactic acid in the body ) , all most likely due to mitochondrial toxicity . 
 As a protein synthesis inhibitor , it stops the growth of bacteria by disrupting their production of proteins , that is , it is a bacteriostatic agent , not <unk> . Although many antibiotics work this way , the exact mechanism of action of linezolid appears to be unique in that it blocks the initiation of protein production , and not one of the later steps . Bacterial resistance to linezolid has remained very low since it was first detected in 1999 , although it may be increasing . It is a member of the oxazolidinone class of drugs . 
 Linezolid was discovered in the 1990s by a team at Pharmacia and Upjohn Company and first approved for use in 2000 . It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most important medications needed in a basic health system . Linezolid costs approximately US $ 100 per tablet in the United States . Nonetheless , it appears to be more cost @-@ effective than generic alternatives such as vancomycin , mostly because of the possibility of switching from intravenous to oral administration as soon as patients are stable enough , without the need for dose adjustments . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 The main indication of linezolid is the treatment of severe infections caused by Gram @-@ positive bacteria that are resistant to other antibiotics ; it should not be used against bacteria that are sensitive to drugs with a narrower spectrum of activity , such as penicillins and cephalosporins . In both the popular press and the scientific literature , linezolid has been called a " reserve antibiotic " — one that should be used sparingly so that it will remain effective as a drug of last resort against potentially intractable infections . 
 In the United States , the indications for linezolid use approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) are the treatment of vancomycin @-@ resistant Enterococcus faecium infections , with or without bacterial invasion of the bloodstream ; nosocomial pneumonia ( hospital @-@ acquired ) and community @-@ acquired pneumonia caused by S. aureus or S. pneumoniae ; complicated skin and skin structure infections ( <unk> ) caused by susceptible bacteria , including diabetic foot infection , unless complicated by osteomyelitis ( infection of the bone and bone marrow ) ; and uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections caused by S. pyogenes or S. aureus . The manufacturer advises against the use of linezolid for community @-@ acquired pneumonia or uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections caused by MRSA . In the United Kingdom , pneumonia and <unk> are the only indications noted in the product labeling . 
 Linezolid appears to be as safe and effective for use in children and newborns as it is in adults . 
 = = = Skin and soft tissue infections = = = 
 A large meta @-@ analysis of randomized controlled trials found linezolid to be more effective than glycopeptide antibiotics ( such as vancomycin and teicoplanin ) and beta @-@ lactam antibiotics in the treatment of skin and soft tissue infections ( <unk> ) caused by Gram @-@ positive bacteria , and smaller studies appear to confirm its superiority over teicoplanin in the treatment of all serious Gram @-@ positive infections . 
 In the treatment of diabetic foot infections , linezolid appears to be cheaper and more effective than vancomycin . In a 2004 open @-@ label study , it was as effective as ampicillin / <unk> and Amoxicillin / <unk> acid , and far superior in patients with foot ulcers and no osteomyelitis , but with significantly higher rates of adverse effects . A 2008 meta @-@ analysis of 18 randomized controlled trials , however , found that linezolid treatment failed as often as other antibiotics , regardless of whether patients had osteomyelitis . 
 Some authors have recommended that combinations of cheaper or more cost @-@ effective drugs ( such as co @-@ <unk> with rifampicin or clindamycin ) be tried before linezolid in the treatment of <unk> when susceptibility of the causative organism allows it . 
 = = = Pneumonia = = = 
 No significant difference appears in treatment success rates between linezolid , glycopeptides , or appropriate beta @-@ lactam antibiotics in the treatment of pneumonia . Clinical guidelines for the treatment of community @-@ acquired pneumonia developed by the American Thoracic Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommend that linezolid be reserved for cases in which MRSA has been confirmed as the causative organism , or when MRSA infection is suspected based on the clinical presentation . The guidelines of the British Thoracic Society do not recommend it as first @-@ line treatment , but rather as an alternative to vancomycin . Linezolid is also an acceptable second @-@ line treatment for community @-@ acquired pneumococcal pneumonia when penicillin resistance is present . 
 U.S. guidelines recommend either linezolid or vancomycin as the first @-@ line treatment for hospital @-@ acquired ( nosocomial ) MRSA pneumonia . Some studies have suggested that linezolid is better than vancomycin against nosocomial pneumonia , particularly ventilator @-@ associated pneumonia caused by MRSA , perhaps because the penetration of linezolid into bronchial fluids is much higher than that of vancomycin . Several issues in study design have been raised , however , calling into question results that suggest the superiority of linezolid . Regardless , linezolid 's advantages include its high bioavailability ( because it allows easy switching to oral therapy ) , and the fact that poor kidney function is not an obstacle to use ( whereas achieving the correct dosage of vancomycin in patients with renal insufficiency is very difficult ) . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 It is traditionally believed that so @-@ called " deep " infections — such as osteomyelitis or infective endocarditis — should be treated with bactericidal antibiotics , not bacteriostatic ones . Nevertheless , preclinical studies were conducted to assess the efficacy of linezolid for these infections , and the drug has been used successfully to treat them in clinical practice . Linezolid appears to be a reasonable therapeutic option for infective endocarditis caused by multi @-@ resistant Gram @-@ positive bacteria , despite a lack of high @-@ quality evidence to support this use . Results in the treatment of <unk> endocarditis have varied , with some cases treated successfully and others not responding to therapy . <unk> to medium @-@ quality evidence is also mounting for its use in bone and joint infections , including chronic osteomyelitis , although adverse effects are a significant concern when long @-@ term use is necessary . 
 In combination with other drugs , linezolid has been used to treat tuberculosis . The optimal dose for this purpose has not been established . In adults , daily and twice @-@ daily dosing have been used to good effect . Many months of treatment are often required , and the rate of adverse effects is high regardless of dosage . There is not enough reliable evidence of efficacy and safety to support this indication as a routine use . 
 Linezolid has been studied as an alternative to vancomycin in the treatment of febrile neutropenia in cancer patients when Gram @-@ positive infection is suspected . It is also one of few antibiotics that diffuse into the vitreous humor , and may therefore be effective in treating <unk> ( inflammation of the inner linings and cavities of the eye ) caused by susceptible bacteria . Again , there is little evidence for its use in this setting , as infectious <unk> is treated widely and effectively with vancomycin injected directly into the eye . 
 = = = = Infections of the central nervous system = = = = 
 In animal studies of meningitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae , linezolid was found to penetrate well into cerebrospinal fluid , but its effectiveness was inferior to that of other antibiotics . There does not appear to be enough high @-@ quality evidence to support the routine use of linezolid to treat bacterial meningitis . Nonetheless , it has been used successfully in many cases of central nervous system infection — including meningitis — caused by susceptible bacteria , and has also been suggested as a reasonable choice for this indication when treatment options are limited or when other antibiotics have failed . The guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommend linezolid as the first @-@ line drug of choice for VRE meningitis , and as an alternative to vancomycin for MRSA meningitis . Linezolid appears superior to vancomycin in treating community @-@ acquired MRSA infections of the central nervous system , although very few cases of such infections have been published ( as of 2009 ) . 
 = = = = Catheter @-@ related infections = = = = 
 In March 2007 , the FDA reported the results of a randomized , open @-@ label , phase III clinical trial comparing linezolid to vancomycin in the treatment of catheter @-@ related bloodstream infections . Patients treated with vancomycin could be switched to <unk> or <unk> if the bacteria that caused their infection was found to be susceptible , and patients in both groups ( linezolid and vancomycin ) could receive specific treatment against Gram @-@ negative bacteria if necessary . The study itself was published in January 2009 . 
 Linezolid was associated with significantly greater mortality than the comparator antibiotics . When data from all participants were pooled , the study found that 21 @.@ 5 % of those given linezolid died , compared to 16 % of those not receiving it . The difference was found to be due to the inferiority of linezolid in the treatment of Gram @-@ negative infections alone or mixed Gram @-@ negative / Gram @-@ positive infections . In participants whose infection was due to Gram @-@ positive bacteria alone , linezolid was as safe and effective as vancomycin . In light of these results , the FDA issued an alert reminding healthcare professionals that linezolid is not approved for the treatment of catheter @-@ related infections or infections caused by Gram @-@ negative organisms , and that more appropriate therapy should be instituted whenever a Gram @-@ negative infection is confirmed or suspected . 
 = = = Specific populations = = = 
 In adults and children over the age of 12 , linezolid is usually given every 12 hours , whether orally or intravenously . In younger children and infants , it is given every eight hours . No dosage adjustments are required in the elderly , in people with mild @-@ to @-@ moderate liver failure , or in those with impaired kidney function . In people requiring hemodialysis , care should be taken to give linezolid after a session , because dialysis removes 30 – 40 % of a dose from the body ; no dosage adjustments are needed in people undergoing continuous hemofiltration , although more frequent administration may be warranted in some cases . According to one study , linezolid may need to be given more frequently than normal in people with burns affecting more than 20 % of body area , due to increased <unk> clearance of the drug . 
 Linezolid is in U.S. pregnancy category C , meaning there have been no adequate studies of its safety when used by pregnant women , and although animal studies have shown mild toxicity to the fetus , the benefits of using the drug may outweigh its risks . It also passes into breast milk , although the clinical significance of this ( if any ) is unknown . 
 = = = Spectrum of activity = = = 
 Linezolid is effective against all clinically important Gram @-@ positive bacteria — those whose cell wall contains a thick layer of peptidoglycan and no outer membrane — notably Enterococcus faecium and Enterococcus faecalis ( including vancomycin @-@ resistant enterococci ) , Staphylococcus aureus ( including methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus , MRSA ) , Streptococcus agalactiae , Streptococcus pneumoniae , Streptococcus pyogenes , the <unk> group streptococci , Listeria monocytogenes , and Corynebacterium species ( the latter being among the most susceptible to linezolid , with minimum inhibitory concentrations routinely below 0 @.@ 5 mg / L ) . Linezolid is also highly active in vitro against several mycobacteria . It appears to be very effective against Nocardia , but because of high cost and potentially serious adverse effects , authors have recommended that it be combined with other antibiotics or reserved for cases that have failed traditional treatment . 
 Linezolid is considered bacteriostatic against most organisms — that is , it stops their growth and reproduction without actually killing them — but has some bactericidal ( killing ) activity against streptococci . Some authors have noted that , despite its bacteriostatic effect in vitro , linezolid " behaves " as a bactericidal antibiotic in vivo because it inhibits the production of toxins by staphylococci and streptococci . It also has a post @-@ antibiotic effect lasting one to four hours for most bacteria , meaning that bacterial growth is temporarily suppressed even after the drug is discontinued . 
 = = = = Gram @-@ negative bacteria = = = = 
 Linezolid has no clinically significant effect on most Gram @-@ negative bacteria . Pseudomonas and the Enterobacteriaceae , for instance , are not susceptible . In vitro , it is active against Pasteurella <unk> , <unk> , Moraxella catarrhalis , Legionella , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , and moderately active ( having a minimum inhibitory concentration for 90 % of strains of 8 mg / L ) against Haemophilus influenzae . It has also been used to great effect as a second @-@ line treatment for <unk> infections . 
 = = = = Comparable antibiotics = = = = 
 Linezolid 's spectrum of activity against Gram @-@ positive bacteria is similar to that of the glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin , which has long been the standard for treatment of MRSA infections , and the two drugs are often compared . Other comparable antibiotics include teicoplanin ( trade name <unk> , a glycopeptide like vancomycin ) , <unk> / <unk> ( <unk> , a combination of two <unk> , not active against E. faecalis ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , a <unk> ) , and some agents still being developed , such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Linezolid is the only one that can be taken by mouth . In the future , <unk> and <unk> may be useful oral alternatives to linezolid — both are in the early stages of clinical development . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 When used for short periods , linezolid is a relatively safe drug . Common side effects of linezolid use ( those occurring in more than 1 % of people taking linezolid ) include diarrhea ( reported by 3 – 11 % of clinical trial participants ) , headache ( 1 – 11 % ) , nausea ( 3 – 10 % ) , vomiting ( 1 – 4 % ) , rash ( 2 % ) , constipation ( 2 % ) , altered taste perception ( 1 – 2 % ) , and discoloration of the tongue ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 % ) . Fungal infections such as thrush and vaginal candidiasis may also occur as linezolid suppresses normal bacterial flora and opens a niche for fungi ( so @-@ called antibiotic candidiasis ) . Less common ( and potentially more serious ) adverse effects include allergic reactions , pancreatitis , and elevated transaminases , which may be a sign of liver damage . Unlike some antibiotics , such as erythromycin and the quinolones , linezolid has no effect on the QT interval , a measure of cardiac electrical conduction . Adverse effects in children are similar to those that occur in adults . 
 Like nearly all antibiotics , linezolid has been associated with Clostridium difficile @-@ associated diarrhea ( <unk> ) and <unk> colitis , although the latter is uncommon , occurring in about one in two thousand patients in clinical trials . C. difficile appears to be susceptible to linezolid in vitro , and linezolid was even considered as a possible treatment for <unk> . 
 = = = Long @-@ term use = = = 
 Bone marrow suppression , characterized particularly by thrombocytopenia ( low platelet count ) , may occur during linezolid treatment ; it appears to be the only adverse effect that occurs significantly more frequently with linezolid than with glycopeptides or beta @-@ lactams . It is uncommon in patients who receive the drug for 14 days or fewer , but occurs much more frequently in patients who receive longer courses or who have renal failure . A 2004 case report suggested that pyridoxine ( a form of vitamin B6 ) could reverse the anemia and thrombocytopenia caused by linezolid , but a later , larger study found no protective effect . 
 Long @-@ term use of linezolid has also been associated with chemotherapy @-@ induced peripheral neuropathy , a progressive and enduring often irreversible tingling numbness , intense pain , and hypersensitivity to cold , beginning in the hands and feet and sometimes involving the arms and legs . Chemotherapy drugs associated with <unk> include thalidomide , the epothilones such as <unk> , the vinca alkaloids vincristine and vinblastine , the <unk> paclitaxel and docetaxel , the proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib , and the platinum @-@ based drugs cisplatin , oxaliplatin and <unk> and optic neuropathy , which is most common after several months of treatment and may also be irreversible . Although the mechanism of injury is still poorly understood , mitochondrial toxicity has been proposed as a cause ; linezolid is toxic to mitochondria , probably because of the similarity between mitochondrial and bacterial ribosomes . Lactic acidosis , a potentially life @-@ threatening buildup of lactic acid in the body , may also occur due to mitochondrial toxicity . Because of these long @-@ term effects , the manufacturer recommends weekly complete blood counts during linezolid therapy to monitor for possible bone marrow suppression , and recommends that treatment last no more than 28 days . A more extensive monitoring protocol for early detection of toxicity in seriously ill patients receiving linezolid has been developed and proposed by a team of researchers in Melbourne , Australia . The protocol includes twice @-@ weekly blood tests and liver function tests ; measurement of serum lactate levels , for early detection of lactic acidosis ; a review of all medications taken by the patient , interrupting the use of those that may interact with linezolid ; and periodic eye and neurological exams in patients set to receive linezolid for longer than four weeks . 
 The adverse effects of long @-@ term linezolid therapy were first identified during postmarketing surveillance . Bone marrow suppression was not identified during Phase III trials , in which treatment did not exceed 21 days . Although some participants of early trials did experience thrombocytopenia , it was found to be reversible and did not occur significantly more frequently than in controls ( participants not taking linezolid ) . There have also been postmarketing reports of seizures , and , as of 2009 , a single case each of Bell 's palsy ( paralysis of the facial nerve ) and kidney toxicity . 
 = = Interactions = = 
 Linezolid is a weak monoamine oxidase inhibitor ( MAOI ) , and should not be used <unk> with other MAOIs , large amounts of <unk> @-@ rich foods ( such as pork , aged cheeses , alcoholic beverages , or smoked and pickled foods ) , or serotonergic drugs . There have been postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome when linezolid was given with or soon after the discontinuation of serotonergic drugs , particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as paroxetine and sertraline . It may also enhance the blood pressure @-@ increasing effects of sympathomimetic drugs such as pseudoephedrine or <unk> . It should also not be given in combination with pethidine ( <unk> ) under any circumstance due to the risk of serotonin syndrome . 
 Linezolid does not inhibit or induce the cytochrome P450 ( CYP ) system , which is responsible for the metabolism of many commonly used drugs , and therefore does not have any CYP @-@ related interactions . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 = = = Pharmacokinetics = = = 
 One of the advantages of linezolid is its high bioavailability ( close to 100 % ) when given by mouth : the entire dose reaches the bloodstream , as if it had been given intravenously . This means that people receiving intravenous linezolid may be switched to oral linezolid as soon as their condition allows it , whereas comparable antibiotics ( such as vancomycin and <unk> / <unk> ) can only be given intravenously . Taking linezolid with food somewhat slows its absorption , but the area under the curve is not affected . 
 Linezolid has low plasma protein binding ( approximately 31 % , but highly variable ) and an apparent volume of distribution at steady state of around 40 – 50 liters . Peak serum concentrations ( <unk> ) are reached one to two hours after administration of the drug . Linezolid is readily distributed to all tissues in the body apart from bone matrix and white adipose tissue . Notably , the concentration of linezolid in the epithelial lining fluid of the lower respiratory tract is at least equal to , and often higher than , that achieved in serum ( some authors have reported bronchial fluid concentrations up to four times higher than serum concentrations ) , which may account for its efficacy in treating pneumonia . Cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) concentrations vary ; peak CSF concentrations are lower than serum ones , due to slow diffusion across the blood – brain barrier , and trough concentrations in the CSF are higher for the same reason . The average half @-@ life is three hours in children , four hours in teenagers , and five hours in adults . 
 Linezolid is metabolized in the liver , by oxidation of the morpholine ring , without involvement of the cytochrome P450 system . This metabolic pathway leads to two major inactive metabolites ( which each account for around 45 % and 10 % of an excreted dose at steady state ) , one minor metabolite , and several trace metabolites , none of which accounts for more than 1 % of an excreted dose . Clearance of linezolid varies with age and gender ; it is fastest in children ( which accounts for the shorter half @-@ life ) , and appears to be 20 % lower in women than in men . 
 = = = Mechanism of action = = = 
 The oxazolidinones are protein synthesis inhibitors : they stop the growth and reproduction of bacteria by disrupting translation of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) into proteins in the ribosome . Although its mechanism of action is not fully understood , linezolid appears to work on the first step of protein synthesis , initiation , unlike most other protein synthesis inhibitors , which inhibit elongation . 
 It does so by preventing the formation of the initiation complex , composed of the 30S and 50S subunits of the ribosome , tRNA , and mRNA . Linezolid binds to the 23S portion of the 50S subunit ( the center of peptidyl transferase activity ) , close to the binding sites of chloramphenicol , lincomycin , and other antibiotics . Due to this unique mechanism of action , cross @-@ resistance between linezolid and other protein synthesis inhibitors is highly infrequent or nonexistent . 
 In 2008 , the crystal structure of linezolid bound to the 50S subunit of a ribosome from the archaean <unk> <unk> was elucidated by a team of scientists from Yale University and deposited in the Protein Data Bank . Another team in 2008 determined the structure of linezolid bound to a 50S subunit of Deinococcus radiodurans . The authors proposed a refined model for the mechanism of action of oxazolidinones , finding that linezolid occupies the A site of the 50S ribosomal subunit , inducing a conformational change that prevents tRNA from entering the site and ultimately forcing tRNA to separate from the ribosome . 
 = = Physical and chemical properties = = 
 At physiological pH , linezolid exists in an uncharged state . It is moderately water @-@ soluble ( approximately 3 mg / mL ) , with a logP of 0 @.@ 55 . 
 The oxazolidinone pharmacophore — the chemical " template " essential for antimicrobial activity — consists of a 1 @,@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ one moiety with an aryl group at position 3 and an S @-@ methyl group , with another substituent attached to it , at position 5 ( the R @-@ enantiomers of all oxazolidinones are devoid of antibiotic properties ) . In addition to this essential core , linezolid also contains several structural characteristics that improve its effectiveness and safety . An acetamide substituent on the 5 @-@ methyl group is the best choice in terms of antibacterial efficacy , and is used in all of the more active oxazolidinones developed thus far ; in fact , straying too far from an acetamide group at this position makes the drug lose its antimicrobial power , although weak to moderate activity is maintained when some <unk> groups are used . A fluorine atom at the 3 ′ position practically doubles in vitro and in vivo activity , and the electron @-@ donating nitrogen atom in the morpholine ring helps maintain high antibiotic potency and an acceptable safety profile . 
 The anticoagulant <unk> ( <unk> ) bears a striking structural similarity to linezolid ; both drugs share the oxazolidinone pharmacophore , differing in only three areas ( an extra ketone and <unk> , and missing the fluorine atom ) . However this similarity appears to carry no clinical significance . 
 = = = Synthesis = = = 
 Linezolid is a completely synthetic drug : it does not occur in nature ( unlike erythromycin and many other antibiotics ) and was not developed by building upon a naturally occurring skeleton ( unlike most beta @-@ lactams , which are semisynthetic ) . Many approaches are available for oxazolidinone synthesis , and several routes for the synthesis of linezolid have been reported in the chemistry literature . Despite good yields , the original method ( developed by Upjohn for pilot plant @-@ scale production of linezolid and eperezolid ) is lengthy , requires the use of expensive chemicals — such as palladium on carbon and the highly sensitive reagents <unk> chloride and n @-@ butyllithium — and needs low @-@ temperature conditions . Much of the high cost of linezolid has been attributed to the expense of its synthesis . A somewhat more concise and cost @-@ effective route better suited to large @-@ scale production was patented by Upjohn in 1998 . 
 Later syntheses have included an " atom @-@ economical " method starting from D @-@ mannitol , developed by Indian pharmaceutical company Dr. Reddy 's and reported in 1999 , and a route starting from ( S ) <unk> <unk> ( prepared from vitamin C ) , developed by a team of researchers from Hunan Normal University in Changsha , Hunan , China . On June 25 , 2008 , during the 12th Annual Green Chemistry and Engineering Conference in New York , Pfizer reported the development of their " second @-@ generation " synthesis of linezolid : a convergent , green synthesis starting from ( S ) <unk> , with higher yield and a 56 % reduction in total waste . 
 = = Resistance = = 
 Acquired resistance to linezolid was reported as early as 1999 , in two patients with severe , multidrug @-@ resistant Enterococcus faecium infection who received the drug through a compassionate use program . Linezolid @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus was first isolated in 2001 . 
 In the United States , resistance to linezolid has been monitored and tracked since 2004 through a program named <unk> , which ( as of 2007 ) was conducted in 60 medical institutions throughout the country . Resistance has remained stable and extremely low — less than one @-@ half of one percent of isolates overall , and less than one @-@ tenth of one percent of S. aureus samples . A similar , worldwide program — the " Zyvox Annual Appraisal of <unk> and Spectrum Study " , or <unk> — has been conducted since 2002 . As of 2007 , overall resistance to linezolid in 23 countries was less than 0 @.@ 2 % , and nonexistent among streptococci . Resistance was only found in Brazil , China , Ireland , and Italy , among <unk> @-@ negative staphylococci ( 0 @.@ 28 % of samples resistant ) , enterococci ( 0 @.@ 11 % ) , and S. aureus ( 0 @.@ 03 % ) . In the United Kingdom and Ireland , no resistance was found in staphylococci collected from bacteremia cases between 2001 and 2006 , although resistance in enterococci has been reported . Some authors have predicted that resistance in E. faecium will increase if linezolid use continues at current levels or increases . 
 = = = Mechanism = = = 
 The intrinsic resistance of most Gram @-@ negative bacteria to linezolid is due to the activity of efflux pumps , which actively " pump " linezolid out of the cell faster than it can accumulate . 
 Gram @-@ positive bacteria usually develop resistance to linezolid as the result of a point mutation known as <unk> , in which a guanine base is replaced with thymine in base pair 2576 of the genes coding for 23S ribosomal RNA . This is the most common mechanism of resistance in staphylococci , and the only one known to date in isolates of E. faecium . Other mechanisms have been identified in Streptococcus pneumoniae ( including mutations in an RNA methyltransferase that <unk> <unk> of the 23S rRNA and mutations causing increased expression of ABC transporter genes ) and in Staphylococcus epidermidis . 
 = = History = = 
 The oxazolidinones have been known as monoamine oxidase inhibitors since the late 1950s . Their antimicrobial properties were discovered by researchers at E.I. duPont de Nemours in the 1970s . In 1978 , DuPont patented a series of oxazolidinone derivatives as being effective in the treatment of bacterial and fungal plant diseases , and in 1984 , another patent described their usefulness in treating bacterial infections in mammals . In 1987 , DuPont scientists presented a detailed description of the oxazolidinones as a new class of antibiotics with a novel mechanism of action . Early compounds were found to produce liver toxicity , however , and development was discontinued . 
 Pharmacia & Upjohn ( now part of Pfizer ) started its own oxazolidinone research program in the 1990s . Studies of the compounds ' structure – activity relationships led to the development of several subclasses of oxazolidinone derivatives , with varying safety profiles and antimicrobial activity . Two compounds were considered drug candidates : eperezolid ( codenamed PNU @-@ <unk> ) and linezolid ( PNU @-@ <unk> ) . In the preclinical stages of development , they were similar in safety and antibacterial activity , so they were taken to Phase I clinical trials to identify any difference in pharmacokinetics . Linezolid was found to have a pharmacokinetic advantage — requiring only twice @-@ daily dosage , while eperezolid needed to be given three times a day to achieve similar exposure — and therefore proceeded to further trials . The U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) approved linezolid on April 18 , 2000 . Approval followed in Brazil ( June 2000 ) , the United Kingdom ( January 2001 ) , Japan and Canada ( April 2001 ) , Europe ( throughout 2001 ) , and other countries in Latin America and Asia . 
 As of 2009 , linezolid is the only oxazolidinone antibiotic available . Other members of this class have entered development , such as <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( TR @-@ 701 ) , and <unk> ( RX @-@ 1741 ) . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Economics = = = 
 Linezolid is quite expensive ; a course of treatment may cost one or two thousand U.S. dollars for the drug alone , not to mention other costs ( such as those associated with hospital stay ) . However , because intravenous linezolid may be switched to an oral formulation ( tablets or oral solution ) without jeopardizing efficacy , patients may be discharged from hospital relatively early and continue treatment at home , whereas home treatment with injectable antibiotics may be impractical . Reducing the length of hospital stay reduces the overall cost of treatment , even though linezolid may have a higher acquisition cost — that is , it may be more expensive — than comparable antibiotics . 
 Studies have been conducted in several countries with different health care system models to assess the cost @-@ effectiveness of linezolid compared to glycopeptides such as vancomycin or teicoplanin . In most countries , linezolid was more cost @-@ effective than comparable antibiotics for the treatment of hospital @-@ acquired pneumonia and complicated skin and skin structure infections , either due to higher cure and survival rates or lower overall treatment costs . 
 In 2009 , Pfizer paid $ 2 @.@ 3 billion and entered a corporate integrity agreement to settle charges that it had <unk> and illegally promoted four drugs , and caused false claims to be submitted to government healthcare programs for uses that had not been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration . $ 1 @.@ 3 billion was paid to settle criminal charges of illegally marketing the anti @-@ inflammatory <unk> , while $ 1 billion was paid in civil fines regarding illegal marketing of three other drugs , including Zyvox . 
 = = = Brand names = = = 
 Linezolid is marketed by Pfizer under the trade names Zyvox ( in the United States , United Kingdom , Australia , and several other countries ) , <unk> ( in Europe ) , and <unk> ( in Canada and Mexico ) . <unk> are also available , such as <unk> ( in India , by <unk> ) , <unk> ( in Pakistan , by Brookes ) , <unk> ( in India , as a dry syrup by <unk> ) , and <unk> ( in Bangladesh , by <unk> ) . 
 = Dyslexia = 
 Dyslexia , also known as reading disorder , is characterized by trouble with reading despite normal intelligence . Different people are affected to varying degrees . Problems may include difficulties in spelling words , reading quickly , writing words , " sounding out " words in the head , pronouncing words when reading aloud and understanding what one reads . Often these difficulties are first noticed at school . When someone who previously could read loses their ability , it is known as alexia . The difficulties are involuntary and people with this disorder have a normal desire to learn . 
 The cause of dyslexia is believed to involve both genetic and environmental factors . Some cases run in families . It often occurs in people with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and is associated with similar difficulties with numbers . It may begin in adulthood as the result of a traumatic brain injury , stroke , or dementia . The underlying mechanisms are problems within the brain 's language processing . Dyslexia is diagnosed through a series of tests of memory , spelling , vision , and reading skills . Dyslexia is separate from reading difficulties caused by insufficient teaching ; or either hearing or vision problems . 
 Treatment involves adjusting teaching methods to meet the person 's needs . While not curing the underlying problem , it may decrease the degree of symptoms . Treatments targeting vision are not effective . Dyslexia is the most common learning disability , affecting 3 – 7 % of the population ; however , up to 20 % may have some degree of symptoms . While dyslexia is more often diagnosed in men , it has been suggested that it affects men and women equally . Dyslexia occurs in all areas of the world . Some believe that dyslexia should be best considered as a different way of learning , with both benefits and downsides . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Dyslexia is thought to have two types of cause , one related to language processing and another to visual processing . It is considered a cognitive disorder , not a problem with intelligence . However , emotional problems often arise because of it . Some published definitions are purely descriptive , whereas others propose causes . The latter usually cover a variety of reading skills and deficits , and difficulties with distinct causes rather than a single condition . The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke definition describes dyslexia as " difficulty with spelling , phonological processing ( the manipulation of sounds ) , or rapid visual @-@ verbal responding " . The British Dyslexia Association definition describes dyslexia as " a learning difficulty that primarily affects the skills involved in accurate and fluent word reading and spelling " and is characterized by " difficulties in phonological awareness , verbal memory and verbal processing speed " . 
 Acquired dyslexia or alexia may be caused by brain damage due to stroke or atrophy . Forms of alexia include pure alexia , surface dyslexia , semantic dyslexia , phonological dyslexia , and deep dyslexia . 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 There is some variability in the definition of dyslexia . Some sources , such as the U.S. National Institutes of Health , define it specifically as a learning disorder . Other sources , however , define it simply as an inability to read in the context of normal intelligence , and distinguish between developmental dyslexia ( a learning disorder ) and acquired dyslexia ( loss of the ability to read caused by brain damage ) . ICD 10 , the manual of medical diagnosis used in much of the world , includes separate diagnoses for " developmental dyslexia " ( 81 @.@ 0 ) and for " dyslexia and alexia " ( 48 @.@ 0 ) . DSM 5 , the manual of psychiatric diagnosis used in the United States , does not specifically define dyslexia , justifying this decision by stating that " the many definitions of dyslexia and <unk> meant those terms would not be useful as disorder names or in the diagnostic criteria " . Instead it includes dyslexia in a category called specific learning disorders . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 In early childhood , symptoms that correlate with a later diagnosis of dyslexia include delayed onset of speech , difficulty distinguishing left from right , difficulty with direction , and a lack of phonological awareness , as well as being easily distracted by background noise . The reversal of letters or words and mirror writing are sometimes seen in people with dyslexia , but are not considered to be defining characteristics of the disorder . 
 School @-@ age children with dyslexia may exhibit signs of difficulty in identifying or generating rhyming words , or counting the number of syllables in words – both of which depend on phonological awareness . They may also show difficulty in segmenting words into individual sounds or may blend sounds when producing words , indicating reduced phonemic awareness . Difficulties with word retrieval or naming things is also associated with dyslexia . People with dyslexia are commonly poor spellers , a feature sometimes called <unk> or <unk> , which depends on orthographic coding . 
 Problems persist into adolescence and adulthood and may accompany difficulties with summarizing stories , memorization , reading aloud , or learning foreign languages . Adults with dyslexia can often read with good comprehension , though they tend to read more slowly than others without a learning difficulty and perform worse in spelling tests or when reading nonsense words – a measure of phonological awareness . 
 A common myth about dyslexia is that its defining feature is reading or writing letters or words backwards , but this is true of many children as they learn to read and write . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The orthographic complexity of a language directly impacts how difficult learning to read the language is . English and French have comparatively " deep " phonemic orthographies within the Latin alphabet writing system , with complex structures employing spelling patterns on several levels : letter @-@ sound correspondence , syllables , and morphemes . Languages such as Spanish , Italian and Finnish have mostly alphabetic orthographies , which primarily employ letter @-@ sound correspondence – so @-@ called shallow orthographies – which for dyslexics makes them easier to learn . <unk> writing systems , such as Chinese characters , have extensive symbol use , and pose problems for dyslexic learners . 
 = = = Associated conditions = = = 
 Dyslexia is often accompanied by several learning disabilities , but it is unclear whether they share underlying neurological causes . These associated , or comorbid , disabilities include : 
 <unk> – A disorder which primarily expresses itself through difficulties with writing or typing , but in some cases through difficulties associated with eye – hand coordination and direction or sequence @-@ oriented processes such as tying knots or carrying out repetitive tasks . In dyslexia , <unk> is often multifactorial , due to impaired letter @-@ writing <unk> , organizational and <unk> difficulties , and impaired visual word forming which makes it more difficult to retrieve the visual picture of words required for spelling . 
 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) – A disorder characterized by problems paying attention , excessive activity , or taking action without forethought . Dyslexia and ADHD commonly occur together . Either 15 % or 12 – 24 % of people with dyslexia have ADHD . 35 % of people with ADHD have dyslexia . 
 Auditory processing disorder – A listening disability that affects the ability to process auditory information . This can lead to problems with auditory memory and auditory sequencing . Many people with dyslexia have auditory processing problems , and may develop their own logographic cues to compensate for this type of deficit . Some research indicates that auditory processing skills could be the primary shortfall in dyslexia . 
 Developmental coordination disorder – A neurological condition characterized by marked difficulty in carrying out routine tasks involving balance , fine @-@ motor control , kinesthetic coordination , difficulty in the use of speech sounds , problems with short @-@ term memory , and organization . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Researchers have been trying to find the neurobiological basis of dyslexia since the condition was first identified in 1881 . For example , some have tried to associate the common problem among dyslexics of not being able to see letters clearly to abnormal development of their visual nerve cells . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Modern neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) and positron emission tomography ( PET ) have shown a correlation between both functional and structural differences in the brains of children with reading difficulties . Some dyslexics show less electrical activation in parts of the left hemisphere of the brain involved with reading , such as the inferior frontal gyrus , inferior parietal lobule , and the middle and ventral temporal cortex . Over the past decade , brain activation studies using PET to study language have produced a breakthrough in the understanding of the neural basis of language . Neural bases for the visual lexicon and for auditory verbal short @-@ term memory components have been proposed , with some implication that the observed neural manifestation of developmental dyslexia is task @-@ specific ( i.e. functional rather than structural ) . <unk> in dyslexics have provided important data which point to the interactive role of the cerebellum and cerebral cortex as well as other brain structures . 
 The cerebellar theory of dyslexia proposes that impairment of cerebellum @-@ controlled muscle movement affects the formation of words by the tongue and facial muscles , resulting in the fluency problems that are characteristic of some dyslexics . The cerebellum is also involved in the <unk> of some tasks , such as reading . The fact that some dyslexic children have motor task and balance impairments has been used as evidence for a cerebellar role in their reading difficulties . However , the cerebellar theory is not supported by controlled research studies . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Research into potential genetic causes of dyslexia has its roots in post @-@ autopsy examination of the brains of people with dyslexia . Observed anatomical differences in the language centers of such brains include microscopic cortical malformations known as <unk> , more rarely , vascular micro @-@ malformations , and <unk> . The previously cited studies and others suggest that abnormal cortical development presumed to occur before or during the sixth month of fetal brain development was the cause of the abnormalities . Abnormal cell formations in dyslexics have also been reported in non @-@ language cerebral and subcortical brain structures . Several genes have been associated with dyslexia , including <unk> and <unk> on chromosome 6 , and <unk> on chromosome 15 . 
 = = = Gene – environment interaction = = = 
 The contribution of gene – environment interaction to reading disability has been intensely studied using twin studies , which estimate the proportion of variance associated with a person 's environment and the proportion associated with their genes . Studies examining the influence of environmental factors such as parental education and teacher quality have determined that genetics have greater influence in supportive , rather than less optimal , environments . However , more optimal conditions may just allow those genetic risk factors to account for more of the variance in outcome because the environmental risk factors have been minimized . As environment plays a large role in learning and memory , it is likely that epigenetic modifications play an important role in reading ability . Animal experiments and measures of gene expression and methylation in the human periphery are used to study epigenetic processes ; however , both types of study have many limitations in the extrapolation of results for application to the human brain . 
 = = Mechanisms = = 
 The dual @-@ route theory of reading aloud was first described in the early 1970s . This theory suggests that two separate mental mechanisms , or cognitive routes , are involved in reading aloud . One mechanism is the lexical route , which is the process whereby skilled readers can recognize known words by sight alone , through a " dictionary " lookup procedure . The other mechanism is the <unk> or <unk> route , which is the process whereby the reader can " sound out " a written word . This is done by identifying the word 's constituent parts ( letters , phonemes , graphemes ) and applying knowledge of how these parts are associated with each other , for example , how a string of neighboring letters sound together . The dual @-@ route system could explain the different rates of dyslexia occurrence between different languages ( e.g. the Spanish language dependence on phonological rules accounts for the fact that Spanish @-@ speaking children show a higher level of performance in non @-@ word reading , when compared to English @-@ speakers ) . 
 Dyslexia disorder is not caused by mutation in one gene ; in fact , it appears to involve the combined effects of several genes . Studying the cognitive problems associated with other disorders helps to better understand the genotype @-@ phenotype link of dyslexia . <unk> and imaging procedures are being used to ascertain phenotypic characteristics in dyslexics , thus identifying the effects of certain genes . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 There are tests that can indicate with high probability whether a person is a dyslexic . If diagnostic testing indicates that a person may be dyslexic , such tests are often followed up with a full diagnostic assessment to determine the extent and nature of the disorder . Tests can be administered by a teacher or computer . Some test results indicate how to carry out teaching strategies . 
 = = = Central dyslexias = = = 
 Central dyslexias include surface dyslexia , semantic dyslexia , phonological dyslexia , and deep dyslexia . ICD @-@ 10 reclassified the previous distinction between dyslexia ( 315 @.@ 02 in ICD @-@ 9 ) and alexia ( 315 @.@ 01 in ICD @-@ 9 ) into a single classification as <unk> The terms are applied to developmental dyslexia and inherited dyslexia along with developmental aphasia and inherited alexia , which are considered synonymous . 
 = = = = Surface dyslexia = = = = 
 In surface dyslexia , words with regular pronunciations ( highly consistent with their spelling , e.g. mint ) are read more accurately than words with irregular pronunciation , such as colonel . Difficulty distinguishing homophones is a diagnostic used for some forms of surface dyslexia . This disorder is usually accompanied by surface <unk> and fluent aphasia . Acquired surface dyslexia arises when a previously literate person experiences brain damage , which results in pronunciation errors that indicate impairment of the lexical route . 
 = = = = Phonological dyslexia = = = = 
 In phonological dyslexia , sufferers can read familiar words but have difficulty with unfamiliar words , such as invented pseudo @-@ words . Phonological dyslexia is associated with lesions in the parts of the brain supplied with blood by the middle cerebral artery . The superior temporal lobe is often also involved . Furthermore , dyslexics compensate by overusing a front @-@ brain region called Broca 's area , which is associated with aspects of language and speech . The <unk> <unk> Sequencing Program ( <unk> ) is used to treat phonological dyslexia . This system is based on a three @-@ way sensory feedback process , using auditory , visual , and oral skills to learn to recognize words and word patterns . Case studies with a total of three patients found a significant improvement in spelling and reading ability after using <unk> . 
 = = = = Deep dyslexia = = = = 
 Individuals with deep dyslexia experience both semantic <unk> ( para @-@ dyslexia ) and phonological dyslexia , which causes the person to read a word and then say a related meaning instead of the denoted meaning . Deep alexia is associated with clear phonological processing impairments . Deep dyslexia is caused by widespread damage to the brain that often includes the left hemisphere . The " continuum " hypothesis claims that deep dyslexia develops from phonological dyslexia . 
 = = = Peripheral dyslexias = = = 
 Peripheral dyslexias have been described as affecting the visual analysis of letters as a result of brain injury . <unk> , a visual field loss on the left / right side of the vertical midline , is associated with this condition . 
 = = = = Pure dyslexia = = = = 
 Pure , or phonologically @-@ based , dyslexia , also known as <unk> dyslexia , dyslexia without <unk> , and pure word blindness , is dyslexia due to difficulty in recognizing written sequences of letters ( such as words ) , or sometimes even letters . It is considered ' " pure " because it is not accompanied by other significant language @-@ related impairments . Pure dyslexia does not affect speech , handwriting style , language or comprehension impairments . Pure dyslexia is caused by lesions on the visual word form area ( VWFA ) . The VWFA is composed of the left lateral occipital sulcus and is activated during reading . A lesion in the VWFA stops transmission between the visual cortex and the left angular gyrus . It can also be caused by a lesion involving the left occipital lobe or the <unk> . It is usually accompanied by a homonymous hemianopsia in the right side of the visual field . Multiple oral re @-@ reading ( MOR ) is a treatment for pure dyslexia . It is considered a top @-@ down processing technique in which affected individuals read and reread texts a predetermined number of times or until reading speed or accuracy improves a predetermined amount . 
 = = = = <unk> dyslexia = = = = 
 <unk> dyslexia is commonly considered to derive from visual field loss due to damage to the primary visual cortex . Sufferers may complain of abnormally slow reading but are able to read individual words normally . This is the most common form of peripheral alexia , and the form with the best evidence of effective treatments . 
 = = = Neglect dyslexia = = = 
 In neglect dyslexia , some letters , most commonly those at the beginning or left side of a word , are skipped or misread during reading . This alexia is associated with right parietal lesions . The use of prism glasses has been shown to substantially mitigate this condition . 
 = = = = <unk> dyslexia = = = = 
 People with attentional dyslexia complain of letter @-@ crowding or migration , sometimes blending elements of two words into one . Sufferers read better when words are presented in isolation rather than flanked by other words and letters . Using a large magnifying glass may help mitigate this condition by reducing the effects of flanking from nearby words ; however , no trials of this or indeed any other therapy for left parietal syndromes have been published as of 2014 . 
 = = Management = = 
 Through the use of compensation strategies , therapy and educational support , dyslexic individuals can learn to read and write . There are techniques and technical aids which help to manage or conceal symptoms of the disorder . Removing stress and anxiety alone can sometimes improve written comprehension . For dyslexia intervention with alphabet @-@ writing systems , the fundamental aim is to increase a child 's awareness of correspondences between graphemes ( letters ) and phonemes ( sounds ) , and to relate these to reading and spelling by teaching how sounds blend into words . It has been found that reinforced collateral training focused on reading and spelling yields longer @-@ lasting gains than oral phonological training alone . Early intervention – that done while the language areas of the brain are still developing – is the most successful in reducing the long @-@ term impacts of dyslexia . There is some evidence that the use of specially @-@ tailored fonts may mitigate the effects of dyslexia . These fonts , which include <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , were created based on the idea that many of the letters of the Latin alphabet are visually similar and may therefore confuse dyslexics . <unk> and <unk> both put emphasis on making each letter more distinctive in order to be more easily identified . Font design can have an effect on reading , reading time , and the perception of legibility of all readers , not only those with dyslexia . 
 There have been many studies conducted regarding intervention in dyslexia . Among these studies one meta @-@ analysis found that there was functional activation as a result . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 <unk> children require special instruction for word analysis and spelling from an early age . However , there are fonts that can help dyslexics better understand writing . The prognosis , generally speaking , is positive for individuals who are identified in childhood and receive support from friends and family . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The percentage of people with dyslexia is unknown , but it has been estimated to be as low as 5 % and as high as 17 % of the population . While it is diagnosed more often in males , some believe that it affects males and females equally . 
 There are different definitions of dyslexia used throughout the world , but despite significant differences in writing systems , dyslexia occurs in different populations . Dyslexia is not limited to difficulty in converting letters to sounds , and Chinese dyslexics may have difficulty converting Chinese characters into their meanings . The Chinese vocabulary uses logographic , monographic , non @-@ alphabet writing where one character can represent an individual phoneme . 
 The phonological @-@ processing hypothesis attempts to explain why dyslexia occurs in a wide variety of languages . Furthermore , the relationship between phonological capacity and reading appears to be influenced by orthography . 
 = = History = = 
 Dyslexia was identified by Oswald <unk> in 1881 , but the term dyslexia was coined in 1887 by Rudolf Berlin , an ophthalmologist in Stuttgart . He used the term to refer to the case of a young boy who had a severe impairment in learning to read and write , despite showing typical intelligence and physical abilities in all other respects . In 1896 , W. Pringle Morgan , a British physician from Seaford , East Sussex , published a description of a reading @-@ specific learning disorder in a report to the British Medical Journal titled " Congenital Word Blindness " . The distinction between phonological and surface types of dyslexia is only descriptive , and without any etiological assumption as to the underlying brain mechanisms . However , studies have alluded to potential differences due to variation in performance . 
 = = Research and society = = 
 The majority of currently available dyslexia research relates to alphabetic writing systems , and especially to European languages . However , substantial research is also available regarding dyslexics who speak Arabic , Chinese , Hebrew or other languages . 
 As is the case with any disorder , society often makes an assessment based on incomplete information . Before the 1980s , dyslexia was thought to be a consequence of education , rather than a basic disability . As a result , society often <unk> those with the disorder . There is also sometimes a workplace stigma and negative attitude towards those with dyslexia . If a dyslexic 's instructors lack the necessary training to support a child with the condition , there is often a negative effect on the student 's learning participation . There is no evidence demonstrating that the use of music education is effective in improving dyslexic adolescents ' reading skills . 
 = M @-@ 18 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 18 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs for 77 @.@ 530 miles ( 124 @.@ 772 km ) through the central region of the state connecting US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) near North Bradley with M @-@ 72 in rural Crawford County near the community of Luzerne . In between , the roadway connects several smaller communities while running through woodlands in both state and national forest areas . Two segments of M @-@ 18 run along sections of county boundaries , and one part of the highway forms a component of the business loop for the village of Roscommon . 
 When the highway was first designated in the late 1910s , it extended farther south than it does today and ended well short of its current northern terminus . The southern end was added to another state highway , truncating M @-@ 18 's length to roughly its current southern terminus in 1926 . The northern end was also simultaneously extended for the first time with these revisions to the highway 's routing . In the 1940s , the northern extension was reversed and then reinstated . M @-@ 18 's course was last changed with the opening of three different freeways in the area in the 1960s and 1970s . The last extension in 1973 supplanted the M @-@ 144 designation from Roscommon north to Luzerne . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 18 begins about 20 miles ( 32 km ) northeast of Mount Pleasant at the North Bradley interchange on US 10 in rural Midland County . The highway runs due north through woodlands that are a part of the Au Sable State Forest and into Gladwin County . The trunkline enters the community of Beaverton and turns northwest to cross the section of the Tobacco River known as Ross Lake . Continuing northwesterly , the road runs along a section of the lake and then turns back due northerly . North of Beaverton , M @-@ 18 runs through some farm fields as it approaches the county seat of Gladwin . The highway runs through the southwestern outskirts of town near a golf course as it approaches a junction with M @-@ 61 . M @-@ 18 merges with , and runs concurrently along , M @-@ 61 eastward into town on Cedar Avenue . At <unk> Street , M @-@ 18 turns back north near the airport . M @-@ 18 continues northward out of town back into farm country . 
 The highway turns westward along Wirtz Road and past the southern terminus of county road F @-@ 97 in the northern part of Gladwin County . Near a crossing with the Cedar River , M @-@ 18 turns north along Bard Road and then west again along <unk> Road . The highway returns to its northerly course when it turns to run along <unk> Road , which runs along the Clare – Gladwin county line . The roadway angles to the northwest briefly , cutting across the extreme northeast corner of Clare County as the highway crosses into Roscommon County . Through the southern portion of the county , the road runs through the Roscommon forest management unit of the Au Sable State Forest as it approaches Prudenville . In that community , M @-@ 18 turns northeasterly and runs along M @-@ 55 along the eastern shore of Houghton Lake . The two highways separate on the eastern edge of town , and M @-@ 18 turns northward , intersecting the northern end of M @-@ 157 . M @-@ 18 continues north , parallel to Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) near Higgins Lake ; M @-@ 18 crosses I @-@ 75 at exit 239 south of Roscommon . 
 North of this freeway interchange , M @-@ 18 is also the route of Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) . The combined BL I @-@ 75 / M @-@ 18 runs north near the Roscommon Conservation Airport and turns northeasterly into town . In the middle of Roscommon , BL I @-@ 75 turns northwest along Old 76 Road , and M @-@ 18 continues northeasterly across a line of the Lake State Railway . The highway continues independently to the northwest over the South Branch of the Au Sable River and out of town . It then turns due east along the Roscommon – Crawford county line . This section of the county line also forms the southern boundary of the Huron National Forest . M @-@ 18 curves to the northeast off the county line into the national forest territory where it meets F @-@ 97 for a second time . At this junction , F @-@ 97 merges with M @-@ 18 and the two roads run due north to a junction with M @-@ 72 west of Luzerne . At this intersection , F @-@ 97 continues north and M @-@ 18 terminates in rural Crawford County . 
 M @-@ 18 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like all other state trunkline highways . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the traffic volumes along the roads under its jurisdiction using a measurement called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a metric for the level of traffic along a roadway segment for any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT calculated that 14 @,@ 017 vehicles used the section of M @-@ 18 along the M @-@ 61 concurrency , the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 18 . The lowest AADT was found along the highway in Crawford County in the 2009 surveys . Commercial traffic varied between the 50 trucks daily in Crawford County and the 214 trucks a day north of Gladwin . No section of M @-@ 18 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 By July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 18 was first designated on a routing that ran between M @-@ 46 west of Merrill through Edenville to M @-@ 14 ( later US 27 ) in Prudenville . The highway south of Beaverton was realigned to run due south a new terminus at North Bradley along the new US 10 in late 1926 . The former routing between Beaverton and M @-@ 30 north of Edenville was redesignated M @-@ 80 , and the highway from the M @-@ 30 junction south to M @-@ 46 became an extended M @-@ 30 . At the same time , the north end was extended along US 27 to end at M @-@ 76 in Roscommon . The northern extension was scaled back in 1941 to Prudenville . 
 When the new alignment for US 27 was opened in early 1949 , M @-@ 18 was re @-@ extended north from Prudenville to Roscommon , where it turned northwesterly with M @-@ 76 to end at US 27 south of Grayling . The completion of two freeways in the state shifted the termini of M @-@ 18 slightly in 1961 . The southern terminus was moved north about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the new US 10 freeway , and the northern terminus was also shifted north about a mile to the new I @-@ 75 / US 27 freeway . The Michigan State Highway Department completed a freeway segment in 1970 in the Roscommon area for the modern I @-@ 75 ; in a temporary assignment they moved M @-@ 18 / M @-@ 76 onto that freeway . When the remainder of the freeway for I @-@ 75 was completed between Roscommon and West Branch in 1973 , M @-@ 18 was rerouted at Roscommon to run northeasterly over the routing of M @-@ 144 , a highway that had existed since 1940 . Part of the former M @-@ 18 / M @-@ 76 routing on the northwestern side of Roscommon was used for BL I @-@ 75 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Nigel Kneale = 
 Thomas Nigel Kneale ( 18 April 1922 – 29 October 2006 ) was a British screenwriter . He wrote professionally for more than 50 years , was a winner of the Somerset Maugham Award , and was twice nominated for the British Film Award for Best Screenplay . In 2000 , he received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Horror Writers Association . 
 Predominantly a writer of thrillers that used science @-@ fiction and horror elements , he was best known for the creation of the character Professor Bernard Quatermass . Quatermass was a heroic scientist who appeared in various television , film and radio productions written by Kneale for the BBC , Hammer Film Productions and Thames Television between 1953 and 1996 . Kneale wrote original scripts and successfully adapted works by writers such as George Orwell , John Osborne , H. G. Wells and Susan Hill . 
 He was most active in television , joining BBC Television in 1951 ; his final script was transmitted on ITV in 1997 . Kneale wrote well @-@ received television dramas such as The Year of the Sex Olympics ( 1968 ) and The Stone Tape ( 1972 ) in addition to the Quatermass serials . He has been described as " one of the most influential writers of the 20th century , " and as " having invented popular TV . " 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Kneale was born Thomas Nigel Kneale in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , England . His family came from the Isle of Man , and returned to live there in 1928 , when Kneale was six years old . He was raised in the island 's capital , Douglas , where his father was the owner and editor of the local newspaper , The Herald . He was educated at St Ninian 's High School , Douglas , and after leaving studied law , training to become an advocate at the Manx Bar . He also worked in a lawyer 's office , but became bored with his legal training and eventually abandoned the profession . At the beginning of the Second World War Kneale attempted to enlist in the British Army , but was deemed medically unfit for service owing to photophobia , from which he had suffered since childhood . 
 On 25 March 1946 Kneale made his first broadcast on BBC Radio , performing a live reading of his own short story " Tomato Cain " in a strand entitled Stories by Northern Authors on the BBC 's North of England Home Service region . Later that year he left the Isle of Man and moved to London , where he began studying acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) . He made further radio broadcasts in the 1940s , including a reading of his story Zachary <unk> 's Angel on the BBC Light Programme , broadcast nationally on 19 May 1948 . He also had further short stories published in magazines such as Argosy and The Strand . He began using the name " Nigel Kneale " for these professional credits , but continued to be known as " Tom " to his family and friends up until his death . 
 After graduating from RADA , Kneale worked for a short time as a professional actor performing in small rôles at the Stratford Memorial Theatre in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . He continued to write in his spare time and in 1949 a collection of his work , entitled Tomato Cain and Other Stories , was published . The book sufficiently impressed the writer Elizabeth Bowen that she wrote a foreword for it , and in 1950 the collection won the Somerset Maugham Award . ( His son , Matthew Kneale , would later win the same award in 1988 for his novel Whore Banquets . ) 
 Following this success , Kneale gave up acting to write full @-@ time . He did take small voice @-@ over roles in some of his 1950s television productions , such as the voice heard on the factory loudspeaker system in Quatermass II ( 1955 ) , for which he also narrated most of the recaps shown at the beginning of each episode . Kneale 's publisher was keen for him to write a novel , but Kneale himself was more interested in writing for television . A keen cinema @-@ goer , he believed that the audience being able to see human faces was an important factor in storytelling . 
 His first professional script writing credit came when he wrote the radio drama The Long Stairs , broadcast by the BBC on 1 March 1950 and based on an historical mining disaster on the Isle of Man . In 1951 he was recruited as one of the first staff writers to be employed by BBC Television ; before he started working for the BBC , Kneale had never seen any television . Kneale was initially a general @-@ purpose writer , working on adaptations of books and stage plays and even writing material for light entertainment and children 's programmes . The following year , Michael Barry became the Head of Drama at BBC Television , and spent his entire first year 's script budget of £ 250 to hire Kneale as a full @-@ time writer for the drama department . Kneale 's first credited role in adult television drama was providing " additional dialogue " for the play Arrow to the Heart , broadcast on 20 July 1952 . This play was adapted and directed by the Austrian television director Rudolph Cartier , who had also joined the staff of the BBC drama department in 1952 . It was the beginning of a successful working relationship between the pair , that would lead to some of Kneale 's best known work . 
 = = BBC staff screenwriter = = 
 Neither Kneale nor Cartier were impressed with the state in which they found BBC television drama . At his initial job interview with Michael Barry , Cartier had criticised the department 's output as being too sedate and theatrical , while Kneale was frustrated at what he saw as the slow and boring styles of television drama production then employed , which he felt wasted the potential of the medium . Together they would help to revolutionise British television drama and establish it as an entity separate from its theatre and radio equivalents ; the television historian Lez Cooke wrote in 2003 that " Between them , Kneale and Cartier were responsible for introducing a completely new dimension to television drama in the early to mid @-@ 1950s . " Jason Jacobs , a lecturer in film and television studies at the University of Warwick , wrote in his 2000 history of early British television drama that " It was the arrival of Nigel Kneale ... and Rudolph Cartier ... that challenged the intimate drama directly ... Kneale and Cartier shared a common desire to invigorate television with a faster tempo and a broader thematic and spatial canvas , and it was no coincidence that they turned to science @-@ fiction in order to get out of the dominant stylistic trend of television intimacy . " 
 The science @-@ fiction production to which Jacobs referred was The Quatermass Experiment , broadcast in six half @-@ hour episodes in July and August 1953 . The serial told the story of Professor Bernard Quatermass of the British Experimental Rocket Group , and the consequences of his sending the first manned mission into space when a terrible fate befalls the crew and only one returns . The Quatermass Experiment was the first adult television science @-@ fiction production , held a large television audience gripped across its six weeks , and has been described by the Museum of Broadcast Communications as dramatising " a new range of gendered fears about Britain 's postwar and post @-@ colonial security . " Kneale was inspired in choosing the character 's unusual surname by the fact that many Manx surnames began with " Qu " ; the actual name itself was picked from a London telephone directory . The Professor 's first name was chosen in honour of the astronomer Bernard Lovell . 
 The BBC recognised the success of the serial , particularly in the context of the impending arrival of commercial television to the UK . Controller of Programmes Cecil McGivern wrote in a memo that : " Had competitive television been in existence then , we would have killed it every Saturday night while [ The Quatermass Experiment ] lasted . We are going to need many more ' Quatermass Experiment ' programmes . " Like all of Kneale 's television work for the BBC in the 1950s , The Quatermass Experiment was transmitted live . Only the first two episodes were telerecorded and survive in the BBC 's archives . 
 Kneale and Cartier next collaborated on an adaptation of Wuthering Heights ( broadcast 6 December 1953 ) and then on a version of George Orwell 's novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four ( 12 December 1954 ) . Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four was a particularly notable production ; many found it shocking , and questions were asked in Parliament about whether some of the scenes had been suitable for television . There was also prominent support for the play ; the Duke of Edinburgh made it known that he and the Queen had watched and enjoyed the programme , and the second live performance on 16 December gained the largest television audience since her coronation the previous year . The Guardian newspaper 's obituary of Kneale in 2006 claimed that the adaptation had " permanently revived Orwell 's reputation , " while the British Film Institute included it in their list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century in 2000 . 
 The Creature — an original script by Kneale concerning the legend of the abominable snowman — was his next collaboration with Cartier , broadcast on 30 January 1955 , followed by an adaptation of Peter Ustinov 's play The Moment of Truth ( 10 March 1955 ) , before Kneale was commissioned to write Quatermass II . Specifically designed by the BBC to combat the threat of the new ITV network , which launched just a month before Quatermass II was shown , the serial was even more successful than the first , drawing audiences of up to nine million viewers . Kneale was inspired in writing the serial by contemporary fears over secret UK Ministry of Defence research establishments such as Porton Down , as well the fact that as a BBC staff writer he had been required to sign the Official Secrets Act . 
 Almost simultaneously with the transmission of Quatermass II in the autumn of 1955 , Hammer Film Productions released The Quatermass Xperiment , their film adaptation of the first serial . Kneale was not pleased with the film , and particularly disliked the casting of Brian Donlevy as Quatermass , as he explained in a 1986 interview . " [ Donlevy ] was then really on the skids and didn 't care what he was doing . He took very little interest in the making of the films or in playing the part . It was a case of take the money and run . Or in the case of Mr Donlevy , waddle . " 
 Quatermass II was Kneale 's final original script for the BBC as a staff writer . He left the corporation when his contract expired at the end of 1956 ; " Five years in that hut was as much as any sane person could stand , " he later told an interviewer . But he continued to write for the BBC on a freelance basis . 
 = = Freelance film and television work = = 
 The same year that he left the BBC , Kneale wrote his first feature film screenplay , adapting Quatermass II for Hammer Film Productions along with producer Anthony Hinds and director Val Guest . Hinds and Guest had overseen the first Quatermass film , upon which Kneale had been unable to work due to his BBC staff contract . Kneale was disappointed that Brian Donlevy also returned in the role of Quatermass . The film premiered at the end of May 1957 , and was reviewed positively in The Times : " The writer of the original story , Mr. Nigel Kneale , and the director , Mr. Val Guest , between them keep things moving at the right speed , without digressions . The film has an air of respect for the issues touched on , and this impression is confirmed by the acting generally . " 1957 also saw the release of another cinematic collaboration between Kneale and Guest , when Kneale adapted his 1955 BBC play The Creature into The Abominable Snowman ; in this case , Hammer retained the star of the BBC version , Peter Cushing . 
 In May 1957 , Kneale was contracted by the BBC to write a third Quatermass serial , and this was eventually transmitted as Quatermass and the Pit across six weeks in December 1958 and January 1959 . On this occasion Kneale was inspired by the racial tensions that had recently been seen in the United Kingdom , and which came to a head while the serial was in pre @-@ production when the Notting Hill race riots occurred in August and September 1958 . Drawing audiences of up to 11 million , Quatermass and the Pit has been referred to by the BBC 's own website as " simply the first finest thing the BBC ever made . " It was also included in the British Film Institute 's " TV 100 " list in 2000 , where it was praised for the themes and subtexts it explored . " In a story which mined mythology and folklore ... under the guise of genre it tackled serious themes of man 's hostile nature and the military 's perversion of science for its own ends . " 
 Despite the success of the serial , Kneale felt that he had now taken the character of Quatermass as far as he could . " I didn 't want to go on repeating because Professor Quatermass had already saved the world from ultimate destruction three times , and that seemed to me to be quite enough , " he said in 1986 . It was also his final new collaboration with Rudolph Cartier , although the director did later handle a new version of Kneale 's 1953 adaptation of Wuthering Heights for the BBC in 1962 . 
 In 1958 , Kneale 's play Mrs Wickens in the Fall , transmitted by the BBC the previous year , was remade by the CBS network in the United States , retitled The Littlest Enemy . Broadcast on 18 June as part of The United States Steel Hour anthology series , the script was severely cut back in length . It was Kneale 's only involvement with American television , and he was not pleased with the result . " I made up my mind I would never ever again have anything done on a television network in America , " he later commented . 
 For the next few years , Kneale concentrated mostly on film screenplays , adapting plays and novels for the cinema . Described by The Independent as " one of the few writers not to fall out with John Osborne , " Kneale adapted Osborne 's plays Look Back in Anger and The Entertainer in 1958 and 1960 respectively , both for director Tony Richardson . Kneale knew Richardson through having previously adapted a Chekhov short story for the BBC , which Richardson had directed . Kneale was nominated for the British Film Award ( later known as a BAFTA ) for Best Screenplay for both films . Film producer Harry Saltzman , who had produced the two Osborne adaptations , approached Kneale about scripting a project he was working on to adapt Ian Fleming 's James Bond novels for the cinema ; Kneale was not a fan of Fleming 's work and turned the offer down . Further adaptations Kneale did work on were H.M.S. Defiant ( 1962 , from the novel Mutiny by Frank Tilsley ) and First Men in the Moon ( 1964 , from the novel by H. G. Wells ) . 
 Less successfully during this period , Kneale completed screenplays for adaptations of the novels Lord of the Flies by William Golding and Brave New World by Aldous Huxley . Neither of these scripts ever saw production , as the companies making them went out of business — Kneale commented in a 2003 interview that " I reckon I closed down at least two film companies . " Another screenplay that went unproduced was a Kneale original , a drama involving a wave of teenage suicides called The Big Giggle , or The Big , Big Giggle . Written in 1965 while Kneale was suffering from a mystery illness and forced to stay in bed for a long period , the concept started life as a drama serial for the BBC , before the corporation had second thoughts about the nature of the storyline and the possibility of copycat suicides ; Kneale later agreed that they were probably right not to make it for television . The production was nearly made as a film by 20th Century Fox , but John Trevelyan , Chief Executive of the British Board of Film Censors , forbade the script 's production . 
 In 1966 Kneale worked again for Hammer Film Productions when he adapted Norah Lofts 's 1960 novel The Devil 's Own into the horror film The Witches . Kneale had first worked on the screenplay for the adaptation in 1961 , the same year in which he had begun to adapt Quatermass and the Pit for Hammer . Like The Witches , the film version of Quatermass and the Pit took several years to reach the screen , eventually being released in 1967 . Roy Ward Baker directed , with Andrew Keir starring as Quatermass . Kneale was much happier with this version than the previous Hammer Quatermass adaptations , and the film was described by The Independent in 2006 as " one of the best ever Hammer productions . " Quatermass and the Pit was Kneale 's final credited film work ; 1979 's The Quatermass Conclusion was only released to cinemas in overseas markets after having been made for television in the UK , and he had his name removed from the credits of Halloween III : Season of the Witch ( 1982 ) . 
 Kneale had returned to writing for television with the BBC for the first time since Quatermass and the Pit when his play The Road was broadcast in September 1963 . The play concerned the population of an 18th @-@ century village who become haunted by visions of a future nuclear war , and was followed by several further one @-@ off dramas for the BBC over the following decade , including two entries into BBC1 's The Wednesday Play anthology strand . During this period he was regarded as one of the finest writers working for the BBC . Kneale did his first work for the ITV network during this time , writing one @-@ off play The Crunch for the ATV company in 1964 . 
 A particular critical success was The Year of the Sex Olympics , broadcast as part of BBC2 's Theatre 625 series in July 1968 . Kneale 's first television work to be made in colour — although only a black @-@ and @-@ white copy now survives — the story was based in a future where the majority of the population are kept in a docile state by constant broadcasts of pornography and other low @-@ brow reality television programming . The Live Life Show , in which a family are watched twenty @-@ four hours a day as they struggle to live on an isolated rural island , becomes a massive success , especially when a murderer is introduced into the set @-@ up . 
 The Year of the Sex Olympics has been praised for its foreshadowing of the rise of reality television programmes such as Big Brother ( 1999 – present ) and Celebrity Love Island ( 2005 – 2006 ) . The critic Nancy Banks @-@ Smith wrote in 2003 that : " In The Year of the Sex Olympics [ Kneale ] foretold the reality show and , in the scramble for greater sensation , its logical outcome ... This is satire from a TV insider , but it mutates into something far more desolate and disorientating . " The island locations scenes for the production were filmed on the Isle of Man , Kneale 's homeland . 
 In 1965 Kneale had been approached by the producer of the BBC2 science @-@ fiction anthology series Out of the Unknown to write a new one @-@ off 75 @-@ minute Quatermass story for the programme . Nothing came of this , but seven years later he was commissioned by the BBC to write a new four @-@ part Quatermass serial , based in a dystopian near future world overrun with crime , apathy , martial law and youth cults . The serial was announced as a forthcoming production by the BBC in November 1972 , and some model filming was even begun in June 1973 , but eventually budgetary problems and the unavailability of Stonehenge — a central location in the scripts — led to the project 's cancellation . " It lingered through the summer and slowly died as a project , " he later commented . 
 Kneale 's next script for the BBC was The Stone Tape , a scientific ghost story broadcast on Christmas Day 1972 . Lez Cooke praised the production , when writing in 2003 , describing it as " one of the most imaginative and intelligent examples of the horror genre to appear on British television , a single play to rank alongside the best of Play for Today . " His final BBC work was an entry into a series called Bedtime Stories , adapting traditional fairy tales into adult dramas . Kneale 's script , Jack and the Beanstalk , was transmitted on 24 March 1974 , and marked the end of his BBC writing career . 
 = = ITV and Hollywood = = 
 Kneale 's remaining television work was written for ITV . His first script for ITV was the one @-@ off play <unk> , made by the network 's Midlands franchise holders Associated <unk> ( ATV ) in 1975 . The play , a horror piece based around witchcraft , led the following year to a series called Beasts , a six @-@ part anthology where Kneale created six different character @-@ based tales of horror and the macabre . It featured some well @-@ known actors such as Martin Shaw , Pauline Quirke and Bernard Horsfall , but did not gain a full network run on ITV ; different regions transmitted the episodes in different timeslots and some in different sequences . 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , Kneale made his only attempt at writing a stage play . Called Crow , it was based upon the memoirs of real @-@ life Manx slaver Captain Hugh Crow . Kneale was unable to find backing to produce the play for the stage , but sold the script to ATV who put it into pre @-@ production for television . However , shortly before filming it was cancelled by order of ATV 's managing director , Lew Grade — Kneale was never told why . 
 Following the cancellation of Crow , Kneale moved to work for another of the ITV companies , Thames Television , who in 1977 commissioned the production of the scripts of Kneale 's previously abandoned fourth Quatermass serial , to be produced by their Euston Films subsidiary film company . The production was structured to work both as a four @-@ episode serial for transmission in the UK , and a 100 @-@ minute film version for cinema release overseas — something Kneale later regretted agreeing to . Starring John Mills as Quatermass and with a budget of over £ 1 million — more than fifty times the budget of Quatermass and the Pit in 1958 — the serial was not as critically successful as its predecessors . " Thematically no less awesome than Mr Kneale 's earlier science @-@ fiction essays for BBC Television , his ITV debut has proved only a so @-@ so affair , " was the verdict of The Times when previewing the final episode . Tying in with the series , Kneale returned to prose fiction when he wrote his only full @-@ length novel , Quatermass , a novelisation of the serial . 
 Kneale 's next television series was a departure from his usual style — Kinvig , his sole attempt at writing a sitcom , produced by London Weekend Television and broadcast on ITV in the autumn of 1981 . Although his first out @-@ and @-@ out comedy , Kneale was keen to stress that there had always been elements of humour present throughout his scripts , and some of the press reaction to Kinvig was positive . " If you like the idea of the Hitch @-@ Hiker 's Guide but found its realization tiresomely hysterical you may well prefer Kneale 's relaxed wit . Cast splendid , direction deft , " was The Times 's preview of the first episode . However , the series was not a success , although Kneale later remained personally pleased with it . 
 In 1982 , Kneale made another one @-@ off diversion from his usual work when he wrote his only produced Hollywood movie script , Halloween III : Season of the Witch . Kneale had initially been approached by the director John Landis to work on the screenplay for a remake of Creature from the Black Lagoon , and he and his wife spent some time living at the Sheraton Hotel in Hollywood while Kneale worked on the project . The Black Lagoon script never went into production , but while in America Kneale met the director Joe Dante , who invited him to script the third film in the Halloween series , on which Dante was working . Kneale agreed , on the proviso that it would be a totally new concept unrelated to the first two films , which he had not seen and he did not like what he had heard about them . 
 Kneale 's treatment for the film met with the approval of John Carpenter , the producer of the Halloween series , although Kneale was required to write the script in only six weeks . Kneale got on well with the director assigned to the film , Tommy Lee Wallace , but when one of the film 's backers , Dino De Laurentiis , insisted upon the inclusion of more graphic violence and a rewrite of the script from Wallace , Kneale became displeased with the results and had his name removed from the film . 
 He returned to writing scripts for British television , including Gentry with Roger Daltrey for ITV in 1987 , and the 1989 adaptation of Susan Hill 's novel The Woman in Black for transmission on ITV on Christmas Eve . Lynne Truss , reviewing a repeat broadcast of the production on Channel 4 for The Times in 1994 , wrote that : " Clip @-@ clop is not usually a noise to get upset about . But it will be an interesting test , today , to go up behind people and whisper ' clip @-@ clop ' , to find out whether they saw The Woman in Black last night . People who made the bold decision to watch this excellent drama will respond to any ' clip @-@ clop ' by gratifyingly leaping in the air and grabbing the backs of their necks . " The adaptation nearly went unmade ; Kneale had written the script in ten days but been advised by his agent to wait before submitting it to the producers Central Independent Television so that they would not think he had rushed it . When he did submit the script three weeks later , he discovered that Central had been about to cancel the production as they had assumed that Kneale , then 67 , had not been able to complete the work due to his age . 
 Susan Hill herself did not like some of the changes that Kneale had made to The Woman in Black . It has been observed that Kneale on some occasions operated a double @-@ standard with adaptations ; being unhappy when others made changes to his stories , but willing to make changes to stories he was adapting into script form . Referring to The Woman in Black adaptation , the writer and critic Kim Newman noted that : " He was very offended at the notion of Susan Hill using the name of Kipps from HG Wells as the hero of The Woman in Black , and so he decided not to use it and to change the hero 's name to Kidd . I 'm sure if somebody thought that Quatermass was a silly name and changed it , he 'd be furious ! " However , Kneale 's adaptations were by no means always unpopular with the original author . In 1991 , a four @-@ part version he wrote of Kingsley Amis 's novel Stanley and the Women , met with approval from the original author , with Amis regarding it as the most successful adaptation of any of his work . 
 Kneale also adapted Sharpe 's Gold for ITV in 1995 , as part of their series of adaptations of Bernard Cornwell 's Sharpe novels . This was an assignment that surprised his agent ; " We didn 't think he 'd want to bother with them but he did . That was probably because he liked the producer . " He returned to writing for radio for the first time since the 1950s in 1996 , when he wrote the drama @-@ documentary The Quatermass Memoirs for BBC Radio 3 . Partly composed of Kneale looking back at the events that led to the writing of the original three Quatermass serials and using some archive material , there was also a dramatised strand to the series , set just before the ITV Quatermass serial and featuring Andrew Keir , star of the Hammer version of Quatermass and the Pit , as the Professor . 
 While recording an audio commentary for that film in 1997 , Kneale speculated about a possible Quatermass prequel set in 1930s Germany . According to The Independent , Kneale conceived a storyline involving the young Quatermass becoming involved in German rocketry experiments in the 1930s , and helping a young Jewish woman to escape the country during the 1936 Berlin Olympics . 
 Kneale was invited to write for the successful American science @-@ fiction series The X @-@ Files ( 1993 – 2002 ) , but declined the offer . His final professional work was an episode of the ITV legal drama Kavanagh QC , starring John Thaw . Kneale 's episode , " Ancient History " , was about a Jewish woman who during the Second World War had been subjected to horrific experiments in a concentration camp . <unk> on 17 January 1997 and cited as one of the programme 's finest episodes , it brought Kneale 's writing career to a close after more than fifty years . 
 He continued to appear as an interview subject in various television documentaries , and also recorded further audio commentaries for the release of some of his productions on DVD . In 2005 , he acted as a consultant when the digital television channel BBC Four produced a live remake of The Quatermass Experiment . He lived in Barnes , London , until his death on 29 October 2006 at the age of 84 , following a series of small strokes . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The writer and actor Mark Gatiss , paying tribute to Kneale on the BBC News Online website shortly after his death , indicated that he was among the first rank of British television writers , but that this had been overlooked . " He is amongst the greats — he is absolutely as important as Dennis Potter , as David Mercer , as Alan Bleasdale , as Alan Bennett , but I think because of a strange snobbery about fantasy or sci @-@ fi it 's never quite been that way . " Similarly , his obituary in The Guardian commented that : 
 Kneale was by no means the only author to have been largely wasted by television , and to have seen his status overtaken by soap opera hacks . But his place is secure , alongside Wells , Arthur C. Clarke , John Wyndham and Brian Aldiss , as one of the best , most exciting and most compassionate English science fiction writers of his century . 
 Writing about The Year of the Sex Olympics in 2003 , Nancy Banks @-@ Smith felt that Kneale was one of the few television writers whose work was particularly memorable . 
 Once upon a time , Lord Hailsham , proceeding to the chamber of the House in black stockings and full @-@ bottomed wig as Lord High Chancellor , spotted a friend and cried lustily , " Neil ! " They say a whole party of American tourists fell to their knees . At the name of Kneale , I feel , every knee should bow . How much TV do you remember from last night ... last year ... last century ? Quite . Curiously , I can remember clearly the first time I saw The Year of the Sex Olympics by Nigel Kneale . It was 35 years ago . 
 Kneale was admired by the film director John Carpenter , who hired Kneale to write the screenplay Halloween III . Carpenter wrote the screenplay for his 1987 film Prince of Darkness under the pseudonym " Martin Quatermass " , a reference to Kneale 's work . The horror fiction writer Stephen King has cited Kneale as an influence , and Kim Newman suggested in 2003 that King had " more or less rewritten Quatermass and the Pit in The Tommyknockers . " Other writers have acclaimed Kneale as an influence on their work including comics writer Grant Morrison and television screenwriter Russell T Davies , who described the Beasts episode " Baby " as " the most frightening thing I 've ever seen ... Powerful stuff . " Film screenwriter and director Dan O 'Bannon was also an admirer of Kneale 's writing , and in 1993 wrote a potential remake of The Quatermass Experiment , of which Kneale approved , but the film was never made . 
 High @-@ profile entertainment industry figures have publicly expressed admiration for Kneale 's work , including The Beatles ' drummer Ringo Starr , members of the rock group Pink Floyd and Monty Python 's Flying Circus writer / performer Michael Palin . 
 Kneale never saw himself as a science @-@ fiction writer , and was often critical of the genre . He particularly disliked the BBC series Doctor Who ( 1963 – 89 ; 1996 ; 2005 – present ) , for which he had once turned down an offer to write . " It sounded a terrible idea and I still think it was , " he commented in 1986 . " The fact that it 's lasted a long time and has a steady audience doesn 't mean much . So has Crossroads and that 's a stinker " . He also slammed Blake 's 7 , which he described as the lowest point of British television science @-@ fiction : " I think the low point for me would be the very few bits I 've seen of a thing called Blake 's 7 which I found <unk> awful . The dialogue / characterisation seemed to consist of a kind of childish squabbling " and Doomwatch : " I was approached to write Doomwatch . That didn 't seem to be much good either . " Doctor Who was heavily influenced by Kneale 's Quatermass serials , in some cases even using specific storylines that were very similar to those from Quatermass . 
 In a January 2015 , BBC Radio 2 gave an interview with Hammer Films CEO Simon Oaks with news of developing a new Quatermass series for television . 
 = = Family = = 
 In the early 1950s Kneale met fellow BBC screenwriter Judith Kerr , a Jewish refugee , in the BBC canteen . They married on 8 May 1954 and had two children ; Matthew , who later became a successful novelist , and <unk> , an actress and later a special effects designer who worked on the popular Harry Potter series of films . Kerr became a successful children 's writer , with the Mog series of books and When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit , which was based on her own experiences of fleeing Nazi Germany in her youth . Kneale worked with Kerr on an adaptation of When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit in the 1970s , but the eventual makers of the film version disregarded their script . Similarly , in 1995 Kneale scripted a four @-@ part adaptation of one of Kerr 's sequels to the book , A Small Person Far Away , but this also went unproduced . 
 Kneale was proud of his son 's success as a writer . When his novel English Passengers won the Whitbread Book of the Year award in 2001 , his father commented that : " Matthew 's much better than I am . I just wrote screenplays . " 
 Kneale 's younger brother is the renowned artist and sculptor Bryan Kneale , who was Master and then Professor of Sculpture at the Royal Academy from 1982 to 1990 . Bryan Kneale painted the covers for the Quatermass script books released by Penguin Books in 1959 and 1960 . He was also responsible for a painting of a lobster from which special effects designers Bernard Wilkie and Jack Kine drew their inspiration for the Martian creatures they constructed for the original television version of Quatermass and the Pit . 
 = Molly Brant = 
 Molly Brant ( <unk> – April 16 , 1796 ) , also known as Mary Brant , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> , was a Mohawk woman who was influential in the era of the American Revolution . Living in the Province of New York , she was the consort of Sir William Johnson , the British Superintendent of Indian Affairs , with whom she had eight children . Joseph Brant , who became a Mohawk leader , was her younger brother . 
 After Johnson 's death in 1774 , Brant and her children returned to her native village of Canajoharie on the Mohawk River . A Loyalist during the American Revolutionary War , she fled to British Canada , where she worked as an intermediary between British officials and the Iroquois . After the war , she settled in what is now Kingston , Ontario . In recognition of her service to the Crown , the British government gave Brant a pension and compensated her for her wartime losses . 
 Since 1994 , Brant has been honored as a Person of National Historic Significance in Canada . She was long ignored or disparaged by historians of the United States , but scholarly interest in her increased in the late 20th century . She has sometimes been controversial , criticized for being pro @-@ British at the expense of the Iroquois . A devout Anglican , she is commemorated on April 16 in the calendar of the Anglican Church of Canada and the Episcopal Church ( USA ) . No portraits of her are known to exist ; an idealized likeness is featured on a statue in Kingston and on a Canadian stamp issued in 1986 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known for certain about Molly Brant 's early life . Named Mary , but commonly known as " Molly " , she was born around 1736 , possibly in the Mohawk village of Canajoharie , or perhaps further west in the Ohio Country . Her parents were Christian Mohawks . She may have been the child named Mary who was christened at the chapel at Fort Hunter , near the Lower Castle , another Mohawk village , on April 13 , 1735 . If so , her parents were named Margaret and <unk> . Most historians believe that her father was named Peter . Joseph Brant , born in 1743 , was Molly 's brother or half @-@ brother . 
 One of Molly 's Mohawk names , perhaps her birth name , was <unk> <unk> , which means " Someone <unk> Her a Flower " . Her other Mohawk name , given to her at adulthood , was <unk> , meaning " Two Against One " . Her Mohawk names have been spelled in a variety of ways in historical records . 
 The Mohawk are one of the Six Nations of the Iroquois League . At the time of the American Revolutionary War , they lived primarily in the Mohawk River valley in what is now upstate New York . At some point , either before or after her birth , Molly 's family moved west to the Ohio Country , which was used as an Iroquois hunting ground . 
 After Molly 's father died , her family moved back to Canajoharie . On September 9 , 1753 , Molly 's mother married Brant Kanagaradunkwa , a Mohawk sachem of the Turtle clan . Possibly to reinforce their connection to Brant Kanagaradunkwa , who was a prominent leader , Molly and Joseph took their stepfather 's name as a surname , which was unusual for that time . 
 Molly Brant was raised in a Mohawk culture that was highly anglicized . In Canajoharie , the Brants lived in a substantial colonial @-@ style frame house and used many European household goods . The family attended the Church of England . Molly was fluent in Mohawk and English . It is not clear whether she was formally educated or whether she could read and write . There are several letters signed " Mary Brant " , but these may have been dictated by Molly and written by someone else . A letter from 1782 is signed with " her mark " , indicating that she may have been only semi @-@ literate . 
 In 1754 , Molly accompanied her stepfather and a delegation of Mohawk elders to Philadelphia , where the men were to discuss a fraudulent land sale with colonial leaders . The party traveled to Albany , where an English officer , Captain Staats Long Morris , nephew of Governor Lewis Morris of Pennsylvania , met and fell in love with Brant . She was then about nineteen years old and described as " pretty likely " , meaning " good looking " . 
 = = Consort of Sir William = = 
 When General Sir William Johnson , Superintendent for Northern Indian Affairs , visited Canajoharie , he always stayed at the house of his friend , Molly 's stepfather Brant Kanagaradunkwa . Johnson and Molly Brant became intimate ; in September 1759 , she gave birth to his son , Peter Warren Johnson , named for Sir William 's early patron and uncle , Admiral Sir Peter Warren . Brant lived with Johnson at Fort Johnson , and then Johnson Hall after 1763 , becoming effectively Sir William 's common @-@ law wife or consort . The couple had nine children together , eight of whom lived past infancy . They included the following : 
 Peter Warren Johnson ( named after William Johnson 's uncle ) ; 
 Six daughters , Elizabeth , Magdalene , Margaret , Mary , Susanna , and Ann ( also known as Nancy ) . Elizabeth married Dr. Robert Kerr , a British physician and magistrate . Magdalene married John Ferguson , who became a member of the Legislature of Upper Canada for Kingston . Ann ( also known as Nancy ) married a naval officer , Captain Hugh Early for whom Earl Street in Kingston is named after today . Margaret married captain George Farley of the 24th Regiment in Kingston . Mary remained single , although she also lived in Kingston with her sister , Magdalene , after the war . Susanna who married Lieutenant Henry Lemoine of the famous 60th American Foot regiment . 
 George Johnson . 
 In Johnson 's will , Molly is referred to as his " housekeeper " , which at the time meant that she ran the household , served as hostess , and supervised the female servants and slaves . According to the historian Barbara Graymont , " Mary Brant presided over Johnson 's household with intelligence , ability , grace , and charm , and she effectively managed the estate during Johnson 's many and prolonged absences . " Johnson and Brant 's relationship was public ; she received gifts and thank @-@ you notes from prominent visitors such as Lord Adam Gordon . Johnson used his connection with Brant to further his public and private dealings with the Iroquois . Brant 's role as Johnson 's domestic and political partner was well known . " Before the age of forty , " writes <unk> and Pulis , " she was already a legendary figure .... " 
 William Johnson died in July 1774 . In his will he left land , money , and slaves to Brant and her children ; He left Johnson Hall to John Johnson , his eldest son by his first common @-@ law wife , Catherine <unk> , a Palatine German immigrant . Molly returned to Canajoharie with her children , personal belongings , and slaves . There she lived a comfortable life in a large house , and prospered as a trader . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 Brant supported the British Crown during the American Revolutionary War . From her home in Canajoharie , she provided food and assistance to Loyalists who were fleeing from New York to Canada . Despite harassment from local Patriots , she remained at Canajoharie for the first two years of the war . 
 A turning point came in 1777 when British forces invaded New York from Canada and laid siege to Patriots in Fort Stanwix . In August , when Brant learned that a large body of Patriot militia was on its way to relieve the fort , she sent Mohawk runners to alert the British commander of the danger . This information enabled a British , Mohawk , and Seneca force to ambush the Patriots and their Oneida allies in the Battle of Oriskany . After this battle , in which Iroquois warriors fought on both sides , the war in the Mohawk Valley became particularly brutal . The Oneida and Americans retaliated against Brant by pillaging Canajoharie . Brant fled with her children to Onondaga , the Iroquois capital . Her departure was so precipitate that she had to leave most of her belongings behind . 
 At Onondaga , the Iroquois held a council to discuss what course to take . Most Iroquois favored assisting the British , but after the Battle of Saratoga , it seemed unlikely that the British could win . Sayenqueraghta , a Seneca chief , urged the Iroquois to withdraw from the war . Brant criticized Sayenqueraghta 's advice , invoking the memory of Sir William to convince the council to remain loyal to the Crown . According to Daniel Claus , a British Indian agent and Sir William 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Brant was " in every respect considered and esteemed by them [ the <unk> ] as Sir William 's <unk> [ i.e. widow ] , and one word from her is more taken notice of by the Five Nations than a thousand from any white man without exception " . 
 Much of Brant 's influence came from her connections to Sir William Johnson and her stepfather Brant Kanagaradunkwa . Additional influence came from the fact that women in matrilineal Iroquois society had more political influence than women in patriarchal societies . Because Brant 's ancestry is unclear , historians have apparently disagreed about whether she was born into an influential clan . Brant has been described as the " head of the Six Nations matrons " , although historian Robert Allen writes that " there is no substantive evidence to suggest that Molly was ever a clan matron or mother within the Iroquois matrilineal society " . <unk> and Pulis write that " although not born to the position , she became one of the Mohawk matrons " . 
 In late 1777 , Brant relocated to Fort Niagara at the request of Major John Butler , who wanted to make use of her influence among the Iroquois . At Niagara , Brant worked as an intermediary between the British and the Iroquois , rendering , according to Graymont , " inestimable assistance there as a diplomat and stateswoman " . Meanwhile , in November 1777 Brant 's son Peter Johnson was killed in the Philadelphia campaign while serving in the British 26th Regiment of Foot . 
 In 1779 , Brant visited Montreal , where some of her children attended school , but headed back when the Americans began their invasion of <unk> that year . Because of the war , she could only get as far as the British post at Carleton Island , where many Iroquois refugees had fled from the Americans . There she continued her work as an intermediary . The British commander considered Brant 's influence " far superior to that of all their Chiefs put together " . Brant was unhappy with having to live in an army barracks with her children . Hoping to keep her favor , the British built her a house on the island in 1781 , where she lived with her children and four slaves for the remainder of the war . Throughout the war , Brant played important roles as a negotiator , mediator , liaison , and advocate for Mohawk and Iroquois peoples at Fort Niagara , Montreal , and Carleton Island . 
 = = Final years and legacy = = 
 When Carleton Island was largely abandoned in 1783 , Brant moved to Cataraqui , now Kingston , Ontario , where the government built her a house and gave her an annual pension of £ 100 . The property that she was assigned was Farm Lot A in Kingston Township , along the northern limit of the town . It was only 116 acres instead of the standard 200 acres because it was encroached upon by the Clergy Reserve . Brant and her family received compensation from the British government for their losses in the American Revolution . Hoping to make use of her influence , the United States offered Brant compensation if she would return with her family to the Mohawk Valley , but she refused . 
 Brant lived in Kingston for the remainder of her life , a respected member of the community and a charter member of the local Anglican Church . Her son George Johnson , known as " Big George " among Natives , married an Iroquois woman and became a farmer and teacher ; her daughters married prominent white men . She died in Kingston on April 16 , 1796 , at about age 60 , and was buried in St. Paul 's Churchyard , Kingston 's original burial ground , now the site of St. Paul 's Anglican Church . The exact location of her grave is unknown . 
 Brant 's legacy is varied . Since 1994 , she has been honored as a Person of National Historic Significance in Canada . Brant was long ignored or disparaged by historians of the United States , but scholarly interest in her increased in the late 20th century . The Johnson Hall State Historic Site in New York now interprets her public and private roles for visitors . She has sometimes been controversial , criticized for being pro @-@ British at the expense of the Iroquois . According to <unk> and Pulis , " She made choices for which she is sometimes criticized today ; some have seen her as having played a large part in the loss of Iroquois land in New York State . " Brant saw the Mohawk and Iroquois ' best chance of survival as lying with the British . When history is painted in <unk> terms of British versus American , it is easy to see Brant as a traitor . However , Brant saw herself as Mohawk and Iroquois woman first , and she made strategic choices that she believed would best benefit her peoples . 
 Brant is commemorated on April 16 in the calendar of the Anglican Church of Canada , as well as the Episcopal Church . No portraits of her are known to exist ; an idealized likeness is featured on a statue in Kingston and on a Canadian stamp issued in 1986 . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 In 1988 , archaeological testing was conducted at the site of the former home of Molly Brant in Kingston , Ontario , in preparation for a construction project . Salvage excavations were carried out in 1989 . Much of the original site of the Brant homestead had been disturbed by industrial activities . 
 The area had been the location of the Kiwanis Playing Field , and was not disturbed until Imperial Oil bought the property in 1938 . At this time , the below @-@ ground remains of the structures were likely removed . Excavations revealed the remains of a privy , which contained over 5 @,@ 000 artifacts of domestic and personal items from the 19th century . 
 = = Recognition in Kingston = = 
 On August 25 , 1996 the City of Kingston proclaimed Molly Brant Commemoration Day . The Mohawk Nation - Bay of Quinte , the Corporation of the City of Kingston , the City of Kingston Historical Board , Mr. John <unk> ( Molly Brant Sculptor ) and the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada agreed to commemorate her life with the creation of a bust representing Molly Brant along with an historic monument at the front entrance of Rideaucrest Home on Rideau Street in Kingston . The memorial sculpture was unveiled at Rideaucrest on Molly Brant Commemoration Day . The commemoration began with a service at St. George 's Cathedral , a tobacco burning and wreath laying ceremony at St. Paul 's Anglican Church and a reception at Rideaucrest where the sculpture of Molly Brant was unveiled in the eastern courtyard . 
 The Molly Brant Foundation was established in 2005 in honour of Molly Brant . It focuses its not @-@ for @-@ profit work on urban Aboriginal research in the Kingston area . 
 The Molly Brant One Woman Opera , composed by Augusta <unk> @-@ Bates , was first performed at St. George 's Cathedral in Kingston on April 25 , 2003 under the aegis Cataraqui Archaeological Research Foundation . It has since evolved into a four @-@ act opera which grew out of the original one @-@ woman opera of 2003 . The 2003 production was sung by Kingston soprano Rhona Gale , with Carrie Wyatt , flute , and the composer at the piano . 
 On June 17 , 2015 , Limestone District School Board trustees selected Molly Brant as the name for a new elementary public school located on Lyons Street on Queen Elizabeth Collegiate property . Scheduled to open for the 2016 – 17 school year , the 49 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot building will educate students from First Avenue and Frontenac Public Schools . 
 = Hello Goodbye ( Ugly Betty ) = 
 " Hello Goodbye " is the series finale of the television comedy @-@ drama series , Ugly Betty . The episode serves as the 20th and final episode of the fourth season . It was written by series creator and executive producer Silvio Horta , and was directed by Victor Nelli , Jr . It first aired on ABC in the United States on April 14 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Bryan Batt , Neal Bledsoe , Grant Bowler , Alec Mapa , Ryan McGinnis , Matt Newton and Adam Rodríguez . 
 The episode focuses on Betty Suarez ( America Ferrera ) struggling to tell her friend and boss , Daniel Meade ( Eric Mabius ) about her new job in London . At the same time , Betty 's sister , Hilda ( Ana Ortiz ) tries to keep their father from finding out she is moving to Manhattan . Wilhelmina Slater ( Vanessa Williams ) recovers from being shot by Tyler ( Neal Bledsoe ) and Amanda Tanen ( Becki Newton ) finally finds her father . 
 " Hello Goodbye " has received critical acclaim from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 43 million viewers during its original broadcast , which was a season high . It received a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Betty ( America Ferrera ) is worried about how Daniel ( Eric Mabius ) will take the news that she is leaving <unk> for a new job in London . Marc St. James ( Michael Urie ) overhears Betty talking about her new job and sends a mass text to everyone in the building . Daniel reveals to Betty that he knows about her new job and tells her he is fine about it . However , he later burns her contract release form and tells her that he is angry that she is leaving . Daniel then offers Betty a promotion , which she turns down . Daniel does not turn up to her farewell party and Betty says goodbye to her family . 
 At the same time , Wilhelmina ( Vanessa Williams ) is in a coma from being shot by Tyler ( Neal Bledsoe ) . Claire Meade ( Judith Light ) is the only witness and a possible suspect . When she wakes up , she is visited by Connor Owens ( Grant Bowler ) , who tells her that he cannot live without her . Upon leaving the hospital , Wilhelmina holds a press conference and tells the reporters that she shot herself accidentally . Claire thanks her for not mentioning Tyler and Wilhelmina tells her that they are now good . Daniel later tells Wilhelmina that he is stepping down as editor of <unk> and gives her his job . 
 Hilda ( Ana Ortiz ) and Bobby ( Adam Rodríguez ) tell Betty that they are looking for an apartment in Manhattan , but Hilda worries that their father , Ignacio ( Tony Plana ) will be lonely without them . Bobby eventually tells him that he and Hilda are moving out and Ignacio reassures them that he is happy to live alone . Marc receives a promotion and a second chance with Troy ( Matt Newton ) . Amanda ( Becki Newton ) finds out that Spencer ( Bryan Batt ) is her father and confronts him . Spencer tells Amanda that he knew she was his daughter when he hired her to be his stylist and they embrace . 
 Betty is shown enjoying her new life in London and she later runs into Daniel in Trafalgar Square . They talk and Daniel apologizes for not saying goodbye , before asking Betty out to dinner . Betty then jokingly asks if he needs something to do , she is looking for a new assistant and Daniel tells her that he might submit his resume . As Betty then heads off to work across Trafalgar Square , the series title is superimposed onto the scene ; after a moment , Ugly disappears . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Hello Goodbye " was written by Ugly Betty creator and executive producer Silvio Horta and directed by Victor Nelli Jr . The episode originally aired on April 14 , 2010 on ABC as the twentieth episode of the series ' fourth season and 85th overall . 
 This episode marks the end of Ugly Betty . ABC announced in January 2010 that the series ' fourth season was to be the last , following falling ratings . In a joint statement Silvio Horta and ABC Entertainment president Steve McPherson said " We 've mutually come to the difficult decision to make this Ugly Betty 's final season . " The network cut the episode order from 22 to 20 , but gave the writers enough time to create a satisfying conclusion that was to air on April 14 . On what he was set out to accomplish with the series finale , Horta said " Primarily , I wanted it to be about Betty 's journey , about Betty making it in her professional life , first and foremost , overcoming the obstacles in her past and really succeeding " . Vanessa Williams said the cancellation of Ugly Betty was " devastating " for the cast . She said " Our cast was one of those rare opportunities where we love each other . It was a real shocker , and really devastating when it all ended " . 
 For the final scenes of the episode , the cast and crew travelled to London to film around a variety of the city 's landmarks . This episode featured a guest appearance from former Mad Men star Bryan Batt , who continued his role as soap opera star Spencer Cannon from the previous episode . It was announced in March 2010 that Batt would star in the final season of Ugly Betty , as a potential love interest for Marc St. James ( Michael Urie ) . Batt is the second Mad Men actor to appear in the final season of the series , following Rich Sommer 's appearance in " Fire and Nice " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings , " Hello Goodbye " was viewed by 5 @.@ 43 million viewers upon its original broadcast in the United States . This was an increase of 29 percent from the previous episode , " The Past Presents the Future " , which was watched by 4 @.@ 0 million American viewers . It earned a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . " Hello Goodbye " became the highest viewed episode of the season and number one in its hour . 
 Since airing , the episode has received critical acclaim from critics . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly praised the episode calling it " A super @-@ sweet end to a super @-@ sweet series ! " Mrs. <unk> of television website , TV Fanatic said " Overall , " Hello Goodbye " did wrap up each of our beloved characters lives in a nice pretty bow " , they added " We wanted MORE ! " The day after the episode 's U.S. airing , a reporter for the British newspaper Daily Mail praised Betty 's transformation saying " Gone were the thick @-@ rimmed glasses and braces that once defined America Ferrera 's character , and in its place a professional career woman signalling the completion of a four @-@ year metamorphosis . " However , some critics felt the ending of the episode was not enough . Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald gave the episode a mixed review saying it was " like one long hug with loved ones you don 't want to leave , " but added the conclusion was " unsatisfying " . New York magazine said " The cast of Ugly Betty damn well earned a happy ending — and that 's exactly what creator Silvio Horta gave them last night on the series finale " . However , they also found the conclusion to be unsatisfying saying " The one @-@ hour finale easily could have been longer , meaning some plotlines went unresolved . " Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post said " Last night , Ugly Betty attempted to earn a place in TV history , but I fear their last episode will be quickly forgotten by the fans " . Wieselman also added " On a show that always favored high drama and cool camp , I was saddened to see everyone get such an expected ending " . Wieselman , however , did enjoy the final scene calling it " pitch @-@ perfect " . 
 = Ibuki @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Ibuki @-@ class ( <unk> , Ibuki @-@ gata ) cruisers were the last class of heavy cruisers built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) . In order to save design time , the ships were essentially repeats of the earlier Mogami class . Begun during World War II , only the lead ship , Ibuki , was launched , but was in the process of being converted into a light aircraft carrier when construction was suspended in 1945 . She was scrapped beginning in 1946 . The unnamed second ship was scrapped less than a month after being laid down in order to clear her slipway for an aircraft carrier . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Ibuki class was a minor improvement over the last pair of the Mogami class after those ships had been upgraded during the late 1930s . The main improvement was the replacement of the triple torpedo tube mounts in the older ships with quadruple mounts . They cost 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yen each and had a crew of 54 officers and 822 enlisted men . 
 The ships had a length of 200 @.@ 6 meters ( 658 ft 2 in ) overall . They had a beam of 20 @.@ 2 meters ( 66 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 04 meters ( 19 ft 10 in ) . They displaced 12 @,@ 220 metric tons ( 12 @,@ 030 long tons ) at standard load and 14 @,@ 828 metric tons ( 14 @,@ 594 long tons ) at ( full load ) . 
 They were fitted with four Kampon geared steam turbine sets with a total of 152 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 113 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving a 3 @.@ 9 @-@ meter ( 13 ft ) propeller . Steam was provided by eight Kampon Ro Gō @-@ type three @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers that operated at a pressure of 22 kg / cm2 ( 2 @,@ 157 kPa ; 313 psi ) and temperature of 300 ° C ( 572 ° F ) . The ships had a designed speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . They carried 2 @,@ 163 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 129 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them an estimated range of 6 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 700 km ; 7 @,@ 200 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied by three 300 @-@ kilowatt ( 400 hp ) turbo generators and two 200 @-@ kilowatt ( 270 hp ) diesel generators . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament of the Ibuki class was intended to be ten 50 @-@ caliber 20 cm 3rd Year Type No. 2 guns mounted in twin turrets , three forward and two aft of the superstructure , numbered one through five from the bow to the stern . The first two forward turrets were on the same level , but the third turret could <unk> over the first two . The guns could depress to − 5 ° and had a maximum elevation of 55 ° . They fired 125 @.@ 85 @-@ kilogram ( 277 @.@ 5 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 840 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . They had a maximum range of 29 @,@ 400 yd ( 26 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 45 ° and the ship carried 128 rounds per gun . The secondary armament was to consist of eight 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in twin mounts . They fired 23 @.@ 45 @-@ kilogram ( 51 @.@ 7 lb ) projectiles at a rate between 8 and 14 rounds per minute at a muzzle velocity of 700 – 725 m / s ( 2 @,@ 300 – 2 @,@ 380 ft / s ) ; at 45 ° , this provided a maximum range of 14 @,@ 800 meters ( 16 @,@ 200 yd ) , and a maximum ceiling of 9 @,@ 400 meters ( 30 @,@ 800 ft ) . The ships were also intended to be equipped with four twin 25 mm Type 96 light AA guns abreast the funnel . They fired .25 @-@ kilogram ( 0 @.@ 55 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 900 m / s ( 3 @,@ 000 ft / s ) ; at 50 ° , this provided a maximum range of 7 @,@ 500 meters ( 8 @,@ 202 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute due to the frequent need to change the fifteen @-@ round magazines . Two twin 13 @.@ 2 mm Type 93 machine gun mounts were supposed to be mounted on the bridge with 2 @,@ 000 rounds per gun . 
 The Ibuki @-@ class ships were intended to be armed with four rotating quadruple 61 cm ( 24 in ) Type 92 torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . The ship carried 24 Type 93 torpedoes , 16 in the tubes and 8 in reserve . Quick @-@ reloading gear was installed for every mount that allowed the reserve torpedoes to be loaded in three to five minutes in ideal conditions . The Type 93 torpedo , fueled by compressed oxygen and widely referred to in post @-@ war literature as the " Long Lance " , had three range / speed settings . It had a range of 20 @,@ 000 meters ( 22 @,@ 000 yd ) at a speed of 48 knots ( 89 km / h ; 55 mph ) , 32 @,@ 000 meters ( 35 @,@ 000 yd ) at 40 knots ( 74 km / h ; 46 mph ) , or 40 @,@ 000 meters ( 44 @,@ 000 yd ) at a speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Before Ibuki was launched , one proposal was made to replace the aircraft and their equipment with five quintuple Type 0 torpedo tube mounts . Two of these would be mounted on each side and the last on the centerline , but nothing was done . 
 = = = Fire control , sensors and aircraft = = = 
 Two Type 94 fire @-@ control directors , one atop the bridge and the other abaft the funnel , were going to be fitted to control the main guns . They used range data received from three 8 @-@ meter ( 26 ft 3 in ) coincidence rangefinders . Two of these were to be installed in turrets Nos. 3 and 4 while the primary rangefinder was mounted above the bridge . A pair of Type 94 high @-@ angle directors , one on each side of the bridge , were intended to control the Type 89 guns . Each director was fitted with a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder . The 25 mm guns would have been controlled by two Type 95 directors mounted on the bridge . 
 Early warning would have been provided by a Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 air search radar mounted at the top of the foremast . A Type 93 passive hydrophone system would have been fitted in the bow . The ships were designed to carry three aircraft on a platform between the funnel and the mainmast . These would have consisted of one three @-@ seat Aichi E13A and two two @-@ seat Yokosuka <unk> floatplanes . They would have been launched by a pair of Kure Type 2 aircraft catapults , one on each side of the aircraft platform . The ships would have carried a total of 122 powder charges for the catapults as well as four 250 @-@ kilogram ( 550 lb ) bombs for the aircraft . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ships ' armor scheme was only slightly modified from the Mogami @-@ class cruisers . Their waterline armoured belt extended all the way down to the double bottom . It extended from the forward to the rear magazines below the fore and aft turrets and was angled inwards at the top 20 ° from the vertical to improve its resistance to horizontal shellfire . Over the machinery spaces , it was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick at the top and tapered to 30 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) at the bottom . The outer ends of the fore and aft machinery compartments was protected by a 105 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) transverse bulkhead . On the sides of the magazines , the belt was 140 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick and tapered to 30 mm at the bottom . The magazines were protected by fore and aft transverse bulkheads 95 – 140 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick . The steering gear and the rudder compartments had sides that consisted of 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) plates and their ends were protected by 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . 
 The deck above the steering gear and rudders was 30 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The thickness of the armored deck ranged from 35 – 40 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) on the flat and 60 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) on the slope . The sides of the conning tower were 100 millimeters thick while its roof was 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 25 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) of armor on all sides and on the roof . The barbette armor ranged from 25 to 100 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) in thickness . The ammunition hoists for the secondary armament were protected by 75 to 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) of armor . The funnel uptakes were provided with 70 to 95 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 7 in ) of armor . There was no separate anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead as that function was performed by the lower extension of the belt armor . 
 = = Ships = = 
 The two Ibuki @-@ class cruisers were ordered in November 1941 as part of the IJN 's Rapid Naval Armaments Supplement Programme ( <unk> , <unk> Maru Kyū <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> Dai @-@ Ichi <unk> <unk> <unk> ? ) . Both ships were laid down without names , just as Warships No. 300 and No. 301 , but the former was named Ibuki on 5 April 1943 . 
 No. 301 was ordered scrapped less than a month after she was laid down in order to clear her slipway for the carrier Amagi which was laid down on 1 October 1942 . After her launch , the construction of Ibuki was suspended in July 1943 while her fate was discussed . A possible conversion to a fast oiler was considered until the Navy decided on 25 August to convert her to a light aircraft carrier at Sasebo Naval Arsenal . Work on the conversion did not begin until the incomplete hull was towed to Sasebo on 21 December . It was originally intended to complete her in March 1945 , but this was extended until August . Construction was suspended on 16 March , when the ship was about 80 % complete , to allow for the construction of small submarines . Ibuki was scrapped at Sasebo from 22 November 1946 to 1 August 1947 . 
 = Demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States = 
 The demographics of the Supreme Court of the United States encompass the gender , ethnicity , and religious , geographic , and economic backgrounds of the 112 people who have been appointed as justices to the Supreme Court . Certain of these characteristics have been raised as an issue since the Court was established in 1789 . For its first 180 years , justices were almost always white male Protestants . Prior to the 20th century , a few Roman Catholics were appointed , but concerns about diversity of the Court were mainly in terms of geographic diversity , to represent all geographic regions of the country , as opposed to ethnic , religious , or gender diversity . The 20th century saw the first appointment of a Jewish justice ( Louis Brandeis , 1916 ) , an African @-@ American ( Thurgood Marshall , 1967 ) , an Italian @-@ American ( Antonin Scalia , 1986 ) , and a woman ( Sandra Day O 'Connor , 1981 ) . The 21st century saw the first appointment of a Hispanic justice ( Sonia Sotomayor , 2009 ) if Benjamin Cardozo , 1932 , is excluded ( see the discussion below ) . 
 In spite of the interest in the Court 's demographics and the symbolism accompanying the inevitably political appointment process , and the views of some commentators that no demographic considerations should arise in the selection process , the gender , race , educational background or religious views of the justices has played little role in their jurisprudence . For example , the opinions of the two African @-@ American justices have reflected radically different judicial philosophies ; William Brennan and Antonin Scalia shared Catholic faith and a Harvard Law School education , but shared little in the way of jurisprudential philosophies . The court 's first two female justices voted together no more often than with their male colleagues , and historian Thomas R. Marshall writes that no particular " female perspective " can be discerned from their opinions . 
 = = Geographic background = = 
 For most of the existence of the Court , geographic diversity was a key concern of presidents in choosing justices to appoint . This was prompted in part by the early practice of Supreme Court justices also " riding circuit " — individually hearing cases in different regions of the country . In 1789 , the United States was divided into judicial circuits , and from that time until 1891 , Supreme Court justices also acted as judges within those individual circuits . George Washington was careful to make appointments " with no two justices serving at the same time hailing from the same state " . Abraham Lincoln broke with this tradition during the Civil War , and " by the late 1880s presidents disregarded it with increasing frequency " . 
 Although the importance of regionalism declined , it still arose from time to time . For example , in appointing Benjamin Cardozo in 1929 , President Hoover was as concerned about the controversy over having three New York justices on the Court as he was about having two Jewish justices . David M. O 'Brien notes that " [ f ] rom the appointment of John Rutledge from South Carolina in 1789 until the retirement of Hugo Black [ from Alabama ] in 1971 , with the exception of the Reconstruction decade of 1866 – 1876 , there was always a southerner on the bench . Until 1867 , the sixth seat was reserved as the ' southern seat ' . Until Cardozo 's appointment in 1932 , the third seat was reserved for New Englanders . " The westward expansion of the U.S. led to concerns that the western states should be represented on the Court as well , which purportedly prompted William Howard Taft to make his 1910 appointment of Willis Van Devanter of Wyoming . 
 Geographic balance was sought in the 1970s , when Nixon attempted to employ a " Southern strategy " , hoping to secure support from Southern states by nominating judges from the region . Nixon unsuccessfully nominated Southerners Clement Haynsworth of South Carolina and G. Harrold Carswell of Georgia , before finally succeeding with the nomination of Harry Blackmun of Minnesota . The issue of regional diversity was again raised with the 2010 retirement of John Paul Stevens , who had been appointed from the midwestern Seventh Circuit , leaving the Court with all but one Justice having been appointed from states on the East Coast . 
 As of 2014 , the Court has a majority from the Northeastern United States , with seven justices coming from states to the north and east of Washington , D.C. including four justices born or raised in New York City . The remaining two justices come from Georgia and California . Contemporary Justices may be associated with multiple states . Many nominees are appointed while serving in states or districts other than their hometown or home state . Chief Justice John Roberts , for example , was born in New York , but moved to Indiana at the age of five , where he grew up . After law school , Roberts worked in Washington , D.C. while living in Maryland . Thus , three states may claim his domicile . 
 Despite the efforts to achieve geographic balance , nineteen states have never produced a Supreme Court Justice . Some states have been over @-@ represented ( although partly because there were fewer states from which early justices could be appointed ) , with New York producing fifteen justices , Ohio producing ten , Massachusetts nine , Virginia eight , six each from Pennsylvania and Tennessee , and five from Kentucky , Maryland , and New Jersey . A handful of justices were born outside the United States , mostly from among the earliest justices on the Court . These included James Wilson , born in Fife , Scotland ; James Iredell , born in Lewes , England ; and William Paterson , born in County Antrim , Ireland . Justice David Josiah Brewer was born farthest from the U.S. , in Smyrna , in the Ottoman Empire , ( now İzmir , Turkey ) . George Sutherland was born in Buckinghamshire , England . The last foreign @-@ born Justice , and the only one of these for whom English was a second language , was Felix Frankfurter , born in Vienna , Austria . The Constitution imposes no citizenship requirement on federal judges . 
 = = Ethnicity = = 
 All Supreme Court justices were white and of European heritage until the appointment of Thurgood Marshall , the first African American Justice , in 1967 . Since then , only two other non @-@ white Justices have been appointed , Marshall 's African @-@ American successor , Clarence Thomas in 1991 , and Sonia Sotomayor in 2009 . 
 = = = White justices = = = 
 The vast majority of white justices have been of Northern European and Northwestern European descent . Up to the 1980s , only six justices of " central , eastern , or southern European derivation " had been appointed , of which five " were of Germanic background , which includes Austrian , German @-@ Bohemian , and Swiss origins ( John Catron , Samuel F. Miller , Louis Brandeis , Felix Frankfurter , and Warren Burger ) , while one justice was of Iberian descent ( Benjamin N. Cardozo ) . " Justice Antonin Scalia ( appointed in 1986 ) and Justice Samuel Alito ( appointed in 2006 ) are the first justices of Italian descent to be appointed to the Supreme Court . Cardozo , appointed to the Court in 1932 , was the first Justice known to have non @-@ northern European ancestry . 
 = = = African American justices = = = 
 No African @-@ American candidate was given serious consideration for appointment to the Supreme Court until the election of John F. Kennedy , who weighed the possibility of appointing William H. Hastie of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit . Hastie had been the first African @-@ American elevated to a Court of Appeals when Harry S. Truman had so appointed him in 1949 , and by the time of the Kennedy Administration , it was widely anticipated that Hastie might be appointed to the Supreme Court . That Kennedy gave serious consideration to making this appointment " represented the first time in American history that an African American was an actual contender for the high court " . 
 The first African American appointed to the Court was Thurgood Marshall , appointed by Lyndon B. Johnson in 1967 . The second was Clarence Thomas , appointed by George H. W. Bush to succeed Marshall in 1991 . 
 Johnson appointed Marshall to the Supreme Court following the retirement of Justice Tom C. Clark , saying that this was " the right thing to do , the right time to do it , the right man and the right place . " Marshall was confirmed as an Associate Justice by a Senate vote of 69 – 11 on August 31 , 1967 . Johnson confidently predicted to one biographer , Doris Kearns Goodwin , that a lot of black baby boys would be named " Thurgood " in honor of this choice ( in fact , Kearns 's research of birth records in New York and Boston indicates that Johnson 's prophecy did not come true ) . 
 Bush initially wanted to nominate Thomas to replace William Brennan , who stepped down in 1990 , but he then decided that Thomas had not yet had enough experience as a judge after only months on the federal bench . Bush therefore nominated New Hampshire Supreme Court judge David Souter instead . The selection of Thomas to instead replace Marshall preserved the existing racial composition of the court . 
 = = = Hispanic and Latino justices = = = 
 The words " Latino " and " Hispanic " are sometimes given distinct meanings , with " Latino " referring to persons of Latin American descent , and " Hispanic " referring to persons having an ancestry , language or culture traceable to Spain or to the Iberian Peninsula as a whole , although the term " <unk> " usually refers to persons having an ancestry , language or culture traceable to Portugal specifically . 
 Sonia Sotomayor — nominated by President Barack Obama on May 26 , 2009 , and sworn in on August 8 — is the first Supreme Court Justice of Latin American descent . Born in New York City of Puerto Rican parents , she has been known to refer to herself as a " Nuyorican " . Sotomayor is also generally regarded as the first Hispanic justice , although some sources claim that this distinction belongs to former Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo . 
